Már Guðmundsson: The financial crisis in Iceland and the fault lines in 
cross-border banking 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at FIBE, Bergen, 
7 January 2010. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Bergen  this  morning  to  give  an  address  on  the 
financial crisis in Iceland, and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the organisers for 
inviting me to do so. You call this session Icelandic mysteries. At this juncture, this is a more 
apt phrase than you might think. We are currently waiting for the findings of a parliament-
appointed  committee  that  has  been  working  hard  for  over  a  year,  collecting  evidence  and 
analysing the causes of the financial crisis in Iceland. The committee  is due to release its 
report  in  early  February,  and  we  hear  the  report  and  supporting  material  will  be  well  in 
excess of a thousand pages. We know how the Icelandic banks failed in the autumn of 2008 
and  can  identify  some  of  the  key  vulnerabilities  that  led  to  their  demise.  However,  some 
important pieces of the puzzle are still missing, in particular regarding the governance and 
risk  management  of  the  banks,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Icelandic  authorities’  crisis 
management and interaction with their counterparts in other countries, on the other. 
So what I will present here today is unavoidably a partial picture.1 You could say that it is just 
as well, for this is a complex saga with many twists. To paint with a broad brush, we can say 
that  economic  and  financial  developments  in  Iceland  during  the  last  decade  or  so  are  a 
combination  of  two  separate  but  interrelated  stories.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  Iceland’s 
boom-bust  cycle  and  problems  with  macroeconomic  management  in  small,  open  and 
financially integrated economies. This is a well  known story that has played out in Iceland 
and other countries several times. On the other hand, we have the story of the rise and fall of 
three cross-border banks operated on the basis of EU legislation (the European “passport”). 
That story, at least for smaller countries, is much more unique than the first. 
In my remarks today, I will concentrate mostly on the second story, which is probably more 
suited  to  this  audience,  as  I  understand  that  the  conference  is  oriented  towards 
microeconomics  and  finance.  However,  it  must  be  remembered  that  although  these  two 
stories  are  different,  they  interact  in  important  ways.  Thus  the  unsustainable  boom  that 
Iceland experienced during the years 2005–2007 was fuelled by a combination of favourable 
external  conditions,  macroeconomic  mismanagement,  and  aggressive  domestic  bank 
lending. It may well be that the banks’ international activities and the easy access to foreign 
credit that came with those activities fuelled stronger growth in domestic bank lending than 
would have occurred in a more traditional small-country banking system. But we cannot be 
sure to what degree, as we know that unsustainable domestic credit booms fuelled by capital 
inflows  can  very  well  take  place  in  countries  that  are  not  home  countries  to  international 
banks. 
                                                 
1   Several books have already been published, both in Icelandic and English, on the financial crisis in Iceland. 
See, for instance, Jónsson, Ásgeir (2009). Why Iceland?: How One of the World’s Smallest Countries Became 
the  Meltdown’s  Biggest  Casualty.  McGraw-Hill  Professional.  Thorvaldsson,  Armann  (2009).  Frozen  Assets: 
How I Lived Iceland’s Boom and Bust. ISBN-13: 978-0470749548. Boyes, Roger (2009). Meltdown Iceland: 
Lessons on the World Financial Crisis from a Small Bankrupt Island. Ingimundur Fridriksson, a former member 
of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, has analysed important aspects of the crisis in two 
speeches: 
2008 
(http://www.sedlabanki.is/?PageID=287&NewsID=2035), 6 February 2009, and Fridriksson, Ingimundur (2009): 
Presentation prepared for a SUERF, CEPS and Belgian Financial Forum Conference on Crisis Management at 
Cross-Roads held in the National Bank of Belgium in Brussels, 16 November 2009. To be published by SUERF 
along  with  other  conference  presentations  in  early  2010.  See  also  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  (2009).  Financial 
Stability 2009, 26 October 2009 (pp. 9–37, 90) (http://www.sedlabanki.is/?PageID=1061). 
Fridriksson, 
Ingimundur 
banking 
Iceland 
(2009): 
crisis 
The 
in 
in 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
1
An important channel of interaction was through the exchange rate. On the one hand, low 
risk aversion and ample liquidity tended to boost both the exchange rate of the króna and the 
banks’ share prices at the same time. On the other hand, a speculative position against the 
share price of the banks tended to weaken the króna, as the banks were listed in Iceland and 
their equity denominated in krónur. Furthermore, as the banks’ official accounts and equity 
were  denominated  in  Icelandic  krónur,  while  ⅔  of  their  balance  sheet  was  in  fact 
denominated  in  foreign  currency,  they  tended  to  hedge  their  equity,  which,  during  the 
weakening  phase  of  the  króna,  tended  to  weaken  it  further.  These  relationships  emerge 
clearly in the graphs below, which show the strong correlation between international liquidity 
conditions, as measured by an index constructed by the Bank of England, the exchange rate 
of the Icelandic króna and share prices of listed financial institutions. 
International financial market liquidity 
and the króna exchange rate
Liquidity index
Index, January 2005 = 100
The króna exchange rate and bank stock 
prices
Index, January 2005 = 100
Index, January 2005 = 100
2
1
0
‐1
‐2
‐3
‐4
‐5
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
250
200
150
100
50
0
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Financial market liquidity (left axis)
Effective exchange rate (right axis)
Real stock prices for financial institutes (left axis)
Effective exchange rate (right axis)
The liquidity index shows the number of standard deviations from the mean 
(exponential moving average) from a simple average of nine liquidity measures, 
Source: Bank of England, Central Bank of Iceland.
Source: EcoWin Reuters, Central Bank of Iceland.
 As  so  often  occurs  in  great  tragedies,  the  two stories converged  in  a grand  finale  in  early 
October 2008, when nearly nine-tenths of Iceland’s banking system collapsed when its three 
large  cross-border  banks  –  Glitnir,  Landsbanki,  and  Kaupthing  –  were  taken  into  special 
resolution regimes on the basis of the emergency legislation that had just been passed by 
Parliament. This added significantly to the recessionary forces that were already at play in 
the Icelandic economy as the macroeconomic imbalances created in 2005–2007 subsided. 
But  here  again,  it  is  still  an  open  question  what  is  due  to  what,  i.e.,  what  is  the  specific 
contribution  of  the  banking  collapse  over  and  above  an  international  recession  and  a 
domestic macroeconomic adjustment? The fact of the matter is that the contraction in 2009 
has proven smaller than originally predicted, with the fall in GDP now expected to be around 
7½–8%,  as  opposed  to  the  10%  forecasted  earlier  in  the  year,  and  unemployment  still 
around  8%.  Conditions  are  expected  to  deteriorate  further  in  the  first  half  of  this  year, 
however, with unemployment peaking at around 10%. But who knows? Maybe the economy 
will prove more resilient and will surprise once again on the upside.  
It is clear from these numbers that, in terms of the macroeconomic impact of the international 
financial  and  economic  crisis,  Iceland  is  not  at  the  top  of  the  league.  There  are  probably 
several explanations for this. Automatic fiscal stabilisers were allowed to work more or less 
freely  in  2009,  with  fiscal  consolidation  taking  hold  this  year.  Last  year,  Icelanders  were 
allowed  early  withdrawal  from  their  third-pillar  pension  funds,  to  the  tune  of  1½%  of  GDP, 
2 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
which  is  equivalent  to  a  fiscal  stimulus.  The  financial  restructuring  of  corporations  and 
households has been delayed and, although this is detrimental for medium-term recovery, it 
has postponed some of the pain. The depreciated exchange rate has stimulated the traded 
goods sector. The manufacture of consumer and capital goods has a relatively low weight in 
the Icelandic economy, but the demand for these was hit disproportionally during the post-
Lehman economic confidence crisis in the second half of 2008 and first half of 2009. Finally, 
although the destruction of wealth that Iceland has experienced as a result of the collapse of 
the Icelandic banks is enormous, it is not proportionate to the size of the banks, as foreign 
creditors will lose much more.  
Let us now turn our attention from the macroeconomic part and explore further the story of 
Iceland’s  cross-border  banks,  which  to  my  mind  holds  important  lessons  for  cross-border 
banking more generally, both from the standpoint of the small economy and at the European 
and global levels.  
In the rest of my remarks, I will first give you a short overview of how the Icelandic banks 
failed. I will proceed to explain the build-up of these cross-border banks and the associated 
vulnerabilities.  I  will  then  return  to  the  collapse  of  the  banking  system  by  discussing  crisis 
management and resolution before turning to some of the causes. Finally, I will reflect on the 
lessons learnt and some of the issues that remain unresolved. 
How did the banks fail? 
Iceland’s three cross-border banks all failed and were placed in special resolution regimes 
during  the  first  full  week  of  October  2008.  Refinancing  their  foreign  currency  liabilities  had 
become a concern in the mini-crisis of 2006, as I will discuss later, but proved increasingly 
difficult as the global financial crisis tightened its grip in successive waves from the autumn of 
2007  onwards.  The  banks  were  thus  forced  to  halt  any  further  expansion  and  begin 
deleveraging in order to create the foreign exchange liquidity they needed in order to survive 
until foreign funding markets opened again. In the conditions then reigning, it was not easy to 
dispose  of  assets;  however,  two  of  the  banks,  Landsbanki  and  Kaupthing,  were  able  to 
improve their foreign liquidity position by collecting deposits abroad. Kaupthing did so mostly 
through subsidiaries, but Landsbanki collected deposits primarily through branches in the UK 
and  the  Netherlands.  This  was  to  prove  devastating  for  Iceland  when  the  bank  failed, 
because of the resulting dispute about the settlement of deposit insurance. 
But  what  had  been  difficult  before  the  Lehman  collapse  in  mid-September  2008  became 
almost impossible afterwards. In the immediate aftermath of the Lehman bankruptcy, cross-
currency liquidity management of banks and other entities became very difficult as FX swap 
markets  became  severely  impaired  and  there  was  a  general  scramble  for  dollar  liquidity 
around the globe. The Lehman bankruptcy led to a major loss of confidence, where concerns 
over protecting one’s own solvency and liquidity led financial institutions worldwide to take 
action that, although rational from the standpoint of individual institutions, was disastrous for 
the  system  as  a  whole.  Credit  lines  were  closed,  margin  calls  were  made,  and  all  but  the 
safest assets sold off at fire sale prices. Emerging market assets experienced a sell-off as a 
part of this process, and funds were repatriated back to the US in order to meet margin calls 
and repay debt.  
In normal times, managing liquidity across currencies from countries with free movement of 
capital and relatively developed capital markets is not much of an issue. In these conditions, 
FX swap markets can speedily be used to convert liquidity from one currency to another at 
spreads  that  closely  reflect  the  differences  in  domestic  money  market  rates  in  the  two 
countries concerned. In other words, the covered interest parity condition broadly holds. Vis-
à-vis  the  US  dollar,  this  relationship  showed  periodic  strain  for  most  currencies  after  the 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
3
financial  turmoil  erupted  in  late  summer  2007,  but  it  broke  down  almost  completely  after 
Lehman. There are probably several reasons for this, some of which were analysed in BIS 
publications such as the Quarterly Review during the period when I was still there.2 Thus, for 
instance, we know that before the crisis, European banks had a structural imbalance where 
they had invested in longer-maturity USD assets and financed them partly in USD interbank 
markets at shorter maturities. When these dried up, there was probably a scramble to get 
USD  liquidity  through  FX  swap  markets,  with  the  result  that  those  markets  became 
dysfunctional as well. 
This problem was significantly mitigated with the FX swap lines that the US Fed negotiated 
with  the  ECB  and  other  major  central  banks,  especially  after  these  became  uncapped  in 
some cases. But the problem was not confined to currency pairs involving the US dollar, and 
a  similar  kind  of  dynamic  played  out  for  smaller  currencies  in  Europe  vis-à-vis  the  euro, 
especially  where  banking  systems  had  significant  short-term  foreign  refinancing  needs,  or 
what can also be called rollover risk in terms of foreign currency.  
In some cases, FX swap lines were granted vis-à-vis the dollar, the euro and the yen, and in 
some  cases  not.  Where  swap  lines  were  granted,  it  helped.  And  for  some  of  the  smaller 
players, it might not have mattered terribly much which of the major international currencies 
they  hooked  on  to  in  this  sense,  especially  after  the  uncapped  swap  lines  had  been 
established.  
What  we  observed  during  this  peak  of  the  crisis  was  thus  a  run  on  cross-border  banking 
operations. We know how to solve such problems domestically by letting central banks lend 
to  markets  and/or  institutions  through  their  almost  unlimited  short-run  capacity  to  expand 
their domestic balance sheet. However, when it comes to foreign currency, a central bank’s 
capacity to help banks to refinance the foreign liquidity denied them on the market is limited 
by the size of its reserves or the willingness of its big neighbours to help. 
This is what did the Icelandic banks in. At that point, their balance sheet was almost 11 times 
GDP,  with  the  foreign  currency  part  constituting  ⅔,  or  almost  7½  times  GDP.  And  as  is 
always the case in banking, there was a significant maturity mismatch between the asset and 
liability sides. Compare these numbers to the reserves of the Central Bank of Iceland, which 
were  21%  of  GDP  at  the  time;  a  swap  agreement  with  the  Nordic  countries  amounting  to 
€1.5 bn, or around 12% of GDP; and committed credit lines of around 2% of GDP, or a total 
of around 35%. This is dwarfed by the foreign currency liabilities of the banks, even if some 
of them were, of course, longer-term. These defences could only buy limited breathing space 
in the face of a full-scale run on cross-border operations of banks this size. Further research 
is needed before we can assess to what degree such breathing space would have facilitated 
a more orderly and less costly episode than the complete collapse that took place. 
At any rate, it is clear that this limited ability was one of the factors behind the decision not to 
grant Glitnir a loan of last resort amounting to €600 m, which it requested on 25 September 
in order to cover a loan repayment in mid-October. Instead, the Government, on the advice 
of the Central Bank, announced on 29 September that it was taking a 75% equity stake in 
Glitnir valued at €600 m. This implied a big fall from what such a stake was valued at in the 
market the week before. In the following week, the equity price collapsed further, ending the 
week 75% below its value at the end of the preceding week.  
This action did not boost market confidence in the Icelandic banking system. On the contrary, 
it  intensified  the  run.  On  the  following  day,  both  the  sovereign  and  the  banks  were 
                                                 
2   Baba, Naohiko, Frank Packer and Teppei Nagano, (2008). “The spillover of money market turbulance to FX 
swap  and  cross-currency  swap  markets”,  BIS  Quarterly  Review,  March  2008,  73–86;  Baba,  Naohiko,  and 
Frank Packer, (2008). “Interpreting deviations from covered interest parity during the financial market turmoil 
of 2007–08”, BIS Working Papers, No. 267. See also Box III-1, “The recent turmoil in the Icelandic foreign 
exchange swap market” in the Central Bank of Iceland Monetary Bulletin 2008/1, pp. 26–29. 
4 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
the 
following  day, 
downgraded by two notches, followed by widespread margin calls and closing of credit lines. 
The foreign deposits that had helped to alleviate the foreign liquidity squeeze experienced 
outflows. And the equity loss involved in the Glitnir takeover created a domino effect within 
the Icelandic financial system.  
It was becoming clear that the entire system was on the brink of collapse, and on 6 October 
2008, the Icelandic Parliament passed emergency legislation with the objective of ensuring 
continued  domestic  banking  operations.  The 
Icelandic  Financial 
Supervisory  Authority  (FME)  intervened  in  the  operations  of  Glitnir  and  Landsbanki.  On 
October  8,  following  perfunctory  exchanges  between  the  UK  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
and the Icelandic Minister of Finance, the UK government froze the assets of Icelandic banks 
in the UK and took over Singer & Friedlander, a British-licensed subsidiary of Kaupthing. The 
deposit part of Singer & Friedlander was transferred to ING. Later that day, a system-wide 
response  of  central  banks  and  governments  emerged,  emphasising 
international 
coordination.  Such  efforts  were  too  little  and  too  late  for  the  Icelandic  banks,  and  on 
October 9, the FME intervened in Kaupthing Bank. 
The collapse of these three banks was quite large, not only relative to Iceland, but also on an 
absolute  scale.  According  to  Moody’s  list  of  defaults  during  the  period  1920–2008,3 
Kaupthing, at USD 20 bn, ranks 4th after Lehman, Worldcom and GMAC, with Glitnir close 
on its heels. The combined balance sheet of these failed banks was much larger than that of 
Worldcom,  and  only  Lehman’s  was  bigger.  And  the  effect  was  felt  far  and  wide,  as  these 
banks were truly international. Kaupthing alone was active in 13 jurisdictions. 
It might be of some interest that the possibility that the Icelandic banks might fail in precisely 
the way they did was much more widely foreseen than is currently acknowledged. Available 
on the BIS website is a speech that I gave on 18 May 2007 before the Institut International 
d’Études Bancaires, entitled Financial globalisation and challenges for prudential policies and 
macroeconomic  management,  where  I  said:  “...emergency  liquidity  assistance  will  be 
complicated or even impossible for central banks to deliver when internationally active banks 
face liquidity problems in currencies other than that of their home country. Iceland is a case 
in  point.”4  But  this  was  before  the  breakout  of  the  financial  turmoil  in  August  of  the  same 
year, and in company with many others, I saw this as a tail event rather than an immediate 
possibility,  although  concern  was  beginning  to  creep  in.  However,  as  the  financial  crisis 
intensified,  the  risks  mounted,  and  by  early  2008,  both  the  banks  themselves  and  the 
Icelandic  authorities  were  acutely  aware  of  it.5  This  is  why  the  Central  Bank  was  actively 
seeking to conclude FX swap agreements with major central banks and why, in May 2008, 
parliament authorised large-scale foreign borrowing in order to boost reserves. Both efforts 
were largely unsuccessful, except for the €1.5 bn swap agreement with the Nordic countries. 
The committee investigating the collapse will probably throw light on why that was. 
                                                 
3   Moody’s  Global  Credit  Research  (2009).  Corporate  Default  and  Recovery  Rates,  1920–2008.  26  February 
2009. 
4   Gudmundsson, Már (2007). “Financial globalisation and challenges for prudential policies and macroeconomic 
management.”  Speech  by  Deputy  Head  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic  Department  of  the  BIS,  at  a  
meeting  of 
Iceland,  18  May  2007 
(http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp070525.htm). 
International  d’Études  Bancaires,  Reykjavik, 
Institut 
the 
5   A report written by William Buiter and Anne Siebert in the spring of 2008 for one of the banks that failed later 
in the year gives sound analysis of the problems facing the Icelandic banking system at the time. See Buiter, 
William  H.,  and  Anne  Sibert,  (2008).  “The  Icelandic  banking  crisis  and  what  to  do  about  it:  The  lender  of  
last 
Insight,  No.  26,  October  2008. 
(http://www.cepr.org/pubs/policyinsights/PolicyInsight26.pdf). 
theory  of  optimal  currency  areas”,  CEPR  Policy 
resort 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
5
The build-up 
So  how  were  these  mammoths  created?  Following  a  process  of  consolidation  and 
privatisation,  which  was  largely  completed  in  2003,  the  Icelandic  banks  grew  very  rapidly. 
With headquarters in Reykjavik, they expanded their activities abroad, for the most part by 
acquiring financial institutions in other countries, opening up bank branches, and stepping up 
their foreign operations. This phenomenal growth was made easier by Iceland’s membership 
in the European Economic Area (EEA). The EEA Agreement provided a legal and regulatory 
framework based on EU Directives. This meant that the operating licences held by Icelandic 
financial institutions were not limited to Iceland but included all the countries in the EEA. The 
European  “Passport”  gave  the  banks  the  scope  to  operate  throughout  the  EEA,  including 
permission to operate branches in other EEA countries.  
Statistics give a picture of rapid-fire growth over a very short period (see graph). From 2003 
to 2007, the banks’ total assets grew from less than two times Iceland’s GDP to almost nine 
times. Right before their collapse, total assets amounted to eleven times GDP. Over 40% of 
total assets were in foreign subsidiaries, 60% of total lending was to non-residents, and 60% 
of income was from foreign sources. Over two-thirds of lending and over three-quarters of 
deposits were denominated in foreign currency, notably in pounds sterling. Around 85% of 
the  banks’  foreign  lending  was  in  Europe,  with  half  in  the  Nordic  countries,  a  third  in  the 
United Kingdom, and a tenth in the Benelux countries.  
Banks' balance sheet expansion and 
leverage
% of GDP
Total assets/Equity
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Total assets (left axis)
Leverage ratio (right axis)
Consolidated accounts of three largest commercial banks. 2008 data is end‐June.
Source: Central Bank of Iceland.
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
Currency composition of deposits 2007
Other; 14%
ISK; 22%
GBP; 45%
EUR; 16%
USD; 3%
Deposits to customers. From the largest commercial banks' 
consolidated accounts.
Source: Commercial banks' annual reports, Central Bank of Iceland.
  It is important to note that the phenomenal growth of the Icelandic banks was enabled but not 
caused by the common European legal and regulatory framework. As we all know, from the 
early 2000s to the middle of 2007, highly unusual conditions developed in the international 
financial markets. The supply of credit was plentiful, and interest rates were lower than they 
had  been  at  any  time  in  the  20th  century.  The  financial  markets  eagerly  sought  bonds, 
including  those  of  the  Icelandic  banks,  which  were  suited  for  use  in  various  kinds  of 
structured products, partly because their ratings were high compared to their CDS spreads. 
The banks were under regular scrutiny by international credit rating agencies, which at one 
point  took  them  to  triple-A.  In  turn,  the  good  ratings  facilitated  their  push  into  the  bond 
market.  Finally,  the  banks  became  an  important  part  of  the  Icelandic  economy,  their 
6 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
expansion and that of Icelandic firms enjoyed broad support, they paid high salaries, and the 
Treasury received sizable tax receipts based on their activities, direct and indirect. 
In the first half of 2006, the Icelandic banks narrowly escaped the so-called mini-crisis. In late 
2005  and  into  2006,  the  banks  began  to  attract  international  attention.  A  notable  shift  in 
market attitudes was reflected in rising credit default swaps. Analytical coverage of the banks 
became  critical,  expressing  significant  concerns  about  their  ability  to  manage  risk  or  to 
exploit  economies  of  scale  given  such  rapid  growth.  The  enormous  dependence  on 
wholesale financing given the low share of deposits as a proportion of total funding, lack of 
transparency,  cross-ownership  ties  and  connected  lending,  and  other  points  were  also 
mentioned.  Up  to  that  time,  the  banks  had  actively  sought  to  raise  funds  with  large 
international bond issues and were strained to bring in funds for all their activities, which now 
become more difficult. 
Both the banks and the authorities reacted to the criticism by cleaning up their act, but also 
by taking the offensive with a propaganda campaign.6 That worked. In retrospect, one could 
even say this was unfortunate, as it would have been much easier to reduce the size and the 
riskiness of the system in the conditions prevailing in 2006 than in 2008. Furthermore, one of 
the solutions was to start collecting deposits abroad, which was to prove devastating for the 
Icelandic nation once the banks failed.  
The  banks  also  entered  new  markets,  including  the  US,  where  issuers  with  good  credit 
ratings found it easy to sell bonds. As a result, risk appetite returned and Moody’s took the 
banks  to  triple-A  for  a  while  in  2007.  Moreover,  the  Icelandic  banks  were  perhaps  better 
prepared than otherwise for the dramatic reversal of market sentiment that took place in mid-
2007. Interestingly, the high credit default swaps compared to their ratings made the banks’ 
bonds good input for structured products. That, however, was to prove a big drawback for the 
banks  once  the  financial  crisis  hit  for  real  in  2007  and  2008,  as  the  sell-off  of  structured 
products pulled Icelandic bank shares with it and sent CDS spreads through the ceiling. 
The fact that the Icelandic banking system was based on EU legislation was conducive to 
cross-border  expansion.  However,  in  spite  of  all  its  merits,  there  were  fatal  flaws  in  this 
system. The basic problem was that, although banking and regulation was European, both 
supervision and the safety net of deposit insurance and lender of last resort were national. 
The  same  applied  to  a  significant  degree  to  crisis  management.  There  was  an  inherent 
vulnerability  and  risk  associated  with  this  setup,  especially  for  small  countries  outside  the 
euro  area.  This  proved  fatal  for  Iceland,  in  part  because  it  made  the  mistake  of  taking 
European  regulatory  directives  as  mostly  binding,  but  not  as  a  minimum.  However,  the 
biggest design failure was in the case of deposit insurance, because not only did it violate the 
principle  of  matching  international  private  action  with  international  public  measures,  but  it 
also  violated  the  insurance  principle  of  pooling.  European  banks  need  European  deposit 
insurance. That is how it is. 
Crisis management and resolution 
Let me say a few words about crisis management and resolution in the case of the Icelandic 
banks.  During  the  height  of  the  crisis,  its  management  left  a  great  deal  to  be  desired, 
especially the cross-border part: 
• 
• 
There was lack of information sharing and co-operation across affected jurisdictions. 
There  was  early  sale  of  “good”  assets  at  fire  sale  prices,  which  will  lead  to  lower 
recovery ratio for bond holders. 
                                                 
6  A report by Tryggvi Thór Herbertsson and Frederic Mishkin was particularly influential in this regard. See Mishkin, 
Frederic  S.,  and  Tryggvi  T.  Herbertsson,  (2006).  Financial  stability  in  Iceland,  Iceland  Chamber  of  Commerce. 
(http://www.vi.is/files/555877819Financial%20Stability%20in%20Iceland%20Screen%20Version.pdf). 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
7
  UK authorities froze and ring-fenced assets. 
Further research will throw light on the UK decision to close Singer & Friedlander, 
which  brought  down  Kaupthing  –  however,  a  lender  of  last  resort  (LOLR)  loan  in 
Sweden. 
A consequence of all of this is the dispute with UK and Dutch authorities over the 
settlement  of  deposit  insurance  claims  related  to  Landsbanki  branches.  This 
problem is still negatively affecting the economic resurrection of Iceland. It is a big 
topic  in  its  own  right,  but  I  am  not  going  to  say  more  about  it  here,  as  involves 
international  relations,  European  legal  issues,  and  balance  of  payments  and  debt 
sustainability issues, and as such, is far beyond the scope of my topic today. 
Bank resolution on the Icelandic side has been somewhat more orderly. It was shaped by the 
initial  goal  of  securing  continued  banking  operations  in  the  country.  First,  we  have  the 
Emergency Act of 6 October 2008, under which the FME acquired broad-based intervention 
rights; deposits were assigned higher priority than other unsecured claims; and government 
capital  injections  received  parliamentary  approval.  Then  the  Government  issued  the 
statement that all deposits in Iceland were guaranteed.7 
The  tool  used  to  reach  this  goal  was  to  split  the  banks  into  new  and  old  banks,  along 
domestic and foreign lines, in such a way that the foreign creditors do not suffer over and 
above what was implied by giving deposits seniority over other claims. When these drastic 
actions are assessed, one must bear in mind the dire straits Iceland was in at the time and 
the  sense  in  the  country  that  it  was  under  financial  siege.  Furthermore,  the  banks’  assets 
were 10 times GDP, and in the absence of international cooperation, forced downsizing was 
the only option. The new banks are 1.7 times GDP.  
The domestic system functioned more or less seamlessly throughout, but demand for cash 
tripled and almost outstripped physical supply for a few days until the Government issued the 
statement  that  domestic  deposits  were  safe.  International  payment  flows  were  seriously 
affected, however. Payments stopped at first, as the correspondent banking system seized 
up due to uncertainty, attempts at netting and punitive actions, and the UK freezing order. 
Normal functioning was gradually restored with Central Bank involvement.8 
Since  November  2008,  continuation  of  the  resolution  process  has  been  part  of  an  IMF 
programme  whose  main  elements  are  stabilisation  of  exchange  rate,  a  plan  for  fiscal 
sustainability, and resurrection of the financial system.9 All the three banks are now up and 
running, and two of them are majority-owned by the foreign creditors of the old banks. The 
savings banks will be financially restructured in the coming weeks. 
The causes 
Earlier in my remarks I told you how the banks failed. Does this also tell us why they failed? I 
think it does so only partly. The interplay between trust, liquidity and solvency is complicated 
                                                 
7   Central Bank of Iceland (2009). Financial Stability 2009. 26 October 2009 (pp. 18–19, 68–70). 
8   Financial Stability 2009, 22–37. 
9  
IMF  (2008).  “Iceland:  Request  for  Stand-By  Arrangement  –  Staff  Report”,  IMF  Country  Report  No.  08/362, 
November  2008.  IMF  (2009).  “Iceland:  Staff  Report  for  First  Review  under  Stand-By  Arrangement  and 
Request  for  Extension  of  the  Arrangement,  Waivers  of  Nonobservance  of  Performance  Criteria,  and 
Rephasing of Access”, IMF Country Report No. 09/306, October 2009. For further information about the IMF 
Stand-By Arrangment and the economic programme of the government, please refer to the web sites of the 
Central  Bank  of 
the  Prime  
Minister’s  Office 
Fund 
(http://www.imf.org/external/country/isl/index.htm). See also Central Bank of Iceland (2009). Financial Stability 
2009. 26 October 2009 (pp. 71–75). 
Iceland 
(http://eng.forsaetisraduneyti.is/), 
(http://www.sedlabanki.is/?pageid=186&dt_date=2009-01-01), 
International  Monetary 
and 
the 
8 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
when it comes to banks. Banks fail because they lose trust. That loss of trust might not be 
warranted, in which case the bank will face a liquidity problem. However, it might still fail if it 
is  not  supported  by  a  credible  lender  of  last  resort,  or  if  the  liquidity  problem  lasts  long 
enough. The line between liquidity and solvency can be a thin one. An underlying solvency 
problem will often manifest itself as a liquidity problem, and over time, a liquidity problem will 
often create a solvency problem. 
Did  the  Icelandic  banks  face  a  solvency  problem?  Not  if  we  look  at  what  used  to  be  the 
traditional metrics before the crisis, cf. the displayed table. 
 CAD ratio 
Tier 1 ratio 
Leverage ratio 
Equity/tangible assets 
Bond maturity 
Deposits/funding 
Liquidity ratio 
Kaupthing 
11.2% 
9.3% 
15.1 
5.2% 
5y 
32.3% 
1.95 
Landsbanki 
10.3% 
8.2% 
20.0 
4.0% 
5y 
72.4% 
1.74 
Glitnir 
11.2% 
8.0% 
19.3 
3.6% 
3.2y 
20.8% 
1.52 
Compared  to  peers,  their  capital  and  leverage  ratios  were  not  out  of  line.  Neither  do  the 
underlying  liquidity  problems  glare  at  us  through  these  metrics.  But  that  might  say  more 
about  the  metrics  than  the  reality.  Add  to  this  the  fact  that,  around  a  month  before  the 
collapse,  the  FME  issued  statements  about  how  well  the  banks  performed  on  a  range  of 
stress tests. However, these stress tests were flawed in the sense that they did not include 
liquidity.  Furthermore,  they  tested  one  institution  at  a  time  and  did  therefore  not  take  into 
account the interconnectedness and contagion elements that proved so important during the 
collapse. 
Capital adequacy and funding duration for some selected 
banks in March 2008
Kaupthing
Glitnir
Landsbanki
Handelsbanken
DnB NOR
Swedbank
Intesa Sanpaolo
o
i
t
a
r
 
y
c
a
u
q
e
d
a
l
a
t
i
p
a
C
12
11,5
11
10,5
10
9,5
9
8,5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Remaining time to maturity of issued securities
Sources: Bloomberg, Riksbank.
 9
 BIS Review 9/2010 
 
A  great  deal  of  value  is  lost  at  the  very  moment  when  banks  stop  being  going  concerns. 
However,  low  estimated  recovery  rates  after  the  banks’  collapse  seem  to  indicate  the 
existence  of  an  underlying  solvency  problem.  It  also  raises  questions  about  the  quality  of 
accounting. This is one of the mysteries that still wait to be solved. 
My list of causes for the collapse of the Icelandic banks is the following: 
• 
Large  foreign-currency  balance  sheets  with  significant  maturity  mismatches  but 
without a LOLR. 
Size relative to the home base (country and currency). 
Fatal flaws in the EU financial architecture. 
Bad and non-cooperative crisis management across interested jurisdictions. 
• 
• 
• 
But there were also triggers and contributing factors: 
• 
The international financial crisis and all the usual suspects that have been named in 
relation to it, including incentive systems, regulation and supervision. 
Flaws in business models and risk management. 
Iceland’s large macroeconomic imbalances. 
Domino vulnerabilities in Iceland’s financial sector (e.g., cross-ownership, connected 
lending, large exposures across institutions). 
Bad governance and accounting?  
  Lessons and unresolved issues 
Before  making  my  final  remarks,  let  me  mention  briefly  some  of  what  I  consider  the  main 
lessons  and  unresolved  issues  in  relation  to  both  the  Icelandic  banking  crisis  and 
cross-border banking more generally.  
• 
The  risks  in  cross-border  banking  were  underestimated,  especially  the  cross-
currency part.10 
The  crisis  had  significant  elements  of  a  run  on  cross-border  banking.  In  Iceland’s 
case, a partial run on deposits in foreign branches and subsidiaries also contributed. 
Sizeable cross-border banking operations in small countries with their own currency 
are too risky. 
The EU architecture for cross-border banking is profoundly flawed, as it allowed free 
flow  of  capital  and  banking  services  with  domestic  safety  nets  and  crisis 
management. 
Either we regress (de-globalisation and the death of branches) or we move towards 
EU  supervision,  deposit  insurance,  crisis  management  and  resolution  regimes  for 
cross-border banks. 
                                                     
10   Researchers  at  the  BIS  have  done  an  excellent  work  in  throwing  light  on  this  aspect.  See  for  instance 
McCauley,  Robert  M.  and  Patrick  McGuire,  (2009).  “Dollar  appreciation  in  2008:  safe  haven,  carry  trades, 
dollar shortage and overhedging”, BIS Quarterly Review, December 2009; Baba, Naohiko, and Frank Packer, 
(2009). “From  turmoil to crises: Dislocations in the FX swap market  before  and after the failure  of Lehman 
Brothers”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 28, 1350–1374; and McGuire, Patrick, and Götz von 
Peter, (2009). “The US dollar shortage in global banking and the international policy response”, BIS Working 
Papers, No. 291.  
10 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
   Key proposals (e.g., the De Larosière and Turner reports)11 do not go far enough 
and  do  not  measure  up  to  the  Icelandic  experience  (wrongly  seen  as  primarily  a 
supervisory failure, which it was only in part). 
Do we need a system of FX swap lines or an FX liquidity pool to provide insurance 
against  a  run  on  cross-border  banking  (as  we  have  domestically  through  central 
bank liquidity provisions and LOLR)? 
The crisis showed that, when all is said and done, “banks are international in life, but 
national  in  death!”12  Will  reforms  change  this,  or  will  we  regress?  The  question 
remains open. 
Concluding remarks 
I told you in the beginning that this is a complex saga with many twists. I have only covered a 
small part of it. However, be sure that there is more to come. I am currently reading a newly 
published biography of Snorri Sturluson.13 He and other Icelanders wrote about events that 
occurred  here  in  Norway  and  Iceland,  in some  cases  more  than  two centuries  earlier.  We 
might thus be writing about the Icelandic financial crisis for centuries as well! If history is any 
judge, then we are probably better at it than we were this time at managing, regulating and 
supervising a cross-border banking system. For the sake of all of us, let us at least hope so. 
Thank you very much. 
                                                 
11   De Larosiére, Jacques (chair), (2009). The High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the EU, Brussels, 
25 February  2009.  Financial  Services  Authority,  (2009).  The  Turner  Review:  A  regulatory  response  to  the 
global banking crisis, March 2009 
12   This apt phrase is attributed to Mervin King, the Governor of the Bank of England.  
13   Gudmundsson, Óskar (2009). Snorri – ævisaga Snorra Sturlusonar 1179–1241 (e. Snorri – the biography of 
Snorri Sturluson 1179–1241). Forlagið – JPV útgáfa, ISBN-13: 978-9935-11-074-9. 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
11
