Andrew Haldane: Patience and finance 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Haldane,  Executive  Director,  Financial  Stability,  Bank  of  England,  
at the Oxford China Business Forum, Beijing, 9 September 2010. 
 I  am  grateful  to  Geoff  Coppins,  Richard  Davies,  Salina  Ladha,  Pippa  Lowe,  Gareth  Murphy,  Rhiannon 
Sowerbutts, Nick Vause and Iain de Weymarn for background research and comments. 
In the East, it is said: 
“One moment of patience may ward off great disaster 
 One moment of impatience may ruin a whole life” 
 [Chinese Proverb] 
In the West, it is said: 
“I often make more money when I am snoozing than when I am active” 
 [Warren Buffett] 
These observations have common conceptual roots. Underlying both lies patience. Patience, 
or its alter ego impatience, is a key factor shaping inter-temporal decisions. Whether to save 
or  spend,  trade  or  invest,  work  or  quit,  stick  or  twist.  As  such,  patience  has  important 
implications for the evolution of economic and social systems. 
This paper considers the role of patience in decision-making, in particular financial decision-
making. Patience is not static; it evolves. This paper brings together lessons from economics, 
history,  psychology,  neurology,  sociology  to  assess  patience  and  its  implications  for  the 
evolution of economic and financial systems. 
Evidence  from  social  and  economic  systems  points  to  two  evolutionary  paths.  Along  one, 
patience  becomes  self-reinforcing.  For  example,  financial  liberalisation  may  encourage 
patience and improve inter-temporal choice, unlocking growth. But there is a second path, 
along which impatience is self-reinforcing. Financial liberalisation can also unlock impatience, 
generating over-trading and under-investment. 
These  dual  equilibria  make  choosing  the  right  pace  and  path  of  financial  reform  crucial. 
Some countries, like China, appear to be proceeding along the patient path. The choice is 
how  to  pace  reform  to  prevent  overshooting  onto  the  impatient  path.  For  countries  which 
have already liberalised, the choice is how to promote patience while harnessing impatience. 
These are real public policy choices. 
Patience and impatience 
Patience, we are told, is a virtue. That has been the verdict of theologians, philosophers and 
authors  for  well  over  700  years.  Interestingly,  it  was  also  the  verdict  of  the  earliest 
economists. In his Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759), Adam Smith declares:  
“The  qualities  most  useful  to  ourselves  are,  first  of  all,  superior  reasons  and 
understanding, by which we are capable of discerning the remote consequences 
of  all  our  actions;  and,  secondly,  self-command,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to 
abstain  from  present  pleasure  or  to  endure  present  pain  in  order  to  obtain  a 
greater pleasure in some future time”. 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 1
So for Smith, patience was both a distinctive and valuable human commodity. Subsequent 
research  has  shown  he  was  right.  Patience  is  peculiarly  human.  Our  nearest  evolutionary 
relatives, discount almost entirely outcomes more than one minute into the future.1 It is not 
that animals are incapable of far-sighted behaviour – for example, squirrels collecting nuts or 
birds  flying  south  for  the  winter.  But  these  are  not  acts  of  spontaneous  self-control,  like 
saving or dieting. Rather, they are genetically pre-programmed. The squirrel does not store 
food as a dietary device. 
The patience “gene” 
The source of human self-command, or patience, appears to be neurological. Recently, this 
has become detectable using brain imaging technology. That suggests the pre-frontal cortex 
of the brain is key to self-control and patience in humans.2 The pre-frontal cortex develops 
with age, being least developed in small children. In other words, neurology has confirmed 
the suspicions, and frustrations, of generations of parents with impatient toddlers. 
The  pre-frontal  cortex  is  also  the  part  of  the  brain  which  has  developed  most  recently. 
Human skulls developed from prominent brow ridges of Neanderthal man to the high straight 
foreheads  of  today’s  homo  sapiens  to  accommodate  the  growth  of  the  pre-frontal  cortex. 
That tells us the patient part of the brain was close to being fully developed perhaps around  
30–50,000 years ago. Today, although the pre-frontal cortex in humans is no larger than in a 
gorilla, its evolution has resulted in patience having become a distinctive, perhaps unique, 
human attribute. 
As such, it is not too big a leap to imagine patience having had important implications for the 
evolution  of  human  systems,  economic  and  social.  Take  economic  growth.  The  Neo-
Classical  growth  model  in  economics  provides  a  simple  link  between  patience  and 
development. Patience generates savings by households which in turn finances investment 
by companies. And capital accumulation by firms, growth theory suggests, is then the prime 
driver  of  future  output.  Countless  empirical  studies,  across  time  and  countries,  have 
confirmed that theory. 
Long-run patterns of growth are also consistent with a patience-based explanation. Relative 
to  animals,  human  systems  have  experienced  extra-ordinary  economic  development, 
especially over the past 400 years. And the timing of that development has a neurological 
link. Between 1 million BC and 50,000 BC, world GDP per capita was roughly unchanged. By 
the  end  of  that  period,  Neanderthal  man  had  gone  the  way  of  the  dinosaurs.  Inside  our 
skulls,  patience  and  the  pre-frontal  cortex  became,  literally  and  metaphorically,  front  and 
centre. 
In  the  subsequent  period,  patience  brought  prosperity.  Between  50,000  BC  and  1000  AD, 
world GDP per capita rose around 50%, at an annual growth rate of 0.00072%. Economists 
today would classify that as anaemic. But, at the time, it must have felt like a Golden Age. In 
the subsequent millennium, world GDP per capita has risen 50-fold, at an annual growth rate 
of around 0.4%. Much of that growth has been since 1750 AD, since when world GDP per 
capita has risen almost 37-fold, at an annual growth rate of 1.4% per annum.3 It is difficult to 
imagine patience not having hastened this dramatic journey. 
Some studies have drawn a more explicit link between patience and growth. Studies have 
linked  various  cultural  and  religious  characteristics  to  growth.4  For  example,  it  has  been 
                                                 
1  For  example,  Stevens  et  al  (2005),  although  Rosati  et  al  (2007)  argue  that,  when  making  food  choices, 
chimpanzees and bonobos exhibit greater patience than humans. 
2  Figner et al (2010). 
3  DeLong (1998). 
4  Barro and McCleary (2003). 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2010
argued  that  pre-dominantly  Protestant  countries  in  Europe  grew  faster  than  Catholic 
countries as a result of differences in patience and work ethic.5 This has echoes with recent 
literature emphasising the role of “Asian values”, such as thrift and patience, as a driver of 
growth in the region.6  
Patience is also likely to have been a key factor in the evolution of financial systems. At root, 
banks and capital markets are simply a means of matching saving to investment. They are 
about realising the benefits of patience and thus growth. There is strong evidence for such 
effects.  Financial  deepening  is  known  to  be  an  important  determinant  of  long-run  growth.7 
Why?  Efficient 
thereby 
encouraging thrift and promoting growth. 
intermediation 
to  patience, 
the  returns 
increases 
financial 
The impatience “gene” 
For every virtue there is a vice, for every ego an alter ego. So it is with patience. In Smith’s 
Theory of Moral Sentiments, he also spoke of a “two self” model. People had both a patient 
and  impatient  component.  This  double-self  principle  was  developed  by  psychologists  and 
philosophers,  such  as Freud  and  Berlin,  during  the  1950s  and  1960s.  Latterly  the  work  of 
behavioural economists, such as Thaler and Shefrin, has formulated the two selves as the 
patient “planner” and impatient “doer”.8 
Using brain imaging, this model has recently been given neurological support. While patient 
behaviour  is  associated  with  activity  in  the  pre-frontal  cortex,  impatient  behaviour  is 
associated  with  a  distinct  part  of  the  brain  –  the  limbic  (or  midbrain  dopamine)  system.9 
Humans have distinct patience and impatience “genes”. When making difficult inter-temporal 
decisions, we are quite literally in two minds. 
Impatience is no stranger to economics. It was discussed by Neo-Classical economists, such 
as Marshall, Fisher and Pigou writing over a century ago. Pigou memorably described the 
tendency  of  humans  to  discount  excessively  future  outcomes  as  a  “defective  telescopic 
faculty”.  Today,  research  has  gone  one  step  further:  discounting  is  not  just  myopic  but 
inconsistent 
if 
mathematically more accurate, moniker by economists – “hyberbolic discounting”.10 
Hyperbolic  discounting  describes  how  people’s  preferences  alter  as  distant  outcomes 
become closer to the present. Concretely, imagine a person who prefers $100 in ten years’ 
time to $90 in nine years’ time. With hyperbolic preferences, this same person would also 
favour  $90  in  one  year’s  time  to  $100  in  two  year’s  time.  They  exhibit  inconsistencies  in 
decision-making across time, or so-called preference reversals. 
The implications of such behaviour are potentially far-reaching. The patient planner becomes 
a  spontaneous  doer  when  outcomes  are  within  reach.  The  cautious  saver  becomes  a 
reckless spender when nest eggs are close to hatching. The long-term investor becomes a 
short-term  speculator  if  assets  can  be  cashed.  As  temptation  beckons,  the  devil  on  one 
shoulder whispers more seductively than the angel on the other. Preferences switch as the 
distant becomes instant. 
time.  This  has  been  given  a  somewhat 
less  memorable, 
through 
                                                 
5  Weber (1958). 
6  Franke et al (2007). 
7  Levine (1997). 
8  Thaler and Shefrin (1981). 
9  McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein and Cohen (2004). 
10  For example, Pigou (1920), Ainslie and Haslam (1992) and Laibson (1997). 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 3
In these situations, the double-self becomes a practical reality for both animals and humans. 
Experimental evidence lends strong support. Hyperbolic discounting has been found in such 
diverse  case  studies  as  pigeons  pecking  corn,  students  choosing  video  games,  women 
choosing anaesthesia in childbirth and drug addicts assessing their next fix.11 Psychiatrically, 
it may emerge as multiple personality disorders. 
Addiction  is,  in  some  respects,  hyperbolic  discounting  writ  large.12  It  is  Pigou’s  defective 
telescope being held the wrong way round. Immediate gratification (drugs, alcohol, sex, food) 
is sought irrespective of the long-term consequences. There is a neurological explanation for 
such behaviour. Drugs and some foodstuffs flood the brain with dopamine, which stimulates 
the  midbrain  associated  with  instant  reward.  This  might  explain  why  addictive  behaviour 
appears  to  be  more  prevalent  in  humans  than  in  animals.  While  few  squirrels  are  dieters, 
even fewer are glue-sniffers. 
Impatience has implications for economic and financial systems every bit as profound as its 
well-behaved  twin.  For  economies,  hyperbolic  discounting  would  tend  to  generate  under-
saving, as people seek instant gratification. And neo-classical growth theory says that under-
saving has adverse implications for long-run investment and growth. Some jam today would 
come at the expense of a whole jam-jar tomorrow. 
For financial systems, the implications are just as far-reaching. The flipside of under-saving is 
over-borrowing. Consumer credit is one means of bringing forward tomorrow’s spending to 
today.  In  that  sense,  credit  addiction  and  drug  addiction  are  close  relatives.  And 
accompanying over-borrowing is likely to be over-trading: a propensity to realise investments 
sooner rather than later, to twist rather than stick. 
So where does this leave us? Patience is an evolutionary human trait which has played an 
important role in the development of economic and financial systems. But impatience is also 
a human trait whose implications for growth are potentially malign. How have these two traits 
evolved over time? Has the good gene, by a Darwinian process, deselected the bad? 
importantly  over 
The evolution of patience 
In most economic models, people’s rate of time preference is assumed to be fixed. Studies of 
real-world behaviour suggest that assumption is rarely satisfied. People’s preferences, and 
their  cognitive  architecture,  have  evolved 
time.  Patience  evolved 
dramatically  from  Neanderthal  to  modern  man.  It  continues  to  evolve  today  from  child  to 
adult. Preferences also adapt with the environment. 
Consider people’s risk preferences. Economists typically assume these too are fixed. But the 
real-world suggests that the environment is key. For example, in the face of a losing streak, 
experimental evidence shows that human risk preferences tend to flip from risk-averting to 
risk-loving  behaviour.13  That  is  why  we  often  hear  “double  or  quits”.  Such  gambles  for 
resurrection  can  explain  the  ruin  of  bankers  as  well  as  gamblers,  including  most  recently 
Lehman Brothers and Bear Stearns. 
These shifts in risk preferences are not peculiar to humans. They are also observed in birds, 
insects and mammals when faced with a losing streak.14 Birds foraging in mid-winter have 
been found to take a calculated gamble by pursuing high-risk, high-return strategies, much 
like the down-at-heel gambler or world-weary CEO. Although Lehman CEO Dick Fuld was 
                                                 
11  For example, Ainslie and Haslam (1992), Ainslie (1974). 
12  For example, Madden et al (1997), Bickel et al (1999), Petry (2001), Vuchinich and Simpson (1998). 
13  For example Kahneman and Tversky (1979). 
14  For example, Watson and Platt (2010), Schultz et al (2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2010
nick-named the gorilla, his behaviour during a losing streak was closer to that of a ravenous 
robin. 
Self-improving cycles 
If preferences evolve over time, this gives rise to the possibility of self-reinforcing patterns of 
behaviour.  Such  evolutionary  trends  have  been  extensively  studied  by  sociologists, 
psychologists and even some economists. These studies confirm the old aphorism: virtue is 
its own reward. Specifically, patience is capable of setting in train a cycle of self-improving 
behaviour in individuals, economic and social systems. 
Take happiness. Studies have shown that happy people save more and spend less.15 Happy 
people also take longer to make decisions and expect a longer life. In short, they are patient. 
These patterns of behaviour are connected and reinforcing. Expecting a longer life, happy 
people  defer  immediate  gratification  and  save.  In  consequence,  they  enjoy  a  more 
prosperous  tomorrow  as  they  harvest  the  fruits  of  their  investment.  In  these  models, 
happiness is not just fulfilling; it is self-fulfilling. 
Exercise  and  dieting  generate  similar  self-improving  behavioural  cycles.  Take  gym 
attendance. A recent study found that providing a small financial inducement to attend a gym 
generated  radically  different  fitness  behaviour.16  It  served  as  a  catalyst  for  an  exercise 
regime  which,  once  begun,  was  much  more  likely  to  be  completed.  Improving  health 
improved  life  chances,  inducing  long-sighted  behaviour  which  was  then  both  fulfilling  and 
self-fulfilling. 
While  self-improving  cycles  shape  individual  behaviour,  they  can  also  have  broader  social 
consequences.  Studies  have  found  strong  behavioural  contagion  not  just  between  friends, 
but  between  friends’  friends  and  indeed  friends’  friends’  friends.  In  other  words,  people’s 
behaviours  have  “three  degrees  of  influence”.17  Sociological  contagion  has  been  found  in 
studies  of  happiness,  exercise  and  dieting.  It  may  have  a  neurological  explanation,  as 
imaging suggests we often incorporate friends’ views and attitudes into our brains as if they 
were our own.18 
Latterly,  models  of  economic  systems  have  got  in  on  the  act.  Growth,  too,  can  be  self-
improving  or  endogenous  –  for  example,  because  investment  in  human  capital  is  self-
reinforcing.19 Working, like dieting, is good for self-esteem and long-term productivity. Idling, 
like  over-eating,  is  bad.  History  suggests  a  strongly  self-reinforcing  relationship  between 
saving and growth. That is probably why cross-country studies point to such strong growth 
enhancing effects of financial deepening. 
Self-destructive cycles 
Just  as  patience  can  self-generate,  so  too  can  impatience.  And  while  patience  generates 
self-improving cycles, its alter ego can create self-destructive cycles. Addiction is the classic 
self-destructive  cycle.  Drugs  and  alcohol  chemically  alter  the  balance  of  the  double-self, 
increasing  the  value  of  instant  gratification.  This  shortens  time  horizons,  increasing  further 
the  value  of  instant  gratification  in  a  downward  spiral.  Unless  arrested,  this  unfulfilling 
equilibrium becomes self-fulfilling. 
                                                 
15  For example, Guven (2008). 
16  Charness and Gneezy (2009). 
17  Christakis and Fowler (2009). 
18  For example, Tuckett (2009). 
19  For example, National Institute on Drug Abuse (2007). 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 5
Similar cycles have been found with a more commonly-prescribed drug – work. Workaholism 
arises from a spiralling imbalance between work and life.20 Too much work lowers the value 
of  life  away  from  work.  This  encourages  even  greater  work  and  an  even  greater  work/life 
imbalance  in  a  downward  spiral.  Obesity  can  likewise  generate  self-affirming  negative 
behaviours, often operating through low self-esteem. 
As  with  self-improving  cycles,  these  self-destructive  spirals  have  a  social  dimension.  Bad 
behaviours  rub  off  just  as  much  as  good,  with  three  degrees  of  influence.  It  is  not  just 
happiness,  diet  tips  and  gym  membership  cards  which  pass  between  friends’  (friends’ 
friends). So too do depression, chocolate cake recipes and membership of addiction clinics.21 
As patience is contagious, impatience is infectious. 
So self-destructive cycles in social systems are the result of a neurological seed nurtured by 
sociological  forces.  Self-destruction,  like  self-improvement,  is  part  nature,  part  nurture. 
Finance has both these raw ingredients. Most traders’ brains harbour the impatience gene. 
Often,  they  harbour  little  else.  And  traders’  behaviour  is  shaped  every  bit  as  much  by  the 
footfall  of  their  friends  in  the  herd.  So,  in  theory,  we  might  expect  similar  cycles  of  self-
destruction and self-improvement in finance. 
Gresham’s law in finance 
To  illustrate  these  theoretical  dynamics  in  action,  consider  a  sketch  model.  Imagine  three 
classes of investor: 
 
an impatient short-term speculator, who follows the momentum of the herd, buying 
when prices are rising and selling when they fall; 
a patient long-term investor, who invests according to where prices are relative to 
their long-term fundamentals; 
an untested investor, who can mimic either the speculator or the long-term investor, 
but  whose  performance  either  way  is  assessed  at  frequent  intervals  by  end-
investors who withdraw or maintain funds accordingly. 
  long-term 
fundamentals,  while 
Market prices in this model are buffeted by two winds. Momentum-based speculators cause 
deviations  from 
investors  drive  prices  back  towards 
fundamentals.  These  are  the  double-selves  of  the  financial  brain,  the  patience  and 
impatience genes. And as in social systems, the balance of these two genetic types results in 
two very different evolutionary equilibria. 
Under  one  equilibrium,  patience  wins  the  day.  When  long-term  investors  start  in  the 
ascendency,  prices  tend  to  correct  towards  fundamentals.  The  performance  of  untested 
investors  pursuing  momentum  strategies  falters,  while  those  pursuing  long-term  strategies 
flourish.  The  fraction  of  long-term  investors  rises.  The  self-correcting  tendencies  of  market 
prices are thus reinforced, further supporting long-term investors. The patience gene thrives, 
the impatience gene dies. Natural selection results in a self-improving cycle, as with dieting, 
happiness and exercise. 
But  there  is  a  second  equilibrium  where  this  cycle  operates  in  reverse  gear.  With  a  large 
fraction  of  momentum  traders,  prices  deviate  persistently  from  fundamentals.  Among 
untested investors, momentum strategies now flourish while long-term fundamentalists fail. 
The speculative balance of investors rises, increasing the degree of misalignment in prices. 
The patience gene falls into terminal decline. Natural selection results in a self-destructive 
cycle, as with drug, alcohol and food addiction. 
                                                 
20  For example, McNamara (2004). 
21  Christakis and Fowler (op.cit.). 
6 
 BIS Review 114/2010
These  self-destructive  dynamics  would  have  been  familiar  to  economist,  and  some-time 
investor, John Maynard Keynes. He quipped: “markets can remain irrational for longer than 
you or I can remain solvent”. In the sketch model, a Keynesian dynamic selection process is 
at work. Myopic finance bankrupts the long-sighted. 
This echoes an earlier evolutionary game in finance – Gresham’s Law. Named after English 
financier Sir Thomas Gresham in the 16th century, this refers to the tendency for bad money 
to drive out good. The first paper money example of Gresham’s Law pre-dated Gresham. It 
came from China during the Yuan (1271–1368) period. Then, paper money drove out silver 
coinage.22  This  bad  money  dynamic  has  since  been  replicated  across  many  monetary 
economies. 
China  also  provided  the  world  with  its  first  example  of  the  reverse  phenomenon  –  a  self-
improving cycle of good money driving out bad. During the Ming (1368–1644) dynasty, paper 
money was swept away by commodity money.23 This dynamic has also since been replicated 
across a number of monetary economies, including dollarizing emerging market economies 
over recent decades. 
Today, finance faces its own Gresham’s dilemma – the patient or impatient path. Innovation 
has, of course, transformed finance over the intervening years. Liberalisation has resulted in 
far greater information and liquidity in financial markets. Perhaps these developments have 
helped  good  finance  drive  out  bad,  nudging  money  towards  the  patience  path?  Not 
necessarily. 
Take information. In an evolutionary game, information is a double-edged sword. It supports 
the  cause  of  the  long-term  investor,  by  allowing  them  more  easily  to  compare  prices  with 
fundamentals.  But  it  also  tests  the  patience  of  the  untested  investor  subject  to  regular 
performance  evaluation.  Investors  whose  judgement  is  right,  but  whose  timing  is  wrong, 
stand  an  increasingly  high  chance  of  exiting  the  game.  More  frequent  information  on 
performance risks contaminating the gene pool, driving out the patient to the benefit of the 
impatient. 
Anecdotally  at  least,  performance  evaluation  intervals  have  progressively  shortened.  Over 
recent decades, companies have migrated from annual general meetings, to a six monthly or 
quarterly reporting cycle to today’s steady stream of within-cycle trading updates. In finance, 
information is in general a good thing. But in finance, as in life, it is possible to have too much 
of a good thing. 
Liquidity  is  similarly  double-edged.  It  reduces  the  impact  of  momentum  trading  on  prices, 
thereby  increasing  market  efficiency.  But  it  also  reduces  the  costs  of  pursuing  such 
strategies. In other words, liquidity unlocks the impatience gene. Investors whose judgement 
is wrong, but whose timing is right, can lock in immediate gains. Liquidity, too, can pollute the 
gene pool by allowing the impatient to prosper. Like information, liquidity can be too much of 
a good thing.24 
So we have pitchfork equilibrium: along one prong virtue, along the other vice. As in other 
social  systems,  these  two  financial  equilibria  have  neurological  roots  and  sociological 
branches.  They  yield,  however,  very  different  economic  fruit.  This  dual-self  world  is 
structurally  schizophrenic:  financial  innovation  is  both  good  and  bad;  information  is  both 
solution  and  problem;  liquidity  is  both  cure  and  curse;  investors  are  both  abstemious  and 
addicts. 
                                                 
22  Chen (1995). 
23  Bernholz (1997). 
24  For example, Laibson (1997). 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 7
So which evolutionary gene is dominating finance in practice? Is bad money driving out good 
or the reverse? Is history repeating itself as the Yuan or the Ming dynasties? 
Patience in finance 
There is ample evidence, theoretical and empirical, of self-improving financial cycles. From 
the Medici banks in Italy in the 13th century to the joint stock banks of he 19th century to the 
explosion  of  capital  market  finance  in  the  latter  part  of  the  20th  century.  Today,  China 
provides no better example of that self-improving cycle in motion. 
But can financial systems overshoot onto the impatient path, where too much liquidity and 
information unlock the impatience gene and its ugly progeny. Along that path lies excess – 
excess  trading,  excess  credit  and  excess  volatility.  What  evidence  exists  on  these 
phenomena? 
Patience and puzzles 
One  source  is  the  enormous  literature  on  financial  market  efficiency.  If  markets  were 
efficient,  asset  prices  would  mirror  fundamentals.  This  would  be  indirect  evidence  against 
impatience,  which  tends  to  cause  prices  to  deviate  persistently  from  equilibrium.  In  fact, 
empirical finance is full of puzzles – economist code for deviations from  market efficiency. 
And, interestingly, many of these observed puzzles are consistent with impatient dynamics. 
They include: 
 
Excess  volatility  puzzle:  There  is  strong  evidence  that  asset  prices,  both  real  and 
financial, are both considerably more volatile than fundamentals and can deviate for 
persistent periods.25 
Serial correlation puzzle: There is strong evidence that asset prices do not follow a 
random walk, but instead exhibit short-term positive correlation (for example, due to 
momentum traders) and medium-term negative correlation.26 
Equity premium puzzle: The required yield on equity over safe assets is greater than 
can be explained by conventional asset pricing theory – a puzzle which some have 
explained using hyperbolic discounting.27 
Excess sensitivity puzzle: Contrary to standard theory, consumption is “excessively” 
sensitive to movements in income, violating the predictions of the permanent income 
model – a puzzle which impatience and under-saving can also help explain.28 
Dividend payout puzzle: In practice, there is strong evidence of high and persistent 
dividend  payout  ratios,  consistent  with 
immediate  returns 
(dividends) over future returns (capital gains).29 
Discounting puzzle: The discount rates used to value firms, and to evaluate projects, 
appear to be consistently higher than can be explained by fundamentals, a finding 
consistent with short-termism in investment.30 
investors  valuing 
                                                      
25  For example, Shiller (1981). 
26  For example, Poterba and Summers (1988). 
27  For example, Benartzi and Thaler (1995). 
28  For example, Laibson (1997), Laibson et al (2001). 
29  For example, Black (1976). 
30  For example, Miles (1993). 
8 
 BIS Review 114/2010
 Fund  management  puzzle:  Actively-managed  investment  portfolios  appear,  if 
anything,  to  underperform  passively  managed  funds,  consistent  with  the  Buffett 
“snoozing rule” for successful investment.31 
Patience and efficiency 
If impatience in the financial system is growing, there should be evidence of financial prices 
having  become  more  volatile  and  more  divorced  from  fundamentals  over  time.  Excess 
volatility  and  misalignment  would  rise  alongside  short-termism,  with  market  efficiency  the 
casualty. What does the evidence suggest? 
Chart  1  plots  equity  prices  in  the  US  back  to  1880,  relative  to  a  model-based  measure  of 
equity  market  fundamentals  based  on  discounted  expected  future  profit  streams.  Chart  2 
shows a measure of excess volatility in these series over time (a moving average of the ratio 
of  actual  to  fundamentals-based  volatility),  while  Chart  3  shows  a  measure  of  price 
misalignment  (the  absolute  deviation  of  prices  from  fundamentals,  expressed  as  a 
percentage of prices). 
Chart 2 suggests that, on average over the past century, US stock prices have been over 
three times more volatile than fundamentals, confirming the excess volatility hypothesis. But 
the  trend  in  the  degree  of  excess  volatility  is  also  telling.  Up  until  the  1960s,  prices  were 
around twice as volatile as fundamentals. Since 1990, they have been anywhere between six 
and ten times more volatile. Excess volatility in equity prices has risen as financial innovation 
has taken off. 
The pattern is much the same with measures of misalignment. Up until 1960s, the average 
absolute deviation of US equity prices from fundamentals was just over 20%. Since 1990s, 
the  average  absolute  deviation  has  been  well  over  100%.  Charts  4–6  present  the  same 
evidence  for  UK  equity  prices  since  1920.  While  less  dramatic,  the  patterns  are  much  the 
same. Misalignment correlates with innovation and liquidity. 
Patience and profits 
To  bring  these  market  inefficiencies  to  life,  consider  a  simple  experiment  to  gauge  the 
relative performance of momentum  and long-term investors. Both are assumed to follow a 
simple strategy: the speculator buys (sells) when prices have risen (fallen) in the previous 
period; the fundamentalist buys (sells) when prices are low (high) relative to fundamentals. 
Portfolios  are  evaluated  and  re-optimised  on  a  monthly  basis,  based  on  a  $1  initial  stake. 
How would these strategies have fared historically? 
Charts 7 and 8 show cumulative returns to these strategies in the US and UK. They suggest 
a dramatic evolutionary pattern. The speculator’s $1 stake in US equities in 1880 would by 
2009 have grown to over $50,000. The fundamentalist’s same $1 stake would have fallen to 
be worth around 11 cents. Impatience would have trumped patience by a factor of half a million. 
This out-performance is mirrored in the UK, if less dramatically (Chart 8). Starting in 1920, 
the  value  of  the  speculator’s  £1  stake  would  have  risen  to  around  £1.56,  while  the 
fundamentalists’ stake would have fallen to 32 pence. Momentum would have mopped the 
floor with fundamentals. The sheep would have defeated the goats. 
In an evolutionary game, these profit profiles would alter the balance of investors. Impatient 
investors would have profited and thrived, while patient investors would have lost and died. 
Nature would have deselected the patience gene. As Keynes predicted, market inefficiencies 
would  have  supported  the  myopic  and  irrational  at  the  expense  of  the  solvency  of  the 
far-sighted. 
                                                 
31  For example, French (2008). 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 9
Patience and trading 
If impatience strategies flourish, we would expect this to be reflected in a secular fall in the 
average duration of asset holdings, as the fraction of short-term investors rises. Again, what 
does the evidence suggest? 
Chart 9 plots the average holding period of investors in the US NYSE index since 1940. This 
is estimated by simply looking at the ratio of the market value of the shares outstanding to 
the value of shares traded in any given year. It suggests a striking pattern. 
In 1940, the mean duration of US equity holdings by investors was around 7 years. For the 
next 35 years up until the mid-1970s, this average holding period was little changed. But in 
the subsequent 35 years average holding periods have fallen secularly. By the time of the 
stock market crash in 1987, the average duration of US equity holdings had fallen to under 
2 years.  By  the  turn  of  the  century,  it  had  fallen  below  one  year.  By  2007,  it  was  around 
7 months. Impatience is mounting. 
Chart 10 plots the same measure for the UK over a shorter window. It shows a similar trend. 
The average duration of equity holdings has fallen from around 5 years in the mid-1960s to 
around 2 years in the 1980s. At the turn of the century, it had reached just over a year. By 
2007, it had fallen to around 7 ½ months. 
Chart 11 shows the average duration of equity holdings across a wider set of international 
equity  markets  over  the  past  15  years.  The  trends  are  much  the  same.  Average  holding 
periods have fallen. Today, they are typically below one year. For the Shanghai stock index, 
the  mean  duration  is  closer  to  6  months.  Some  investors  have  bucked  this  trend.  Warren 
Buffett  told  Berkshire  Hathaway  investors  in  1988  “our  favourite  holding  period  is  forever”. 
But for an increasing fraction of the financial world, the favoured investment horizon seems 
to be whenever. 
A  number  of  structural  factors  help  account  for  these  trends,  some  of  them  positive. 
Transactions costs in equity markets have fallen significantly. This has encouraged growth in 
a particular class of investor – high-frequency traders (HFTs). While HFTs are not new, their 
speed of execution has undergone a quantum leap. A decade ago, the execution interval for 
HFTs was seconds. Advances in technology mean today’s HFTs operate in milli- or micro-
seconds. Tomorrow’s may operate in nano-seconds. 
HFTs operate in size as well at speed. HFT firms are believed to account for more than 70% 
of all trading volume in US equities, 40% of volumes in US futures and 20% of volumes in US 
options.  In  Europe,  HFTs  account  for  around  30–40%  of  volumes  in  equities  and  futures. 
These fractions have risen from single figures as recently as a few years ago. And they look 
set to continue to rise. 
Asian is not immune from these trends. HFT is believed to account for between 5 and 10% of 
Asian equity volumes. In China, HFT is still in its infancy. But  market contacts suggest as 
much as 80–90% of trading on the Shanghai stock exchange may be done by day-traders, 
many small retail investors. Impatience is socially, as well as technologically, contagious. 
This evolution of trading appears already to have had an effect on financial market dynamics. 
On 6 May 2010, the price of more than 200 securities fell by over 50% between 2.00pm and 
2.45pm.32 At 2.47pm, Accenture shares traded for around 7 seconds at a price of 1 cent, a 
loss of market value close to 100%. No significant economic or political news was released 
during this period. 
The causes and consequences of this “flash crash” are no clearer now than at the time. But it 
is  known  that  a  number  of  large  HFT  trading  positions  coincided  with  these  chaotic 
                                                 
32  Giffords (2010). 
10 
 BIS Review 114/2010
dynamics.  In  response,  market-makers  and  liquidity-providers  withdrew.  Gresham’s  Law 
re-emerged as bad money drove out good, its effects now taking milli-seconds rather than 
months. Trading in securities generated trading insecurities. The impatient world was found, 
under stress, to be an uncertain and fragile one. 
Patience and dividends 
Another way of gauging short-termism is to look at investors’ implied preferences for income 
today (dividends) over income tomorrow (retained earnings).33 In theory, investors should be 
indifferent between these options, as the dividend payout ratio ought not to affect the value of 
a firm.34 Empirical evidence suggests, however, strong evidence of high and sticky dividend 
payout  ratios,  almost  irrespective  of  profits.35  Moreover,  dividends  appear  to  be  becoming 
stickier over time. 
Between  1825  and  1870,  a  study  of  over  500  NYSE  listed  firms  found  that  dividend 
increases  and  decreases  were  roughly  equally  split.36  Chart  12  plots  dividend  payout 
behaviour  among  US  firms  during  this  period.  Dividend  reductions  occurred  just  less  than 
50% of the time, as might be expected. Similar behaviour has been found among UK quoted 
firms during the 19th century.37  
Now  fast  forward  a  century.  As  Chart  13  illustrates,  dividend  behaviour  has  altered 
dramatically. Between 1980 and 2010, the world’s largest 200 companies reduced dividends 
only 8% of the time. This was despite dividends being greater than earnings in over 10% of 
cases – and, indeed, dividends being positive despite negative earnings in 5% of cases. 
Chart  14  plots  the  standard  deviation  of  earnings  and  dividends  across  a  panel  of 
international firms. Over recent years, earnings have been more than six times more volatile 
than  dividends.  Berkshire  Hathaway  has  again  bucked  the  trend.  Since  1967,  it  has  paid 
dividends only once. And that may have been once too often for Buffett: “I must have been in 
the bathroom when the dividend was declared”. 
Patience and discounting 
A more direct test of short-termism would involve estimating directly the discount rate people 
assign to future outcomes. Conducting your own test is fairly simple. Ask your friends how 
they would feel if the price of their favourite luxury good were to rise by 10%. Then ask them 
how they would feel if the price of their house were to rise by 10%. The first is likely to meet 
with  a  frown,  the  second  a  smile.  In  general,  people  dislike  goods  price  inflation,  but  like 
asset price inflation. 
This feels rational right? Wrong. These perceptions suggest a sub-conscious myopia. Higher 
goods prices cut today’s disposable income. Higher asset prices cut tomorrow’s disposable 
income. So disliking goods price inflation and liking asset price inflation suggests a potential 
time-inconsistency in preferences. It is leaving as a bequest for your children the mortgage 
but not the house. 
                                                 
33  Several alternative explanations have been proposed including the signalling benefits of maintaining dividend 
ratios (Mann (1989)). 
34  Stiglitz (1974). 
35  For example, Skinner (2008). 
36  Goetzmann, Ibbotson and Peng (2001). 
37  Braggion and Moore (2008). 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 11
It is possible to test more formally the evolution of discount rates by extracting them from the 
prices of financial assets, such as equity prices, using asset pricing theory.38 This suggests 
that  discount  rates  in  asset  prices  are  higher,  often  much  higher,  than  implied  by  rational 
expectations theory, consistent with short-termism. 
For example, in studies of UK companies it has been found that actual annual discount rates 
can  be  materially,  perhaps  as  much  as  300%,  higher  than  their  rational  value.  Or,  put 
differently, cash flows four years ahead are discounted at rates more appropriate for cash 
flows 6 to 10 years ahead. 
Equivalently, studies have found that future cash flows are undervalued by investors. These 
effects compound over time. So if cash flows 5 months ahead are undervalued by 5% today, 
those  occurring  5  years  ahead  are  undervalued  by  40%  today.  This  finding  is  common, 
although not uniform, across countries. It also appears to have grown in the second half of 
the 20th century.39 
Evidence from the US over the period since 1880 suggests a similar pattern. Stock market 
evidence suggests that agents may be undervaluing cash flows by up to 40% each year. Or, 
put  differently,  if  cash  flows  six  months  ahead  are  undervalued  by  20%,  those  occurring 
5 years ahead may be undervalued by up to 90%. The stock market appears to be a quite 
defective Pigouvian telescope. 
Patience and jobs 
If  impatience  is  part  nature,  part  nurture,  it  ought  to  have  implications  beyond  finance.  So 
take another key inter-temporal decision – the choice of job. Like financial assets, the market 
in  employment  is  likely  to  have  become  more  liquid  and  information-efficient  over  time, 
facilitated by the growth of job search services. But as with finance, information and liquidity 
has the potential to cause over-trading. 
Consider, for example, the market for CEOs. Their positions are likely to be particularly at 
risk from short-term performance evaluation in capital markets. And as with holding periods 
for financial investments, CEO tenure patterns have changed strikingly over recent decades.  
In 1995, the mean duration of departing CEOs from the world’s largest 2,500 companies was 
just  less  than  a  decade.40  Since  then,  it  has  declined.  By  2000,  it  had  fallen  to  just  over 
8 years. By 2009, it had fallen to around 6 years. This pattern is replicated across regions, 
but is marked in North America and non-Japan Asia. 
Nowhere  are  these  trends  more  striking  than  in  the  market  for  CEOs  in  a  particular  high 
profile,  high  finance  industry  –  the  football  industry.  As  high  frequency  traders  are  to  the 
financial sector, football clubs are to the corporate sector. In the English Football League, the 
average tenure of departing football club managers has close to halved since 1993.41 Today, 
it stands at less than 1 ½ years, a managerial half-life of less than a full football season. 
Put differently, there are 92 English football league clubs. Among that 92, only two managers 
– Sir Alex Ferguson at Manchester United and Arsene Wenger at Arsenal – have been in 
post significantly longer than the average departing CEO  in non-football companies. Since 
1993,  these  two  clubs  have  between  them  won  the  Premier  league  on  three-quarters  of 
occasions. Patience has brought its own reward. 
                                                 
38  For example, Campbell and Shiller (1988). 
39  For example, Black and Fraser (2002), Cuthbertson et al (1997). 
40  Karlsson et al (2008) and Favaro et al (2010). 
41  League Managers Association (2010). 
12 
 BIS Review 114/2010
Patience and public policy 
This evidence is no more than illustrative. But it does point to the potentially adverse side-
effects of improved information and liquidity in markets. The public good of information and 
liquidity may unleash the public bad of myopia and volatility. So what are the potential public 
policy implications? These include: 
(a) 
Countries, like China, embarking on financial liberalisation need to walk a fine line. 
On one side of this line is the self-improving cycle of increased saving, investment 
and  growth  –  the  patience  path.  On  the  other  is  the  self-destructive  path  of 
increased  volatility  and  consumption  –  the  impatient  path.  China  today  is  an 
intriguing mix of the two paths. Patience is the dominant gene in the high savings 
rates of households and corporations. Yet the impatience gene is dominant in the 
behaviour of frothy equity and property markets. Finance in China is being buffeted 
by opposing winds – the mild east and the wild west. Dynastically, it is part Ming, 
part  Yuan.  China  today  is  proof  that  financial  innovation  can  be  a  double-edged 
sword. It is important to keep on the right side of that sword. That calls for careful 
sequencing of financial reform, in China and elsewhere. 
If  excess  volatility  in  market  prices  is  a  distortionary  tax  on  long-duration 
investments,  policy  measures  may  be  needed  to  offset  this  distortion.  Pigou’s 
defective telescope may need to be repaired, perhaps reversed. One way of doing 
so is to provide incentives for longer-duration asset holdings. Another would be to 
introduce  disincentive  devices  for  short-termist  behaviour:  holding  period-related 
levies on financial investments is one such example.42 A third potential instrument is 
governance  –  for  example,  some  have  proposed  that  voting  rights  and  the 
appointment of board members could be made conditional on the duration of equity 
holdings.43  
Impatient  preferences  can  be  constrained  by  pre-commitment  devices  –  diets, 
exercise regimes, tattoos of your partner’s name. The financial equivalents include 
trust  and  pension  funds,  Christmas  Clubs  and  pre-nuptial  agreements.  Some 
economists have called these “golden egg” investments – investments which cannot 
be  realised  quickly,  so  that  temptation  is  constrained.44  Pre-commitment  can  also 
work for non-financial contracts. For example, job contracts could be based on long-
duration  performance  measures.  These  contracts  may  require  a  public  policy 
“nudge”.45  For  example,  savings  schemes  might  require  people  to  opt  out  rather 
than opt in.  
Institutional  arrangements,  and  policy 
such 
pre-commitment device. They are a means of resisting the temptation to place short- 
over  long-term  policy  objectives.  Government’s  policy  preferences,  which  are 
derived from people’s preferences, can be hyperbolic too. That is the essence of the 
policy time-consistency problem. A solution to that problem is to delegate policy to a 
patient,  low  discount  rate  agent.  Because  central  banks  have  very  long  horizons, 
they fit the bill. Increasingly over the course of the past century, central banks have 
been chosen to safeguard the long-run objectives of price and financial stability, as 
a means of leaning against short-termist temptations. 
frameworks,  are  another 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
                                                 
42  The Aspen Institute (2009). 
43  For example, Securities and Exchange Commission (2010). 
44  Laibson (1997). 
45  For example, Thaler and Sunstein (2009). 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 13
To illustrate some of the benefits of pre-commitment and long-duration investment, imagine 
having placed that $1 stake in 1967 with an investment firm whose motto was “our favourite 
holding  period  is  forever”.  By  2009,  that  long-term  investor’s  stake  would  have  risen  to 
$2650.  Over  the  same  period,  the  momentum  traders’  stake  would  have  returned  $75. 
Buy-and-hold would have out-performed bought-and-sold by a factor of around 36. 
How  different  the  world  may  have  looked.  Fundamentals  would  have  triumphed  over 
momentum.  The  sheep  would  have  been  herded  by  the  goats.  Facing  a  losing  streak, 
speculators may  have  gone  the  same  way  as  despairing Dick  Fuld  or  the  ravenous  robin. 
The gene pool may have been cleansed of the impatient. Patience may have helped ward off 
great disaster, the like of which we have recently seen. 
Just as patience can ward off great disaster, impatience can ruin a whole life. Generations of 
dieters and addicts are testament to that. So too is finance, not least in the light of the crisis. 
It is important finance sticks to the patient evolutionary path. To do so, the fidgeting fingers of 
the invisible hand may need a steadying arm. 
14 
 BIS Review 114/2010
Annex 
 BIS Review 114/2010 
  15
  16 
 BIS Review 114/2010
 BIS Review 114/2010 
  17
  18 
 BIS Review 114/2010
References 
Ainslie,  G  and  Haslam,  N  (1992),  “Hyperbolic  Discounting”,  Choice  Over  Time,  Russell 
Sage Foundation. 
Ainslie,  G  (1974),  “Impulse  control  in  pigeons”  Journal  of  the  Experimental  Analysis  of 
Behaviour 21(5). 
Angeletos,  G,  Laibson,  D,  Repetto,  A,  Tobacman,  J  and  Weinberg,  S  (2001),  “The 
Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation”,  Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 15(3), pp 47–68. 
Barro, R J and McCleary, R (2003), Religion and Economic Growth, NBER Working Paper 
9682. 
Benartzi,  S  and  Thaler,  R  H  (1995),  “Myopic  Loss  Aversion  and  the  Equity  Premium 
Puzzle”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1), pp 73–92. 
Bernholz, P (1997), “Paper Money Inflation, Prices, Gresham’s Law and Exchange Rates in 
Ming China” KREDIT und KAPITAL. 
Bickel,  W  K,  Odum,  A  L  and  Madden,  G  J  (1999),  “Impulsivity  and  Cigarette  Smoking: 
Delay  Discounting  in  Current,  Never,  and  Ex-Smokers”,  Psychopharmacology  146(4), 
pp 447–454. 
Black, F (1976), “The Dividend Puzzle”, Journal of Portfolio Management 2, pp 5–8.  
Black,  A  and  Fraser,  P  (2002),  “Stock  Market  Short-termism  –  An 
Perspective”, Journal of Multinational Financial Management 12, pp 135–158. 
Braggion, F and Moore, L (2008), Dividend Policies in an Unregulated Market: The London 
Stock  Exchange  1895–1905,  Discussion  paper  2008–83,  Tilburg  University,  Center  for 
Economic Research. 
Campbell,  J  Y  and  Shiller,  R  J  (1988),  Stock  Prices,  Earnings  and  Expected  Dividends, 
NBER Working Paper 2511. 
Charness,  G  and  Gneezy,  U  (2009),  “Incentives  to  Exercise”,  Econometrica  77(3),  
pp 909–931. 
Chen  (1995),  “The  Sung  and  Ming  Paper  Monies:  Currency  Competition  and  Currency 
Bubbles” Journal of Macroeconomics. 
Christakis,  N  and  Fowler,  J  H  (2009),  Connected:  The  Surprising  Power  of  Our  Social 
Networks and How They Shape Our Lives, Little, Brown and Company. 
Cuthbertson, K, Hayes, S and D Nitzsche, D (1997), “The Behaviour of UK Stock Prices 
and Returns: Is the Market Efficient?”, The Economic Journal 107(443), pp 986–1008. 
De  Long,  B  (1998),  Estimates  of  World  GDP,  One  Million  B.C.  –  Present,  available  at 
http://econ161.berkeley.edu/TCEH/1998_Draft/World_GDP/Estimating_World_GDP .html 
Favaro, K, Karlsson, P and Neilson, G L (2010), “CEO Succession 2000–2009: A Decade 
of Convergence and Compression”, Strategy+Business 59, Booz & Company. 
Figner,  B,  Knoch,  D,  Johnson,  E  J,  Krosch,  A  R,  Lisanby,  S  H,  Fehr,  E  and  Weber, 
E U (2010),  “Lateral  prefrontal  cortex  and  self-control  in  intertemporal  choice”,  Nature 
Neuroscience 13, pp 538–539. 
Franke,  R  H,  Hofstede,  G  and  Bond,  M  H  (2007),  “Cultural  Roots  of  Economic 
Performance: A Research Note”, Strategic Management Journal 12(S1), pp 165–173. 
French, K R (2008), “The Cost of Active Investing”, Journal of Finance 63(4), pp 1537–1573. 
Giffords, B (2010), “High Stakes Ahead”, Automated Trader, 2010Q1. 
International 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 19
Goetzmann, W N, Ibbotson, R G, and Peng, L (2001), “A New Historical Database for the 
NYSE  1815  to  1925:  Performance  and  Predictability”,  Journal  of  Financial  Markets  4(1), 
pp 1–32. 
Guven,  C  (2008),  “Reversing  the  Question.  Does  Happiness  Affect  Consumption  and 
Savings  Behavior?”,  Deakin  University,  School  of  Accounting,  Economics  and  Finance, 
Working Paper Series 2008/20. 
Kahneman, D and Tversky, A (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decisions Under 
Risk”, Econometrica 47, pp 313–327. 
Karlsson,  P,  Neilson,  G  L  and  Webster,  J  C  (2008),  “CEO  Succession  2007:  The 
Performance Paradox”, Strategy+Business 51, Booz & Company.  
Laibson  (1997),  “Golden  Eggs  and  Hyperbolic  Disounting”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics 112(2), pp 443–77. 
League Managers Association (2010) “End of Season Statistics”. 
Levine,  R  (1997),  “Financial  Development  and  Economic  Growth:  Views  and  Agenda”, 
Journal of Economic Literature 35(2), pp 688–726. 
Madden, G J, Petry, N M, Badger, G J, and Bickel, W K (1997), “Impulsive and self-control 
choices  in  opioid-dependent  patients  and  non-drug-using  control  participants:  drug  and 
monetary rewards”, Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology 5(3), pp 256–262. 
Mann, S V (1989), “The Dividend Puzzle: A Progress Report”, Quarterly Journal of Business 
and Economics 28(3), pp 3–35. 
McClure,  S  M,  Laibson,  D,  Loewenstein,  G  and  Cohen,  J  D  (2004),  “Separate  Neural 
Systems  Value 
Immediate  and  Delayed  Monetary  Rewards”,  Science  306(5695),  
pp 503–507. 
McNamara, C (2004), Workaholism, available at  
http://www.managementhelp.org/prsn_wll/wrkholic.htm 
Miles, D (1993), “Testing for Short Termism in the UK Stock Market”, Economic Journal 103, 
pp 1379–1396. 
Modigliani,  F  and  Miller,  M  (1958),  “The  Cost  of  Capital,  Corporation  Finance  and  the 
Theory of Investment”, American Economic Review 48(3), pp 261–297. 
National Institute on Drug Abuse (2007), Drugs, Brains, and Behaviour – The Science of 
Addiction, available at http://www.drugabuse.gov/scienceofaddiction/sciofaddiction.pdf 
O’Donoghue, T and Rabin, M (2002), Addiction and Present-Biased Preferences, University 
UC Berkeley Working Paper E02–312. 
Orphanides, A and Zervos, D, “Myopia and Addictive Behaviour”, Economic Journal 108, 
pp 75–91. 
Petry,  N  M  (2001),  “Delay  discounting  of  money  and  alcohol  in  actively  using  alcoholics, 
currently abstinent alcoholics, and controls”, Psychopharmacology 154(3). 
Pigou (1920), The Economics of Welfare, London: Macmillan and co. 
Poterba, J M, and Summers, L H, (1988), “Mean Reversion in Stock Returns: Evidence and 
Implications”, Journal of Financial Economics (22:1), pp 27–59. 
Rosati, A G, Stevens, J R, Hare, B and Hauser, M D (2007), “The Evolutionary Origins of 
Human  Patience:  Temporal  Preferences  in  Chimpanzees,  Bonobos,  and  Human  Adults”, 
Current Biology 17, pp 1663–1668. 
20 
 BIS Review 114/2010
(2010), 
(2010),  Facilitating  Shareholder  Director 
Schultz, W, Preuschoff, K, Camerer, C, Hsu, M, Fiorillo, C D, Tobler, P N and Bossarts, 
P 
“Explicit  Neural  Signals  Reflecting  Reward  Uncertainty”,  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society, 363, 3801–3811. 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission 
Nominations, available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2010/33-9136.pdf 
Shiller,  R  J  (1981),  “Do  Stock  Prices  Move  Too  Much  to  be  Justified  by  Subsequent 
Changes in Dividends?”, American Economic Review 71(5), pp 421–436. 
Skinner,  D  J  (2008),  “The  Evolving  Relation  Between  Earnings,  Dividends,  and  Stock 
Repurchases”, Journal of Financial Economics 87(3), pp 582–609. 
Smith, A (1759), The Theory of Moral Sentiments, London: A. Millar. 
Stevens,  J  R,  Hallinan,  E  V,  and  Hauser,  M  D  (2005),  “The  Ecology  and  Evolution  of 
Patience in Two New World Monkeys”, Biological Letters, 1, 223–226. 
Stiglitz,  J  (1974),  “On  the  Irrelevance  of  Corporate  Financial  Policy”,  American  Economic 
Review 64(6), pp. 851–866. 
Thaler, R H and Benartzi, S (2004), “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioural Economics 
to Increase Employee Saving”, Journal of Political Economy 112(1), pp S164–187. 
Thaler,  R  H  and  Shefrin,  H  M  (1981),  “An  Economic  Theory  of  Self  Control”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy 89(2), pp 392–406. 
Thaler, R H and C R Sunstein (2009), Nudge: Improving Decisions about Wealth, Health 
and Happiness, Yale University Press. 
The  Aspen  Institute  (2009),  Overcoming  Short-termism:  A  Call  for  a  More  Responsible 
Approach to Investment and Business Management. 
Tuckett,  D  (2009),  “Addressing  the  Psychology  of  Financial  Markets”,  the  Economics 
e-journal, Vol. 3, 2009–40. 
Vuchinich, R E and Simpson, C A (1998), Delayed Reward Discounting in Alcohol Abuse, 
NBER Working Paper 6410. 
Wang,  G  J,  Volkow,  N  D,  Telang,  F,  Jayne,  M,  Ma,  J,  Rao,  M,  Zhu,  W,  Wong,  C  T, 
Pappas,  N  R,  Geliebter,  A  and  Fowler  J  S  (2004),  “Exposure  to  Appetitive  Food  Stimuli 
Markedly Activates the Human Brain”, NeuroImage 21(2004), pp 1790–1897. 
Watson,  K  K  and  Platt,  M  L  (2010),  “Neuroethology  of  Reward  and  Decision-Making”, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 363, 3825–3835. 
Weber,  M  (1958),  The  Protestant  Ethic  and  the  Spirit  of  Capitalism,  New  York:  Charles 
Scribner’s Sons. 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 21
