Ardian Fullani: Albania – sustaining macroeconomic stability in a 
challenging external environment 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Seminar  “Albania  – 
sustaining  macroeconomic  stability 
in  a  challenging  external  environment”,  Tirana, 
4 March 2010. 
 Dear Mr Bell, Dear Minister, 
Dear participants, 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to this seminar and to attend its proceeding. 
This seminar and its topics are very coherent and dwell upon very important issues for the 
economic development of Albania and of all emerging economies. They explicate the topics 
that the economic authorities are faced with, as a consequence of macro and microeconomic 
side effects of the global financial crisis of the financial markets and the real economy. 
Generally, the policies undertaken by authorities in the light of the country-specific conditions 
proved to be successful. Fiscal expansion and easing of monetary conditions according to 
respective  needs  turned  out  to  be  successful  in  avoiding  the  turning  of  the  crisis  into 
depression, like that of 1930. In Albania’s case, these stimuli helped preventing the economic 
events that characterize the financial crisis and mitigated the adverse effects that the global 
economy gave on the Albanian economy. 
Though  the  crisis  effects  continue  to  exert  their  influence  on  the  world-wide  economy,  it’s 
time to reassess the situation and the economic policies. Generally, the current period in the 
world economy coincides with the correction stage, which is reflected in a lower economic 
growth and new balances in production, trade, services, financial intermediation, exchange 
rate and household budgets. In itself, these new balances do not represent a new stage or 
evolution of the crisis. They represent a sustainable equilibrium under new circumstances. 
Distortions in financial markets and lack of rationality in consumer behaviour are assessed as 
the main triggers of the crisis, because their level during the bubble blowing were not in line 
with the long-term sustainable equilibrium of the economy. 
Consequently,  the  idea  to  continue  the  economic  stimuli,  to  speed  up  production, 
consumption and financial intermediation at the same rates and with the same instruments 
would be similar to the financial markets stimuli during the pre-crisis period. In other words, 
pursuing  the  same  policies  under  current  conditions  and  the  new  equilibrium  would  cause 
major  economic  and  financial  imbalances  over  the  medium  run,  which  would  damage  the 
economy rather than helping it. 
Precisely from this viewpoint, it is important that we now start to think about and cooperate 
for  finding  and  implementing  policies  that  would  guarantee  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability at home. 
From the above viewpoint, the nature of stimulus policies at present and in the future should 
aim at minimizing the costs of side effects that the expansionary policies have caused in the 
course  of  years.  A  very  important  place  in  this  direction  is  occupied  by  reduction  of  debt 
created during the fiscal expansion, and reduction of its cost. In this framework, all the fiscal 
authorities should work not only for avoiding the creation of new debt, but also for settling the 
debts in arrears with maximum efficiency. Debt exit strategies, including also the replacing of 
the expensive debt in arrears with a new cheaper debt, are very important and welcomed. 
In current conditions, when there is a high probability for further debt growth, the policies to 
sustain  the  economy  by  expenditures  is  restricted  from  the  incapability  of  the  economy  to 
generate economic growth. 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 1
Shifting the focus of discussion to the reality of our economy, in order to maintain the debt 
level and the macro-financial stability, it is necessary to restrict expenditures in accordance 
with revenues. The latter depends directly on Albanian economy revenues. Therefore, it is 
very important to encourage the economic development and to direct the financial resources 
to  those  directions  where  the  Albanian  economy  provides  its  competitive  advantage.  This 
would enable the substitution of imported consumer goods with domestic products whenever 
possible  and  efficient.  The  purpose  is  to  encourage  production  not  only  for  domestic 
consumption but also for exports in traditional markets and products and in new ones. This 
objective is a necessity, not only from the short-term and mid-term perspective, but also from 
long-term one. 
The strategies for debt management and reduction (debt restructuring) are not only part of 
the  macroeconomic  policies.  They  should  be  extended  to  every  cell  of  the  economy, 
whenever the microeconomic balance sheets have been burdened by debt. The restructuring 
and the resumption of lending activity can not take place without leaving aside the sick and 
bad part of the balance sheets. Currently we are confronted with exchange rate correction. 
This  automatic  adjustment  of  consumer  and  producer  behaviour  in  terms  of  consumption, 
savings  and  investments,  has  been  an  indispensable  process  in  line  with  the  new 
equilibrium. However, it is insufficient; therefore, it should be accompanied by correction of 
fixed asset prices in accordance with the new wealth balances. I would like to emphasize that 
the equilibriums of a balance-sheet, either fiscal, private or household one, are guaranteed 
by simultaneous and equal changes in its both sides. 
Banks and businesses should work together to identify and separate the sound parts from 
the problematic ones. If the current restructuring strategies lack the potential for improving 
the sick part, then perhaps it is the due time to pass to a new strategy that treats both parts 
of the business as separate from each other. This would enable an optimal solution in each 
specific case versus a unified refinancing strategy that was implemented so far. Clearing the 
lending activity would bring about shifting of the new credit from inefficient refinancing to new 
development possibilities and economic growth, where the savings-investment balance is in 
equilibrium.  This  issue  relates  not  only  to  the  performance  of  the  banking  system  and  the 
financial stability of the country, but also to the ability of the economy to grow in the future. 
As I have also mentioned in other events, both the macro and micro factors that encouraged 
rapid economic growth in the recent years, are no longer present in the global and national 
economy. The new equilibriums we are living with show that the rapid consumption-driven 
growth  models  and  credit-based  growth  models  will  no  longer  be  present  in  out  economy. 
This is true owing to supply and demand factors, since the rapid consumption- and credit-
driven  growth  has  aggravated  the  savings  –  investments  balance  sheets  of  agents  in  the 
economy. 
Consequently, there should be found a new long-term economic growth model, capable of 
absorbing the financial resources, particularly the foreign ones, and generating an economic 
growth. The first step in this regard is the identification of the competitive advantages that the 
Albanian  economy  generates  and  the  acceleration  of  structural  reforms  in  the  Albanian 
economy in the light of these priorities. 
It is a pleasure that our timely discussion topics and activities are in line with the agenda of 
this  activity.  Thus  the  IMF  provides  a  valuable  contribution  to  our  economy  through 
discussion  of  these  topics.  Furthermore,  through  this  activity,  the  IMF  enhances  the 
transparency  throughout  the  Albanian  economy  regarding  the  economic  development 
vulnerabilities from the IMF viewpoint, thus participating in the country’s economic debate. 
I would like to emphasize the latter, because I find it particularly important with regard to the 
difference  between  scientific  contribution  and  that  of  political  economy.  The  IMF  comes  to 
Albania as a participant in this debate with four scientific papers, whose results are based on 
available and reliable statistics, identified economic models and conclusions based on well-
grounded  assumptions  and  analyses.  Each  of  these  elements  is  clearly  explained  in  the 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2010
working  papers  that  will  be  discussed  today.  These  elements  altogether  make  the  work 
replicable  (controllable),  open  for  discussion,  and  assign  credibility  to  the  results  and 
inferences.  These  materials  represent  good  grounds  for  discussing  issues  of  great 
importance  to  the  Albanian  economy.  In  contrast,  today  the  bulk  of  economic  discussions 
and analyses in Albania are based on a different criterion: that of listening and discussing. 
Analysts and economists focus mainly on the transmission of conclusions of their economic 
thought. They neglect the important discussion of data sources, the identification of theory 
references (by author or by year), or the assumptions made while applying the models on 
whose bases the results are obtained. 
This  working  model  of  “speak  and  listen”  has  dominated  the  economic  analysis  outside 
institutions. This model lacks two essential elements, the “read and write” ones. Economic 
comeback focuses only on television media, while all the economic policies of the Bank of 
Albania  are  based  on  the  analysis  and  research  papers  with  theoretical  and  empirical 
character and on economic indicators database. 
All  these  elements  of  decision-making  are  transparent  to  the  public  because  they  are 
published  in  electronic  formats  on  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  website,  and  are  simultaneously 
available in printed forms as separate working papers or summarized in volume forms. All 
this  information  is  free  of  charge  and  is  made  available  to  the  public  as  a  public  good. 
Consequently,  analysis  and  comments  on  the  nature,  direction  and  speed  of  economic 
policies should start from, and address to these studies in order to discuss them. 
It is true that any analysis and critique starts from an economic hypothesis, but before the 
discussion becomes public, it is necessary that the validity of the null hypothesis is tested. 
This process should be documented in a working paper or article, because if the hypothesis 
or  the  model  or  data  used  are  not  appropriate  in  the  analysis  in  question,  then  the 
conclusions are partial in the best case or make no sense in the worst case. Honestly, I hope 
that today’s activity would help in establishing a model or a culture of debate or analysis from 
the  perspective  of  a  third  party.  Everyone  can  benefit  from  the  discussion,  which  is  a 
necessary  good  for  any  institution  that  designs  and  implements  policies  of  economic, 
environmental, social or any other nature. And this happens only when the content and the 
form of discussion is not determined by individual definition of the phenomenon, but by its 
detailed theoretical and empirical explication as required by the economic science standards. 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 3
