Rundheersing Bheenick: Comprehensive reflections on economic and 
financial activities in Mauritius during 2009 
Letter  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  to  stakeholders, 
Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, December 2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius’ website (www.bom.intnet.mu). 
 Dear Stakeholders, 
This is the third annual letter that I am addressing to you as I end my third year as Governor 
of the Central Bank. I must say that I have received positive feedback on this new medium of 
communication  that  I  initiated  two  years  back.  It  has  proved  to  be  a  very  useful  forum  to 
share with each of you my summary assessment of the domestic and global economy and 
outline my perspective on future developments. This annual letter, I believe, also contributes 
to enhance transparency and central bank communication to the outside world. I hope it will 
become a tradition for the Bank. 
What a year 2009 has been for us! Certainly a year of great turbulence and uncertainty, but 
also – against all odds – a year of considerable achievement for the Bank! When I wrote to 
you last year, the global economy was going through one of its worst crises since the Great 
Depression of the 1930’s. There were serious concerns as to which way the world economy 
was heading. Doubts began to surface on the ability of our small and vulnerable island-nation 
to  withstand  the  impact  of  the  global  recession  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  we  had  skilfully 
managed our affairs for several decades. We shared those doubts and fears and maintained 
an  outward  calm,  refusing  to  be  alarmed  by  our  own  worst-case  scenarios  while  working 
furiously  on  possible  responses  and  lining  up  adequate  tools.  The  full  force  of  the  adage 
“Gouverner, c’est prévoir” had never hit me home with such immediacy before. 
The economy, global and domestic, is in a much happier state now than a year ago. Most 
countries which were in recession are slowly pulling out of it. Stock markets have recovered, 
though  not  mercifully  to  bubble  levels.  Global  trade  is  picking  up  as  protectionist  fears 
subside.  But  we  would  be  wrong  to  believe  that  the  problems  are  over.  In  advanced 
economies, growth is still very low; unemployment is high and still rising; bank credit is yet to 
pick up and de-leveraging is yet to run its course. Worse, there is the lurking danger of the 
downside  effects  of  ill-timed  and  uncoordinated  withdrawal  of  the  massive  monetary  and 
fiscal accommodation that prevented the global economy from being sucked into what might 
have become the mother of all depressions.  
Closer to home, the year gone by was indeed challenging not just for the banking sector but 
for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  For  our  small  open  economy,  surfing  against  the  unruly  and 
unpredictable  waves  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  without  losing  our  balance  and  being 
swallowed  up,  remained  our  topmost  priority.  As  if  battling  against  these  unprecedented 
economic challenges was not enough, we ran into considerable internal turbulence which the 
institution did not deserve and could well have done without. 
In spite of these internal and external challenges during the year, my colleagues and I can 
look back on our record with a sense of pride. Some of our home-grown policies in our core 
functions have, after close examination, been hailed by the International Monetary Fund as 
worthy  of  emulation  by  other  similarly-placed  economies.  Quite  a  turnaround  for  a  country 
that,  as  carping  critics  claimed,  was  submitting  its  population  to  the  “diktats”  of  the  Fund! 
What is even more noteworthy is that we have been able to achieve this despite being the 
central bank of a very small country occupying an insignificant place in the global economy. 
In what follows, I shall comment on major developments that occurred during the past year, 
from  a  broad  and  rather  general  perspective.  Those  of  you  who  want  to  go  deeper  in  the 
issues raised, may wish to navigate the user-friendly links provided in this letter where you 
will find additional details. 
Economy 
Our  country  has  fared  relatively  better  than  many  others,  with  our  economic  growth  rate 
remaining in positive territory at 2.8 per cent. The fiscal stimulus and the parallel easing of 
our  monetary  policy  stance  did  contribute  significantly  to  uphold  business  and  consumer 
confidence. Growth  is  now  forecast  to  pick  up to  around  4.3  per  cent,  which  is  the  official 
forecast  from  the  CSO  for  2010  and  also  the  average  expected  rate  of  growth  for  sub-
Saharan Africa in 2010. But it may turn out to be higher depending on the strength of the 
global  recovery.  While  other  countries  have  seen  unemployment  rising  to  unprecedented 
highs, it is comforting to note that most people in Mauritius can feel pretty safe in their jobs. 
Reserves position 
The  gross  external  reserves  of  the  Bank  increased  by  more  than  23  per  cent  since 
December  2008  and  stood  at  nearly  Rs70  billion  in  December  2009,  while  the  net 
international reserves exceeded the Rs100 billion mark for the first time in November 2009 
and represented nearly 43 weeks’ imports. While the Bank pursued its strategy of investing 
in higher-yielding instruments, it also reviewed its investment policy to increase concentration 
in near-cash instruments to respond to the crisis. In addition, the Bank purchased two metric 
tons  of  gold  under  the  limited  gold  sales  programme  of  the  IMF  in  November  2009  to 
diversify  our  portfolio  of  foreign  assets  and  mitigate  the  impact  of  currency  volatility.  This 
more than doubled the Bank’s gold holding from 2.34 per cent to 5.69 per cent of total foreign 
exchange reserves as at 13 November 2009. 
Monetary policy 
We  achieved  major  success  in  our efforts  to  maintain  price  stability.  Inflationary  pressures 
abated considerably in 2009. The Bank conducted a counter-cyclical monetary policy in the 
year with a view to cushioning our economy from the fall-out of the crisis. At the close of the 
year, the headline inflation rate was 2.5 per cent, a level not seen for 18 years. 
I would like to underline that our commitment and success in preserving price stability has 
been  mirrored  in  anchoring  inflationary  expectations,  as  shown  by  our  own  fifth  Inflation 
Expectations  Survey,  results  of  which  have  been  released  on  the  Bank’s  website  and 
confirmed in a survey conducted by a local consultancy firm (published in a local daily on 
13 January 2010). Our monetary policy stance has been commended by the last IMF Article 
IV  mission  of  October  2009  which  considered  our  “hybrid  system  of  inflation  targeting”  as 
worthy  of  emulation  by  other  similarly-placed  economies.  Without  any  false  sense  of 
modesty, I can assert that such high-level praise, unprecedented in the annals of the Bank, 
reflects  very  well  on  the  colleagues  who  helped  me  to  deliver  on  this  core  part  of  our 
mandate. I foresee that managing imported inflation will be our major challenge for monetary 
policy this year.  
2 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
Domestic foreign exchange market 
The domestic foreign exchange situation remained relatively comfortable for most of 2009. 
The forex market was able to function without undue volatility and required no intervention on 
the part of the Bank. This was in line with our policy of allowing the free play of market forces 
to  determine  the  exchange  value  of  the  rupee  and  we  have  not  intervened  on  the  market 
since November 2008 – another record! I was pleased when the IMF offered to reclassify us 
from  a  “managed  floater”  to  a  “free  floater”,  thereby  placing  us  in  the  same  league  as 
top-notch economies of the likes of the US and the UK. 
The  rupee  exchange  rate  index,  MERI1  and  MERI2,  which  the  Bank  rolled  out  in  2008, 
declined steadily since May last year indicating an appreciation of the rupee. At the end of 
the  year,  the  build-up  of  supply  pressures  arising  from  reduced  demand  from  importers 
contributed to an acceleration in the appreciation of the rupee against major currencies. The 
strong  rupee  was  definitely  benefiting  the  consumer  in  our  import-dependent  economy  but 
export-oriented enterprises and the tourism sector began to feel the pinch and murmurs of 
impending massive layoffs became louder. We also observed that the volume of transactions 
in  the  foreign  exchange  market  was  on  the  low  side  compared  to  the  same  period  in  the 
previous  year  as  forex  sellers  began  to  hoard  their  currency.  We  actively  engaged  in 
discussions  with  the  Treasury,  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association,  the  Mauritius  Exporters’ 
Association and the Association des Hôteliers et Restaurateurs de L’Ile Maurice to come up 
with  a  win-win  solution  that  would  neither  distort  the  forex  market  –  nor,  for  that  matter, 
worsen  the  excess  rupee  liquidity  which  we  have  also  had  to  reckon  with  for  much  of  the 
year.  We  thus  devised  a  made-to-measure  mechanism  in  the  form  of  short-term  foreign 
currency swaps which we introduced just before Christmas to inject liquidity in the market, 
thereby avoiding the uncertainties that could have had financial stability implications, while 
also offering the option of T-Bills on tap to mop up any resulting excess rupee liquidity.  
Banking sector 
Performance 
Our banking sector emerged virtually unscathed from the global financial crisis. While bank 
failures  made  the  headlines  in  other  countries,  our  banks  weathered  these  difficult  times 
without any systemic or institutional failures. Banking sector assets declined very slightly by 
0.4 per cent while banking deposits increased by 2.1 per cent between December 2008 and 
December 2009. There were no visible signs of credit constraint, as advances increased by 
3.2 per cent over the same period. Overall profitability continued at satisfactory levels with a 
healthy year-on-year growth of 11.3 per cent posted for the year ended 30 June 2009. Our 
two major domestic banks recorded remarkable profit levels during the past financial year. 
This is, in my view, a great accomplishment and speaks volumes for the state of our banking 
industry and for the resilience of the real sector in our country. 
I  cannot  keep  mum  on  the  recent  “downgrading”  of  our  two  major  domestic  banks  by  the 
rating agency Moody’s. This is a sore point indeed for our banking sector as the “downgrade” 
was a result of an internal change of methodology at Moody’s and was not attributable to any 
problems  with  the  banks  concerned.  The  downgrade  of  our  two  major  banks  came  at  an 
unfortunate time and could have unduly penalised us as we strove to come up with the right 
fiscal and monetary policies to cushion our small and vulnerable economy from the fallout of 
the global financial crisis. Such actions by rating agencies make us question even more their 
credibility and the reliability of their ratings. 
Regulation and supervision 
I believe that the banking sector resisted so well in the face of the crisis partly because, as it 
unfolded, we stepped up our policymaking and took pre-emptive measures even before the 
waves  hit  our  shores.  Although  our  financial  institutions  were  already  subject  to  rigorous 
supervision, we intensified our surveillance to ensure that toxic fumes did not choke up our 
system. Then, as now, we closely followed developments elsewhere to provide the best and 
most suitable regulations for our banking system. We do not believe that there is any need 
for  a  complete  overhaul  of  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  here  in  Mauritius, 
however critical this may be for some of the developed economies. What we need is some 
tweaking and fine-tuning – as, indeed, we have been doing continuously in consultation with 
the industry and other stakeholders. 
Islamic banking 
The series of small but decisive steps we have been taking to implement Islamic banking in 
Mauritius began to bear fruit last year. We started with the organisation of an International 
Seminar on Islamic Capital Markets jointly with the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) 
and with the local collaboration of the Financial Services Commission. Discussions for the 
Bank of Mauritius to become a full member of IFSB which started there culminated with the 
Bank acquiring full membership in October 2009. The Bank of Mauritius joins the Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore  as  the  only  central  banks  from  non-Islamic  countries  on  the  IFSB 
Council. I see this adhesion to the top-league of IFSB membership as a confidence-boosting 
move  to  provide  a  supportive  environment  for  Islamic  financial  services  to  take  root  in 
Mauritius. The legal amendments having been made, the Bank is working with other central 
banks, including Bank Negara Malaysia, for the issue of an international sukuk bond. This 
will  attract  investors  from  a  wider  geographic  base,  lead  to  finer  terms  and  open  new 
avenues for our economic development. 
Public debt management 
As  the  agency  responsible  for  managing  Government  Debt  and  for  auctioning  domestic 
public debt instruments, the Bank took a number of measures to discharge this function more 
effectively: 
 
We  introduced  an  on-line  auctioning  system  in  February  2009  to  modernise  the 
system and reduce its labour-intensive nature. 
We lengthened the maturity profile of Government Debt. More instruments are now 
available for investment – Treasury Bills of 91-day, 182-day and 364-day maturities, 
Treasury Notes of 2-year, 3-year and 4-year tenors, and bonds of various maturities 
ranging from 5-years to 20-years, including inflation-linked bonds. 
We set up a Debt Management Committee and a Joint Working Group, comprising 
representatives  of 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Empowerment,  to  formulate  and  implement  Government’s  Debt  Management 
Strategy, along the lines of the recommendations of the World Bank. 
We  also  initiated  work  at  the  Bank  relating  to  a  major  review  of  Government’s 
medium-term debt strategy to include benchmarks and targets for the overall debt 
portfolio,  based  on  cost-  and  risk-analysis  to  optimize  both  the  composition  and 
tenor of the debt portfolio. 
the  Bank  and 
BIS Review 10/2010
   4 
 
Yield curve 
There were two notable developments with respect to the yield curve which I must mention. 
The  yield  curve  shifted  well  below  the  levels  of  December  2008  and  December  2007  and 
steepened significantly at the shorter end by December 2009. 
Payments and settlement system 
Modernisation of the system 
I  was  impelled  by  a  strong  motivation  to  upgrade  and  modernise  the  payments  and 
settlement system of the country and benchmark it with international standards. A modern 
payments  and  settlement  system  is  indispensable  for  the  efficient  flow  of  payments  for 
goods,  services  and  financial  assets.  Its  smooth  functioning  is  crucial  for  the  effective 
implementation of the central bank’s monetary policy and for maintaining financial stability. 
An efficient payments and settlement system can become a source of competitive advantage 
and enhance our competitiveness as an international financial centre. In my last letter, I had 
already  mentioned  the  various  projects  on  which  we  had  embarked.  I  have  unfortunately 
encountered unexpected roadblocks in the articulation of my vision for the Mauritian financial 
system  and  its  internationalisation.  However,  I  must  express  my  gratitude  to  the  banking 
community which showed dedication by their contribution to the modernisation of this public 
good. 
Regional payments and settlement system 
I  would  like  to  share  with  you  one  achievement  in  which  I  take  much  pride.  The  Bank  of 
Mauritius was chosen as settlement bank for the Regional Payments and Settlement System 
(REPSS)  of  the  COMESA  Clearing  House  against  prestigious  contestants  including  the 
Federal Reserve of New York. Just think of the enormous potential of a regional group like 
the COMESA with its combined market access of more than 415 million people and intra-
regional  trade  reaching  over  US$15  billion  in  2008  –  and  compare  it  with  our  1.2  million 
population and our US$8.5 billion GDP – and you can appreciate the sheer enormity of this 
achievement. The home-grown payment system will offer faster settlement of payments and 
is  expected  to  reduce  the  cost  of  payments  in  intra-regional  transactions  by  more  than 
50 per cent.  Each  member-state  will  thus  have  cheaper  access  to  bigger  markets.  What  a 
boost this will give to trade within the region! Over and above the incontestable benefits to 
trade within the region, I believe that the REPSS represents a springboard from which we 
can take the final leap to an African Monetary Union, while also allowing us to nurture some 
hope of playing a bigger role than our size would warrant in the African Community financial 
institutions and mechanisms that may be set up to buttress this Union. 
Mauritius Credit Information Bureau 
Recent press reports on the alleged over-indebtedness of the Mauritian population prompt 
me  to  highlight  the  key  role  that  the  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  (MCIB)  plays  in 
credit risk management. The enhanced credit information environment created by the MCIB 
has been a significant factor behind the lower non-performing loans in the banking system. 
We are extending the coverage of the MCIB to credit-offering institutions other than banks. 
Eleven leasing companies and the Mauritius Housing Company Ltd, a leading state-owned 
home  mortgage  provider,  joined  the  MCIB  in  May  2009.  Insurance  companies,  the 
Development  Bank  of  Mauritius  Ltd,  –  a  state  agency  providing  term-loans  and  which, 
despite its name, is not a bank regulated by the Bank of Mauritius and does not fall under the 
Banking  Act,  –  the  Employees  Welfare  Fund  and  The  Mauritius  Civil  Service  Mutual  Aid 
Association Ltd will be connected to the MCIB early this year.  
We are working on the inclusion of other credit providers such as hire-purchase companies 
and utility companies in the MCIB. This extended coverage will give a more complete picture 
of  the  potential  borrower’s  indebtedness.  The  MCIB  data  base  will  allow  us  to  develop 
appropriate policies to address the issue of over-indebtedness of vulnerable households. In 
fact, the issue of over-indebtedness may, in our assessment, be less severe than what some 
press comment would lead one to believe. 
Cheque truncation 
The  Bank  has  embarked  on  the  much-delayed  Cheque  Truncation  Project  jointly  with 
commercial banks. The system, upon implementation, will provide a faster clearing cycle for 
cheques,  help  combat  signature  forgery  and  cheque  alteration,  while  at  the  same  time 
significantly reducing the cost associated with cheques clearing. 
Financial stability 
When the Bank of Mauritius Act was amended in 2004, the legislator had already provided 
that the Bank’s mandate should be extended to ensuring the soundness and stability of the 
financial system. In 2007, in fact well before the global financial crisis had unfolded putting at 
stake the stability of the international financial system, the Bank had anticipated rightly that a 
proper assessment of the risks and vulnerabilities of the financial system would be essential 
for  ensuring  its  stability  and  soundness.  I  created  a  Financial  Stability  Unit  to  provide 
independent monitoring and analysis of financial stability on an on-going basis. Ancillary to 
this main function was the production of a Financial Stability Report on a bi-annual basis. In 
the  light  of  our  operating  experience  and  in  recognition  of  the  need  to  inculcate  a  greater 
awareness of financial stability issues throughout the Bank, in August 2009, I decided to put 
in place a multi-layered structure comprising officers at various levels in other Divisions of the 
Bank to develop ownership so that we are better equipped to deliver on this mandate which 
is new to central banks around the world. Furthermore, I channelled significant resources to 
allow the Bank to build capacity in this area to help us fulfil this vital function more efficiently. 
The Bank’s balance sheet 
This year, the Bank’s balance sheet will reflect the full effect of the systematic and sustained 
cuts  in  interest  rates  by  central  banks  in  major  economies,  in  whose  currencies  our 
investments are held or denominated. To put things into perspective, I need to go back to 
early  2008  when  the  domestic  system  was  submerged  by  FDI  inflows  and  the  Bank  was 
forced to intervene in the market to mop up the excess liquidity through the issue of Bank of 
Mauritius Bills in exchange for foreign exchange assets that we purchased. That is when we 
first felt the need for dynamic provisioning on account of the very clear “negative carry” in 
these transactions. Alas, our pioneering attempt to apply the dynamic provisioning approach 
had to be abandoned in the midst of much incomprehension and recrimination. This failure to 
change our accounting approach – which the Bank of Mauritius Act allows – left me with a 
feeling of deep regret because I sincerely believe that the Bank missed a golden opportunity 
to break new ground. Our balance sheet would have been in much healthier shape today. I 
intend  to  pursue  consultations  with  the  Treasury  this  year  as  I  firmly  believe  that  dynamic 
provisioning would allow us to provide for “rainy days” in times of plenty. Instead of dipping 
into our reserves, I feel that we should adopt a more conservative approach to keeping the 
books  instead  of  slavishly  adhering  to  standards  which  are  anyway  more  applicable  to 
commercial banks than to a central bank with a very different balance sheet structure. 
6 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
Regional and international presence 
The year 2009 saw the Bank playing a very active role at the regional and international level. 
We participated in various regional and international fora, namely the SADC Committee of 
Central  Bank  Governors,  the  meeting  of  Governors  of  the  Association  of  African  Central 
Banks as well as its Eastern African Sub-Regional chapter and the Commonwealth Central 
Bank Governors Meeting which I had the honour to chair, and whose report I presented to 
the Commonwealth Ministers of Finance Meeting in Cyprus. We were also closely involved in 
discussions at various fora convened to consider the African response to the crisis. We made 
our contribution to de-stigmatising access to Fund resources for countries like ours with an 
appropriate underlying policy framework in the event of crisis-induced balance of payments 
difficulties – a scenario that was very much on the cards in the first semester of the year. The 
situation improved rapidly thereafter and we could discard preliminary plans to draw on the 
IMF’s Flexible Line of Credit which, coming as it did without any ex-ante conditionality, was 
tailor-made to meet our kind of requirement. 
A  lot  has  been  said  in  some  quarters  about  the  travels  of  senior  management  including 
myself, to international meetings and conferences. Globalisation and the internationalisation 
of our banking sector require the central bank to enhance its role in professional, regional 
and  international  conclaves  –  just  as  we  have  sought  to  lend  additional  credibility  to  our 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  by  resorting  at  considerable  cost  to  the  services  of  two 
international professionals of repute as its members. At a time when there is re-thinking and 
re-modeling of the global financial architecture, I believe that participation of our central bank 
in such fora is a matter of strategic importance to ensure that Mauritius is on the world map. 
Now,  more  than ever, the “little-Mauritius” isolationist islander reflex will do a disservice to 
our  national  ambition.  For  the  sake  of  transparency,  I  am  providing,  as  in  previous  years, 
details  on  all  my  overseas  engagements  as  well  as  those  of  my  First  Deputy  Governor, 
Second Deputy Governor, and Chief Economist. 
to  make  presentations 
two  private  sector  operators 
COMESA Committee of Central Bank Governors 
We hosted the 14th Meeting of the COMESA Committee of Central Bank Governors during 
which we had the honour of welcoming Governors and their representatives to Mauritius. I 
raised  the  profile  of  the  COMESA  meeting  by  inviting  two  key  speakers  to  make 
presentations on (i) “The evolving structure and role of Monetary Policy Committees” by a 
member of the Kenya Monetary Policy Committee and (ii) “Issues of Governance in Central 
Banks” by Mr Gavin Bingham, Secretary-General of the Central Bank Governance Forum at 
the Bank for International Settlements, often called the central bank of central banks. I also 
invited 
to  Governors  on  a 
currency/commodity trading platform and secure cash conveyance. These initiatives by the 
Bank  –  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  the  COMESA  Committee  of  Governors  –  were  so 
highly  appreciated  that  the  Committee  decided  to  create  space  at  its  future  meetings  for 
invited speakers and private sector participants to address issues of direct interest to central 
bank  Governors.  At  this  14th  meeting,  the  Bank  assumed  the  chairmanship  of  this  key 
COMESA Committee, which I see as an opportunity for us to become more involved in taking 
forward the calendar of regional integration to which the Bank is deeply committed.  
The  dynamism  with  which  the  Bank  has  gone  regional,  heightened  our  visibility  on  the 
international  front  and  has  earned  us  much  respect.  I  am  grateful  for  the  support  which 
COMESA Governors lent to our successful candidature to host AFRITAC (South), one of the 
two new African Technical Assistance Centres which the IMF is establishing in Africa, in the 
face of strong regional contenders. We shall soon begin work on refurbishing the old Bank 
building to house this facility. 
I  am  also  happy  to  record  that  an  increasing  number  of  central  banks  in  the  region  are 
sending  their  Officers  on  attachment  to  the  Bank  to  learn  from  our  experience  in  various 
areas of central bank operations. Surely, we must be doing a few things right! 
Dialogue with our stakeholders 
A distinguishing feature of last year was the heightened consultation and collaboration with 
all our stakeholders. This enhanced interaction was reflected in the long consultation process 
through  which  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  guidelines  pass  before  being  finalised  and 
issued to the industry. Another egregious instance where we reach out to a wider community 
to  inform  and  enrich  our  proposed  policy  moves  is  the  pre-Monetary  Policy  Committee 
consultation process which I have initiated and where Chatham House rules are scrupulously 
followed. Representatives of major sectors of the economy and opinion leaders are invited in 
their personal capacity to the pre-MPC meetings to express their views. We have a schedule 
of  regular  meetings  with  the  banks  which  we  regulate  and  with  other  financial  and  non-
financial institutions. 
We extended our network of regulators with whom we have Memoranda of Understanding to 
include institutions such as the Central Statistics Office, the Financial Intelligence Unit and 
the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority,  because  we  firmly  believe  that  we  must  work  jointly  to 
advance the common agenda of the Government. We hosted the Annual Dinner in honour of 
Economic Operators in December 2009 which gave us the opportunity not only to share with 
them some of our concerns but also to celebrate our fruitful collaboration with them all the 
year through. We were honoured by the presence of His Excellency Tito Mboweni, who had 
just retired as Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). He shared with us his 
rich experience at the helm of SARB. These illustrate the new orientation that the Bank has 
taken  during  the  last  two  years.  We  remain  firmly  committed  to  pursue  our  dialogue  and 
deepen  our  interaction  with  all  stakeholders  for  the  betterment  of  the  industry  and  the 
country.  Lest  we  forget,  central  banking  is  all  about  the  public  good  and  advancing  public 
interest, as opposed to any specific narrow sectoral interest. 
Bank’s publications 
The  Bank  publishes  several  monthly,  six-monthly  and  yearly  reports.  For  the  second  year 
running, we published an advance release calendar of statistical publications and we have 
ensured that this calendar was adhered to, with the frequency of statistical data releases on 
our website ranging from weekly and fortnightly to the  more traditional monthly and yearly 
ones,  as  we  gear  up  to  graduate  to  the  IMF’S  SDDS.  I  strongly  advocate  greater 
transparency with respect to the functioning of the Bank and for the first time in the Bank’s 
Annual Report, we have provided some metrics on meetings of the Board of the Bank and of 
the Monetary Policy Committee. Governor Tito Mboweni commended the Bank for what he 
termed “the wealth of information” contained in our Annual Report. The last two additions to 
the  Bank’s  list  of  publications,  the  Inflation  Report  and  the  Financial  Stability  Report  have 
now run through three issues each. 
Capacity building and financial education 
The Bank has invested heavily in its human resources over the last few years. We have built 
capacity in policymaking and other technical areas directly related to central banking such as 
economic modeling, bank regulation, financial stability, risk management etc. The Bank will 
continue to build capacity in these areas. However, we now need to complement our growing 
technical knowledge to make the Bank more effective by providing training opportunities in 
leadership, team-building, management skills and talent management among others. There 
will also be study visits to other central banks with respect to cash management, currency 
handling, security and maintenance of the building, an area which I consider important now 
that we are housed in an intelligent building. 
We  expect  to  boost  up  our  financial  literacy  programme  in  2010  as  good  policymaking 
requires  that  economic  agents  understand  well  the  why’s  and  the  how’s  of  the  Bank’s 
policies. We also propose to launch an educational programme on the need to “Save for a 
8 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
better  future”,  aimed  at  disseminating  knowledge  on  financial  products  and  helping 
households to better manage their income. 
Platinum commemorative coin 
I am proud that last year, the Bank joined the exclusive league of central banks which have 
issued a platinum coin. We went one step further. We inaugurated a series of three platinum 
coins – one was issued last year and the other two will be launched this year and in 2011. 
The coin pays a fitting tribute to Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, our first Prime Minister, and 
subsequently Governor-General, and fondly remembered by one and all as the “Father of the 
Nation”.  This  platinum  series  has  enhanced  the  Bank’s  collection  of  commemorative  and 
special  coins,  which  is  now  more  visible  and  accessible  to  collectors  and  the  public  in 
general through greater promotion on our part. 
Overall assessment of the year 2009 
These are some of the highlights of our activities at the Bank in the past year. I must admit 
that the year gone by was also marked by some avoidable events which we would prefer to 
forget. There were some distractions and turbulences which we weathered by fastening our 
seatbelts  and  remaining  resolutely  focused  on  our  priorities.  Unfortunately,  we  made  local 
headlines for reasons which were not directly related to the core functions of the Bank, that is 
maintaining  price  stability  and  promoting  orderly  and  balanced  economic  development.  It 
saddened me terribly that the steep decline in inflation, our well-calibrated monetary policy 
stance, our prudent and judicious management  of our foreign exchange reserves, and our 
exchange  rate  framework  so  well-suited  to  the  needs  of  the  economy,  did  not  elicit  any 
remotely-comparable  press  coverage.  I  am  happy,  however,  that  international  institutions 
such as the International Monetary Fund gave us the pat on the shoulder which we so badly 
needed to stay on course. 
As I have mentioned time and again, the unhappy situation which prevailed in the Boardroom 
traces  its  origin  in  a  conflicting  interpretation  of  the  role  and  responsibilities  of  the  Bank’s 
executive management and its Board. I am hopeful we shall see the end of this unnecessary 
tussle,  now  that  the  matter  has  been  referred  to  the  Supreme  Court  as  a  by-product  of  a 
case where a Bank employee is suing the Bank as his employer. 
On 14 February 2007, the Prime Minister placed his confidence in my ability to head the central 
bank of the country. And, on his recommendation, the President appointed me as Governor 
and Chairman of the Board of the Bank for a specified term. I have made every effort to fulfil 
the duties devolving on me under the Bank of Mauritius Act to the best of my ability. I hope I 
have given satisfaction to my appointing authority and to all stakeholders. In this year when 
many Central Bank Governors from Argentina to Zimbabwe have faced a barrage of criticism, I 
have  not  been  spared.  But  I  understand  that  even  my  worst  critics  have  admitted  that  my 
professional  work  does  not  occasion  criticism  although  many  decry  my  “bedside  manners”. 
With hindsight, I look back at the past three years with a sense of accomplishment. 
But I also have a few regrets. Under my stewardship, the Bank has been endowed with a 
new  structure  that  allows  it  to  function  more  effectively  but,  unfortunately,  we  have  been 
unable to provide the staff with the kind of remuneration package that would align their level 
of responsibilities and performance with their pay packet. This constitutes a major setback for 
me as I firmly believe that the productivity-related pay, by which I set much store, would have 
propelled the Bank to new heights in terms of the quality of staff that we would have been 
able to recruit and retain. I am, however, determined to ensure that the unfinished agenda, to 
the extent it is in the hands of the executive management, is taken to its logical conclusion, 
and I am confident of resolving all other issues in the best interest of the institution and the 
economy. 
Dear  Stakeholders,  as  I  conclude  this  letter  to  you  on  what  I  believe  are  some  of  the 
highlights of the year just gone by, may I leave you with a question to reflect upon? In the 
storm-tossed seas buffeting the global economy in the wake of the worst crisis that the world 
has seen since the Great Depression, don’t you find it remarkable that our small, open and 
vulnerable island-economy has been a haven of such incomparable stability- exchange rate 
stability, financial stability, monetary stability, price stability, employment stability and social 
stability?  This  happy  outcome  was  neither  serendipity  nor  happenstance.  Our  Bank 
contributed to it. And I am proud to have led the Bank in these troubled, testing and turbulent 
times. 
I wish you a happy and prosperous 2010. 
10 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
