Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Economic ties between China and Malaysia 
Address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (Malaysia) Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 28 April 2010. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  on  the  official  launch  of  Industrial  and 
Commercial  Bank  of  China  (Malaysia)  Berhad  (ICBC).  The  establishment  of  ICBC  in 
Malaysia,  the  largest  commercial  bank  in  the  world  today,  represents  an  important 
development in forging stronger economic and financial ties between the People’s Republic 
of  China  and  Malaysia.  This  licence  is  issued  pursuant  to  the  arrangement  entered  into 
between  the  Government  of  Malaysia  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  in  2009, 
reinforcing a long-term relationship that has been strengthened over the years. The presence 
of  ICBC,  in  our  financial  system  will  pave  the  way  for  increased  business  and  investment 
opportunities between our two countries. 
As Asia leads the global recovery and with the progressive liberalisation in the region, the 
economic integration of the Asian region can be expected to strengthen further. Today, intra-
regional trade in Asia has increased to an average of 50% of the total exports of the region 
as compared to 32% in 1995. The underlying structural and demographic changes in Asia 
are  expected  to  reinforce  this  trend.  In  addition,  as  domestic  demand  in  the  regional 
economies increases, it will provide further impetus to intra-regional trade and to the overall 
prospects for Asia. In the area of infrastructure development in Asia, the overall investment 
requirements for the next ten years are estimated to be about USD8 trillion.  
To support these developments, the regional financial integration process in Asia needs to 
be  accelerated  and  deepened.  Significant  progress  has  already  been  achieved  in 
strengthening cooperation and collaboration efforts amongst regional policymakers within the 
Asian  region  to  ensure  that  financial  stability  in  the  region  is  preserved.  Efforts  have  also 
been taken to develop the financial markets in Asia. In addition, after a decade of financial 
reforms, the financial systems in Asia have emerged resilient. While the financial systems in 
several  of  the  advanced  economies  continue  to  be  confronted  by  unresolved  challenges, 
financial systems in the region have continued to function and perform well to support private 
sector economic activity. Financial institutions in Asia, have in fact, continued to expand their 
reach within the region during this period to support and facilitate the regional financial and 
economic integration. As regional financial integration accelerates moving forward, this would 
contribute towards sustaining the future prospects of the region as it increasingly becomes 
an important growth centre in the world economy.  
With China now becoming Malaysia’s largest trading partner, Bank Negara Malaysia and the 
People’s Bank of China have entered into a bilateral currency swap arrangement  in 2009. 
This swap arrangement serves as a key platform to promote trade and investment linkages 
between both countries. In March of this year, Bank Negara Malaysia established a Reuters 
page  for  the  RMB/MYR  exchange  rate  for  trade-related  settlements,  with  11  banking 
institutions offering the facility to Malaysian companies. A cost-effective arrangement is now 
being  finalised  to  provide  the  option  for  exporters  and  importers  to  settle  bilateral  trade 
obligations  in  local  currency  by  the  middle  of  this  year.  This  will  complement  the  existing 
facilities that are already being provided by commercial banks in the settlement of trade in 
RMB. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  also  signed  a  memorandum  of  understanding  with  the  China 
Banking Regulatory Commission in 2009 to further strengthen the framework for cooperation 
and  collaboration  between  both  authorities,  and  to  promote  regional  financial  integration. 
This MOU provides the platform for both regulatory agencies to share information, to ensure 
the  enforcement  of  prudential  rules  and  regulations  and  to  undertake  pre-emptive  actions 
BIS Review 58/2010 
 1
towards  ensuring  the  sound  development  of  financial  institutions  operating  in  both  the 
respective  jurisdictions.  This  MOU  also  provides  an  established  mechanism  to  enhance 
cooperation  in  areas  that  will  be  mutually  beneficial  for  the  development  of  the  financial 
sector in both countries. 
With  respect  to  the  performance  of  the  Malaysian  financial  sector,  it  has  demonstrated  its 
resilience throughout the recent global financial crisis. Financial intermediation has remained 
intact with the banking institutions in a strong position to support the economy. This has been 
reinforced by fiscal and monetary measures to ensure adequate access to financing by all 
segments  of  the  private  sector.  Malaysia  has  also  pursued  its  longer  term  strategy  to 
enhance the role of the financial sector in supporting the transition to become a high value-
added, high income economy. Despite the challenging economic environment in 2009, key 
liberalisation measures were introduced as part of this strategy to enhance the longer term 
vision for the financial sector to facilitate this economic transformation. 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  We  look  forward  to  ICBC’s  commitment  and  contribution 
towards  promoting  greater  economic  and  financial  linkages  between  China  and  Malaysia. 
We  congratulate  you  on  this  historic  occasion  and  we  welcome  your  presence  into  the 
Malaysian financial system. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2010
