Leasi Papali’i Scanlan: Financial inclusion and mobile banking in Samoa 
Address by Mr Leasi Papali’i Scanlan, Governor of the Central Bank of Samoa, at the official 
opening of the Workshop/Information Exchange on “Financial Inclusion and Mobile Banking 
in Samoa”, Apia, 20 January 2010. 
 At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  of  you  for  accepting  our  invitation  to  participate  in 
today’s Workshop on Mobile Money and Mobile Banking, which are two key strategies for 
implementing  what  is  known  as  Financial  Inclusion.  I  would  also  like  to  extend  a  warm 
welcome  to  our  partners  on  financial  inclusion  in  the  Pacific,  Mr.  Tillman  Bruett  and 
Mr. Michael  McCaffrey  of  the  United  Nations  Capital  Development  Fund’s  Pacific 
Financial Inclusion Program. 
As stated in our invitation letter, you have been identified as Individuals and Representatives 
of Organizations with the potential to make a significant contribution to financial inclusion 
and financial literacy; especially those of you with an interest in mobile telephones and 
financial services businesses in general. I trust that the free exchange of your valuable 
knowledge  and  experiences,  will  not  only  greatly  benefit  the  other  Participants  of  today’s 
Workshop but also Financial Inclusion (as a whole) in Samoa. 
In  July  2009,  I  attended  a  Pacific  Regional  Meeting  in  Fiji  to  discuss  the  advent  of 
Microfinance in the Pacific. At this Meeting, I was introduced to the concept of Financial 
Inclusion, and I was subsequently convinced of its relevance and importance to Samoa. 
As you will be hearing from Mr. Tillman Bruett, Financial Inclusion is simply described as the 
extension of financial services, at affordable costs, to reach those that are classified as the 
“unbanked”.  These  are  people  who  have  little  or  no  access  to  formal  financial  services 
generally, not only as a result of the lack of financial education, but also due to their rural and 
isolated  locations  or  low  incomes.  The  purpose  of  the  many  Financial  Inclusion  strategies 
that are being implemented around the world, is to connect these “unbanked” people with the 
formal  banking  system,  to  enable  them  benefit  from  the  various  financial  services  that  are 
available,  and  thus  help  equip  them  with  the  confidence  to  make  informed  financial 
decisions. 
Financial  Inclusion  has  the  potential  to  play  a  very  important  role  in  Samoa’s  economic 
development. Traditionally, much of the efforts of the Central Bank of Samoa (like most other 
central banks in the world) have been concentrated on promoting financial and economic 
stability,  on  the  “macro”  level.  Unfortunately,  there  has  not  been  enough  attention  given 
directly to developing and promoting the “micro” sector of the economy, which accounts for 
the major part of the population. 
Reflecting the leading roles increasingly played by many overseas central banks, in driving 
Financial  Inclusion  in  their  economies,  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Samoa  recently 
approved for the Bank’s mandate to be expanded to include Financial Inclusion. No longer 
will the Central Bank of Samoa stand on the sidelines and play only a promotional role, and 
hoping for the desired economic and financial results to eventuate. 
The adoption of Financial Inclusion, as part of our mandate will ensure that the Central Bank 
takes  on  a  more  holistic  approach  to  promoting  and  maintaining  financial  and  economic 
stability in the country. Moreover, it would lend support to Government’s efforts to facilitate 
the achievement by Samoa of the Millennium Development Goals, on a timely basis. 
Here at the Central Bank of Samoa, Financial Inclusion is tasked to the Financial Research 
and Markets Development Area, headed by Deputy Governor Losefo Bourne. The Financial 
Markets  Department  assumes  the  role  of  Financial  Inclusion  Secretariat,  supported  by  a 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
1
for 
Initiatives  have  presented  great  opportunities 
financial  inclusion  team  comprising  of  selected  staff  from  the  Research  and  Statistics, 
Banking and Corporate Services and Financial Institutions Departments. 
Financial  Inclusion  is  not  a  completely  new  concept,  as  some  elements  of  it  (particularly 
Micro Credit Schemes) have already been implemented in some countries of the Pacific, 
including here Samoa. And, these micro-credit schemes have been promoted mostly through 
private Non-Government Organisations. 
In  the  Pacific  Region,  Financial  Inclusion  is  being  spearheaded  by  the  Pacific  Financial 
Inclusion Program of the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), with their 
Head Office located in Fiji. Recognizing its great potential to alleviate poverty in the Pacific, 
the  UNCDF  has  joined  forces  with  the  UNDP,  the  European  Union,  AUSAID  and  other 
Donor Agencies together with Governments and central banks in the region, to drive and 
spread the benefits of financial inclusion throughout the Pacific Island Countries. 
For  today’s  Workshop,  the  focus  will  be  on  Mobile  Money  and  Banking,  an  important 
Financial Inclusion strategy already launched in many developing countries. And, I don’t want 
to  pretend  that  I  am  an  expert  on  mobile  money  or  mobile  banking.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that 
these 
the  previously  unbanked 
communities  in  large,  developing  countries  such  as  Kenya,  the  Philippines,  Mexico,  and 
Brazil to name a few. 
Here at the Central Bank of Samoa, we believe that the introduction of mobile money and 
mobile  banking  in  the  domestic  economy  will  be  hugely  beneficial.  It  will  allow  better 
financial access to our low-income community in the rural and isolated areas as well as to 
improve and speed up our payments system. 
In  launching  an  Automatic  Teller  Machine  (or  ATM)  for  one  of  the  commercial  banks 
yesterday, I acknowledged the benefits of having and maintaining bank branches out in the 
rural areas, as these will help increase access to financial services. It is expected that some 
of these rural branches will not be financially viable in the short term. But, in the longer term, 
as more people become more financial literate, business activities will increase and thus help 
generate more revenue for these bank branches. 
Financial literacy and financial inclusion also has great potential to address several issues 
specific  to  the  economy  of  Samoa,  like  reducing  the  current  relatively  high  costs  of 
Remittances into the country. 
Today’s  Exchange  of  Information  on  Mobile  Money  and  Mobile  Banking  kick  starts  the 
Central Bank’s involvement in Financial Inclusion. To this end, I would like to acknowledge, 
with  appreciation,  the  kind  assistance  of  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Program  of  the 
UNCDF and AUSAID in assisting the Bank in its new role by co-hosting and co-sponsoring 
today’s Workshop and Information Exchange. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  encourage  you  to  share  generously  your  knowledge  and 
experiences in your specific fields of expertise so that we are able to put together an effective 
and secure mobile money and banking network for Samoa. 
Because  you  may  not  have  sufficient  time  to  fully  cover  the  important  topics  that  you  are 
going to discuss, I hope that at the end of the formal part of the Workshop, we can all relax 
and continue the dialogue over some refreshments. 
With  these  brief  remarks,  I  would  now  like  to  welcome  to  the  podium  our  Information 
Exchange  Co-ordinators,  Mr.  Tillman  Bruett  and  Mr.  Michael  McCaffrey,  of  the  UNCDF 
Pacific Financial Inclusion Program. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Soifua. 
2 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
