Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Foreign reserve management 
Welcome remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, 
at  the  third  BIS  Meeting  on  Reserve  Management  in  Africa  co-hosted  by  the  Bank  of 
Uganda, Kampala, 18 March 2010. 
 The  BIS  Meeting  Chairman  –  Mr  Louis  de  Montpellier  (Deputy  Head  of  Banking 
Department, BIS) 
Distinguished Resource Persons and Participants from Central Banks in Africa  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I would like to begin by extending to you all a very warm welcome to this meeting: the third 
BIS  Meeting  on  Reserve  Management  in  Africa.  I  would  also  like  to  welcome  our  foreign 
guests to Uganda, especially those who are visiting this country for the first time. I hope that 
this  meeting  will  prove  very  productive  and  that  your  visit  to  Uganda  will  be  a  memorable 
one. I would also like to thank the Bank for International Settlements for granting Uganda the 
honour of hosting this meeting. 
The Bank of Uganda is very pleased to co-host this meeting with the BIS because it comes 
at  a  critical  time  for  central  banks  in  Africa,  which  are  still  grappling  with  the  myriad 
consequences of the global economic crisis. 
Foreign  reserves  management  is  a  core  function  of  central  banks  all  over  the  world.  It  is 
particularly  important  for  developing  countries.  Many  developing  countries  have  suffered 
balance  of  payments  crises,  often  as  a  result  of  large  terms  of  trade  shocks  or  “sudden 
stops” in the capital account. Many African countries suffered BOP crises in the 1980s while 
the 1990s saw BOP crises in emerging market economies; in Latin America, East Asia and 
the former Soviet Union. 
The  costs  of  BOP  crises,  in  terms  of  lost  output,  bankrupt  firms  and  foregone  budget 
revenue, are usually very high. The lesson we have learned from past episodes of external 
shocks is that it makes sense to put in place a strategy to protect our economies from the 
risk of a BOP crisis. One arm of such a strategy comprises sound macroeconomic policies; 
including sustainable fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies. 
The other arm is to maintain a substantial buffer of international reserves, which can be used 
to  support  the  BOP  in  the  event  of  an  adverse  external  shock.  This  motivated  many 
developing and emerging market economies to build up their international reserves to record 
levels  in  the  2000s.  Uganda  was  part  of  this  trend.  Our  gross  international  reserves  have 
increased almost fourfold in the last 10 years: from $760 million at the end of 1999 to nearly 
$2.8 billion today. The countries of Sub-Saharan Africa increased their reserves on average 
from 3.8 months of imports of goods and services at the start of the 2000s to 5.5 months in 
2009. 
The decision by central banks to accumulate reserves has proved farsighted. Many African 
economies,  including  Uganda,  are  weathering  the  current  global  crisis  with  much  less 
damage to their economies than was the case with previous major external shocks, such as 
the oil crises of the 1970s. One of the reasons for the greater resilience of African economies 
to  external  shocks  is  that  they  now  have  much  larger  buffers  of  international  reserves  to 
support  their  balance  of  payments,  although  the  improvement  in  their  macroeconomic 
management undoubtedly made a more important contribution. 
With  countries  across  the  continent  holding  higher  levels  of  international  reserves,  the 
management  of  these  reserves  to  maximize  the  benefits  which  can  be  derived  from  them 
becomes ever more important. Traditionally, central bank reserve management has focused 
on three objectives, commonly referred to as the “classic trilogy of objectives”. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 1
In order of importance, this trilogy of objectives is: 
 
 
Safety of capital – through the prudent management of risks; 
Liquidity – the availability of reserves at short notice and at minimal cost to meet 
unforeseen requirements and; 
Reasonable  consistent  rates  of  financial  return  –  this  objective  is  normally 
subordinated to the safety and liquidity objectives. 
 In pursuit of this trilogy of objectives, most central banks adopt a conservative approach to 
the management of their foreign reserves. Like Silas Marner, central banks hoard their gold 
zealously. I think it is fair to say that this approach, with the attendant governance and risk 
management frameworks that guide its implementation, has also been vindicated by events 
arising  from  the  global  financial  crisis  in  that  central  banks  have  not  suffered  significant 
losses  of  capital  despite  the  dramatic  falls  in  value  of  many  different  classes  of  financial 
assets on world markets. Nor was the liquidity of central bank reserves impaired even though 
liquidity dried up in many sections of the financial markets around the world. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has,  however,  created  new  challenges  for  the  management  of 
reserves by central banks, in several important respects. First, interest rates on fixed income 
securities and in money markets in the industrialised economies have fallen to near record 
low levels as a result of the extraordinary measures taken by central banks in these countries 
to inject liquidity in order to bolster financial markets and aggregate demand. A three month 
United States Treasury Bill currently yields only 0.13 percent and a three year US Treasury 
bond yields only 1.5 percent. 
How long interest rates will remain this low is very difficult to forecast, but I’m sure that you 
will have noted the statement by the United States Federal Reserve on Tuesday of this week 
that economic conditions “are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds 
rate for an extended period.” 
Because of the prevailing low interest rates on the traditional safe assets which dominate the 
portfolios  of  central  banks,  their  reserve  managers  are  facing  increasing  pressure  to  find 
ways of enhancing income, not least because the income generated by reserves is the main 
source of operating revenue for many central banks. As such central banks are starting to 
examine  whether  they  need  to  diversify  their  reserve  asset  portfolios  to  embrace  types  of 
financial assets which can offer higher yields without impairing the liquidity and safety of their 
portfolios. 
A second consequence of the global financial crisis for reserve management is that it has 
radically changed our view of risks in financial markets. We now know that transactions with 
financial institutions and markets which, prior to the crisis, were perceived as being virtually 
risk free can actually carry very significant counterparty and credit risk, as well as liquidity 
risk. 
One other development which has implications for reserve management bears noting. The 
long term dominance of the US dollar in global financial markets may wane, raising the issue 
of  whether  reserve  managers  should  seek  to  establish  a  more  balanced  currency 
composition of their asset portfolios, and if so, what criteria should guide this. 
To meet the challenges posed by low interest rates and the changing nature of risk, central 
banks  must  strengthen  the  technical  capacities  of  their  staff  for  reserve  management.  In 
particular  they  need  to  deepen  their  understanding  of  the risk/return  tradeoff  in  their  asset 
portfolios and they must develop more sophisticated risk management tools. 
This  third  BIS  Meeting  on  Reserve  Management  is  very  timely.  It  presents  a  unique 
opportunity for reserve managers to examine the challenges they face and identify solutions. 
The agenda for the meeting will cover the issues I have highlighted in my remarks as well as 
other important issues for reserve management, such as cooperation among central banks in 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2010
reserve  management.  I  am  confident  that  you  will  be  able  to  take  back  to  your  respective 
central banks a wealth of new ideas to strengthen your reserve management. 
Finally, let me implore you to spare a small part of your precious time to enjoy the beauty of 
this country, the delicious food and the warmth and hospitability of its people. I have heard 
that some of you took a trip to the source of the River Nile in Jinja yesterday and others are 
set to visit Murchison Falls National Park on Saturday. I will be happy to join you later this 
evening at the dinner which the Bank of Uganda will host. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  wish  you  a  very  successful  meeting.  Thank  you  for  your  kind 
attention. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 3
