Jürgen Stark: Towards a stability-oriented policy framework 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the conference “Reconstructing the world economy – redesigning the macro-framework”, 
organised  by  the  Korea  Development  Institute  and  International  Monetary  Fund,  Seoul, 
25 February 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In discussing the current macroeconomic framework, I will focus on the institutional aspects 
that have proved successful, in particular, from the European perspective. These are central 
bank independence, the centrality of price stability for monetary policy and the need to adopt 
a medium-term, rules-based perspective in the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies. The 
financial crisis has not contested or discredited these three principles.  
However,  it  is  certainly  true  that  other  aspects  of  the  international  consensus  framework 
merit some deep re-thinking. I will take this opportunity to share my thoughts on four such 
elements, namely inflation targeting, central banking as risk management, monetary policy 
and asset prices, and fiscal policy.  
The reference model 
Inflation targeting, together with the canonised version of the New Keynesian model on which 
it  is  predicated,  is  perhaps  the  main  building  block  of  the  pre-crisis  consensus  paradigm. 
Although  they  are  closely  connected,  I  wish  to  separate  the  policy  prescriptions  from  the 
underlying model, and address each in turn.  
The shortcomings of the New Keynesian modelling paradigm have been recognised before. 
But addressing them has not yielded a paradigm shift to overcome them.  
The first shortcoming of this paradigm is its inability to explain and recognise the importance 
of financial frictions and the role of money. Money is at best ignored – and at worst derided – 
as  a  redundant  and  unnecessary  complication.  This  has  to  do  with  the  fragile  theoretical 
foundations  of  the  mechanisms  which  –  in  this  paradigm  –  account  for  the  connection 
between the real economy, financial imbalances, and the state of confidence and inflation. 
This disregarding of money goes hand-in-hand with the assumption of the absence of risk. 
The mainstream model excludes default. If assets are formulated at all, they all net out. No 
risk  generated  in  the  financial  sector  can  affect  the  real  economy.  The  financial  crisis  has 
clearly  exposed  the  flaws  in  this  assumption.  It  has  led  to  a  misapprehension  of  the  root 
causes of the crisis and its propagation mechanism. 
Liquidity and money are key for the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Far from showing that 
the ECB’s strategy lacks theoretical foundations, the crisis has borne out our broad-based 
approach and exposed the incompleteness of the transmission mechanism in the reference 
model. 
The second shortcoming of this paradigm is its undue focus on small economic fluctuations 
around benign states of the economy. This left economists unprepared in terms of being able 
to predict the crisis and its impact. 
Third, the paradigm rests on the built-in assumption that the announcement of an inflation 
target automatically yields credibility. The canonised version of the model does not allow for 
an  understanding  of  how  institutional  strength  and  a  track  record  affect  credibility. 
Institutional  strength  requires  central  bank 
legal 
independence is a necessary, but by no means sufficient prerequisite. 
independence, 
for  which, 
turn, 
in 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 1
Inflation targeting 
The reference model has been at the heart of inflation targeting approaches. In brief, inflation 
targeting can be summed up as follows:  
First,  take  inflation  and  output  gap  forecasts  as  summary  statistics  of  the  state  of  the 
economy.  
Second, ignore a host of variables, particularly money and credit. Assume that these adjust 
to the state of the economy, but do not influence it independently.  
Third, fine-tune the policy instrument so that inflation forecasts – whatever the nature of the 
shocks that might have caused them – are stabilised, and output volatility is minimised, at a 
pre-set horizon. 
It  has  long  been  known  that  it  is  misleading  to  limit  the  information  set  to  output  gap  and 
inflation forecasts. Output gaps are ill-defined and cannot be accurately measured.  
Furthermore,  inflation  forecasts  are  not  summary  statistics  of  the  state  of  the  economy. 
Different underlying shocks – even though they might lead to the same inflation forecast – 
can have vastly different implications for policy.  
Risk management 
It has frequently been argued that central banks should act as risk managers by organising 
their framework around events with a high deflationary impact. To minimise the likelihood of 
deflation,  central  banks  should  err  on  the  lax  side  and  aim  at  significantly  higher  inflation 
rates.  With  this  in  mind,  the  IMF  asks  whether  a  permanent  inflation  target  of  4%  is 
appropriate. The proposal is nothing less than asking whether in the pursuit of price stability 
central banks put macroeconomic stability at risk.  
I do see the temptation for governments to ask for higher inflation in order to monetise the 
dramatic  build-up  of  public  debt  in  nearly  all  advanced  economies.  This  is  why  calling  on 
central banks to raise inflation rates permanently is most unhelpful. It deflects from the most 
pressing problem that, currently, macroeconomic stability is threatened by the unsustainable 
position  of  public  finances  in  nearly  all  advanced  economies.  I  can  only  reject  the  idea  of 
raising inflation rates permanently. I would not like to imagine the consequences if, on top of 
the current financial fragilities and in an environment of high public debt, the general public 
were to lose trust in the purchasing power of money.  
There is no evidence whatsoever to support that deviating from price stability and aiming at 
an inflation rate of 4% would enhance economic prosperity or growth. On the contrary, no 
one would seriously deny that inflation has a detrimental impact.  
The  inflation  tax  does  not  constitute  just  another  tax  distortion.  It  greatly  exacerbates 
distortions from existing taxes, contributing to a misallocation of resources and a rise in the 
tax  burden,  especially  for  lower-income  households,  and  ultimately  depresses  economic 
growth.  
It is an irrefutable empirical fact that inflation variability rises with the level of inflation, which 
in turn increases uncertainty for investors and long-term interest rates through a rise in the 
inflation risk premium.  
A  permanent  increase  in  inflation  curtails,  rather  than  stimulates,  long-term  growth.  A 
considerable body of empirical research finds that the Phillips curve has a negative bent in 
the long run: inflation and inflation volatility penalise capital formation and thus detract from 
the economy’s growth potential.  
Empirical  evidence  confirms  this  negative  relationship,  with  a  100  basis  point  permanent 
increase  in  inflation  being  associated  with  a  10–30  basis  point  decrease  in  trend  output 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2010
growth. Hence, if this is applied to the euro area, a 4% inflation target would shave no less 
than half a percentage point per year off trend growth!  
As for using monetary policy to manage macroeconomic risk, it should be recognised that 
this would introduce harmful asymmetries. It avoids policy restriction when positive supply-
side  shocks  reduce  inflation,  fuelling  asset  price  booms;  and  when  the  asset  price  boom 
finally turns into a bust, it leads central banks to overreact to negative demand-side shocks. 
So,  financial  instability  meets  two  formidable  multipliers,  the  first  being  a  pro-cyclical 
monetary response to expansionary disinflations in good times and the second being moral 
hazard  in  financial  markets,  namely  the  expectation  that  the  central  bank  will  aggressively 
protect the markets from “tail events” in bad times. These expectations encourage markets to 
tend towards risky strategies, over-exposures and exuberance.  
Monetary policy and asset prices 
It is worth mentioning the role of asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy. A long series 
of  booms  and  busts  over  the  past  four  decades  have  demonstrated  that  asset  price 
developments  can  pose  serious  threats  to  macroeconomic  and  price  stability,  and  that, 
therefore,  central  banks  cannot  simply  neglect  them.  In  this  respect,  it  appears  that  a 
comprehensive monetary policy strategy, which also gives prominence to money and credit 
developments,  might  be  better  able  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  of  financial  exuberance. 
Central  banks  should  be  equipped with  a  broad-based  analytical  framework  for  monitoring 
and analysing in detail such developments. At the ECB, this approach is underpinned by the 
monetary analysis, the second pillar of our monetary policy strategy.  
Fiscal policy 
For many commentators, the financial crisis has underlined the need for a return of the State 
in  managing  macroeconomic  developments.  Of  course,  together  with  central  bank  liquidity 
support,  discretionary  government  intervention  has  been  key  in  forestalling  a  repeat  of  a 
1930s-style depression. However, we are observing a drift in public liabilities that will prove 
hard to correct with the usual stabilisers. In some countries, this drift actually has nothing to 
do with the financial crisis. It is rooted in the policy hyper-activism that was already in place 
before the crisis. And this despite the obvious dangers of an overreactive fiscal stance, which 
cannot be decided and implemented without long lags.  
Here, fiscal rules, such as the Stability and Growth Pact in the European Union can help. If 
given enough authority, rules can induce symmetric behaviour.  
It remains to be seen how the discretionary fiscal measures adopted in response to the crisis 
can be wound down and reversed to support fiscal sustainability in the longer run. Since the 
ECB  has  started  to  gradually  phase  out  its  extraordinary  liquidity  support  measures,  fiscal 
authorities  should  also  start  to  withdraw  stimulus  to  safeguard  public  solvency  over  the 
medium  term.  To  support  this,  we  have  the  right  mechanisms  in  place  in  Europe. 
Governments will have to comply with and, as experience shows, even re-enforce the fiscal 
rules enshrined in the Stability and Growth Pact.  
Concluding remarks: some lessons 
From this quick overview, I draw two lessons for monetary policy. 
The  first  lesson  to  be  learned  is  that  central  banks  need  to  broaden  –  not  restrict  –  their 
overview of the economy. Monetary data are critical in warning against risks that are slow to 
appear  in  inflation  forecasts.  Monetary  analysis  at  the  ECB  consistently  sent  early  signals 
that risk was broadly under-priced, when inflation was quiescent and measures of slack were 
moderate. 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 3
The second lesson is that price stability is the only anchor which can pin down the economy 
in  turbulent  times.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  guarantee  financial  stability,  but  it  is  certainly 
necessary to prevent financial instability.  
Increasing the level of inflation that central banks should aim at would be a step in the wrong 
direction. Our price stability mandate has not constrained us from responding forcefully and 
successfully  to  the  biggest  disinflationary  shock  experienced  in  generations.  With  inflation 
rates  in  the  euro  area  currently  projected  to  be  slightly  above  1%  in  the  short  to  medium 
term,  deflation  risks  continue  to  be  absent,  and  price  stability  has  been  maintained.  Most 
importantly, of course, price stability has not compromised macroeconomic stability. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2010
