Ric Battellino: Twenty years of economic growth 
Address by Mr Ric Battellino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Moreton 
Bay Regional Council, Redcliffe, Queensland, 20 August 2010. 
I would like to thank my colleagues in the Bank’s Economic Group for their assistance with this talk, particularly 
Susan Black and Cathie Close.  
 Introduction 
1. 
The Australian economy has started what will be its twentieth year of economic growth. This 
has  been  a  remarkable  performance  –  one  that  is  unprecedented  both  in  Australia’s 
economic history and among other developed economies over this period. It raises a number 
of interesting questions:  
 
why was Australia able to record such a good performance; were we just lucky, or 
were there economic policy decisions that contributed to it?  
how has this growth been distributed across the nation? and  
what is the likelihood of it continuing?  
 
 
I would like to focus on these issues in my talk today, but, before I do, it might be useful if I 
set out some facts and figures.  
Historical and international comparisons 
2. 
Following the recession in the early 1990s, the Australian economy began to grow again in 
the September quarter 1991 (Graph 1). In the period since, the economy has grown in every 
quarter except three.  
Graph 1 
 BIS Review 108/2010 
  1
There were a couple of periods when economic growth slowed noticeably, but at no time did 
year-ended  growth  turn  negative.  The  lowest  rate  that  year-ended  growth  fell  to  was 
0.7 per cent. That was in the year to the March quarter 2009. The other slowdown was in  
2000–2001, when growth slowed to 1.4 per cent.  
I  should  note  that,  while  growth  remained  positive,  both  these  slowdowns  in  economic 
activity did cause a noticeable rise in unemployment.  
The period since 1991 is the longest period of growth that Australia has recorded for at least 
the past century. The next longest period during which year-ended growth remained positive 
was the 13 years between 1961 and 1974.1 In the 1970s and 1980s, growth phases typically 
lasted only seven or eight years before another recession hit.  
As I mentioned, no other developed economy has experienced uninterrupted growth over the 
past 20 years. In fact, many developed economies have experienced two episodes of negative 
growth during that period: one in 2001 following the collapse of the dot-com bubble; and one in 
2008 following the collapse of the US sub-prime housing bubble. Even among the fast-growing 
emerging economies, such an extended period of growth is rare, as most of these countries 
were affected at some point by the various crises that occurred over that period.  
Australia’s performance, therefore, is quite unusual and I think it is worth spending some time 
thinking about how it was achieved.  
Factors contributing to this performance 
3. 
Part of the growth came, of course, from the fact that the population grew strongly over the 
period, particularly in recent years. Some people might also say that Australia was just lucky: 
that  it  was  well-placed  to  take  advantage  of  the  emergence  of  China,  both  in  terms  of  its 
location and the composition of its exports. I think these factors have played a role, but they 
are only a small part of the explanation. The China story has been significant only over the 
past five years; most of its significance still lies ahead. Remember, too, that the country that 
was our main export market, Japan, has experienced very subdued economic growth over 
the past 20 years, and that several other of our Asian trading partners experienced a very 
severe  economic  crisis  in  the  1990s.  I  would  therefore  conclude  that  our  luck  has  been 
somewhat  mixed,  and  we  need  to  look  to  other  factors  to  explain  Australia’s  good  growth 
performance.  
I  won’t  pretend  to  be  able  to  provide  a  detailed  analysis  of  these  factors  in  the  short  time 
available today, but I do want to highlight a couple of factors I think have been important. 
These are the increased flexibility of the Australian economy and the pursuit of prudent and 
disciplined financial policies.  
The Australian economy over the past 20 years has shown a greater degree of flexibility than 
was the case in the 1970s and 1980s. This has made it more resilient to the various external 
shocks  that  have  been  experienced  over  the  period:  the  Asian  crisis;  the  collapse  of  the 
dot-com bubble; and the recent collapse of the US sub-prime credit bubble, to name some of 
the more severe.  
One of the key elements in that flexibility has been the floating exchange rate. The Australian 
dollar has played an important countercyclical role by rising and falling in response to various 
external  events  that  otherwise  might  have  had  the  potential  to  destabilise  the  domestic 
economy. This was evident both during the Asian crisis and the dot-com bubble, when the 
Australian dollar fell sharply in response to deteriorating economic conditions abroad, helping 
to insulate the domestic economy.  
                                                 
1  That period, however, was broken by consecutive quarters of negative growth in December 1971 and March 
1972. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2010
Evidence  of  the  role  played  by  the  exchange  rate  in  stabilising  the  economy  can  also  be 
seen  in  recent  years.  The  Australian  dollar  rose  strongly  between  2006  and  2008  as 
commodity  prices  rose,  which  helped  to  dissipate  pressures  that  would  otherwise  have 
caused the economy to overheat. Conversely, the temporary, but sharp, fall in the exchange 
rate during the recent financial crisis helped cushion the economy on the downside.  
Given  the  consistent  way  in  which  the  exchange  rate  has  moved  to  insulate  the  economy 
from  various  external  shocks,  I  would  have  to  conclude  that  the  decision  to  float  the 
exchange rate in 1983 ranks among the most important economic reforms, if not the most 
important reform, of the past 30 years.  
But other reforms have also clearly played a role:  
 
a wide range of reforms to competition and industry policy, implemented over many 
years, have seen the business sector become more outward-looking and competitive;  
labour  market  reforms,  some  extending  back  to  the  late  1980s,  gave  the  labour 
market  increased  flexibility  to  respond  to  changing  economic  conditions  without 
producing large swings in unemployment or unsustainable pressures on wages; and  
various reforms of the financial system gave it greater capacity to meet the financing 
needs of the economy and made Australia more attractive to foreign investors.  
  In total, these reforms contributed to a substantial pick-up in productivity in the 1990s. The 
Bank estimates that, during that decade, Australia was able to produce an extra 1½ per cent 
of output per year simply by using capital and labour more efficiently (Table 1).  
 
Table 1 
Output growth 
All industries  
  GDP growth 
Average annual 
percentage change 
1990/91 to 2000/01 
2000/01 to 2008/09 
1990/91 to 2008/09 
3.6 
3.2 
3.4 
Contributions to GDP growth  
(percentage points)* 
Labour 
Capital 
Multifactor 
productivity 
0.8 
1.0 
0.9 
1.3 
1.8 
1.5 
1.5 
0.4 
1.0 
* Estimates based on a Cobb-Douglas production function. 
Sources: ABS; RBA. 
 
Unfortunately, this growth in productivity appears to have slowed substantially more recently. 
Perhaps this is partly a measurement problem, since the large shifts we have seen in the 
composition and pricing of output in recent years may have complicated the measurement 
task. Some of the slowdown in productivity is also a reflection of the economy being relatively 
fully employed in recent years. It is also possible, however, that the slowing in productivity 
growth is due to the fading effects of the earlier economic reforms.  
Output growth has not slowed as much as productivity in recent years, because businesses 
have  been  applying  increased  amounts  of  labour,  and  particularly  capital,  to  production. 
Business investment in recent years has risen to a very high level relative to GDP, one of the 
highest  among  the  developed  economies  (Graph  2).  Employment  growth  has  also  been 
BIS Review 108/2010 
 3
strong. Nonetheless, the slowdown in productivity growth has meant that GDP growth in the 
latest decade was not as fast as in the previous decade.  
Graph 2 
 Disciplined economic policies also contributed to the good economic performance of the past 
20  years.  They  have  prevented  the  build-up  of  imbalances  that  might  otherwise  have 
threatened the economy, as occurred frequently in the 1970s and 1980s.  
Government budget finances were greatly improved during the period. Budget surpluses were 
recorded  in  10  of  the  19  years  since  1991.  Government  debt  was  reduced  sharply,  leaving 
Australia as one of the best positioned developed economies in terms of government finances.  
Monetary  policy  helped  keep  inflation  low,  providing  a  stable  environment  in  which 
businesses  and  households  could  plan  and  undertake  their  economic  activities.  Since 
inflation targeting began in 1993, inflation has averaged 2.7 per cent, a little above the mid-
point of the target range (Graph 3).  
Graph 3 
4 
  BIS Review 108/2010
How has this growth been distributed through the economy? 
4. 
Economic growth is important because it allows living standards to rise and more people to 
find work. The benefits that have flowed to Australians in this respect over the past couple of 
decades have been impressive. Since June 1991, 3.5 million new jobs have been created 
and income per household has risen by a cumulative 30 per cent in real terms (Graphs 4 
and 5).  
Graph 4 
Graph 5 
  The increase in jobs, which represented a rise of 2 per cent per year on average, was faster 
than the growth in the population, and was met partly by an increase in the proportion of the 
working-age  population  that  is  in  the  workforce,  and  partly  by  a  decline  in  unemployment. 
Over the period, the unemployment rate fell from 9 per cent to a little over 5 per cent.  
BIS Review 108/2010 
 5
One  question  of  interest  is  how  the  benefits  of  this  growth  were  distributed  through  the 
community. There are various ways to look at this: one is across the states; another is across 
the income distribution; and a third is across industries.  
Let  me  start  with  a  comparison  of  the  states.  The  key  point  that  stands  out  is  that  all  the 
states shared in the growth over the period, though Queensland and Western Australia grew 
faster  than  the  others.  As  can  be  seen  in  Table  2,  growth  in  gross  state  product  in 
Queensland averaged 4.8 per cent per year, and that in Western Australia, 4.5 per cent. The 
other states averaged between 2.8 per cent and 3.7 per cent. Population shifts explain most 
of  this  gap,  however,  and  on  a  per-capita  basis  growth  in  gross  state  product  was  more 
uniform.  
Table 2 
State economic indicators 
1991/92 to 2008/09; annual average growth, per cent 
 Gross state product 
Population 
Gross state product per capita 
Source: ABS. 
NSW 
2.8 
1.0 
1.8 
VIC 
3.7 
1.2 
2.5 
QLD 
4.8 
2.2 
2.6 
WA 
4.5 
1.8 
2.7 
SA 
2.9 
0.6 
2.3 
TAS 
2.9 
0.4 
2.5 
 
All the states also experienced large falls in unemployment over the past couple of decades 
(Table  3).  In  fact,  the  states  with  the  highest  unemployment  rates  in  1991  generally 
experienced  larger  falls.  At  present,  the  rate  of  unemployment  is  fairly  uniform  across  the 
states, with the exceptions of Western Australia, where it is below average, and Tasmania, 
where it is above average.  
 
Table 3 
Unemployment rates by state  
Seasonally adjusted, per cent 
 September 1991 
Current (July 2010) 
NSW 
9.4 
5.6 
VIC 
10.3 
5.5 
QLD 
9.4 
5.6 
WA 
10.6 
4.4 
SA 
10.4 
5.1 
TAS 
10.6 
6.5 
Source: ABS. 
 
The benefits of growth were also spread fairly widely across households at different points of 
the income distribution. Income relativities across the bulk of the population did not change 
much over the period, though the relative position of households in the top 10 per cent of the 
income  distribution  improved  somewhat,  and  that  of  households  in  the  lowest  10  per  cent 
deteriorated (Graph 6).  
 
 
6 
 BIS Review 108/2010
Graph 6 
  Table 4 
GDP by industry* 
Per cent of total 
Industry 
2008/09 
1991/92 
Difference 
Financial & insurance services 
Education, health & social assistance 
Retail & wholesale trade 
Manufacturing 
Ownership of dwellings 
Administrative (including public 
administration & safety) 
Mining 
Construction 
Professional, scientific & technical 
services 
Transport, postal & warehousing 
Utilities, accommodation & food services 
Information media & telecommunications 
Rental, hiring & real estate services 
Arts, recreation and other services 
Agriculture, forestry & fishing 
Total 
10.8 
10.4 
9.6 
9.4 
8.0 
8.0 
7.7 
7.4 
6.1 
5.8 
5.0 
3.4 
3.0 
2.8 
2.6 
100.0 
* GDP excludes taxes, subsidies, and the statistical discrepancy.  
Sources: ABS, RBA. 
7.0 
10.8 
10.2 
14.0 
8.9 
7.9 
5.0 
6.3 
4.3 
5.6 
6.4 
4.1 
3.1 
3.1 
3.3 
100.0 
3.8 
–0.4 
–0.6 
–4.6 
–0.9 
0.1 
2.7 
1.1 
1.8 
0.2 
–1.4 
–0.7 
–0.1 
–0.3 
–0.7 
 BIS Review 108/2010 
 7
One  area  where  there  have  been  sizeable  differences  in  growth  performance  has  been 
across  industries.  The  output  of  the  mining,  financial  services  and  professional  services 
industries  grew  at  a  much  faster  rate  than  average,  while  the  output  of  the  manufacturing 
sector increased by less than average (Table 4). Around three-quarters of the economy now 
involves the production of services rather than goods, and the financial sector has replaced 
manufacturing as the largest single industry in the economy.  
While  many  people  lament  the  small  share  of  manufacturing  sector  in  the  Australian 
economy, the low exposure to manufacturing may have been one reason why the economy 
has fared relatively well over the past couple of decades. It meant that Australia was less 
affected than many other countries by the global shift of manufacturing to emerging markets, 
particularly Asia, that took place over that period.  
Current conditions 
5. 
Let me turn now to the current state of the economy, and the prospects for the next few years.  
As  you  know,  the  Australian  economy  recovered  relatively  quickly  from  the  slowdown  that 
followed the global financial crisis. It is currently growing at around its trend rate, in part due to a 
large increase in government spending. Consumer spending remains relatively restrained, even 
though consumer confidence is high. It seems that households have become more cautious in 
their  financial  habits,  borrowing  less  and  saving  more.  The  household  saving  rate  has  risen 
back to around 4 per cent over the past year, after being close to zero in the early part of the 
decade (Graph 7). Investment in new housing is also growing at only a modest pace, despite 
fast growth in the population. This is because of the relatively high cost of housing, rigidities in 
the housing supply process and difficulties for developers in obtaining finance.  
Graph 7 
 Business  investment,  however,  is  at  very  high  levels.  It  did  decline  somewhat  during  the 
financial  crisis,  but  it  is  expected  to  increase  strongly  again  over  the  period  ahead,  driven 
importantly by the mining sector.  
Exports are also increasing at a solid pace at present, as earlier increases in mining capacity 
are  coming  on  stream.  Together  with  much  higher  export  prices,  this  has  meant  that  the 
trade account of the balance of payments has moved strongly back into surplus, an unusual 
situation for Australia.  
8 
 BIS Review 108/2010
Employment  has  been  growing  strongly,  in  fact  more  strongly  than  would  normally  be 
associated  with  recent  rates  of  increase  in  GDP,  and  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen 
significantly since mid 2009, to around 5¼ per cent (Graph 8).  
Graph 8 
 As  I  mentioned  earlier,  over  the  past  couple  of  decades  the  typical  pattern  had  been  for 
growth in the resource-rich states of Queensland and Western Australia to be faster than the 
average of the other states. Currently, however, that is not the case. Queensland is lagging 
the other states, with relatively weak growth in retail sales and consumption, and particularly 
business investment (Table 5). Over the past year, Queensland has experienced little growth 
in final demand, whereas in the rest of Australia demand grew by close to its highs of the 
past decade (Graph 9). Part of the problem is that Queensland seems to be suffering from an 
overhang in the property market after a period of exuberance in the lead-up to the financial 
crisis. Apartment building outside Brisbane is especially weak, as is commercial building. The 
high  exchange  rate  is,  of  course,  also  affecting  the  tourism  industry  in  Queensland,  as 
Australians are taking advantage of cheaper foreign holidays.  
Graph 9 
BIS Review 108/2010 
  9
Table 5 
State economic indicators  
Percentage change over past 12 months* 
 NSW 
VIC 
QLD 
WA 
SA 
TAS 
State final demand (sa, per 
cent) 
Consumption 
Dwelling investment 
Business investment 
Government 
Employment (sa) 
Per cent 
Number (‘000) 
4.7 
2.8 
0.1 
1.9 
13.4 
1.4 
48 
6.4 
3.3 
0.6 
10.4 
12.8 
3.6 
98 
0.3 
1.8 
1.3 
–17.8 
10.6 
2.9 
66 
6.1 
5.9 
5.0 
0.6 
14.5 
5.2 
60 
5.2 
3.3 
–8.1 
–0.7 
17.7 
2.2 
18 
3.1 
3.0 
6.8 
–24.3 
15.8 
–0.1 
0 
* State final demand data are over the year to the March quarter 2010; employment data are over the year to 
July 2010. 
Source: ABS. 
 Outlook 
6. 
Our expectation is that economic growth in Australia will continue for at least the next couple 
of  years,  the  period  for  which  the  Bank  typically  prepares  forecasts.  Our  latest  forecasts, 
which were published earlier this month, show growth in the Australian economy continuing 
at a solid pace over this period.  
This  view  is  partly  based  on  the  expectation  that  the  world  economy  will  continue  the 
expansion that began in 2009. World economic growth is estimated at about 4½ per cent for 
this year, which is above average – in other words, quite a healthy outcome.  
Growth  in  our  major  trading  partners,  a  group  that  is  more  heavily  weighted  to  the  fast-
growing economies of Asia, is expected to be even stronger this year.  
Despite the good performance of the past year, there has been considerable discussion in 
recent months about whether the global economy can continue to grow solidly in the face of 
the  financial  problems  it  has  been  experiencing,  particularly  the  overhang  of  government 
debt in many countries. However, while official forecasters around the world all acknowledge 
that  this  is  a  potential  risk  to  growth,  they  are  nonetheless  forecasting  that  the  global 
economy will grow at a reasonable pace over the next couple of years. This is the Reserve 
Bank’s view as well.  
The strong growth of the global economy over the past year or so has again pushed up the 
prices of commodities that Australia produces. They have returned to the high peaks reached 
before the onset of the global financial crisis in 2008. Relative to prices of our imports, export 
prices are at their highest level in 60 years (Graph 10). This is generating a large increase in 
income for the country: we are forecasting that Australia’s gross income (in nominal terms) 
will rise by about 10 per cent this year.  
10 
 BIS Review 108/2010
Graph 10 
 We  expect  that  export  prices  will  ease  back  somewhat  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  as 
more supply comes on stream and as economic growth in our trading partners slows to a 
more sustainable rate. Nevertheless, by historical standards, prices will still be very high.  
This creates a very favourable environment for the Australian economy. Household income 
will  most  likely  rise  quite  solidly,  which  should  underpin  consumption  even  if  households 
maintain their recent higher rate of savings.  
Most  importantly,  however,  we  think  that  economic  growth  will  be  driven  by  strong  business 
investment.  This  will  be  concentrated  in  the  mining  and  gas  industries,  including  some  large 
projects that are planned here in Queensland. Mining investment typically runs at about 1¾ per 
cent of GDP, and in past mining booms it has reached up to 3 per cent of GDP (Graph 11). In 
the current boom, it has already risen to 4¼ per cent and, even on conservative assumptions, is 
expected to rise significantly in the years ahead. That will provide a major impetus to growth.  
Graph 11 
BIS Review 108/2010 
  11
Even outside mining, investment is likely to rise, given that capacity constraints exist in many 
parts  of  the  economy.  This  expansion  in  business  investment  is  expected  to  outweigh  the 
planned scaling back of government spending.  
In this environment, we see further growth in employment, probably continuing to run ahead 
of growth in the labour force, so that unemployment will continue on a downward trend.  
One  issue  is  whether  the  strength  of  the  economy  will  have  implications  for  inflation.  At 
present, underlying inflation has fallen back into the top half of the target range after rising 
noticeably  over  the  second  half  of  2007  and  2008.  We  expect  that  it  will  stay  around  its 
current rate for the next year or so but, after that, upward pressure on inflation is again likely 
to emerge with a strongly growing economy. History tells us that inflation can be a problem 
during resources booms, and while there are grounds for thinking it will be less of a problem 
this time than in the past, we need to remain alert to the risks.  
While Australia will, most likely, continue to do well over the next few years, it would be a 
mistake to assume that the economic cycle has been eliminated. We also need to recognise 
that it is difficult to foresee what will happen in the future, and that there are risks regarding 
the future path of the economy. It is possible, for example, that growth in the world economy 
will lose momentum, creating a significantly less favourable environment for Australia than is 
currently assumed. Both the volume and price of our exports would be weaker and external 
financing  might  also  be  more  difficult.  On  the  other  hand,  it  could  also  turn  out  that 
inflationary pressures build more quickly than assumed.  
Conclusion 
7. 
Let me conclude.  
Australia has delivered a very good growth performance over the past couple of decades. 
That was the benefit that flowed from a long process of economic reform and the adoption of 
prudent  and  disciplined  economic  policies.  Even  though  there  was  significant  variation  in 
growth  across  industries,  the  benefits  of  growth  were  spread  relatively  widely  across  the 
states and across the income distribution of the population.  
It  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  further  growth  lies  ahead.  However,  with  the  economy  now 
operating close to its capacity, it will take further improvement in productivity and disciplined 
policies for this growth to be sustained.  
12 
 BIS Review 108/2010
