Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Empowering the banking industry through 
continuing education, innovation and research 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the 
Bankers Institute of the Philippines’ (BAIPhil’s) induction of officers, directors and committee 
chairpersons and in celebration of its 70th founding anniversary, Makati City, 20 July 2010. 
 The officers and members of the Bankers Institute of the Philippines, past and present; fellow 
bankers; colleagues from the BSP; special guests: good afternoon and a happy 70th anniversary 
to BAIPhil! 
Today is truly a memorable day not only for BAIPhil but also for the banking industry. If we 
stop  and  think  about  we  ultimately  reach  the  conclusion  that  BAIPhil  is  one  of  the  rare 
professional organizations that has remained consistently relevant and in step with the times, 
growing and evolving with the Philippine banking industry as operations shifted gears from 
manual to automated to electronic.  
Indeed, through seven decades of growth and change, BAIPhil has remained faithful to its 
avowed  mission  of  enhancing  productivity,  good  governance,  and  developing  expertise 
among Philippine banks through research, information exchange and education.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let us celebrate BAIPhil’s seven decades of accomplishments with a 
well-deserved round of applause! 
We at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas have long recognized BAIPhil as one of our steadfast 
partners in moving the banking industry forward. By professionalizing industry standards and 
practices  underpinned  by  the  good  governance  values  of  fairness,  accountability  and 
transparency,  BAIPhil  helps  anchor  positive  change  within  the  industry.  Such  is  BAIPhil’s 
unique legacy as an organization.  
BAIPhil can rightfully claim therefore that it is one of the reasons why the Philippine banking 
system remains sound and stable at a time of global financial crisis. 
Assessment of the Philippine banking system 
To put things in perspective, I will share the latest consolidated industry information that tells 
us where our banking system stands today.  
 
First, total resources of the Philippine banking sector continues to expand. In fact, a 
double-digit  asset  growth  was  registered  in  April  2010;  this  raised  the  value  of 
consolidated assets to P6.2 trillion. This was made possible by sustained growth in 
deposits which expanded by 10.4 percent to P4.6 trillion. 
Second,  asset  quality  has  significantly  improved  with  universal/commercial  banks’ 
average  NPL  ratio  at  a  low  single-digit  level  of  3.37  percent  and  NPA  at 
3.82 percent. At the same time, loan loss provisions have been built up to adequate 
levels.  
Third, bank lending remains on the uptrend: it reached P2.7 trillion as of April this 
year, a growth of 6.1 percent from the same period last year. 
Fourth, the capitalization of the Philippine banking sector remains comfortably above 
the global standard of 8% and BSP’s minimum requirement of 10%: on a solo basis, 
Philippine  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratio  is  14.85%.  On  a  consolidated  basis  it  is 
even higher at 15.78%. 
   BIS Review 101/2010 
 1
 Fifth, banks sustained profitable operations. For the period ending March this year, 
net  income  was  up  by  an  estimated  34  percent,  while  return  on  equity  was  at 
11.4 percent.  
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, our banking system is resilient, sound and stable. The 
key challenge for our banks is to preserve this growth momentum. In this, there should be no 
room for complacency.  
BSP’s policy reform thrusts 
More  than  ever,  it  is  critical  to  sustain  the  path  to  reforms.  We  have  seen  how  our  banks 
passed the ultimate stress test by standing firm amidst the global financial turmoil. This did 
not happen overnight.  
With  the  Bangko  Sentral  setting  the  pace,  Philippine  banks  implemented  reforms  that 
included  the  clean  up  of  their  balance  sheets,  the  strengthening  of  bank  capitalization 
through Basel II, and further improvements in governance structures.  
Moving  forward,  risk-based  supervision  will  remain  central  to  our  reform  agenda.  We  will 
continue to focus on enhancing our macro-surveillance capabilities and on improving further 
our supervisory oversight of risk management. 
Last  year,  the  Bangko  Sentral  issued  the  guidelines  for  Internal  Capital  Adequacy 
Assessment Process (ICAAP) and the Supervisory Review Process (SRP). This is to make 
sure that banks have a better appreciation of their business risks and are more diligent in 
terms of disclosure and transparency to their stakeholders. 
Building the resilience of the banking system goes hand in hand with creating a stable macro 
environment. This includes fostering stable interest rates and exchange rates that encourage 
long-term business planning and lending by banks.  
Ladies and gentlemen. I have said this before and I will say it again: 2010 is not only about 
challenges and changes; it is also about the chances and opportunities that lie ahead. In the 
midst of the ongoing process of recovery in the global economy, domestic banks should be 
able  to  discern  and  seize  opportunities  that  will  help  them  grow  stronger  and  support  the 
turnaround in economic activity. 
I  also  believe  there  is  room  for  financial  innovation,  as  long  as  this  is  coupled  with 
appropriate  prudential  regulations  as  well  as  appropriate  disclosure  and  transparency 
standards. Our objective is to ensure that all stakeholders are fully aware of the risks that 
they are taking on.  
Ideally, we should not swing to the extreme of over regulation; rather, banks should move 
toward greater accountability for their actions. 
Together, let us work out a dynamic, but always well-calibrated balance between regulation 
and innovation to move our economy and our country forward.  
One  way  for  banks  to  keep  pace  with  the  intense  demands  of  an  increasingly  global  and 
complex  financial  environment  is  to  acquire  as  much  relevant  knowledge  and  technical 
expertise in a timely and comprehensive manner.  
In this connection, BAIPhil’s role as the education and research arm of the banking industry 
is  even  more  relevant  in  today’s  rapidly  evolving  financial  landscape.  With  learning  or 
enlightenment comes real empowerment. 
I  am  very  pleased  to  know  therefore  that  based  on  this  belief,  BAIPhil  is  setting  its  sights 
beyond  banks;  it  is  gearing  up  to  include  the education  and  empowerment  of  present  and 
future Filipino bank customers.  
2 
 BIS Review 101/2010
I have been informed that tomorrow afternoon, BAIPhil’s audience will not be bankers, but 
teachers and parents in San Joaquin Elementary School in Pasig City. They will be taught 
personal financial planning, values formation and wealth creation. I am happy to learn that no 
less  than  BAIPhil’s  new  president  Emmanuel  Barcena  will  lead  the  BAIPhil  team  that 
includes  three  former  BAIPHIL  presidents  –  Susan  Uranza,  Artecer  Quebal  and  Rebecca 
Torres – and Marilen Ruiz who chairs BAIPhil’s special projects committee.  
Clearly,  financial  education  of  Filipinos,  including  the  underbanked  and  the  unbanked,  is 
being given special attention by BAIPhil. Palakpakan po natin ang BAIPhil for this initiative!  
I  understand  similar  lectures  will  be  conducted  in  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  Gawad  Kalinga 
Village in Quezon City and in Paranaque City.  
Ladies and gentlemen of BAIPhil. You have our full support in this project. In fact, we invite 
BAIPhil  to  join  the  Bangko  Sentral  in  implementing  an  inclusive  national  economic  and 
financial education program that aims to reach out to the broader public such as our youth, 
overseas  workers  and  their  dependents  as  well  as  the  entrepreneurially-inclined  in  the 
marginalized sectors.  
Having BAIPhil’s first lecture in financial education in a public school makes perfect sense: 
our  public  elementary  school  system  has  about  12  million  children  or  92%  of  Filipino 
elementary  pupils;  it  employs  roughly  400,000  teachers  and  school  staffs;  and  it  is  a 
convenient venue where we can engage millions of parents.  
The BSP looks forward therefore to forging a broader partnership with BAIPhil. This should 
result not only in better efficiencies and greater expertise for Filipino bankers but also lead to 
a more financially informed and empowered public. Together, we can expand the client base 
of banks, fortify the foundations of our banking system further, and bring about balanced and 
sustainable growth in our country. 
Eventually, what is initially looked upon as a corporate social responsibility program could be 
the  key  that  will  unlock  the  full  potential  of  our  banking  industry,  our  people,  and  our 
economy.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  To  reach  our  shared  goal,  let  us  journey  together  in  our  quest  for 
excellence  to  have  a  stronger,  more  resilient,  more  proactive,  more  responsive,  and  more 
inclusive banking system.  
On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I congratulate BAIPhil on its 70th year and for a 
job well done.  
It  is  truly  my  privilege  to  be  here  with  you  today.  Mabuhay  ang  BAIPhil!  Mabuhay  ang 
Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 3
