Paul Fisher: The corporate sector and the Bank of England’s asset 
purchases 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  and  Member  of  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee of the Bank of England, for the Association of Corporate Treasurers Winter 
Paper 2010, London, 18 February 2010. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
England’s website.  
 The start of corporate sector asset purchases 
On  19  January  2009,  the  Chancellor  announced1  that  the  Bank  of  England  was  being 
authorised to purchase “high quality private sector assets”, financed by the issue of Treasury 
Bills  “…  to  increase  the  availability  of  corporate  credit,  by  reducing  the  illiquidity  of  the 
underlying instruments …”. In this talk today, I want to address the rationale for intervening in 
this way and the opportunities and limitations of such operations. I will then go on to review 
the individual schemes and evaluate the results so far. I will not be talking very much about 
the wider programme of gilt purchases, which had different objectives – namely to directly 
boost the money supply and nominal demand. But there are some interactions which I shall 
come back to later. 
At the time the policy was announced, output in the United Kingdom economy was dropping 
sharply.  GDP  has  fallen  by  6%  during  the  recession  overall  and  fell  by  2  ½%  in  2009  Q1 
alone,  at  the  time  these  policies  were  being  put  in  place  (Chart  1).  That  is  the  largest 
recorded quarterly fall in output since 1958. In the wake of the financial dislocation of Autumn 
2008,  there  was  a  collapse  of  confidence  and  elevated  uncertainty  which  had  a  profound 
effect on consumer demand and investment intentions. There was also an intensification of 
the “Credit Crunch” which had been in train since the start of the crisis in mid-2007. 
A range of policies had been introduced in the United Kingdom to prevent an economic melt-
down.  That  included  action  to  re-capitalise  some  of  the  banks;  guarantee  some  of  their 
funding;  expand  liquidity  assistance  and  to  set  appropriately  accommodative  fiscal  and 
monetary policies. Governments around the world took very similar steps. Asset purchases 
were one part of the policy response. 
At  its  peak,  the  Bank  of  England  bought  nearly  £3bn  of  commercial  paper  and  corporate 
bonds  (Chart  2).  This  is  sometimes  compared  with  the  eventual  total  of  £198bn  gilts 
purchased, prompting the question why the Bank didn’t buy more private sector assets? This 
question reflects a – perhaps natural – misunderstanding of the different purposes of these 
interventions.  The  gilt  purchases  were  intended  as  a  monetary  policy  operation  to  inject  a 
substantial amount of money into the economy. The consequences of that policy have been 
addressed  in  Bank  publications  (Bank  of  England,  Quarterly  Bulletin,  June  2009  for 
example), speeches and elsewhere. There has been much less discussion about the private 
sector asset purchases. So to address that topic tonight, I would like to first set out some 
principles,  as  I  see  them,  behind  the  actions  of  central  banks  in  so  called  “credit-easing” 
operations. 
                                                 
1   The  announcement  is  at  http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/press_05_09.htm.  Subsequent  letters  exchanged 
found  at 
between 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/news/2009/005 and those published on 5th March can be found 
via http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/news/2009/019.htm. The letters published on 5th March were 
dated 17th February, from the Governor, and 3rd March from the Chancellor. 
the  Governor  and  Chancellor  were  published  on  29th  January  and  can  be 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 1
Intervention by the authorities 
The Bank of England intervenes routinely in financial markets so as to implement monetary 
policy and provide liquidity insurance to the banking system. 
These  operations,  normally  restricted  to  banks  and  building  society  counterparties,  stem 
directly from the Bank’s core responsibilities of maintaining monetary and financial stability. 
But these responsibilities do not give the Bank a mandate or the ability to provide a source of 
long-term funding for the commercial banking system2, nor is it for the Bank to take material 
risks  with  public  money.  In  the  case  of  monetary  policy,  the  central  bank  expands  and 
contracts  its  balance  sheet  to  meet  its  objectives.  Typically  that  involves  injecting  and/or 
draining  cash  (central  bank  money)  in  order  to  set  interest  rates  or,  as  with  quantitative 
easing  programmes,  changing  the  money  supply  directly.  The  Bank  also  provides  liquidity 
support  to  commercial  banks  in  times  of  stress  (for  example  through  its  Discount  Window 
Facility).  But  such  lending  is  well-collateralised,  so  low  risk,  and  is  always  intended  to  be 
temporary:  to  overcome  a  one-off  shock  or  to  bridge  to  a  more  lasting  solution.  To 
discourage  reliance  on  these  operations,  standard  practice  is  to  charge  a  penalty  rate 
relative  to  market  prices.  These  liquidity  insurance  operations  are  an  integral  part  of  the 
Sterling  Monetary  Framework  which  delivers  our  monetary  policy  objectives  (See  Fisher, 
2009 for further details). 
The  Bank  of  England  does  not  have  access  to  funds  that  could  be  used  to  sustain 
commercial  lending  operations.  We  do  not  have  the  power  to  raise  tax,  nor  do  we  have 
significant retail deposits, nor the freedom to borrow in large scale in the wholesale markets 
for non-monetary purposes.3 More generally, in a capitalist economy, it is private sector or, in 
some cases, national savings which ultimately fund the banking system. And it is the job of 
financial intermediaries to translate those savings efficiently into private sector spending. 
In  contrast,  the  fiscal  authorities  (including  national  wealth  funds  where  they  exist)  can 
access  private  sector  funding  via  taxation  or  by  borrowing  in  large  scale.  There  are  many 
instances throughout UK economic history where the government has intervened to support 
private markets, or indeed individual firms. There are well-known risks associated with such 
action,  including  the  loss  of  public  money  and/or  an  inefficient  allocation  of  capital  in  the 
economy.  There  are  also  substantial  and  well-known  potential  benefits  if  the  intervention 
corrects  a  market  failure  or  achieves  a  wider  social  objective.  The  merits  of  such 
interventions need to be judged on a case-by-case basis. For tonight’s discussion I just want 
to  argue  that  such  decisions  should  be  undertaken  with  the  support  of  the  democratic 
political system and should be implemented as a fiscal operation. Indeed, during this crisis, 
the  UK  Government  has  made  a  number  of  such  interventions  –  such  as  the  Enterprise 
Finance Guarantee Scheme and the Vehicle Discount or “Scrappage” Scheme. 
The Special Liquidity Scheme 
Now, as an aside, some keen watchers of central banks may want to argue that the Bank of 
England’s Special Liquidity Scheme (SLS) appears to have provided £185bn funding for the 
UK banking sector. The SLS, supported by a Government indemnity, was probably the single 
most generous liquidity support scheme introduced by a central bank during the crisis.4 Its 
                                                 
2  
In  the  past,  when  financial  markets  were  less  well  developed,  the  Bank  of  England  has  played  a  part  in 
selected industrial or financial market interventions (see Sayers, 1976), but that is not a role we have now. 
3   The Bank of England issues banknotes of course, but these are monetary liabilities or “central bank money” 
which impact on the monetary stance. They are backed only by the highest quality assets, in order to maintain 
confidence in the integrity of the currency. 
4   This was required given the relatively small capital base of the Bank of England – around £3 ½ bn at end-Feb 
2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2010
detailed characteristics serve to make several points in the context of this talk. The SLS did 
not provide the banks directly with funding. Rather it swapped illiquid private sector assets 
held by the banks for highly liquid treasury bills borrowed from the Debt Management Office. 
The commercial banks then obtained their funding from the market by repo of the treasury 
bills. Essentially the SLS provided a temporary collateral upgrade for the banks. By the time 
the  scheme  closes,  SLS  participants  need  to  have  either  generated  alternative  sources  of 
funding or created alternative collateral which the market will be willing to hold in place of the 
treasury bills. 
Recently,  there  have  been  some  calls  from  interested  parties  for  the  SLS  to  be  extended 
beyond its three-year horizon. If the SLS were to be extended, that would mean an implicit 
subsidy  for  specific  banks.  Albeit  for  a  fee,  those  banks  would  be  funding  on  an  ongoing 
basis  their  illiquid,  risky  assets,  by  borrowing  at  “risk-free”  government  interest  rates.  That 
would give a significant competitive advantage to banks that had most recourse to the SLS. 
But central bank operations are not carried out to protect individual banking franchises, they 
are there to ensure overall monetary and financial stability. 
As the Governor has already made clear, the SLS will close at the end of January 2012. The 
Banks liquidity insurance facilities are, and will be available – but, as I have noted, these are 
for  temporary  usage  during  periods  of  stress,  are  set  at  an  appropriate  price  and  are  not 
there to provide sustained funding for the banking system. 
Market-making operations by the central bank 
As  part  of  its  broader  remit,  however,  a  central  bank  is  fundamentally  concerned  with 
maintaining  conditions  for  the  stable  provision  of  financial  services  to  the  wider  economy. 
This  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  specific  financial  markets  can  sometimes  fail  and  that 
raises  the  possibility  of  the  central  bank  stepping  in  as  “Market  Maker  of  Last  Resort” 
(MMLR). 
Acting as a MMLR is not something of which we – or other central banks – have had a lot of 
experience, but there are some basic principles which, if followed, can allow such operations 
to be run by the central bank consistent with its other objectives. My colleague, Paul Tucker, 
outlined these in a speech last year (Tucker 2009). The most relevant are: 
(i) 
MMLR  activity  should  not  interfere  with  the  setting  of  monetary  policy  by  creating 
additional central bank money independent of monetary policy operations.5 
Transactions should be at a discount to fundamental values so that the operations 
are unattractive to the markets in normal conditions. 
The  operations  should  help  to  re-start,  or  energise  markets  rather  than  replace 
them. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
These principles all apply to the Bank’s corporate asset purchases. In fact, when the Asset 
Purchase Facility (APF) was first introduced, the Bank was effectively operating as an agent 
for the Government: the purchases were financed by the issue of treasury bills, not by the 
Bank, and the Government indemnified the Bank against any losses. Had the Government 
wanted to, the purchases could have been designed and operated as a fiscal operation and 
not implemented by the Bank. But the correspondence from the Chancellor makes it clear 
that  the  purchase  of  private  sector  assets  (i)  was  intended  to  improve  the  functioning  of 
markets and so was consistent with a MMLR function and (ii) it simultaneously provided a 
framework  for  asset  purchases  as  a  monetary  policy  operation  by  the  MPC  and  so  the 
Facility had to be designed to be compatible with that. 
                                                 
5   Once  the  programme  of  quantitative  easing  was  established,  the  corporate  purchases  were  funded  by 
creating central bank reserves. But that was consistent with implementing the MPC’s monetary policy. 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 3
Motivating the APF schemes 
The  Bank’s initial  APF  interventions  focussed  on  sterling corporate  bonds  and  commercial 
paper. These markets are relatively small. At the end of 2006, before the onset of the crisis, 
the  outstanding  stock  of  sterling  non-financial  commercial  paper  was  around  £5bn,  and 
sterling non-financial corporate bonds totalled around £70bn. That is low compared with the 
stock  of  commercial  bank  lending  (lending  by  UK  resident  banks  to  UK  non-financial 
corporates was £437bn at end 2006). But despite their relatively small size, these markets 
are vitally important. 
Commercial paper 
Commercial paper (CP) is a common way for larger firms to manage their day-to-day cash 
needs. And insufficient cash flow is one of the key ingredients in corporate failures. At the 
start of 2009, commercial paper spreads were way above any estimate consistent with the 
risk  involved:  they  implied  default  rates  around  50%  higher  than  witnessed  in  the  Great 
Depression. This market seemed like a prime candidate in which the APF should intervene – 
and  so  facilitate  otherwise  credit-worthy  firms  in  maintaining  their  access  to  short-term 
finance. 
In  trying  to  catalyse  a  market,  the  Bank  could  not  operate  like  a  private  investor  or  bank 
which would make purely discretionary judgements about whose CP to buy. Rather, a facility 
was set up which, in principle, any firm could access if they met fairly broad criteria. The APF 
offered to buy up to three-month CP at spreads which were significantly below those in the 
market at the time, but which were significantly above those expected to prevail in normal 
conditions.  Initially  this would  help to  drive  market  spreads  down  and  the  APF  would  then 
revert to providing a “backstop” offer. In this way the scheme was set up to be self-liquidating 
as normal market conditions returned. 
There were some important restrictions. Most notably, only broadly investment grade paper 
could be bought, consistent with the terms initially set out by the Chancellor and so limiting 
the  degree  of  credit  risk  taken.  Eligible  firms  also  had  to  contribute  materially  to  the  UK 
economy  and  must  not  be  banks  (other  policies,  as  noted,  had  been  introduced  to  help 
banks). And individual counterparty limits were imposed. 
Although  disentangling  the  precise  impact  of  the  scheme  from  the  global  improvement  in 
financial markets is difficult, it does appears to have been successful. Purchases peaked at 
around £2.4bn in late April 2009, at that time amounting to around one third of the sterling 
CP market. But, as I have stressed, the objective of the scheme was not to purchase a large 
quantity for its own sake. It was much more important that market spreads for the average 
issuer started to fall soon after the scheme was launched. Market spreads for all A1 rated 
sterling paper fell below APF spreads in August 2009 (Chart 3). By February 2010 nearly all 
firms who had sold CP to the APF were able to re-issue at cheaper rates in the market and 
the Bank’s CP holdings have fallen back to under £300mn. That decline in usage, together 
with  greater  ability  to  issue  in  the  market,  indicates  the  improvement  in  market  conditions 
which  the  scheme  was  intended  to  help  bring  about.  I  should  note  that,  at  the  current 
moment,  the  need  for  firms  to  issue  CP  is  at  something  of  a  low  point.  Investment-grade 
firms do not seem to have a strong demand for short-term cash and are concentrating on 
issuing longer-term debt. We have promised to keep the CP scheme under review and give 
12 months notice before it is withdrawn. 
Corporate bonds 
A corporate bond scheme was also set up last year. In January 2009, the primary market 
was  open  for  new  bond  issuance,  but  spreads  over  gilts  were  extremely  wide,  and  were 
widening  further  as  issuance  increased  (Chart  4).  It  was  clear  there  was  a  substantial 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2010
liquidity premium in the market. Secondary market liquidity was notoriously poor for sterling 
denominated  bonds.  The  small  size  of  the  bond  market,  relative  to  euro-  and  dollar-
denominated  markets,  meant  that  many  individual  sterling-denominated  bonds  might  not 
trade  for  months  at  a  time.  There  was  a  risk  that  secondary  market  illiquidity  might  have 
restricted the strength of the primary market, so constraining the availability of credit. 
Most corporate bonds are bought by asset managers for long-term investment, but investors 
do need to actively manage their portfolios e.g. for duration and credit risk. The scheme was 
designed  to  meet  this  need  by  offering  to  buy  small  amounts  of  bonds  in  the  secondary 
market on a regular basis. There were two immediate aims. First, by regularly posting traded 
prices,  it  was  hoped  to  improve  the  process  of  price  discovery  and  hence  aid  secondary 
market  liquidity.  Second,  by  offering  a  bid  in  the  secondary  market,  the  scheme  should 
encourage  further  private  sector  demand  in  the  primary  market.  That  leaves  open  the 
question of whether we could or should have been trying to buy much larger quantities. Had 
the  APF  done  so,  in  addition  to  strong  primary  market  private  sector  demand,  it  would 
undoubtedly  have  helped  to  drive  down  market  spreads.  But  it  would  also  have  risked 
displacing  that  private  sector  demand,  to  little  purpose  in  my  view.  In  fact,  a  greater 
intervention in this market during this period could have made things worse – the problem 
was in the functioning of the market, not a lack of demand for the assets. 
It would be fair to say that the corporate bond scheme attracted some criticism in its early 
months.  Many  observers  misunderstood  the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  scheme  and 
considered  that  the  small  amounts  bought  were  a  sign  of  failure.  But,  as  I  have  stressed 
tonight, the objectives of the scheme were not based on buying a particular amount. In fact, 
over  the  past  year,  the  corporate  bond  market  overall  has  performed  consistently  strongly 
and  in  line  with  the  original  objectives  of  the  scheme:  There  has  been  record  issuance  of 
sterling corporate bonds (Chart 5); spreads for eligible bonds have halved (Chart 6); bid-offer 
spreads have narrowed; and the bond-CDS basis6 has also contracted significantly. These 
asset  purchases  do  seem  to  have  played  their  part  in  improving  the access  of investment 
grade corporates to bond market financing. 
The  one  disappointing  feature  of  the  sterling  corporate  bond  market  is  the  continuing 
problem  of  secondary  market  illiquidity.  Market-making  dealers  have  not  been  able  to 
allocate  much  capital  to  holding  inventories  of  bonds  and  hence  the  market  is  still  not 
functioning  as  well  as  it  might.  This  was  one  reason  why,  in  January  this  year,  the  Bank 
introduced  operations  to  sell  as  well  as  to  buy  bonds.  Further  market  evolution  may  be 
needed  to  overcome  this  illiquidity.  One  possible  way  forward  would  be  more  trading  on 
exchanges.  It  will  be  interesting  to  see  whether  the  recent  listing  of  bonds  on  the  LSE  in 
retail-size amounts is successful. 
Secured commercial paper and supply chain finance 
The Bank also considered intervening in other markets such as secured commercial paper 
(SCP), supply chain finance, syndicated loans and more broadly in ABS markets, as set out 
in the Chancellor’s original letter to the Bank.7  
Taking  secured  commercial  paper  first,  this  is  a  form  of  asset-backed  commercial  paper 
(ABCP) based on a bundle of relatively short-term loans to a variety  of borrowers. Due to 
over-collateralisation,  the  security  might  be  investment  grade  even  if  the  underlying 
borrowers  are  not.  By  catalysing  this  market,  smaller  or  lower-rated-firms  could  gain 
                                                 
6   The difference in price between a cash bond and the Credit Default Swap can be interpreted as a measure of 
the liquidity premium in cash bonds. 
7   The Bank also made provision to buy securities issued under the Credit Guarantee Scheme, using the same 
format as for its corporate bond purchases. To date, it has not been deemed necessary to activate this facility. 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 5
improved  access  to  credit.  But,  in  designing  a  facility,  the  Bank  was  concerned  not  to 
encourage  the  sort  of  risk-taking  which  had  caused  so  many  problems  leading  up  to  the 
crisis. In particular that meant a restriction on the degree of maturity mismatch between the 
underlying assets and the securities they backed. 
A purchase scheme was launched last July, but the Bank has not been offered any SCP to 
buy so far. New programmes take 3–6 months to set up and meanwhile, according to our 
contacts, the market for such paper, particularly in the United States, quickly improved to the 
point  where  our  “backstop  bid”  was  no  longer  attractive.  And  we  are  told  there  has  been 
sufficient  capacity  within  commercial  banks’  existing  programmes  to  fund  the  assets  they 
were generating. Nevertheless, the facility remains open and the Bank is still in discussions 
with potential issuers. 
Supply  chain  finance  (SCF)  is  another  route  by  which  smaller  firms  can  potentially  get 
access to credit against high-quality assets. Typically, this would arise when a large firm has 
a  number  of  suppliers  who  wish  to  raise  immediate  finance  against  their  invoices. 
Unfortunately there was no SCF market standard and so there was not a viable market that 
the  APF  could  attempt  to  catalyse.  Last  Autumn,  a  working  group  of  market  participants 
(borrowers, lenders, banks etc) gathered together to develop some proposed standards and 
try to build a sustainable market in this space. That group is being chaired by Stuart Siddall, 
Chief Executive of the ACT, and is due to issue a report in the next few months. 
Syndicated loans and asset backed securities 
A substantial part of lending to larger UK corporates is normally undertaken via syndicated 
loans. The Bank investigated whether there was a market failure or illiquidity premium in this 
market which could be addressed by making APF purchases. After a thorough investigation, 
the Bank concluded that what was needed was more large-scale bank funding, particularly to 
replace  the  foreign  bank  lenders  who  had  been  withdrawing  from  the  UK  market.  But  the 
appropriate  way  to  address  that  was  through  the  various  schemes  in  place  to  support  the 
banks. 
Similarly,  the  Bank  investigated  the  state  of  securitisation  markets.  Here,  there  were  two 
problems. First, many investors were extremely wary of buying mortgage-backed securities 
and  similar  products,  because  the  crisis  had  raised  uncertainty  over  their  underlying  risk 
characteristics. At the same time there was a huge outstanding stock of such assets already 
issued, which would swamp any operation aimed at improving liquidity. In the United States 
the  authorities  have  undertaken  substantial  purchases  of  mortgage-backed  securities,  and 
funded the purchase of other securitised assets. It is not clear yet whether those markets will 
be self-sustainable once official intervention comes to an end.  
In  the  United  Kingdom,  we  have  made  a  range  of  ABS,  including  mortgage  backed 
securities, eligible collateral in the Bank’s permanent liquidity insurance facilities as well as in 
the SLS. And the Bank intends to consult the market shortly on what the requirements should 
be in respect of loan-by-loan information for such assets to be eligible in the future. Along 
with  other  monetary  authorities  taking  similar  actions,8  standardisation  of  information 
provision may help improve investor confidence in the underlying securities. 
Non-bank lending 
Also  during  2009,  the  Bank  used  its  market  and  corporate  contacts  to  identify  why  bank 
lending  dominated  the  supply  of  credit  and  what  the  obstacles  were  to  lending  from  non-
banks. There appeared to be no easy wins but a recent HMT consultation paper which draws 
                                                 
8   See the ECB announcement: http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2009/html/pr091223.en.html. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2010
heavily  on  the  Bank’s  investigation,  explores  options  to  facilitate  the  supply  of  credit  from 
non-bank lenders.9  
Interactions with other monetary policy actions 
The  commercial  paper  and  corporate  bond  schemes  seem  to  have  been  reasonably 
successful in helping to improve key markets and hence facilitating access to credit, at least 
for larger corporates. Smaller firms who supply those larger firms, may also have seen some 
“trickle  down”  benefits.  One  indicator  of  this  is  that  the  rise  in  the  level  of  company 
insolvencies during the recession has been surprisingly small so far, given the fall in output 
(Chart 7). But the major supportive factor has probably come from the very low level of Bank 
Rate and the programme of quantitative easing. The big moves in asset prices during 2009  
– a 50% rise in equities, 150bp fall in LIBOR spreads, the 150 bps fall in targeted corporate 
bond spreads for example – will have been strongly supported by the Bank’s monetary policy 
operations.  And  by  purchasing  the  gilts  which  asset  managers  and  others  would  normally 
have bought, the impact of the quantitative easing programme will have been to increase the 
demand  for  more  risky  assets  –  like  corporate  bonds.  So  the  corporate  and  gilt  purchase 
programmes have been complementary. 
Conclusion 
In my talk this evening, I hope I have explained a bit more clearly the motivation for and the 
design of the APF corporate purchase schemes. The Bank has not sought to provide large 
scale funding directly using public money. Rather, the operations have been consistent with 
a central bank acting as “Market Maker of Last Resort”. The Bank has transacted in modest 
quantities designed to improve the liquidity of corporate credit markets, bring down the cost 
of credit and encourage private sector lending. That has been supported by the much larger 
programme  of  quantitative  easing  and  the  low  level  of  Bank  Rate.  The  evidence  suggests 
that,  in  conjunction  with  a  very  large  monetary  stimulus,  abroad  as  well  as  at  home,  the 
corporate  purchases  have  been  successful  in  helping  to  invigorate  those  corporate  credit 
markets in which the Bank has intervened. 
References 
Benford J, Berry S, Nikolov K, and Young, C (2009), “Quantitative Easing”, Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin 2009 Q2, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb090201.pdf. 
Fisher P G F (2009), “The Bank of England’s Balance Sheet: Monetary Policy and Liquidity 
Provision during the Financial crisis” speech available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech413.pdf. 
Tucker, P M W (2009), “The Repertoire of official sector interventions in the financial system: 
last resort lending, market-making, and capital”, speech, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech390.pdf. 
Sayers, R.S., (1976) “The Bank of England 1891–1944”, Volumes 1 and 2, Cambridge 
University Press. 
                                                 
9   See:  “Discussion  paper  on  non-bank 
http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/non_bank_lending_discussionpaper.pdf. 
lending”,  HMT  published  on 
the  12  January,  available  at  
BIS Review 23/2010 
 7
  8 
 BIS Review 23/2010
 9
 BIS Review 23/2010 
 