Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: From boom to bust – towards a new equilibrium in 
bank credit 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Ernst & Young Business School seminar, Milan, 29 January 2010. 
 I would like to thank, in particular, L. Cappiello, P. Aberg, G. Wolswijk and D. Marqués Ibañez for their contribution 
to the drafting of this speech. The opinions expressed are solely my own. 
Introduction 
1. 
There is now a broad consensus that the period leading up to the crisis was characterised by 
excessive credit growth. When the bubble burst, it resulted in the most pernicious banking 
crisis since the Second World War, accompanied by a severe economic recession.  
In  order  to  revert  to  a  more  balanced  and  sustainable  management  of  credit,  while 
safeguarding  the  role  that  credit  plays  in  stimulating  growth,  new  rules,  regulations  and 
incentives for financial market participants are needed. This is what the regulatory authorities 
and  governments  of  all  major  industrial  countries  and  developing  countries  are  working 
towards.  
This is not the end of the issue, however. Once the objective of establishing a new “steady 
state” has been identified, the path towards achieving this objective must be carved out. This 
will not be easy. If the adjustment is too swift, it could result in an over-adjustment of credit 
flows, i.e. be too restrictive, giving  rise to recessionary effects on the real economy. If the 
adjustment is too slow, however, it could encourage a return to past behaviour, which led to 
excessive risk-taking.  
Today  I  would  like  to  examine  the  issues  relating  to  the  role  of  the  banking  sector  in 
supplying  credit  flows,  in  terms  of  the  following  three  phases:  the  pre-crisis  state  of 
imbalance,  the  new  long-term  steady  state,  and  the  period  of  transition  leading  up  to  said 
steady state.  
The banking system during the credit boom years 
2. 
As  with  all  system-wide  banking  crises,  the  recent  turmoil  was  preceded  by  strong  credit 
growth, combined with a speculative asset price bubble.1 This is confirmed by various credit 
indicators, such as the deviation of the credit-to-GDP ratio from its trend, detrended global 
credit growth2, the credit growth gap, and other indicators.3 
                                                 
1   See  C.  Borio  and  P.  Lowe,  “Securing  sustainable  price  stability:  should  credit  come  back  from  the 
wilderness?”,  BIS  Working  Paper,  No  157,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  2004;  C.  Borio  and 
M. Drehmann, “Assessing the risk of banking crises – revisited”, BIS Quarterly Review, Bank for International 
Settlements, 2009. 
2   See L. Alessi and C. Detken, “Real time early warning indicators for costly asset price boom/bust cycles: a 
role  for  global  liquidity”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series,  No  1039,  2009.  According  to  these  authors,  a  global 
credit-to-GDP ratio gap is one of the best indicators (with a lead-time between six quarters and three years) 
for asset price bubbles that are followed by busts, which prove costly in terms of GDP losses. 
3   See  D.  Gerdesmeier,  H.-E.  Reimers  and  B.  Roffia,  “Asset  price  misalignments  and  the  role  of  money  and 
credit”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 1068. The authors find that the credit growth gap, the investment-to-
30 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
For  example,  the  global  credit-to-GDP  ratio  gap,  an  indicator  of  the  risk  of  speculative 
bubbles,  had  exceeded  its  threshold  in  mid-2007.  Likewise,  the  credit  growth  gap  and  the 
investment-to-GDP ratio had been on a strong upward trend, signalling the turmoil to come. 
Looking  at  the  various  market  segments  confirms  the  excessive  ease  with  which  banking 
credit  had  been  obtained,  for  instance,  the  boom  in  lending  to  finance  leveraged  buyouts 
(LBOs).4  
Fast credit growth in the period leading up to the crisis took place against a background of 
high  capital  ratios.5  This  was  likely  driven  by  four  main  factors.  First,  a  large  share  of  the 
credit granted by large banks, in particular, was shifted off-balance sheet via securitisation. 
Second, non-banks (financial leasing companies, credit card firms, etc.) also contributed to 
the  credit  flow.  Third,  the  high  profitability  of  banks  contributed  to  the  bolstering  of  their 
balance sheets. Finally, most banks, particularly those in the United States, were operating 
under  the  Basel  I  regime.  Increasing  risks,  therefore,  were  not  fully  reflected  in  minimum 
capital requirements.  
The flow of credit, apart from being “excessive”, was in part also channelled to insufficiently 
productive  uses.  There  was  excessive  leverage  in  some  sectors,  which  contributed  to  the 
misalignment  of  underlying  asset  prices.  For  example,  between  2003  and  mid-2007, 
corporate loans to construction and real estate activities constituted almost 60% of total flows 
of loans to non-financial corporations in the euro area.6 The easy flow of credit to the housing 
sector contributed to the overheating of property markets in some countries. When the crisis 
set  in,  the  declines  in  credit  were  most  pronounced  in  countries  such  as  Spain,  Ireland, 
Belgium  and  Greece,  which  had  been  experiencing  double-digit  credit  growth  rates  during 
the lead-up to the crisis.  
Banking  credit  developments  prior  to  the  crisis  were  excessive  owing  to  a  combination  of 
three 
insufficient  supervision,  and  3)  a  highly 
accommodating monetary policy. Let’s take a quick look at these factors.  
The  significant  advances  in  financial  innovation  over  the  last  decade  fuelled  the  idea  that 
asset  liquidity  had  increased  and  that  there  was  a  greater  potential  for  risk  diversification. 
This idea proved, in part, to be an illusion. When the crisis erupted, the presumed liquidity of 
these  assets  disappeared.  Banks’  balance  sheets  were  thereby  clogged  by  illiquid  assets. 
The  growing  role  of  infrastructure  for  clearing  and  settling  OTC  trades  –  non-standardised 
and  predominantly  bilateral  –  created  uncertainty  regarding  the  distribution  of  exposures 
among the various counterparties, fuelling their mutual distrust.  
Another  factor  that  helped  create  the  perception  of  greater  liquidity  was  the  increased 
funding  available  from  wholesale  financial  markets.  Moreover,  the  originate-to-distribute 
model was adopted not only by large institutions but also by others, such as Northern Rock, 
which  were  not  equipped  to  deal  with  funding  sources  considerably  more  volatile  than 
traditional sources, such as deposits.  
Recourse to wholesale markets contributed to exacerbating credit pro-cyclicality, with more 
abundant credit in periods favourable to markets but also greater vulnerability in the case of 
innovation;  2) 
factors:  1) 
financial 
                                                                                                                                                      
GDP ratio, the variations in the long-term interest rate and the house price/equity price gaps can signal asset 
price busts that are likely to occur in the next two years. 
4   Syndicated loans extended to finance LBOs in the euro area reached an annual sum of almost €140 billion 
around  mid-2007,  and  in  the  2005-07  period  loans  to  finance  LBOs  constituted  around  13%  of  the  total 
syndicated loan market compared with around 6% both before and after the boom years, based on data from 
Dealogic. 
5   The Tier 1 ratio fluctuated around 8% and the total capital ratio around 11%. See the ECB’s Financial Stability 
Review, December 2007. 
6   See  also  the  box  entitled  “Developments  in  MFI  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  by  industry”  in  the 
December 2009 issue of the Monthly Bulletin. 
in 
the 
that  had  been  created 
tighter  markets  conditions.  This  problem  is  not  new.  The  crisis  affecting  savings  and  loan 
undertakings  in  the  United  States  also  originated  in  the  differing  maturities  of  bank  assets 
and liabilities, which gave rise to risky activities in the junk bond and derivatives markets.7  
Securitisation  played  a  role  in  creating  cheaper  and  abundant  credit,  providing  banks  with 
additional funding sources.8 
These  developments  posed  unprecedented  and  significant  challenges  for  supervisory  and 
regulatory  authorities.  Although,  in  some  cases,  the  growing  risks  and  vulnerabilities  were 
identified  at  the  aggregate  level,  there  was  insufficient  information  to  understand  the 
interconnections 
financial  system.  Furthermore,  risk 
assessments mainly targeted market participants’ behaviour rather than formulating concrete 
ways to intervene. This reflected the micro-prudential approach of existing legislation, which 
mainly focused on individual financial institutions, without taking account of interconnections. 
Let  me  also  briefly  mention  monetary  policy.  A  wide-ranging  discussion  is  currently  under 
way about the role that keeping interest rates at low levels for a prolonged period has played 
in  fostering  the  supply  of  bank  credit.  According  to  some  research,  there  is  no  correlation 
between the level of interest rates and bank credit, in particular real estate lending.9 Other 
recent  studies  suggest  the  opposite,  providing  evidence  of  several  transmission  channels. 
First, the low level of interest rates may affect valuations, incomes and cash flows, which, in 
turn,  can  modify  the  way  in  which  banks  measure  the  expected  risks  associated  with 
lending.10  Second,  low  returns  on  comparable  so-called  risk-free  securities,  such  as 
government  bonds,  prompt  banks,  asset  managers  and  insurance  companies  to  take  on 
more  risk  and  invest  in  assets  offering  higher  returns,  particularly  if  the  performance  of 
managers is measured on the basis of nominal yields.11 Finally, low interest rates facilitate 
leverage. 
Overall,  although,  from  an  empirical  standpoint  further  analysis  is  needed,  it  is  difficult  to 
reject the view that the policy of low interest rates contributed to the steady credit dynamics 
in the period preceding the crisis. Certainly, this is a theme that should be studied further in 
the economic literature in the next few years. 
The new steady state  
3. 
Given that the financial crisis has demonstrated the excesses in credit developments in the 
past,  it  is  necessary  to  identify  a  new,  sustainable  equilibrium  point.  To  reach  this  steady 
state,  important  measures  are  needed  in  various  areas,  many  of  which  are  already  in 
                                                 
7   Eventually, this required a clean-up programme with an estimated cost of USD 150 billion. 
8   See, for example, A. Ashcraft and T. Schuermann. 
9   Ben Bernanke, “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, a speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia, 3 January 2010. 
10   T. Adrian and H.S. Shin, “Money, liquidity and monetary policy”, American Economic Review, P&P, vol. 99, 
No 2, pp. 600–605, 2009; J.B. Taylor, “The financial crisis and the policy responses: an empirical analysis of 
what went wrong”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No 14631, 2009. 
11   M.K. Brunnermeier, “Asset pricing under asymmetric information – bubbles, crashes, technical analysis and 
herding”,  Oxford,  Oxford  University  Press,  2001;  R.G.  Rajan,  “Has  financial  development  made  the  world 
riskier?”,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper  Series,  No  11728,  2005;  G.  Jiménez, 
S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydro and J. Saurina, “Hazardous times for monetary policy: what do 23 million loans say 
about the impact of monetary policy on credit risk?”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No 6514, 2007; V. Ioannidou, 
S. Ongena  and  J.-L.  Peydro,  “Monetary  policy,  risk-taking  and  pricing:  evidence  from  a  quasi-natural 
experiment”, NBER Summer Institute, 2009; A. Maddaloni and J.-L. Peydro, “Bank risk-taking, securitisation, 
supervision  and  low  interest  rates:  evidence  from  lending  standards”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series, 
forthcoming. 
32 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
process. I will obviously not go into all of them, given the extent of the work in progress, but I 
will mention a few initiatives. 
First  of  all,  the  regulation  of  the  banking  system  must  be  reviewed,  with  new  rules 
constraining its assets and balance sheet structure. In December 2009, the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision announced a reform package aiming to strengthen global capital and 
liquidity  regulations.  Capital  requirements  will  be  more  stringent,  thanks  to  the  improved 
quality,  consistency  and  transparency  of  the  regulatory  capital  base.  Proposals  include  a 
counter-cyclical capital buffer, and measures to promote provisioning over the cycle and to 
mitigate  the  possible  excess  cyclicality  arising  from  the  minimum  capital  requirements.12 
Measures  concerning  the  role  of  external  ratings  and  the  treatment  of  securitisation  have 
also been announced. 
Better risk coverage is also needed, which is capable of capturing major on and off-balance 
sheet risks and derivative-related exposures. Various proposals have been formulated in this 
regard,  including:  strengthening  the  capital  requirements  for  counterparty  credit  risk 
exposures  arising  from  derivatives,  repos  and  securities  financing  activities;  a  leverage 
requirement (capital divided by total exposure) to put a cap on the level of leverage in the 
banking sector; and internationally harmonised global liquidity standards, including a liquidity 
coverage  ratio  and  a  structural  ratio  (measuring  the  amount  of  longer-term  stable  funding 
sources to cover the liquidity needs for funding assets over the period of one year). Finally, 
governance  of  financial  institutions  must  be  strengthened,  for  instance  with  regard  to 
remuneration incentives.13 
The regulatory community is well aware of the fact that the reform must be introduced in an 
ordered manner in order to ensure the resilience of the financial system as a whole, while 
also  supporting  economic  growth  over  the  longer  term.  The  proposals  are  currently  the 
subject of extensive consultations with the banking system. In addition, an impact study will 
be  conducted  to  assess  the  implications  of  the  various  measures.  Based  on  the  outcome 
thereof,  the  aim  is  to  arrive,  by  the  end  of  2010,  at  an  appropriate  calibration  for  the  new 
requirements in terms of the level and quality of capital, in order to find a balance between 
financial  innovation,  financial  stability  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  Basel  reform 
will  be  phased  in  gradually  as  financial  conditions  improve  and  the  economic  recovery 
strengthens, with the aim of implementation by the end of 2012. Appropriate grandfathering 
arrangements will be put in place in order to ensure a smooth transition. 
A further point highlighted by the crisis is the availability of resolution schemes that allow for 
speedy  and  decisive  interventions  in  the  event  of  bank  failures  or  near-failures,  averting 
deposit runs and limiting contagion effects on the wider banking system. Several initiatives in 
this area are under way both at the European and global levels.14 
                                                 
12   The potential role of capital regulation (Basel II) in amplifying credit cycles is being investigated by a number 
of authorities and institutions, including the Basel Committee and the ECB. The consultative document issued 
by the Basel Committee on 17 December 2009 already includes proposals on: (i) mitigating the cyclicality of 
the  minimum  requirement;  (ii)  introducing  forward-looking  provisioning;  (iii)  building  buffers  through  capital 
conservation; and (iv) mitigating excessive credit growth. The latter would imply the introduction of a counter-
cyclical buffer requirement, which would come into effect during periods of excessive credit growth. The Basel 
Committee’s  proposal  is  currently  at  an  early  stage  of  development  and  a  fully-fledged  version  will  be 
developed by the Committee in time for its June 2010 meeting. 
13   See,  for  instance,  F.  Panetta  and  P.  Angelini  (coordinators),  U.  Albertazzi,  F.  Colomba,  W.  Cornacchia, 
A. Di Cesare,  A.  Pilati,  C.  Salleo  and  G.  Santini,  “Financial  sector  pro-cyclicality  –  lessons  from  the  crisis”, 
Questioni di Economia e Finanza, No 44, Banca d’Italia, 2009. 
14   At the international level, the Basel Committee’s Cross-border Bank Resolution Group has published a report 
with  recommendations  to  improve  the  resolution  of  failing  financial  institutions  that  conduct  cross-border 
activities.  At  the  European  level,  the  European  Commission  has  launched  a  public  consultation  on  the  EU 
framework for cross-border crisis management in the banking sector. 
As regards derivatives, the aim is to increase transparency and risk management, especially 
through the creation of market infrastructures to centralise transaction settlement.  
Another area in which more stringent requirements are to be imposed is that of securitisation 
and  credit  derivatives  activity.15  During  the  crisis,  there  was  a  strong  decrease  in 
securitisation. For this segment of the market to experience a broad recovery, fundamental 
changes towards more transparency, standardisation and simplicity are required. There are 
various  initiatives,  both  public  and  private,  targeting  this.  The  ECB  is  taking  measures  in 
order  to  gradually  align  the  collateral  eligibility  criteria  and  risk  control  measures  with  best 
market standards and investors’ requirements.16  
In the context of the regulatory reform, the international community has committed itself to 
reducing the moral hazard posed by systemically important financial institutions. A number of 
proposals are being discussed with international bodies, in particular the Basel Committee 
and  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  The  debate  recently  gained  momentum  following  the 
President of the United States’ proposal to adopt the “Volcker rule”, which aims to separate 
the activities of large financial institutions. An important element of this proposal is that any 
financial institution that obtains federally-insured deposits or has access to refinancing from 
the  Federal  Reserve  would  be  prohibited  from  owning,  investing  in  or  sponsoring  hedge 
funds or private equity firms. Essentially, it aims to separate traditional banking activities from 
higher-risk, proprietary trading operations. It also proposes imposing limits on large financial 
institutions regarding their market share of liabilities, as a supplement to the existing caps on 
the market share of deposits. 
These proposals have still not been detailed in depth. Nonetheless, on the basis of what has 
been  made  public,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  initiative  is  heading  in  the  right  direction  and 
represents  the  first  step  to  ensuring  the  financial  system  can  effectively  support  the  real 
economy and is not weakened by the most volatile market fluctuations. It is, however, not the 
final step. Above all, it should not be a substitute for two other lines of action, which, in my 
opinion, are essential for a complete reform of the system. The first is that the whole financial 
system should be subject to regulation, even if the specific regulations may vary according to 
the  activities  or  institutions  to  which  they  apply.  However,  I  do  not  want  the  separation 
between traditional banking activities and high-risk proprietary trading operations to drive the 
latter  to  be  undertaken  by  sectors  or  institutions  that  are  less  vigilant  or  are  outside  the 
sphere of regulation. My concerns arise from the fact that, while during the first G20 summit 
meetings, there was widespread consensus on the necessity of ensuring that no segments of 
the financial system are left outside the scope of the regulatory framework, over time, this 
resolve  has  dwindled  and  attention  has  mainly  been  focused  on  banks.  Given  the 
interconnectedness of markets, it is essential that investment banks, hedge funds and other 
institutions are also subject to adequate regulation. In particular, the supervisory authorities 
must have adequate information on the activities of these institutions in order to be able to 
evaluate vulnerabilities and possible contagion effects. The second line of action relates to 
the  strengthening  of  the  supervisory  authorities,  beginning  with  their  independence.  Only 
institutions  independent  not  only  of  political  authorities  but  also  of  market  participants  can 
have  the  clarity  and  the  power  to  take  measures  to  reduce  the  cyclicality  of  credit  and 
financial activities. There are, therefore, concerns regarding the developments in the current 
                                                 
15   See, for instance, the Basel Committee of Banking Supervision, “Strengthening the resilience of the banking 
sector”, December 2009. 
16   For example, in September 2008 the ECB announced higher transparency requirements, including the need 
for regular surveillance reports by rating agencies. In early 2009 it increased the rating requirement for newly 
issued  ABSs  to  AAA  at  issuance  and  discontinued  the  acceptance  of  double-layer  securitisations.  In 
November 2009 it announced the eligibility requirement that, as of 1 March 2010, at least two ratings must 
comply  with  the  minimum  rating  threshold  applicable  to  ABSs.  Moreover,  on  23  December  2009  the  ECB 
launched a public consultation on the establishment of loan-by-loan information requirements for ABSs in the 
Eurosystem collateral framework. 
34 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
debate  in  the  United  States,  where  the  most  independent  institution,  namely  the  Federal 
Reserve,  is  subject  to  attacks  and  pressures  from  various  corners,  including  legislative 
initiatives aiming to curtail its powers. 
A final concern regarding international cooperation is this: there is no doubt that the “Volker 
rule” represents a new topic for discussion and that there is a risk that not all countries will 
want to follow this path, out of a wish not to penalise the financial institutions based in their 
own countries through the new regulations on separation. As has been the case in the past, 
it can be expected that vast financial resources will be employed in an attempt to influence 
political decisions and to stand in the way of a proposal of this kind. It would be a shame if 
the authorities in major countries put the interests of these institutions ahead of those of the 
taxpayers and ahead of global interests. 
This brings me to the role that central banks can play in supporting more sustainable credit 
flows.  Recent  work  shows  that  price  stability  is  necessary,  but  not  sufficient  to  ensure  a 
homogenous  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy  and  avoid  financial  instability.  In  particular,  if 
monetary policy concentrates solely on inflation objectives, it might, in some circumstances, 
end up being too accommodative of credit cycles and fuel speculative bubbles. Such a risk 
tends  to  become  more  apparent  when  interest  rates  are  kept  at  a  very  low  level  for  an 
extended period of time. 
On the other hand, it appears to be a difficult task for a central bank to use one instrument, 
such as interest rates, to achieve two objectives at the same time, namely price stability and 
financial stability. This is the reason why central banks should also be equipped with macro-
prudential instruments, distinct from monetary policy, which can be used in order to avoid the 
excessive  pro-cyclicality  of  credit.  These  instruments  should  enhance  the  stability  and 
resilience of the banking sector over the business cycle, as well as the sustainability of the 
balance sheet structures of borrowers. A more efficient allocation of credit should result, thus 
helping to avoid the build-up of financial imbalances and contributing to improved economic 
performance. 
To sum up this part, the new steady state will be characterised by higher capital ratios and 
lower leverage in the banking sector, and probably also less recourse by the banking system 
to  market  financing  in  general,  and  to  securitisation  in  particular.  This  will  allow  for  more 
stable  credit  growth,  which  is  less  subject  to  pro-cyclicality,  especially  that  deriving  from 
supply factors. Credit growth will also be less affected by financial market volatility.17 
The transition 
4. 
The transition from the old equilibrium, which was really one of imbalance, to a new, more 
sustainable  one  cannot  be  instant,  as  that  would  involve  an  excessive  adjustment  with 
potentially recessionary effects. Nor can it take too long as this would risk creating incentives 
to return to the unsatisfactory behaviour exhibited prior to the crisis. Defining the transition 
phases is possibly the most difficult challenge.  
The  transition  is  characterised  not  only  by  the  lag  between  decisions  relating  to  new 
prudential  regulations  and  their  application,  of  which  I  spoke  earlier,  but  also  by  the 
extraordinary measures in terms of monetary and financial policy, adopted by governments 
and  central  banks  to  combat  the  recession  and  support  the  financial  system  in  facing  the 
systemic crisis. 
                                                 
17   In fact, recent studies have shown that securitisation and credit derivatives tend to increase the supply of bank 
loans; see, for instance, Estrella, “Securitisation and the efficacy of monetary policy”, Economic Policy Review, 
vol. 8(1), Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2002; Hirtle, “Credit derivatives and bank credit supply”, Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report,  n.  276,  2007;  Y.  Altunbas,  L.  Gambacorta,  D.  Marques-Ibanez, 
“Securitisation and the bank lending channel”, European Economic Review, Vol. 53, Issue 8, 2009. 
The major central banks have promptly and forcefully responded to the crisis with a broad 
variety of measures. The classical prescription by Walter Bagehot, which describes central 
banks as lenders of last resort, has proven to be as valid today as it was 137 years ago when 
“Lombard Street” was first published.18 Accommodating the sudden increase in the demand 
for liquidity prevented a disorderly de-leveraging process, prevented illiquid but solvent banks 
from going bust, and, more broadly, sustained confidence in the economy.  
The  steps  taken  by  central  banks  have  taken  them  into,  up  to  now,  uncharted  territory. 
Interest rates have been reduced to very low levels by historical standards, clearing the way 
for  significantly  lower  bank  interest  rates  (although  with  a  significant  time-lag),  thus 
supporting  credit  demand  from  households  and  firms.  At  the  same  time,  non-conventional 
measures  have  been  adopted  with  the  aim  of  bringing  abnormally  high  money  market 
spreads down and ensuring a proper transmission of the monetary policy impulse.  
These  exceptional  measures  have  had  important  effects  on  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability, and improved the overall conditions on financial markets.19 In particular, they have 
helped to “liquefy” assets that could otherwise have caused the insolvency of many financial 
institutions. More generally, they have helped to restore confidence by reducing uncertainty. 
In addition, they have prevented contagion effects that can arise in the financial system as a 
result of the inter-connectedness between various market participants. 
The monetary policy intervention also helped to restore the profitability of banks as the fall in 
short-term  interest  rates  steepened  the  yield  curve,  to  the  benefit  of  the  banking  system, 
which usually funds itself in the short term in order to provide credit for longer terms. This 
profitability also helped to support the flow of credit to the economy.  
Financial  measures  have  also  been  adopted,  such  as  increased  deposit  insurance, 
guarantees  for  bank  liabilities,  and  injections  of  capital.  In  addition,  fiscal  budgets  have 
supported aggregate demand via automatic stabilisers and expansionary measures. 
Over the last few months, leverage has generally fallen, especially among those institutions 
that were most highly leveraged.20 The fall reflects, in part, recapitalisation efforts, lower risk-
taking  as  a  result  of  more  prudent  lending  standards,  and  the  shedding  of  assets  and/or 
limitation  of  the  growth  in  balance  sheets.  It  also  reflects  pressure  from  the  market  and 
supervisory  authorities  to  control  leverage,  as  well  as  expectations  regarding  the  possible 
introduction of a leverage ratio, in addition to risk-based capital requirements.21, 22 
Likewise, capital position ratios of large and complex banking groups in the euro area are 
improving. The earnings of these banks have recovered, while the growth of total assets and 
of  risk-weighted  assets  has  slowed  down  and  capital  has  increased,  both  from  public  and 
private  sources.  These  developments  were  necessary  in  view  of  the  expected  increase  in 
non-performing loans as a delayed result of the economic crisis.  
                                                 
18   W. Bagehot, “Lombard Street: a description of the money market”, Scribner, Armstrong & Co., 1873. 
19   With  regard  to  the  importance  of  an  accommodative  monetary  stance  at  the  margin,  see,  for  instance, 
T. Adrian  and  H.S.  Shin,  “Financial  intermediaries  and  monetary  economics”,  Handbook  of  Monetary 
Economics, forthcoming. 
20   It should be noted that this effect only arises when the impact of losses on the capital base is greater than the 
reduction in the value of marked-to-market assets on the balance sheet. 
21   There  are  currently  three  countries  that  use,  or  plan  to  use,  a  leverage  ratio,  namely  the  United  States, 
Canada and Switzerland. Switzerland has introduced a leverage ratio for its two large, internationally active 
banks, which will take effect in 2013. 
22   Pressure on banks to reduce leverage has been apparent from discussions in various international fora, such 
as the G20, which has called for the introduction of leverage ratios, in addition to risk-based capital ratios, in 
order to prevent banks from arbitraging capital requirements. 
36 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
With  improving  conditions  in  the  economy  and  financial  markets,  supportive  measures  by 
governments  and  central  banks  have  progressively  less  “raison  d’être”.  The  withdrawal  of 
these  measures  must  occur  in  a  timely  fashion;  being  too  early  or  too  late  could  have 
unwanted  implications  for  the  speed  at  which  the  new  steady  state  can  be  reached.  In 
particular,  too  brisk  a  phasing-out  could  lead  to  a  dramatic  process  of  de-leveraging, 
jeopardising the economic recovery. On the other hand, it is essential to prevent the banking 
system from relying on support measures for too long, i.e. becoming “addicted” to them. The 
intermediation  role  of  the  central  banks  during  the  crisis,  if  drawn  out  for  too  long,  may 
reduce  incentives  for  banks  to  return  to  actively  operating  in  the  money  market.  Such  a 
scenario may also weaken incentives to restructure banks’ balance sheets.  
Credit flows to households and firms represent an indicator of financing conditions and of the 
prospects of a recovery in economic activity. However, they also reflect supply and demand 
factors. On the whole, developments in credit appear to have been, up to now, in line with 
historical regularities, according to which loans to firms typically lag the economic cycle by a 
couple of quarters. In fact, credit flows remained positive, even during the period of the most 
severe contraction in economic activity, presumably as a result of the growing use of credit 
lines and revolving credit facilities.23 Therefore, lending to firms can be expected to remain 
subdued even in the early stages of economic recovery, but it cannot be ruled out that supply 
factors  will  continue  to  restrict  credit  for  some  months.24  The  flow  of  loans  to  households 
began to grow again at the end of last year.  
The  quarterly  survey  on  bank  lending  indicates  that  the  degree  of  tightening  adopted  by 
banks for the granting of credit to firms declined over the last few months of 2009, but remain 
positive  (see  Figure  1).  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  among  the  factors  that  affect  banks’ 
restrictive  intentions,  neither  the  one  concerning  the  liquidity  position  of  the  banks 
themselves nor the one concerning access to financial markets seems significant any longer. 
Both  factors  now  contribute  in  a  positive  way  to  the  intentions  of  banks  to  grant  credit. 
Considerations  relating  to  the  prospects  for  economic  growth  and  those  linked  to  specific 
sectors of the economy remain restrictive, but the degree of restriction is declining sharply. 
The element that marks a growing concern with regard to restrictiveness relates to the capital 
of banks. Clearly, the considerations in respect of the need to replenish capital are starting to 
exert a strong influence on the decisions of banks to grant new credit. 
This  dynamic  is  worrying.  It  indicates  that  the  banking  system  is  interpreting  the  new 
regulations  restrictively  for  credit.  This  approach  is  undesirable  and  out  of  line  with  the 
objectives  so  far  followed  by  the  economic  policy  authorities  of  supporting  the  financial 
system,  not  as  an  end in  itself  but as  an  essential  function  of  savings  intermediation.  The 
outcry  surrounding  the  effects  that  future  capital  standards  and  risk  management  –  the 
so-called “Basel 3” – will have on credit developments in the short term seems unjustified. 
The  new  rules  are  specifically  intended  to  ensure  a  more  orderly  and  sustainable  flow  of 
credit, not a reduction. Moreover, as I said earlier, a gradual process of adaptation to the new 
requirements is foreseen.  
The  new  capital  requirements  may  be  attained  in  two  different  ways,  although  they  have 
opposite effects on banking activities: reduction in banking activities, particularly in credit to 
firms,  on  the  one  hand,  and  capital  increase  on  the  other.  The  alarm  that  seems  to  be 
widespread in the banking sector concerning the new rules seems to mask the intention of 
adapting  to  them  via  a  reduced  exposure  to  the  real  economy,  rather  than  via  a  capital 
increase.  This  reaction  seems  to  reflect  the  incentive  of  managers  and  shareholders  to 
                                                 
23   Indeed,  in  the  context  of  the  recent  turmoil,  while  the  annual  growth  in  undrawn  credit  lines,  following  an 
increase up to mid-July 2007, has been on a declining trend and moved into negative territory in the course of 
2008, the annual growth in the draw-downs of credit lines has been increasing up to the third quarter of 2008. 
24   This is based on information derived from the Eurosystem’s Bank Lending Survey. 
favour remuneration on equity and human capital, rather than long-term investment. This is 
not in line with the macroeconomic objectives. This is why we insist that the profits made in 
these months by the banking sector – which were obtained thanks to the interventions by the 
policy authorities to keep the system going, and thus ultimately by the taxpayers – should be 
used to increase the capital rather than to reward the banks’ managers and shareholders. 
This applies not only to banks that have received direct assistance through guarantees and 
public capital injections, but also to the indirect benefits obtained as a result of low interest 
rates.  
Conclusion 
5. 
The pre-crisis period was marked by unsustainable credit policies by the banks and, more 
generally,  by  the  financial  system.  These  policies  were  encouraged  by  inadequate 
supervision and slack prudential regulation, and also by the excessive influence the financial 
system had on regulatory mechanisms. This caused the biggest crisis of the post-war period. 
We  must  find  a  new  equilibrium  in  which  the  financial  system  truly  supports  the  real 
economy, encouraging a flow of balanced credit. The adjustment may not be immediate and 
it needs to follow a gradual path in order to arrive, in due course, at a new point of balance 
that  allows  a  restoration  of  confidence  not  only  among  investors  but  also  taxpayers. 
Everyone must play his or her part. The regulatory authorities have to agree quickly on the 
new system parameters, in consultation with the private sector. Macroeconomic policy must 
promote conditions for a gradual adjustment, in line with the objective of sustaining economic 
growth and the restoration of a financial market that efficiently performs its primary role as an 
intermediary. Market players must understand that the future cannot be a simple return to the 
past, to the pre-crisis situation.  
If we fail to reach the new equilibrium in due course we will have wasted not only the crisis 
but also the resources of taxpayers that have been used to save the system. This can only 
backfire on the system. 
38 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
Figure 1 
Changes in credit standards applied to the approval of loans  
or credit lines to enterprises 
(net percentages of banks contributing to tightening standards) 
Notes:  The  net  percentage  refers  to  the  difference  between  the  sum  of  the  percentages  for  “tightened 
considerably”  and  “tightened  somewhat”  and  the  sum  of  the  percentages  for  “eased  somewhat”  and  “eased 
considerably”.  The  net  percentages  for  the  questions  related  to  the  factors  are  defined  as  the  difference 
between the percentage of banks reporting that the given factor contributed to a tightening and to an easing. 
 
