Njuguna S Ndung’u: Collaboration among domestic financial sector 
regulators 
Opening remarks by Prof Njuguna S Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
3rd joint CMA/CBK/RBA/IRA Board Members seminar, Mombasa, 25 March 2010. 
 Board Members; 
Colleagues; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
I am delighted and honoured to be here this evening at the commencement of this 
important retreat. 
To  start  with,  let  me  extend  my  congratulations  to  the  Board  Members  and 
Management  of  Insurance  Regulatory  Authority  (IRA)  for  hosting  the  3rd  Joint 
Retreat for Board Members of Domestic Financial Sector Regulators. 
Allow  me  to  take  this  opportunity  and  touch  briefly  on  the  achievements  of  CBK 
since we last met in Naivasha in July 2009. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  for  instance,  has  since  September  2009 
been implementing decisions aimed at signaling to the market the need to expand 
credit  to  the  private  sector  at  affordable  interest  rates.  In  an  effort  to  make  credit 
cost effective we have several policy initiatives: 
 
Agent  banking:  Central  Bank  has  been  pursuing  a  policy  of  broadening 
financial  inclusion  to  the  majority  of  Kenyans  at  lower  costs  through 
innovations. To this end, The Finance Act, 2009 amended the Banking Act to 
enable banks to use third party agents. This will enable them to leverage on 
additional  cost  effective  distribution  channels  to  offer  financial  services. 
Similarly, the model will enable banks to enhance delivery of financial services 
by use of third parties that include some of the entities that are regulated by 
the other domestic regulators. 
Credit Reference Bureau: To improve the living standards of the majority of 
Kenyans,  higher  economic  growth  is  required.  Economic  growth  cannot  be 
achieved without enhanced private sector lending. In this regard and to ensure 
access to credit at affordable rates, a robust credit information mechanism is 
key. To this end, CBK licensed the first ever Credit Reference Bureau which 
has already commenced operations. It is our hope that this move will positively 
alter  the  Kenyan  banking  sector  landscape  and  facilitate  the  lowering  of  the 
cost of credit. It is our belief that the experience from the banking sector credit 
information  sharing  initiative  will  sooner  rather  than  later  be  expanded  to 
include other lenders and utility service providers to hasten the elimination of 
information asymmetry and hence promote efficiency in the market. 
Cost  of  collateral:  Institutions  have  on  several  occasions  cited  the  cost  of 
collateral as one of the major components contributing to high interest rates. 
To gain an understanding of the underlying factors in the collateral process, 
Central  Bank,  Kenya  Bankers  Association  (KBA)  and  Financial  Sector 
Deepening (FSD) Kenya commissioned a study aimed at reviewing the cost 
associated  with  collateral  in  the  credit  granting  process.  The  study  brought 
forward some invaluable insights on the intricacies surrounding the collateral 
process  and  recommendations  which  when  implemented  will  result  in  both 
cost and time reduction. 
  BIS Review 66/2010 
 1
  Provision of long-term finance: A small committee to look into development 
banking  products  was  formed  in  February  2010  to  explore  avenues  through 
which  development  banking  products,  also  referred  to  as  “Long-Term 
Financing Products”, can be introduced into the market. This was necessitated 
by  several  reasons,  among  them;  the  commercial  banks  credit  market 
structure  that  focuses  more  on  short  term  loan  maturities;  the  moribund 
development  financial  institutions;  the  opening  opportunities  with  flow  of 
international funds that are intermediated by local institutions; and the need to 
develop  the  bonds  market.  The  basic  question:  how  can  we  lengthen  the 
maturity profile of term loans to 5–10 years for SMEs? 
Interactions  with  market  players:  Since  September  2009,  the  MPC  has 
been holding regular meetings with the Chief Executive Officers of commercial 
banks  to  brief  them  on  the  background  to  its  decisions  in  the  bi-monthly 
meetings.  The  meetings  are  part  of  a  wider  strategy  to  enhance  the 
transmission of monetary policy decisions to the real sector through feedback, 
sensitization of the market on the activities of the MPC, as well as engaging 
banks  on  the  need  to  lower  the  cost  of  credit  in  order  to  support  economic 
growth. 
On the market front, the Central Bank of Kenya, the Capital Markets Authority and 
the  Nairobi  Stock  Exchange  undertook  significant  reforms  in  the  domestic  bond 
market.  These  reforms  included  introduction  of  an  Automated  Trading  System 
aimed at enhancing the safety and efficiency in the processing of secondary trading 
of government securities as well as corporate bonds in the market. The move is also 
expected  to  improve  market  liquidity  thereby  encouraging  more  investors  to 
participate in the bond market. This development fits in very well with the aspirations 
of the capital markets development as envisaged in Vision 2030. 
We have accomplished much since we last met, but a lot more remains to be done 
to expand the depth and breadth of the financial sector. I am sure that together as 
the  financial  sector  regulators  we  shall  seek  the  necessary  synergies  to  foster  a 
safe, sound, efficient and inclusive financial system. But more demands as the EAC 
Monetary Union shapes up will be coming to us. 
Being cognisant of the onerous task ahead of us, I shall not extend my remarks any 
further. I look forward to the fruitful deliberations which I am sure we shall have. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2010
