Glenn Stevens: Some longer-run consequences of the financial crisis 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The  Anika 
Foundation Luncheon, supported by Australian Business Economists and Macquarie Bank, 
Sydney, 20 July 2010.  
 I thank George Gardner for assistance in preparing this address. 
Thank  you  for  coming  along  today  in  support  of  The  Anika  Foundation’s  work  supporting 
research into adolescent depression. This is the fifth such occasion and it is very gratifying 
indeed to see such a strong response from the financial community. I want also to record my 
thanks to the Australian Business Economists for their support and to Macquarie Bank for 
their sponsorship of today’s event. 
My subject is the consequences of the financial crisis. We are all aware of the immediate and 
short-term  impacts  the  crisis  had  on  the  international  financial  system  and  the  world 
economy. I won’t repeat them.  
The  initial  phase  of  the  recovery  has  been  underway  for  over  a  year  now.  Global  GDP 
started rising in mid 2009. When all the figures are in we will probably find that it rose by 
close to 5 per cent over the year to June 2010, though the pace has been uneven between 
regions  and  with  some  of  the  leading  Asian  economies  seeking  to  slow  down  to  a  more 
sustainable  pace,  and  European  nations  tightening  fiscal  policy,  there  is  a  bit  more 
uncertainty just now about prospects for 2011. The bulk of financial institutions most affected 
by the crisis have returned to profit, while estimates of the total losses to be absorbed from 
the whole episode have tended to decline somewhat lately (though they are still very large). 
Financial market dislocation has gradually eased, albeit with sporadic episodes of renewed 
doubts and instability.  
But what of the longer-run consequences of the crisis? I want to offer some remarks under 
three headings, though with no claim this is an exhaustive list. These remarks are about the 
general international situation, not Australia in particular, unless otherwise noted.  
Fiscal issues 
The first lasting consequence is the fiscal burden taken on by countries at the centre of, or 
close to, the crisis. There are three components to this.  
First,  some  governments  took  on  bank  ownership  in  order  to  ensure  the  replenishment  of 
capital that had been too thin to start with and that was depleted by the losses on securities 
and  loans.  Table  1  shows  public  capital  injections  to  the  financial  sector  for  several  key 
economies. The amounts in mainland Europe could quite possibly grow soon as a result of 
the forthcoming stress tests. Note that this is not necessarily a permanent burden since, if 
carried out successfully, the ownership stake can be sold again in due course. In fact about 
70 per cent of the funds invested by the United States in banks have been repaid, and the 
US Government expects to make an overall profit from these capital injections.1 Nonetheless 
for a period of time governments are carrying a little more debt than otherwise as a result of 
the provision of support to the banking system.   
                                                 
1  Of course the United States retains the stake in the insurer AIG. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac also remain in 
government ownership though that perhaps might be seen simply as final recognition on the US Government’s 
balance sheet of an obligation everyone always assumed it would meet. 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 1
 Second,  the  depth  of  the  downturn  saw  recourse  to  discretionary  fiscal  packages.  As  the 
table shows, while there was a lot of national variation, for some countries this spending was 
quite significant relative to the normal pace of annual growth in GDP. To the extent that the 
packages had measures that increased spending for a finite period but not permanently, the 
result is a rise in debt of a finite magnitude, but not an ever-escalating path of debt.  
But it is the third factor – namely the magnitude of the downturn itself and the initial slowness 
of recovery – that is having by far the biggest effect on debt ratios. According to the IMF, for 
the group of advanced economies in the G-20, the ratio of public debt to GDP will rise by 
almost  40  percentage  points  from  its  2008  level  by  2015.  Fiscal  stimulus  and  financial 
support packages will account for about 12 percentage points of this. Close to 20 percentage 
points are accounted for by the effects of the recessions and sluggish recoveries. Another 
7 percentage points comes from the unfavourable dynamics of economic growth rates being 
so much lower than interest rates for a couple of years.  
Now  it  is  somewhat  inaccurate  to  attribute  the  economic  downturn  effects  entirely  to  the 
financial crisis because there would probably have been some sort of slowdown even without 
a  crisis.  There  will  always  be  a  business  cycle,  after  all,  and  deficits  and  debt  rise  when 
downturns occur. As a comparison, the rise in the debt ratio of the G7 from 2000 to 2005 
associated  with  the  previous  cyclical  downturn  –  which  was  not  an  especially  deep  one  – 
was around 12 percentage points.  
Nonetheless the recent downturn was a bad one in many countries, and that is because it 
was associated with a financial crisis. For this reason, together with the other factors I have 
already mentioned, the major countries generally are going to have significantly higher public 
debt relative to GDP after the crisis than before, and the debt ratios will continue to rise for 
several more years.  
2 
 BIS Review 97/2010
This was largely unavoidable. To a considerable extent, the fiscal legacy can be seen as one 
manifestation  of  a  broader  legacy  of  lost  output  (and  hence  weaker  budgetary  positions 
through “automatic stabilisers”) over a period of several years. Generally speaking, the public 
balance sheet has played the role of a temporary shock absorber as private balance sheets 
contracted.  
But  the  servicing  of  the  resulting  debt  is  an  ongoing  cost  to  the  citizens  of  the  countries 
concerned. At present that additional cost is, in some countries, reduced compared with what 
it might have been due to the low level of interest rates on government debt that we see. 
Moreover had the debt not been taken on it could well be that the economic outcomes would 
have been much worse, so increasing fiscal and other costs. Nonetheless this lasting debt 
servicing burden is a real cost.   
More importantly, the pace of the rise in public debt has increased focus on the question of 
fiscal sustainability. This is especially so in those countries where debt burdens were already 
considerable before the crisis.  
The difficulty is that “sustainability” is so hard to assess. It is more complex than simply the 
ratio of debt to GDP. In any number of countries, including our own, public debt ratios have 
on  some  past  occasions  been  much  higher  than  100  per  cent.  Many  countries  found 
themselves  with  such  a  situation  in  the  aftermath  of  World  War  II.  Those  ratios  thereafter 
came down steadily though it took until the 1960s in our case, or longer in some others, for 
them  to  reach  levels  like  50  or  60  per  cent  that  today  is  often  regarded  as  a  sort  of 
benchmark.2  That  reduction  occurred  for  a  combination  of  reasons.  The  big  deficits  of  the 
war years really were temporary in most cases; economies recorded good average rates of 
output  growth  in  the  long  post-war  boom  with  strong  growth  in  both  population  and 
productivity;  in  the  same  period,  business  cycle  downturns  were  not  especially  deep  or 
protracted; interest rates were low – so the comparison of the growth rate of GDP and the 
interest  rate  on  the  debt  was  favourable;  and  lastly,  significant  inflation  raised  the 
denominator of the ratio – in some cases in the late 1940s and early 1950s, and more widely 
in the 1970s.  
So high or even very high debt ratios per se have not necessarily been an insurmountable 
problem in the past. On the other hand, that earlier decline in debt ratios may not be easy to 
replicate  in  the  future.  In  some  countries  demographics  are  working  the  wrong  way,  with 
population  growing  more  slowly  or  even  declining.  Other  things  equal,  future  growth  of 
nominal GDP will thus be lower than in the past. A period of rapid catch-up growth in income, 
which helped Europe and Japan in the couple of decades after 1950, is more likely in the 
future to occur in the emerging world than in the parts of the developed world where most of 
the debt is.  
In  fact  it  might  be  argued  that  the  fiscal  position  of  a  number  of  countries  has  been 
increasingly vulnerable for quite some years. Perhaps what the crisis has done is to act as a 
catalyst to bring forward a set of pressures for long-term budgetary reform that were bound 
to emerge anyway.  
This  has  placed  some  governments  in  a  very  difficult  bind,  since  the  heightened  focus  on 
sustainability has increased the pressure for fiscal consolidation at a time when aggregate 
demand  remains  weak.  The  “least-damage  path”  through  the  various  competing  concerns 
has become harder to tread.  
                                                 
2  A public debt to GDP ratio of 60 per cent was one criterion in assessing eligibility for the European monetary 
union  and  was  a  benchmark  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (a  Pact  perhaps  more  often  honoured  in  the 
breach). 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 3
Public intervention in finance  
The second long-run implication of the crisis is that government intervention in the financial 
sector  has  become  much  more  pervasive.  I  have  already  mentioned  governments  taking 
major  stakes  in  banks  in  key  countries,  which  was  virtually  unthinkable,  certainly  for  an 
American or British government, only three years ago.  
But  the  intervention  was  broader  than  just  a  temporary  period  of  public  ownership  –  as 
massive  an  event  as  that  has  been.  Take  guarantees.  Once  the  Irish  Government 
guaranteed its banks, governments all over the world felt bound to follow suit in some form or 
other  –  expanding  or  (as  in  our  case)  introducing  deposit  insurance,  and  guaranteeing 
wholesale obligations (for a fee). The feeling was probably most acute in countries whose 
citizens  could  shift  funds  to  a  bank  guaranteed  by  a  neighbouring  country  without  much 
effort.  
In circumstances of incipient or actual panic, or potential complete market closure, measures 
along  such  lines  had  to  be  taken.  The  simple  truth  is  that,  given  a  big  enough  shock,  the 
public backstop to the financial system has to be used.  
But the backstop having been used so forcefully on this occasion, it is desirable not to use it 
again soon. The real question is how, having set the precedent, governments avoid too easy 
recourse to such measures in the future. They will want to get to a position where in future 
periods of financial turmoil, they are standing well in the background, not in the foreground.  
Meanwhile there is a growing debate, at a very high level, about what  the financial sector 
should do, and what it should not do. The number of inquiries, commissions, conferences, 
papers and ideas about the desirable shape of the system in the future is growing. This is a 
growth industry with, I should think, pretty good prospects over the next few years.  
Another characteristic of public intervention is the expansion of central bank balance sheets. 
During  a  panic,  the  central  bank’s  job  is  to  be  prepared  to  liquefy  quality  assets,  with  a 
suitable  combination  of  hair-cuts  and  penalty  rates,  to  the  extent  necessary  to  meet  the 
demand for cash.  
Once the panic is over, the additional liquidity shouldn’t need to remain in place, and indeed 
some particular facilities established by central banks had design features which saw their 
usage automatically decline as conditions improved. But overall it has proven difficult, so far, 
for the major central banks to start the process of winding down the sizes of their balance 
sheets.  
In effect central banks have been replacing markets. They had to. If counterparties feel they 
cannot trust each other and flows between them are cut off, with everyone preferring to keep 
large  liquid  balances  with  the  central  bank,  the  central  bank  has  to  replace  the  market  to 
ensure that everyone has the cash they need each day (against suitable collateral of course). 
Central bank purchases have also acted to reduce credit spreads and yields.  
I am not arguing that this policy is macro-economically wrong. But consider the implications 
of persisting with it over a long period. One doesn’t have to believe that markets can solve all 
problems  to  accept  that  well-functioning  markets  have  a  value.  A  cost  of  the  zero  or  near 
zero  interest  rate  and  a  greatly  expanded  role  for  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  is  that 
some markets tend to atrophy – as Japan has found over a decade.   
Moreover  some  central  banks  have  had  to  accept  a  degree  of  risk  on  their  own  balance 
sheets that is considerably larger than historical norms. Of course since the governments are 
ultimately the owners of the central banks, that is where the risk really resides. From a purely 
financial point of view, the risk of a rise in yields on bonds held by central banks, but issued 
by their own governments, is actually no risk at all once the central bank is consolidated with 
the government. On the other hand, to the extent that central banks are really exposed, or 
are exposing their governments, to private credit risk or to the risk of other sovereigns, those 
are genuine risks.  
4 
 BIS Review 97/2010
So  some  central  banks,  like  their  governments,  have  found  themselves  in  very  unusual 
terrain. It is terrain: in which the relationship between the central bank and the government is 
subtly changed; where the distinction between fiscal and monetary policy is less clear; from 
which it may be hard to exit in the near term; and a side effect of which may be wastage, 
over time, in some elements of market capability.  
Regulation 
Of course I have not yet mentioned the other significant public intervention in finance which 
is the major regulatory agenda being pursued by the international community. This is being 
pushed  by  the  G-20  process  and  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  The  “perimeter”  of 
regulation is being extended to include hedge funds and rating agencies. Governments are 
demanding a say in the pay of bankers and talking of specific taxes on banks’ activities. The 
climate is more difficult for bankers these days, it seems, especially in countries where the 
public purse had to be used to save banks.  
But the core work on regulatory reform is being done by the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision. I am not sure who first began to talk of this as “Basel III” but the label seems to 
be starting to stick. Basel II came in only about two years ago for many countries, 20 years 
after Basel I. The gap between Basel II and Basel III looks like being a lot shorter. Warning: 
that pace of acceleration in devising new standards is unsustainable!  
You would all be well aware of the essence of the proposals. In a nutshell, what regulators 
are  pushing  toward  is  a  global  banking  system  characterised  by  more  capital  and  lower 
leverage, bigger holdings of liquid assets and undertaking less maturity transformation. It is 
hoped that this system will display greater resilience to adverse developments than the one 
that grew up during the 1990s and 2000s.  
What  will  be  the  implications  of  the  various  changes?  Put  simply,  the  customers  of  banks 
around the world, and especially of large internationally active banks, will generally be paying 
more for intermediation services, in the form of higher spreads between rates paid by banks 
and rates charged by them. The reason is that capital is not free and it typically costs more 
than debt. The spread between a bank’s own cost of debt, both deposits and bonds etc, and 
the  rate  it  charges  its  borrowers  has  to  cover  operating  costs,  expected  credit  and  other 
losses and the required cost of equity capital. Assuming the costs of equity and debt do not 
change, the more capital intensive the financial structure is, the higher that spread has to be. 
A requirement to hold more high quality liquid assets and/or to lengthen the maturity of debt 
has a similar effect.  
Of course the costs of equity and debt may not be, and actually should not be, constant as 
banking  leverage  declines.  The  cost  of  wholesale  debt  should  fall  over  time  if  the  equity 
buffer, which protects unsecured creditors against losses, is larger. In time, the cost of equity 
may even fall with lower leverage if the required equity risk premium declines to reflect a less 
variable flow of returns to equity holders. All of that assumes of course that the perceived 
riskiness of the underlying assets is unchanged.  
Still,  such  effects  would  take  some  time  to  emerge.  Most  observers  appear  to  agree  that 
even  allowing  for  some  possible  pricing  changes  over  time,  spreads  between  banks’ 
borrowing and lending rates will be wider in the new equilibrium after the regulatory changes 
have been fully implemented.3  
What will be the broader economic effects of these higher costs of intermediation?  
                                                 
3  By the way, in those countries that choose to impose “levies” of some kind or other on banks, we shouldn’t 
assume that the banks’ shareholders will ultimately bear such costs: it is fairly likely that the costs of this tax 
will fall mainly on the customers. 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 5
The conclusion most people are reaching is that economic activity will, to some extent and 
over  some  horizon,  be  lower  than  otherwise.  The  question  is,  by  how  much  and  for  how 
long?  There  are  various  ways  of  approaching  that  question.  Researchers  are  putting  it  to 
various  macroeconomic  models.  The  answers  will  vary,  depending  on  the  models  and 
particularly  according  to  the  degree  of  detail  in  models’  financial  sectors.  Overall,  these 
techniques  are  likely  to  show  moderate  but  nonetheless  non-zero  effects  on  economic 
activity of the regulatory changes over an adjustment period of several years.  
Some other analyses, often by banks themselves, find much larger adverse effects. This is 
usually because they find that credit to the private sector must be reduced in order to meet 
the  various  standards,  particularly  liquidity  standards,  because  it  is  assumed  there  will  be 
quantity limits on the availability of funding in the form necessary. It is further assumed that a 
mechanical relationship between credit and GDP exists, which in turn results in big adverse 
impacts on GDP.  
To a fair extent these differences come down to a discussion about what economists would 
call elasticities: for the non-bank private sector to respond to a desire for banks to be funded 
differently, how big a change in the price is required – a little, or a lot? Some of the industry 
estimates appear (to me anyway) to assume elasticity pessimism. Official sector estimates 
are likely to be based on less pessimism.  
In  truth,  it  is  impossible  to  know  for  sure  exactly  how  big  these  effects  will  be.  That  is  a 
reason to proceed carefully, and to allow time for the new rules to be phased in. Clearly, we 
wish the new rules to be constraining risk taking and leverage as the next boom approaches 
its peak, but that will probably be some years away, so we have time to implement strong 
standards and allow an appropriate period of transition.  
That said, there are three broad observations that I would like to offer.  
First, I think we ought to be wary of the assumption of a mechanical relationship between 
credit and GDP. Of course a sudden serious impairment in lenders’ ability to extend credit 
almost certainly amounts to a negative shock for growth in the short term. But did the steady 
rise in leverage over many years actually help growth by all that much? Some would argue 
that  its  biggest  effects  were  to  help  asset  values  rise,  and  to  increase  risk  in  the  banking 
system, without doing all that much for growth and certainly not much for the sustainability of 
growth in major countries. Some gradual decline in the ratio of credit to GDP over a number 
of years, relative to some (unobservable) baseline, without large scale losses in output may 
be difficult to achieve but I don’t think we should assume it is impossible.  
Secondly, even accepting that there will probably be some effect of the reforms in lowering 
growth over some period of time, relative to baseline, we have to remember that there is a 
potential benefit on offer too: a global financial system that is more stable and therefore less 
likely to be a source of adverse shocks to the global economy in the future. So we have a 
cost-benefit calculation to make. Quantifying all this is very difficult, but then that is often the 
case when deciding policies.  
Thirdly,  however,  the  reforms  do  need  to  be  carefully  calibrated  with  an  eye  to  potential 
unintended  consequences.  One  such  consequence,  obviously,  would  be  unnecessarily  to 
crimp growth if the reforms are not well designed and/or implementation not well handled.  
Another  could  be  that  very  restrictive  regulation  on  one  part  of  the  financial  sector  could 
easily  result  in  some  activities  migrating  to  the  unregulated  or  less  regulated  parts  of  the 
system. Financiers will be very inventive in working out how to do this. If the general market 
conditions are conducive to risk taking and rising leverage (which, sooner or later, they will 
be if the cost of short-term money remains at zero), people will ultimately find a way to do it. 
Of  course  while  ever  the  unregulated  or  less-regulated  entities  could  be  allowed  to  fail 
without endangering the financial system or the economy, caveat emptor could apply and we 
could  view  this  tendency  simply  as  lessening  any  undue  cost  to  the  economy  of  stronger 
regulation of banks. But if such behaviour went on long enough, and the exposures in the 
6 
 BIS Review 97/2010
unregulated sector grew large enough, policymakers could, at some point, once again face 
difficult choices.  
Conclusion 
The financial turbulence we have lived through over recent years has had profound effects. 
The most dramatic ones in the short term have been all too apparent. But big events echo for 
many years. My argument today has been that the full ramifications are still in train, insofar 
as impacts on governments’ finances, governments’ role in the financial sector and the trend 
in regulation are concerned. It will be important, as these reverberations continue, for there to 
be  a  balanced  approach  blending  strong  commitment  to  sensible  long-run  principles  with 
pragmatism in implementation.  
In Australia we have been spared the worst impacts of serious economic recession in terms 
of lost jobs, much as we will be spared the prospect of higher taxes that face so many in the 
developed  world.  These  are  factors  that  support  our  native  optimism,  at  least  about 
economic conditions.  
Nonetheless  depression  still  ranks  as  a  serious,  and  underestimated,  problem  in  our 
community including among our young people. That is why the work of the Anika Foundation, 
working  alongside  other  bodies  seeking  to  combat  depression,  is  so  important,  and  why  I 
thank you all very much for coming along today.  
BIS Review 97/2010 
 7
