Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Monetary policy transmission in a changing 
financial system – lessons from the recent past, thoughts about the 
future 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Barclays Global Inflation Conference, New York City, 14 June 2010. 
 I wish to thank Luca Benati, José Luis Peydró-Alcalde, Massimo Rostagno, Jens Tapkins and Flemming Würtz for 
their contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Introduction 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this conference.  
Since  the  crisis  erupted,  in  mid-2007,  central  banks  throughout  the  world  have  conducted 
their  monetary  policies  using  new  instruments  and  techniques.  Are  these  changes 
temporary,  and  linked  to  the  effects  of  the  financial  crisis?  Or  do  they  mark  more  lasting 
changes in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy? These are important questions 
to understand the role of central banks in the current crisis and in the future.  
The simple answer is that monetary policy operates through financial markets, markets that 
have  changed  substantially  over  the  last  decade.  Monetary  policy  cannot  be  implemented 
without  taking  these  changes  into  account.  However,  since  central  banks  have  to  be 
accountable, they need to explain how they reflect these changes in their monetary policy 
operations without changing their underlying objective.  
I will try to address this issue by dividing my remarks today into three main parts. First, I will 
review trend developments in financial intermediation and single out a recurring theme in the 
evolution  of  the  financial  markets  over  the  last  30  years:  the  rise  of  securitisation  and 
collateralised  finance.  I  will  then  consider  the  consequences  of  this  innovation  for  the 
transmission of monetary policy in the post-crisis world. I will start by looking at the money 
markets and turn to the wider financial system, including the shadow banking sector. Looking 
forward, the main sources of collateralisation will be an issue to consider if the present trend 
towards downscaling the creation of private asset-backed securities continues. Public debt 
instruments  are  likely  to  play  an  important  role.  This  will  lead  us  to  reflect  on  the  role  of 
central banking at a time of high public debt.  
The rise of collateral 
1. 
The financial system has undergone profound changes over the past few decades. Markets 
have  grown  significantly;  competition  has  intensified.  These  are  well-known  phenomena.  I 
would  like  to  focus  on  the  consequence  of  this,  namely  that  the  core  of  financial 
intermediation  has  moved  from  depository  institutions  –  commercial  banks  –  to  a  hybrid 
aggregate of institutions and functions, which is broadly referred to as the shadow banking 
system. The rise of the shadow banks, their ups and their downs, are inseparably connected 
with a key financial innovation of the last 30 years: securitisation.  
The emergence of a shadow banking system is not a new phenomenon. What was new over 
recent decades was the scale of its activities, which is closely related to the rapid expansion 
of securitisation. The securitisation of previously illiquid items in banks’ balance sheets gave 
perhaps the strongest boost to the financial sector. Securitisation allows traditional banking 
assets to be transformed into tradable instruments, thus creating tradable assets. It acts as a 
multiplier of negotiable financial claims or, more simply, a multiplier of finance.  
BIS Review 83/2010 
 1
Why was securitisation so essential to the expansion of shadow banks? The short answer to 
this question is that shadow banking serves as an intermediary for wholesale finance. In this 
segment  of  the  financial  system,  lenders  have  large  –  and  lumpy  –  financial  resources  to 
place  with  intermediaries  for  short  periods  of  time,  with  no  protection  from  formal  deposit 
insurance  mechanisms. This  lack  of  formal  insurance  – since  deposits  are  too large  to  be 
eligible for protection under national laws – calls for an informal or – I should rather say – 
market-based system of protection. This is precisely what the securitisation of assets can do: 
it can give financial intermediaries enough tradable securities to pledge as collateral for the 
large – lumpy – loans that they receive in the wholesale shadow-banking segment of their 
activities.  
The run-up to the crisis clearly showed that shadow banking and securitisation are not only 
interrelated but also that they interact. The shift in banks’ funding away from traditional and 
stable sources – such as retail deposits – to wholesale funding was as much a by-product of 
securitisation  as  a  source  of  its  potentially  unlimited  expansion.  It  was  a  by-product  of 
securitisation because in order to finance the large increase in their securitisation business 
the banking system had to draw on a larger pool of financial resources than retail deposits 
could offer. But that shift also caused, independently, an increase in securitisation because 
the lending of large sums to shadow banks needed – and needs – marketable collateral. In 
its essence, this lending is a large-value deposit which has to be secured by collateral. So, 
securitisation received a formidable boost as banks used it to generate the securities which 
were required to finance its overall business. 
Data confirm this close association between shadow banking, collateral and repo markets. A 
large  portion  of  the  financing  of  the  shadow  banking system  takes  the  form  of  repurchase 
agreements (repos), which work much like deposits. The wholesale lender deposits a large 
sum with the shadow bank for a very short term, perhaps overnight. As this callable claim 
cannot be covered by formal deposit insurance, it needs to be protected by collateral. So, 
technically,  the  transaction  involves  the  purchase  of  some  securitised  assets  from  the 
shadow bank in exchange for cash and a promise by the bank to repurchase the securities at 
the stated price at some future date, perhaps on the day thereafter.  
Data  on  activity  in  the  repo  market  are  limited.  But  we  know  the  volumes  are  large.  The 
business model of the hedge fund industry relies on financing their highly-leveraged activities 
via  the  repo  market.  Repo  activity  will  therefore  exceed  their  already  substantial  leverage 
positions.  Moreover,  as  reflected  in  the  recent  analysis  of  Gorton  and  Metrick  (2009),1 
information can also be gleaned from the balance sheets of broker dealers and investment 
banks. For example, approximately 80% of the balance sheet of investment banks such as 
Lehman  Brothers  and  Bear  Stearns  in  2007  –  that  is,  before  the  crisis  –  was  funded  by 
volatile,  short-term  instruments.  It  was  this  balance  sheet  structure  that,  in  the  end,  made 
these  two  banks  extraordinarily  vulnerable  to  a  sudden  withdrawal  of  liquidity  in  the 
wholesale funding market and which ultimately led to their demise. Note that more than one-
third of this short-term debt was collateralised, that is acquired in the repo market. 
To sum up, we have seen the relentless rise of collateralised finance. Any reflections on the 
future of the monetary policy transmission mechanism have to start from there. 
Collateralisation and the money market 
2. 
The crisis that started in August 2007 has highlighted the key role of collateralised finance in 
two ways: first, as a vehicle of distress; second, as a possible instrument of repair.  
                                                 
1   See: G.B. Gorton and A. Metrick (2009), “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Yale ICF Working Paper 
No. 09-14. 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2010
During  the  crisis,  and  notably  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman,  money  market  spreads  in  the 
euro area surged to unprecedented levels. When I say “money market spreads”, I mean the 
spreads  of  unsecured  money  market  rates  as  well  as  certain  repo  rates  (over  OIS  rates). 
Indeed, repo rate spreads depend on the quality of the underlying collateral. For example, 
single-A private paper repo spreads showed a pattern similar to the spreads of unsecured 
money market rates in late 2008 and early 2009. However, triple-A government bond repos 
appeared to be relatively unaffected by the worsening crisis, at least in Europe. In addition, 
collateral haircuts, which in many cases were very low before the crisis, increased and varied 
greatly  across  asset  classes  and  types  of  borrowing  institution.  Of  course,  money  market 
spreads were generally wider for transactions with longer maturities and significant parts of 
the term money market dried up completely. 
Again, we see the power of collateral in today’s financial world. The presence or absence of 
collateral in money market transactions, and the quality of the collateral used to secure these 
transactions determine whether the very first step of the transmission mechanism works. The 
collateral influences the scale of market spreads over and above the overnight rate at which 
the central bank lends to banks. And money  market spreads play an important role in the 
smooth transmission of monetary policy to the broad economy.  
Early on in the crisis the value of collateral deteriorated so dramatically that even the primary 
unsecured form of lending – interbank lending – ceased to function. Precautionary hoarding 
of liquidity brought about a complete seizure of many segments of the market for credit. At 
the same time, panic sales of assets made market liquidity disappear. Market liquidity is high 
when traders can easily find a price, and that price is very close to what every other trader 
pays for the same asset at the same time. In early October 2008 the market simply couldn’t 
find a value for many of those securities that had been so highly priced only a few weeks 
before. While available collateral was sharply down-priced, the economy-wide equity capital, 
which is largely valued by the market, evaporated in a matter of hours. Equity capital is what 
backs  up  unsecured  money  market  transactions.  This  partly  explains  why  the  unsecured 
market seized up alongside the repo market.  
While collateralised finance can accelerate a generalised loss of confidence, it provides the 
guardians of stability with one more instrument of defence. In late 2008 the ECB increased 
its  collateralised  lending  to  compensate  for  the  withdrawal  of  private  lending  in  inter-bank 
transactions. To ease banks’ liquidity and balance sheet constraints, in particular, we have 
broadened  the  list  of  assets  that  we  consider  eligible  as  collateral  in  our  refinancing 
operations.  This  has  liquified  a  large  fraction  of  our  counterparties’  assets,  which  had 
become  illiquid  in  the  tense  market  conditions  following  the  failure  of  Lehman.  This 
intervention served to shore up savers’ confidence in the viability of the financial sector.  
Our  enhanced  credit  support  measures  were  taken  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  at  a  time  when  banks  showed  a  tendency  to 
withdraw  in  a  disorderly  way  from  their  intermediation  function.  A  functioning  transmission 
mechanism is the pre-condition for the central bank to be able to accomplish its mandate of 
maintaining price stability in the medium term.  
The same policy intention underlies our Securities Markets Programme, which we started on 
10  May  this  year.  We  intervene  in  euro  area  public  and  private  debt  securities  markets  in 
order  to  ensure  depth  and  liquidity  in  those  market  segments  which  have  proved 
dysfunctional. As government securities are the basis for pricing all private debt instruments, 
our action in the sovereign bond markets aims to create the orderly conditions necessary for 
lenders to provide a steady flow of credit to the private economy.  
Overall, through its enhanced credit support measures, the ECB has replaced ill-functioning 
segments  of  the  financial  market  and  acted  as  an  “intermediary”  between  banks  with  a 
liquidity deficit and banks with a liquidity surplus. At the same time, and with a slightly longer-
term  perspective,  the  measures  have  contributed  to  a  more  stable  situation  in  various 
segments  of  the  financial  markets  during  the  crisis.  For  example,  easier  access  to  central 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 3
bank refinancing meant that banks could refinance their money market activities more easily 
if needed. This, in turn, has reduced the risk of lending out liquidity in the money market and 
thereby lowered the liquidity risk premia.2 
In crisis times, banks the world over learnt what Japanese banks learnt back in the 1990s: 
that they could manage their liquidity requirements – perhaps more comfortably and at lower 
cost  –  through  central  bank  intermediation  rather  than  via  their  traditional  money  market 
activities.  Central  banks  –  for  their  part  –  have  seen  that  their  collateralised  lending  has 
made them key market makers at a time when markets were disappearing.  
The role of central banks in money markets 
3. 
In light of all these developments we may well ask whether the new market-making role of 
central banks will continue. If central banks intermediate large volumes in normal times, they 
may  not  need  to  change  their  operational  framework  substantially  when  a  liquidity  crisis 
suddenly hits. Larger intermediation could anchor expectations and make market dynamics 
less  subject  to  threshold  effects.  Does  this  suggest  a  new  steady  state  –  beyond  the 
setbacks  and  progress  of  the  current  crisis  –  in  which  central  banks  will  become  a  larger 
counterparty to the financial system as a whole?  
It is too early to say. Nevertheless, let me share with you some preliminary thoughts on the 
future  role  of  central  bank  intermediation.  Let  me  say  up  front  that  central  bank 
intermediation involves subtle trade-offs. Let me list some of them.  
First, the larger the intermediation offered by the central bank, the smaller, ceteris paribus, 
the  incentives  are  for  banks  to  reduce  liquidity  risk  (for  example,  to  reduce  the  maturity 
mismatch of assets and liabilities). After all, they can turn to the central bank if they need to. 
Of  course,  while  central  bank  intermediation  increases  the  incentives  for  banks  to  take 
liquidity risk, it also increases the liquidity insurance available to banks. That is, as long as a 
bank does not adjust its balance sheet when the central bank offers more intermediation, its 
net liquidity risk exposure may in fact decrease due to the increased liquidity risk insurance 
provided  by  the  central  bank.  But  which  effect  is  stronger:  the  incentive  or  the  insurance 
effect? 
Second,  larger  central  bank  intermediation  can  crowd  out  market  activities.  This  might  be 
perceived as a cost-reducing development by private banks. If the central bank lends larger 
volumes in longer-term operations, this might provide a boost to private lending at the same 
maturities: some banks might consider offering funds in the term money market only if they 
themselves  can  refinance  such  activities  by  participating  in  longer-term  central  bank 
operations. This may make term money markets more liquid in the end. However, this is not 
what the Japanese authorities observed in the first half of this decade. 
To sum up, the extent to which the central bank uses collateralised lending to intermediate 
between banks has proved helpful in restoring confidence and “real money” financial flows in 
the  underlying  asset  markets  –  the  markets  in  which  the  collateral  is  priced.  This  has 
repaired links in the early stages of the transmission channel, the viability of which depends 
on  those  collateral  prices.  These  links  would  have  been  brutally  and  perhaps  irrevocably 
severed, if private arbitrage had been the only force of market motion, as in normal times. 
But increased intermediation has an impact on the liquidity risk exposure of banks, on their 
ability  to  carry  out  maturity  transformation,  as  well  as  on  the  liquidity  of  specific  money 
market segments. Whether the impact is positive or negative is hard to say. But moral hazard 
–  which  is  the  pitfall  of  any  such  type  of  thinking  –  makes  conditions  (and  behaviours) 
                                                 
2   The  significant  increase  in  activity  in  the  primary  market  for  covered  bonds  –  which  the  ECB  started 
purchasing  in  July  2009  in  the  context  of  the  covered  bond  purchase  programme  –  is  an  example  of  how 
these measures have stabilised financial markets. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2010
change  in  response  to  central  bank  actions.  As  was  the  case  at  the  start  of  the  rational 
expectations revolution in macroeconomics, a prudent central bank needs to internalise the 
private sector’s response to its own actions.  
Collateralised finance and the transmission of monetary policy 
4. 
The  shift  of  gravity  in  the  financial  sector  away  from  traditional  commercial  banking  and 
towards shadow banking affects the channels of transmission for monetary policy in different 
ways. 
In some respects the transmission mechanism is weakened through the loss of control over 
some financial aggregates – such as credit formation – and the declining coherence between 
credit and money. In a world of shadow banks the money multiplier might become a will-o’-
the-wisp  which  central  banks  find  difficult  to  use  as  a  steady  instrument  of  policy.  The 
reserve basis – which in the inverted-pyramid representation of the financial system sustains 
the creation of total leverage in the economy – becomes an even thinner support for finance. 
As the famous “conundrum” episode has demonstrated, a central bank’s intention to impose 
limits on credit can be resisted and offset by an endogenous expansion in leverage. While 
the base of the pyramid remains narrow, growing leverage can still expand the whole edifice 
of finance.  
Regulation is an answer to the weakening of central bank controls over the size of finance. It 
will  be  especially  important  to  extend  regulatory  oversight  to  those  market  segments  that, 
before the crisis, had escaped the attention of regulators. The prime focus of attention here 
will  be  –  once  again  –  the  shadow  banking  system.  Here,  of  course,  there  is  an  issue  of 
relative  scale.  If  we  want  central  bank  control  over  leverage  to  be  stronger  in  the  future, 
shadow banks need to be part of what we consider “banks” tout court. In fact, by 2007 the 
size of the official and shadow banking systems, measured by the total amount of assets, 
had become essentially the same.3 
But there is also an issue of quality – or, if you prefer, of composition – of finance. Due to the 
increased risk aversion resulting from the financial crisis, collateralised lending is bound to 
increase in the future, even in markets where traditionally unsecured lending was the most 
important source of finance (e.g., the euro area interbank market). As a consequence, the 
demand for securitised assets – of the type that shadow banks have learned to create in the 
past – is set to increase further in the future, as institutions demand such types of debt to use 
as  collateral.  To  put  it  in  a  nutshell,  we  will  continue  to  need  the  functions,  the  financial 
products and the expertise that the shadow banks have been offering. But, we need to make 
sure that these activities are performed in a non-disruptive way.  
The  new  financial  landscape  can  also  reinforce  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  I 
already mentioned that most of the funding of financial institutions – whether banks, broker-
dealers, hedge funds or shadow banks – is short-term. In other words, a key function of the 
financial  system  is  maturity  transformation.  When  a  central  bank  takes  decisions  on  the 
policy rates, it directly affects the marginal price of leverage for these financial institutions.4 
As  a  result,  the  behaviour  of  financial  intermediaries  –  which,  by  their  nature,  have  high 
levels of leverage – can be strongly influenced by even small changes in short-term rates.5 In 
                                                 
3   See  Figure  3.1  of  T.  Adrian  and  H.S.  Shin  (2009),  “Financial  intermediaries  and  monetary  economics,” 
Handbook of Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
4   See:  T.  Adrian  and  H.S.  Shin  (2009),  “Financial  intermediaries  and  monetary  economics,”  Handbook  of 
Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
5   See: R.G. Rajan (2005), “Has financial development made the world riskier?” Proceedings of the FRB Kansas 
City  Jackson  Hole  symposium  “The  Greenspan  years:  Lessons  for  the  future”;  and  F.  Allen  and  D.  Gale 
(2007), Understanding financial crises, Oxford University Press. 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 5
other words, short-term interest rates are important in and of themselves, not only because 
they influence longer-term rates and other asset prices via expectations of future short-term 
rates,  but  also  because  they  change  the  liquidity  conditions  faced  by  a  large  portion  of 
leveraged institutions. 
A number of empirical studies have explored this issue. In line with the assumption that lower 
short-term  interest  rates  reduce  the  cost  of  leverage  and  thus  encourage  an  expansion  of 
intra-financial sector transactions, these studies find that money market activity, particularly 
in  the  secured  segment,  expands  when  monetary  policy  is  accommodative.  For  example, 
Adrian and Shin (2008) demonstrate that the balance sheets of US broker/dealers expand 
when  monetary  policy  is  accommodative.6  Similar  evidence  is  provided  for  the  US  repo 
market by Gorton and Metrick (2009), who found that activity started to increase significantly 
from 2001 – that is, at a time when monetary policy in the US was relatively loose following 
the bursting of the dot-com bubble.7 Acharya and Schnabl (2010) provide similar evidence 
related to the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market.8 
In summary, if the process that has been set in motion under the aegis of the G20 has the 
potential to place a whole new segment of finance under regulatory scrutiny and oversight, 
the  new  collateral-based  finance  can  give  a  central  bank  stronger  influence  over  financial 
and macroeconomic conditions more broadly. 
Monetary policy in a high-debt environment  
5. 
I mentioned earlier that collateral is likely to play a growing role in the functioning of capital 
markets.  Demand  for  collateral  is  thus  likely  to  increase.  But,  given  the  collapse  of 
securitisation  activity  during  the  crisis,  we  could  imagine  that  the  current  decline  in  the 
creation  of  securitised  assets  might  become  a  permanent  feature  of  the  new  landscape. 
There will be fewer ABSs created out of bank books.  
Sovereign  debt  will  certainly  be  widespread.  It  will  probably  replace  ABSs  in  the 
collateralisation of secured lending. Unlike in the past, the risk characteristics of this type of 
debt instrument will be more graduated than was considered possible only few years ago. 
The  risk  associated  with  what  used  to  be  considered  risk-free  assets  is  something  new  in 
financial markets.  
What type of risk will be incorporated in the market returns on sovereign debt? For people of 
my generation, Sargent and Wallace provided the traditional answer: in a game of chicken 
between  an  irresponsible  and  institutionally  strong  fiscal  authority  on  the  one  hand  and  a 
committed but unrealistic central bank on the other, the former is bound to win. Inflation will 
be  the  outcome.  Knowing  this,  investors  will  demand  high  returns  on  government  debt  to 
offset higher expected inflation. So the game ends before it has even started.  
In  the  new  world,  the  Sargent  and  Wallace  story  has  lost  some  of  its  descriptive  and 
predictive power. The fiscal authority is confronting a strong player with institutional backing. 
And  certainly  in  Europe’s  Monetary  Union,  the  central  bank  is  as  strong  and  institutionally 
established as the fiscal authority. If the fiscal side does not adjust, inflation risk mutates into 
liquidity risk. In the most severe cases, if the fiscal adjustment is delayed, liquidity risk turns 
into solvency risk As you know, markets have learned to become more discriminating with 
regard  to  fiscal  solvency  than  they  have  been  for  decades.  Countries  with  comparatively 
                                                 
6   See: T. Adrian and H.S. Shin (2008), “Liquidity and Leverage,” FRB New York Staff Report no. 328. 
7   See: G.B. Gorton and A. Metrick (2009), “Haircuts,” NBER Working Paper No. 15273. 
8   See: V.V. Acharya and P. Schnabl (2010), “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances? The Case of Asset-
Backed  Commercial  Paper  During  the  Financial  Crisis  of  2007–09,”  paper  presented  at  the  10th  Jacques 
Polak Annual Research Conference, 5–6 November 2009. 
6 
 BIS Review 83/2010
better managed public finances will pay lower risk premia, and therefore lower interest rates, 
which, in turn, will help them to keep budget deficits and the stocks of national debt under 
control. Countries with larger budget deficits and higher stocks of national debt, on the other 
hand,  will  face  higher  risk  premia,  and  therefore  higher  interest  rates,  which,  in  turn,  will 
affect their ability to control the dynamics of their public finances.  
How  will  a  central  bank  committed  to  price  stability  and  endowed  with  the  constitutional 
guarantees  necessary  to  enforce  a  price  stability-oriented  policy  pursue  its  mandate  in  a 
high-debt / high-risk environment?  
Sovereign  securities  have  traditionally  been  the  prime  form  of  collateral  for  central  bank 
credit. In the future, given the greater importance of this type of debt instrument in the total 
portfolio of the economy – to which I was referring before – this primary role is unlikely to 
diminish. So, a central bank will continue to emphasise strongly the maintenance of orderly 
market conditions for this type of instrument. The ECB’s Securities Markets Programme has 
demonstrated how critical it is for a central bank to safeguard the functioning of this segment 
of the market.  
1. 
At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  recognise  that,  when  executing  lending  policy,  a 
central bank functions much like a private financial intermediary. Of course, a central 
bank loan creates money, which is not the case for private loans. But the lending 
side  of  the  operation  is  essentially  the  same.  The  granting  of  private  credit  is 
accompanied by restrictions imposed on the borrower which limit its ability to take 
risks  that  might  endanger  the  value  of  the  loan.  Likewise,  when  a  central  bank 
provides credit against collateral, it must follow up with a frequent re-evaluation of 
the credit conditions so as to safeguard its funds and make sure its commitment is 
not abused. Also, by the very act of declaring an asset eligible for monetary policy 
operations, a central bank has to be aware that it might affect its price. This argues 
in favor of a graduated system of collateral valuation, in which haircuts reflect the 
underlying  fair  value  along  a  continuous  scale,  possibly  with  less  threshold 
discontinuity than at present. These are issues for further analysis. 
In any case, while central banks will be called upon to support market functioning in 
liquidity crises when the integrity of the transmission mechanism is threatened, they 
cannot be asked to rescue insolvent issuers – whether private or public institutions. 
In line with this principle, the SMP is meant to repair the integrity of the transmission 
mechanism, not to finance public debt. 
2. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  briefly  summarise  the  thrust  of  my  message.  Central  banks  have  provided 
exceptional support in exceptional circumstances. Now, they need to apply the Lucas critique 
to their own actions. They need to try and work out what the implications of their actions will 
be  for  financial  markets  in  the  future.  Unless  new  regulations  and  a  material  extension  of 
oversight to the new world of financial intermediation – which the crisis has exposed – are 
applied in earnest, central bank activism risks fuelling moral hazard in the long run.  
Provided that financial regulation covers the full breadth and width of financial intermediation, 
then  the  new  world  will  likely  be  one  in  which  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  will  be 
stronger, not weaker. Risk aversion will call for more collateralisation. The move away from 
unsecured to collateralised lending could make overall lending more sensitive to fluctuations 
in the value of collateral. As monetary policy influences the terms on which these trades are 
made, its effectiveness will increase. 
Sovereign debts instruments are likely to continue playing an important role as collateral – 
both in private lending and in central bank refinancing operations. Central banks should be 
flexible enough to adapt their instruments to changes to the financial environment. But they 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 7
have to remain inflexible in their overall strategy. In a changing financial environment the only 
way to maintain credibility is to safeguard the ultimate objective, which is price stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 83/2010
