David G Opiokello: The aftermath of the financial crisis and the way 
forward 
Closing remarks by Mr David G Opiokello, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
3rd Annual Bankers’ Dinner, Kampala, 7 May 2010. 
Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The inclusion of the word “aftermath” in the title of this talk implies that the global financial 
crisis which erupted in 2008 is now over. That is probably true in respect of the most acute 
manifestation of the crisis – the systemic failures in key financial markets around the globe – 
but  the  repercussions  of  the  financial  crisis  will  be  felt  for  many  years  to  come;  and  this 
applies to countries, such as Uganda, which were relatively less badly affected by it as well 
as to countries where the impact was very severe. In this talk, I want to sketch out what I 
think are the key lessons of the global financial crisis for Uganda and how this will shape the 
development of the banking sector in Uganda in the medium to long term. In doing so I must, 
inevitably,  be  selective:  there  is  not  sufficient  time  to  even  begin  to  touch  on  all  of  the 
potential consequences and lessons of the financial crisis, so instead I will focus on what I 
believe are the issues which are most germane for the Ugandan banking sector. 
The Ugandan banking system and the impact of the financial crisis  
The  Uganda  banking  system,  which  still  dominates  the  financial  sector  in  Uganda,  grew 
rapidly  in  the  years  preceding  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  This  growth  was 
manifested  in  financial  deepening,  measured  by  banking  system  liabilities  as  a  share  of 
GDP, and even more so in the growth of bank loans to the private sector. The latter doubled 
as  a  share  of  GDP  between  2000  and  2008  and  loans  also  increased  as  a  share  of 
commercial banks’ asset portfolios. These were very positive developments for the Ugandan 
economy; reflecting the growing role of banks in the intermediation of funds from creditors to 
borrowers. 
For  a  variety  of  reasons  the  Ugandan  banking  system  was  not  affected  severely  by  the 
global financial crisis. Although it has links with global financial markets, the nature of these 
links helped to insulate it from contagion emanating from the meltdown in financial markets 
elsewhere in the world; a point I will return to later. 
Secondly, although the Ugandan economy was hit by a large external shock in the 2008/09 
fiscal year as a result of the global economic crisis, it was able to ride out this shock without 
suffering either a balance of payments crisis or a recession. I think that this can be attributed, 
in  large  measure,  to  the  macroeconomic  policy  framework  which  we  have  put  in  place  in 
Uganda, but that is not an issue I have time to dwell on this evening. From the standpoint of 
the  banking  system,  the  resilience  of  the  economy  in  the  face  of  the  external  shock  was 
important  because  it  meant  that  bank  borrowers  have  not  been  driven  into  distress,  and 
hence there has not been a substantial rise in non performing loans. 
Thirdly,  the  Ugandan  banking  system,  despite  its  buoyant  growth  in  the  2000s,  is  well 
capitalised,  has  much  lower  leverage  ratios  than  banks  in  developed  countries  and  has 
stronger  liquidity.  As  a  result,  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  in  Uganda  are  much  less 
vulnerable  to  negative  shocks to  the  quality  of  their  assets  and  to  their  liquidity  than  were 
many banks in the developed countries. 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 1
Nevertheless, although we can take some pride in our banking system having avoided the 
fate of its counterparts in many other countries in the last two years, we cannot afford to be 
complacent.  In  the  years  ahead,  our  financial  system  is  almost  certain  to  become  larger, 
more complex and more sophisticated and more globally integrated, an evolution which itself 
will probably be a source of greater vulnerability to financial instability. If we are to mitigate 
this vulnerability, we have to learn the lessons of the global financial crisis and understand 
how these might be relevant to Uganda in the years ahead. I turn to this issue next. 
Lessons of the global crisis for financial sector policy 
The  global  financial  crisis  is  having  a  profound  impact  on  strategy  and  policy  towards  the 
financial sector across the globe, in developed economies and in the emerging markets and 
developing  economies.  It  has  prompted  a  radical  re-assessment  of  how  policymakers  see 
the balance of costs and benefits of financial markets. Prior to the crisis there was an almost 
common belief among academics, policymakers and financial regulators, at least in western 
countries, that the deepening of all financial markets and financial innovation of all types was 
beneficially to the economy, because greater opportunities for economic agents to trade in 
financial  markets  would  automatically  raise  welfare,  and  would  also  promote  more  stable 
financial markets. These beliefs look much less tenable today, if not absurdly Panglossian. In 
particular it is evident that some financial innovations, such as the securitisation of assets, 
which it was claimed would reduce financial fragility by allowing risk to be allocated to those 
best able to bear it, did exactly the opposite and created systemic risk on a mammoth scale. 
The financial crisis has also thrown into question whether some of the activities of financial 
institutions which enjoyed explosive growth in the 2000s and generated a major source of 
their  profits,  such  as  proprietary  trading  in  financial  assets,  provide  any  significant  social 
benefits at all.  
Efforts to reform financial regulation at the global level – spearheaded by the G20 and the 
Basel Committee on Financial Supervision – are already underway. There is a widespread 
recognition that the financial crisis exposed very serious weaknesses in the framework for 
financial  regulation  built  up  over  the  last  two  decades  in  the  western  world.  As  such, 
regulatory  reforms  will  undoubtedly  be  implemented  although  the  precise  nature  of  these 
reforms is still the subject of much debate and dispute. It is very likely that, at the global level, 
there  will  be  moves  to  strengthen  the  capital  adequacy  framework  for  banks  (the  Basel 
Accords),  to  introduce  stronger  liquidity  requirements  and  probably  to  impose  a  leverage 
ratio on banks. There will also be moves to introduce macro-prudential regulations which are 
intended to dampen the pro-cyclical nature of bank lending; for example through some form 
of  countercyclical  capital  buffers  and  forward  looking  provisioning,  although  how  this  will 
operate in practise is still being worked out. Much more controversial are proposals to restrict 
either  the  permissible  activities  of  banks  –  which  are  intended  to  separate  commercial 
banking  from  investment  banking  –  and  to  limit  the  size  of  banks  to  prevent  them  from 
becoming “too big to fail”. 
Regulatory reforms in Uganda 
For  the  rest  of  this  talk  I  want  to  concentrate  on  what  I  believe  will  be  the  most  pertinent 
issues for bank regulation in Uganda. Reform in Uganda will be influenced by global reform 
efforts, although not all of the specific proposals agreed at the global level will necessarily be 
relevant  for  Uganda.  Regulatory  reform  in  Uganda  must  also  take  account  of  the 
requirements of the common  market in East Africa. I want to focus on four aspects of the 
regulatory regime that I think are the most critical in the medium term: capital requirements, 
the scope of permissible bank activities, how to address challenges arising from the global 
integration of finance and regional harmonisation of regulations. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2010
Capital requirements 
Capital  plays  a  double  role  in  banking.  It  provides  incentives  for  bank  owners  to  ensure 
sound  management  of  their  bank  and  it  provides  a  buffer  to  protect  depositors  and  other 
bank  creditors  against  losses.  Capital  requirements  in  Uganda  comprise  two  separate 
components;  a  minimum  paid  up  capital  requirement  and  an  ongoing  capital  adequacy 
requirement which relates a regulatory definition of capital to risk weighted assets.  
At  the  global  level,  concerns  have  focussed  on  loopholes  in  the  capital  adequacy 
requirements:  banks  in  western  countries  were  able  to  “game  the  system”  to  reduce  the 
amount of capital that they were required to hold, thereby driving up their leverage. We have 
not  faced  similar  problems  in  Uganda  and  I  don’t  think  that  radical  changes  in  capital 
adequacy  requirements  are  needed  yet.  We  already  impose  a  higher  capital  adequacy 
requirement – 12 percent of risk weighted assets – than the minimum of 8 percent stipulated 
in  the  Basel  Accord  and  most  banks  in  Uganda  currently  operate  with  much  more  capital 
than  the  statutory  minimum.  We  do,  however,  need  to  make  two  revisions  to  the  capital 
adequacy  requirements  to  cover  risks  which  were  not  previously  considered  pertinent  but 
which have become more so. First, we will shortly introduce a capital charge for market risk, 
which is necessary for full compliance with the Basel I Accord. Secondly, we will eventually 
introduce  a  capital  charge  for  operational  risk,  based  on  one  of  the  methodologies  in  the 
Basel II Accord.  
We require more a radical change to the minimum paid capital requirement for banks. The 
current statutory minimum of Shs 4 billion, which was set six years ago, is far too low. It does 
not ensure that new entrants to the banking industry have sufficient capital to support their 
operations before they reach a scale where they can begin to generate profits. It has also 
fallen way below the minimum statutory levels imposed by our neighbours in East Africa and 
elsewhere in Africa. 
Although the banking system as a whole in Uganda is currently well capitalised, the evolution 
of the banking system over the long term is likely to intensify the risks to which banks are 
exposed.  Hence  I  believe  that  the  changes  I  have  just  described  will  help  to  ensure  that 
banks  are  better  able  to  withstand  shocks  to  their  balance  sheets.  I  think  that  the  higher 
minimum  paid  up  capital  requirement  will  also  stimulate  a  degree  of  consolidation  in  the 
banking industry in Uganda, with fewer but larger commercial banks. I will return to this issue 
when I discuss the implications of the East African common market. 
The scope of allowable banking activities 
The  question  of  whether  commercial  banks  should  be  allowed  to  engage  in  “non  bank” 
activities, and if so, what specific activities should be permitted, poses acute dilemmas for 
regulatory policy. In developing countries, the objective of promoting a diversification of what 
are often very narrow financial markets with very few non bank financial institutions suggests 
that  a  liberal  view  of  what  commercial  banks  are  allowed  to  do  is  appropriate  from  the 
standpoint of financial market development. On the other hand, prudential objectives often 
favour  restricting  bank  activities  to  traditional  commercial  banking  –  taking  deposits  and 
making loans – where the risks are at least relatively well understood. 
The Ugandan banking legislation – the Financial Institutions Act – generally restricts banks to 
the  traditional  bank  activities.  For  example,  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  does  not  allow 
banks to engage in the insurance business nor does it allow banks to underwrite shares or 
act  as  a  securities  broker  or  to  deal  in  securities  on  their  own  account,  other  than  for 
Government or Bank of Uganda securities. 
I believe that there is a strong case for allowing banks to offer to their customers financial 
products  for  which  there  is  a  clear  market  demand  from  the  household  and  the  corporate 
sectors, provided that this does not undermine prudential standards and, critically, that the 
risks of these activities can be understood and managed. As such the Bank of Uganda has 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 3
recommended to the Government that the Financial Institutions Act should be amended to 
allow  banks  to  provide  “bancassurance”  and  Islamic  financial  products,  and  if  these 
amendments are enacted by Parliament the Bank will issue prudential regulations applicable 
to these products. I hope that this will promote the growth of the insurance market and the 
market for Islamic financial products, which should benefit bank customers in the real sectors 
of  the  economy.  Permitting  banks  in  Uganda  to  offer  these  products  will  also  align  the 
Ugandan banking laws with those in other African countries which have already moved, or 
are moving, in a similar direction.  
We  should  be  much  more  cautious  about  liberalising  our  banking  legislation  to  allow 
commercial banks to engage in proprietary securities trading or brokerage activities. As the 
global financial crisis has demonstrated, proprietary trading carries potentially large risks for 
banks; risks both to the value of their assets and to their liquidity. Furthermore, a banking 
system which is heavily engaged in proprietary trading may be more vulnerable to systemic 
risk, because of the pro-cyclical impact of marking securities to market and because of the 
heightened liquidity risks created by proprietary trading. Moreover, as was made clear by the 
global  financial  crisis,  it  is  very  difficult  to  quantify  market  and  liquidity  risk  of  this  nature, 
which 
to 
underestimate these risks and often have powerful incentives to do so if trading activities are 
very profitable. It is also less evident that all of the proprietary trading activities of financial 
institutions really provide significant economic benefits for the rest of society.  
is  partly  endogenous 
financial  system; 
institutions 
financial 
tend 
the 
to 
Global financial integration 
Global financial integration – the integration of the Ugandan financial system with that of the 
rest of the world – engenders difficult challenges for regulators and policymakers. For the last 
two decades Uganda has adopted a broadly open approach to the global integration of the 
financial  system.  We  do  not  restrict  the  entry  of  foreign  owned  banks  provided  that  they 
comply with the licensing requirements and we do not impose restrictions on transactions on 
the capital account of the balance of payments. In general I think that these policies have 
served Uganda well, helping to promote the development of the banking sector and attract 
foreign investment. I do not think that we should reverse these policies, but some reforms are 
needed, for the reasons that I will explain. 
Uganda is now classified as a “frontier market”. The term frontier market denotes a nascent 
emerging  market,  and  is  applied  to  low  income  countries  which  are  experiencing  rapid 
private  sector  led  growth  and  whose  financial  markets  are  beginning  to  attract  investment 
from  foreign  institutional  investors.  This  is  a  positive  development;  it  shows  that  we  are 
making  progress  towards  middle  income  and  emerging  market  economy  status.  However, 
development  involves  risks.  A  prominent  characteristic  of  emerging  markets  is  their 
vulnerability  to  capital  account  crises;  what  are  sometimes  referred  to  as  “sudden  stops”. 
There are many examples of capital account crisis in emerging markets in recent history, in 
Latin America, East Asia and most recently in the former communist countries.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  Ugandan  banks  avoided  contagion  from  the  global  financial  crisis. 
This  was  not  because  they  have  no  links  with  financial  markets  abroad;  rather  it  was 
because  of  the  nature  of  these  links.  Ugandan  banks  are  net  creditors  with  financial 
institutions abroad. In addition, the assets which Ugandan banks hold abroad are mostly low 
risk and highly liquid. As a consequence Uganda did not suffer losses on their external asset 
portfolios  and  they  were  not  vulnerable  to  a  loss  of  liquidity  arising  from  foreign  creditors 
withdrawing access to credit: i.e. a sudden stop.  
The nature of the links between Ugandan banks and financial markets abroad will probably 
change over the medium to long term as the Ugandan economy progressively acquires the 
characteristics  of  an  emerging  market  economy.  I  would  expect  that  Uganda  banks  will 
eventually become net debtors to foreign financial institutions because economic growth in 
Uganda  should  create  more  investment  opportunities  which  provide  higher  rates  of  return, 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2010
even after adjusting for risk, than the cost of borrowing abroad. Attracting more capital into 
Uganda  through  the  banking  system  provides  major  benefits,  because  it  should  allow  a 
higher rate of investment than would otherwise be possible, but it also carries risks, as the 
experience  of  many  emerging  markets  has  demonstrated.  It  makes  both  the  balance  of 
payments and the banking system vulnerable to a “sudden stop” in short term private capital 
flows,  which  could  be  triggered  by  contagion  from  events  which  have  nothing  to  do  with 
Uganda. In addition the volatility of short term private capital flows can make the exchange 
rate less stable. How should we mitigate these risks? 
There are two areas where reforms could be useful. In terms of bank supervision we need to 
provide  stronger  safeguards  against  banks  intermediating  foreign  currency  denominated 
resources to domestic borrowers whose balance sheets, and thus their capacity to service 
their  loans,  would  be  damaged  by  exchange  rate  depreciation.  This  has  been  a  serious 
problem  in  emerging  markets  and  is  one  of  the  main  reasons  why  capital  account  crises 
have often led to steep contractions in output. We also need to ensure that banks maintain 
sufficient  liquidity  in  foreign  exchange  to  meet  short  term  commitments  in  the  event  that 
access to foreign borrowing dries up. 
I  believe  that  we  should  also  consider  whether  to  discourage  purely  short  term  portfolio 
capital flows through some form of tax, although I appreciate that there are serious practical 
obstacles to doing this without creating incentives for agents to seek ways of evading the tax. 
The main reason why I think that this is worth considering is that purely short term portfolio 
flows, which are mainly intermediated in the domestic money markets, may exacerbate short 
term  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  while  they  do  not  provide  any  great  benefits  to  the 
economy: they are far too short term to provide resources for funding capital investment. All 
of the five countries of the East African Community are committed to the eventual adoption of 
a monetary union with a single currency. As we move into the transition towards monetary 
union,  exchange  rate  management  will  become  an  increasingly  important  macroeconomic 
objective for all of the EAC partner states. As anyone familiar with the transition to the single 
currency  in  the  European  Union  in  the  1990s  will  recall,  short  term  capital  flows  created 
major difficulties for the alignment of currencies which is a prerequisite for a monetary union. 
Regional integration 
Finally I want to discuss the implications of East African economic integration for the banking 
industry  and  for  bank  regulation.  The  five  partner  states  of  the  EAC  are  due  to  sign  the 
protocol for the East African common market this year. The common market should remove 
all restrictions on trade in goods, services, capital and labour within the EAC; hence it has 
profound  implications  for  financial  services.  In  principle  the  common  market  should 
eventually allow banks headquartered in any one partner state the “right of establishment” in 
each of the other partner states and allow citizens of each partner state to purchase financial 
services from banks in the other partner states. Precisely how the “right of establishment” will 
operate  with  respect  to  banking  has  yet  to  be  decided.  For  the  banking  industry,  a  key 
question is whether all banks, including those headquartered within the EAC, should only be 
allowed to take deposits in any individual partner state if they operate as a fully capitalised 
subsidiary in that state, rather than merely as a branch. I think that the recent experience in 
the  European  single  market  should  caution  us  against  permitting  bank  branching  across 
borders.  
The  creation  of  a  common  market  should  lead  to  more  efficient  financial  services.  I 
mentioned earlier that I believe that some consolidation in the Ugandan banking sector will 
be  necessary  and  beneficial.  In  particular  larger  banks  will  be  better  placed  to  take 
advantage of the expansion in the size of the market created by the common market and to 
reap  economies  of  scale  which  can  bring  down  the  very  high  operating  costs  as  a 
percentage of assets which afflict banks in Uganda. Lower operating costs will in turn help to 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 5
reduce intermediation spreads which will benefit bank customers in the real sectors of the 
economy. 
To create an efficient common market in banking services it will be necessary to harmonise 
many aspects of bank regulations across all five partner states. This is necessary to create a 
level  playing  field  for  banks  and  to  prevent  regulatory  arbitrage  whereby  banks  aim  to 
operate from the jurisdiction within the EAC with the weakest regulations. I mentioned earlier 
that the Bank of Uganda will advise the Minister of Finance to raise the minimum paid up 
capital  requirement  for  banks.  The  increase  in  part  is  motivated  by  the  need  to  align  our 
capital  requirements  with  those  of  our  partners  in  the  EAC.  Kenya  will  raise  its  minimum 
capital requirement to Ksh 1 billion, which is nearly $13 million, by 2012. Other aspects of 
bank regulations will also need to be harmonised, including permissible activities, restrictions 
on loan concentrations and liquidity requirements.  
Conclusion 
I  have  covered  a  lot  of  ground  in  this  talk  so  I  shall  refrain  from  detaining  you  for  much 
longer. I would like to finish with the following conclusions. I am convinced that the banking 
industry faces exciting challenges in the years ahead. The prospects of sustained economic 
growth coupled with East African economic integration will offer banks huge opportunities for 
expanding  and  diversifying  their  business.  But  over  the  medium  to  long  term  the  banking 
industry, and hence the broader economy, will face greater risks as it becomes larger, more 
sophisticated and more integrated with global financial markets. Banks’ risk management will 
have to be continuously upgraded to tackle the evolving nature of risks that they face, as will 
bank regulation and bank supervision. 
Thank you very much for listening. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2010
