Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  Mission  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Tirana, 
14 July 2010. 
 Honourable participants and representatives of print and visual media,  
The visit of the International Monetary Fund Mission is characterised by fruitful and intensive 
discussions. They  were focused on the recent  developments at home, their perspective in 
the near and far future and the role of structural and macroeconomic policies to encouraging 
and ensuring the sustainable development of the country.  
At the end of these discussions, we conclude that we share a common opinion as regards to 
the role and importance of prudent policies, which should have at their hart the maintenance 
of  the  basic  economic  balances,  as  an  essential  prerequisite  for  the  stable  and  long-term 
growth.  
Likely positive is the fact that the principal decision-taking institutions remain committed to 
perform concrete steps in due time to ensure this development. 
The Bank of Albania has already adopted this position and transparency, as a guidance of its 
decision-taking  process  in  both  the  monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision  fields.  The 
respective  explanation  has  composed  the  essence  of  our  communication  with  the  other 
players of the economy and with the public at large.  
Allow me to deal in more details the issues discussed during these days, by summarising the 
opinion of the Bank of Albania in this regard.  
The  economic  developments  of  the  last  months  carry  encouraging  signals,  but  also  they 
show  some  weakness  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  the  compromises  that  policy-makers 
should realise and accept to accomplish their targets.  
The  Albanian  economy,  during  the  first  half  of  2010,  has  performed  in  line  with  our 
projections, being characterised by a positive, but slow growth of the economic activity.  
This  growth  is  considerably  grounded  on  the  quick  increase  in  exports,  by  denoting  the 
improvement of the world economy, the more competitive position of the exchange rate, also 
the efforts of businesses and industries which carry out their activity in this sector to find new 
markets and the use of their competitive advantages.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  domestic  demand  slowed  down,  mainly  reflecting  the  still  high 
uncertainty  and  the  difficulties  in  the  financing  of  the  economic  activity.  As  regards  to  the 
basic balances of the economy, this period is followed by controlled downward inflationary 
pressures, as well as correcting trends in the external position of the country.  
The economy financial health is improved, the confidence on banking system is recovered 
and the risk premiums have been declining.  
Economic  developments  during  the  first  half  of  year  have  imposed  the  need  to  discus  the 
review of fiscal policies and projections for the rest of year. The realisation of public revenues 
and  the  need  to  preserve  the  fiscal  stability  and  public  confidence  imposed  the 
indispensability  to  take  precautions  which  guarantee  the  control  of  both  budget  deficit  and 
public debt.  
The Bank of Albania, always requesting the accomplishment of these measures, considerers 
the envisaged fiscal precautions in the reviewed budget as the right step in this direction.  
BIS Review 102/2010 
 1
for 
for 
the 
long-term 
fiscal  sustainability  and 
The accomplished real management of the fiscal situation and the adoption of a prudence 
philosophy  regarding  the  implementation  of  budget  for  year  2010  are  considered  as  the 
needed  steps 
the  strengthening  of 
macroeconomic balances.  
Among  others,  a  lower  pressure  of  public  sector  on  the  domestic  monetary  markets 
establishes more adequate conditions for the lending to private sector, through the reduction 
of risk premiums and the control over long-term interest rates.  
Bank of Albania remains ready to further support these developments by other steps of the 
monetary  policy,  which  shall  aim  the  transmission  of  a  careful  monetary  stimulus  to  the 
economy.  At  the  same  time,  we  shall  make  the  right  efforts  in  order  the  banking  system 
transmits  timely  and  successfully  this  incentive,  thus  augmenting  the  lending  of  private 
sector.  
Finally, allow me to emphasise that the current situation and the next developments of the 
country are expected to remain at positive lines, but they also impose the needed attention to 
avoid the possible risks that may hit the economic stability, also threat the potentiality of the 
long-term growth.  
In particular, the Albanian external position shall remain at the focus of our attention. In the 
short-term  it  will  measure  and  conditions  the  economic  incentives,  which  might  be 
successfully absorbed from the Albanian economy. In the long-term, we repeat our call that 
the  encouragement  of  foreign  direct  investments  or  of  the other  forms  of  long-term  capital 
inflows  is  the  right  way  for  the  long-term  development  of  the  country.  Altogether  with  the 
domestic  structural  reforms,  public  authorities  should  pay  an  increasing  attention  on  this 
target, to release the development potentiality of the Albanian economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2010
