George A Provopoulos: The state and prospects of the Greek economy 
and economic policy challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of Shareholders of the Bank of Greece, Athens, 27 April 2010. 
 The  Greek  economy  is  in  the  midst  of  a  deep,  structural  and  multi-faceted  crisis. The  exit 
from  this  crisis  will  therefore  require  a  multi-annual,  persistent  and  systematic  effort.  It  will 
require a break with the past.  
The main features of the crisis are the large fiscal deficit, the huge debt and the continuous 
erosion of the country’s competitive position. These problems were already present prior to 
the global crisis of 2008 and it was inevitable that, in the absence of bold and decisive action, 
they would sooner or later lead to an impasse. As no such action was taken, the situation 
deteriorated.  Meanwhile,  the  global  crisis  amplified  the  cumulated  effects  of  the  chronic 
weaknesses  and  accelerated  the  downturn  of  the  economy.  The  outcome  is  the  present 
situation, which is reflected in the twin deficits and twin debts, and in the close intertwining of 
the public deficit and debt with the external deficit and debt. 
Today’s  crisis  does  not  simply  reflect  a  temporary  cyclical  downturn.  Nor,  of  course,  is  it 
solely reflected in the public sector and in the worrisome competitiveness deficit. It concerns 
the entire economy, its structures, the mentality and patterns of behaviour that prevailed for 
years,  the  distorted  growth  model  that  we  followed.  This  means  that  it  is  not  possible  to 
overcome the crisis by resorting to short-term remedies. On the contrary, what is needed is a 
persistent and systematic effort: an effort that is sustained, concerted and groundbreaking. 
Sustained, because changing the structures that have led us to where we are today will be 
an arduous task that cannot be easily achieved in the short term. Concerted, so that we can 
ensure  a  smooth  aftermath,  by  minimising  the  shocks.  Groundbreaking,  because  today’s 
problems  cannot  be  addressed  if  we  keep  on  thinking  the  same  way  as  we  did  when  we 
created them. Overcoming the crisis will, in other words, require a break with the past. 
 The Bank of Greece had issued timely warnings about the gravity of the situation, stressing 
in  its  reports  that  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  would  only  become  more  severe  as  the 
global economic situation worsened. Clear warning was also given that the cost of borrowing 
was  likely  to  rise.  Moreover,  the  Bank  stressed  the  need  to  send  a  clear  message  to  the 
markets  that  Greece  is  determined  to  implement  a  multi-year  plan  of  far-reaching  fiscal 
consolidation and bold structural reforms. 
 The developments that followed confirmed these dire warnings. The economy has entered a 
vicious circle and there is unprecedented uncertainty, which led to a series of downgradings 
in  Greece’s  creditworthiness.  These  downgradings  led  to  a  large  widening  in  spreads, 
resulting  in  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  government  borrowing  and  debt  servicing.  This 
situation,  to  the  extent  that  it  persists,  worsens  Greece’s  fiscal  position,  makes  fiscal 
consolidation  even  more  difficult  to  achieve,  seriously  hurts  the  real  economy  and  the 
banking system, and refuels the climate of uncertainty, thus exerting a general debilitating 
effect. The only way out is to restore confidence, by drastically reducing the deficit and the 
debt and by recovering the competitiveness that has been lost. 
The crisis of the Greek economy is unfolding in a global environment characterised by high 
uncertainty, in  spite  of  the  existing signs  of  recovery.  The  recovery  of  the  world  economy, 
 BIS Review 58/2010 
 1
proceeding  so  far  at  an  unsteady  step,  on  the  one  hand  has  been  supported  by 
accommodating monetary policies and on the other by expansionary fiscal policies; the latter, 
however, now increase the risks concerning the sustainability of public finances. 
These risks in the advanced economies are compounded by: (a) the large increases in the 
fiscal deficits and the public debt; (b) the adverse demographic prospects due to population 
ageing;  and  (c)  the  assessment  that  a  return  of  potential  growth  and  employment  to  their 
pre-crisis levels should not be expected soon. Additional risks stem from the fact that public 
finances are exposed to shocks originating in the markets. The uncertainty about the timing 
and the intensity of “exit policies” from the fiscal stimulus measures leads to a widening in 
spreads  of  government  bond  yields.  Therefore,  the  cost  of  financing  the  public  debt  is 
expected to rise, while growth rates will be lower than prior to the crisis. The wider the gap 
between  the  interest  rate  on  the  public  debt  and  the  growth  rate,  the  larger  the  fiscal 
adjustment  needed  to  halt  the  upward  trend  in  the  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio.  This  is  why 
structural reforms are needed in order to boost potential growth. It goes without saying that 
these remarks apply a fortiori to Greece. 
 The  crisis  that  the  Greek  economy  is  currently  experiencing  is  reflected  in  the  sharp 
weakening of economic fundamentals and in the deterioration of the economic outlook. 
1. 
What  triggered  the  particularly  adverse  developments  was  the  derailing  of  fiscal 
aggregates: in 2008 and 2009 the situation deteriorated and in 2009 the deficit, as 
the  Bank  of  Greece  had  warned  in  time,  widened  to  a  double-digit  percentage  of 
GDP.  According  to  the  latest  revised  data,  the  deficit  in  2009  reached  13.6%  of 
GDP. 
The  public  debt  increased  to  115.1%  of  GDP,  the  highest  ratio  in  the  euro  area, 
following that of Italy. According to projections based on plausible assumptions, the 
debt-to-GDP  ratio  will  continue  to  rise  and  will  tend  to  stabilise  only  in  2014,  and 
then again at very high levels (130%). Indeed, if the 2009 debt is eventually revised 
to 120% or 122% (as is considered possible by Eurostat), these projections will have 
to be revised unfavourably. 
Large fiscal deficits and debts can, of course, be found in other countries as well. 
Unlike  Greece,  however,  these  countries  are  able  to  finance  their  deficits  mainly 
from domestic saving. Greece’s gross national saving, public and private combined, 
was just above 5% of GDP in 2009. This shortfall in national saving is primarily due 
to Greece’s large fiscal deficits, but also to the fast increase in private consumption 
over the past few years. 
Due  to  the  low  level  of  saving,  the  public  debt  cannot  be  financed  from  domestic 
sources, resulting in a widening current account deficit and a growing external debt. 
Thus,  the  fiscal  problem  becomes  intertwined  with  the  external  deficit  and  debt 
problem, and the twin deficits feed each other in a dangerous vicious circle. 
The current account deficit reached 14.6% of GDP in 2008 and, after a temporary 
decrease to 11.2% of GDP in 2009, began to widen again in the first two months of 
2010.  The  large  trade deficit is  directly  attributable  to  the loss  in competitiveness, 
which  has  cumulatively  exceeded  20%  in  the  2001–2009  period.  Further,  it  is 
estimated that, in terms of relative consumer prices but also in terms of relative unit 
labour costs, the decline in competitiveness is likely to continue through 2010. 
The real economy has entered a recession since 2009, as GDP contracted by 2% 
last year, mainly on account of a sharp drop in investment, but also because of falls 
in private consumption and exports. In its latest Report on Monetary Policy released 
in March, the Bank of Greece estimated that GDP would decline by around 2% in 
the current year. Given the present circumstances, this projection is surrounded by 
high uncertainty and is subject to high upside risks. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2010
6. 
5. 
The  recession  spread  across  all  sectors  of  activity  in  2009,  negatively  impacted 
employment,  and  caused  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  unemployment.  Total 
employment  declined  by  1.1%,  the  number  of  employees  fell  by  1.6%  and  the 
unemployment rate climbed to 9.5%. A further drop in employment is projected for 
2010, while the rate of unemployment will come close to 11%. 
The adverse developments, mainly in Greece’s fiscal aggregates, together with the 
blows  to  market  confidence,  ultimately  took  their  toll  on  the  banking  system. 
Whereas in many other countries the crisis first broke out in the financial system and 
from  there  spread  to  the  real  economy,  in  Greece  things  worked  the  other  way 
round. The Greek banking system only began facing liquidity constraints when the 
severe  fiscal  imbalances  led  to  successive  downgradings  of  the  country’s  credit 
rating – and consequently the credit ratings of Greek banks, thereby restricting their 
access to international capital markets. Meanwhile, the slowdown in deposit growth, 
due  inter  alia  to  the  recession,  affected  the  domestic  supply  of  credit.  It  is  worth 
noting  that,  in  spite  of  these  problems,  the  annual  rate  of  credit  expansion  to  the 
private  sector  remained  positive  throughout  2009,  contrary  to  the  situation  in  the 
euro area as a whole, where there have also been periods of negative credit growth 
rates.  The  Greek  banking  system  showed  remarkable  resilience  during  the  global 
crisis; the provision of ample liquidity from the Eurosystem at low cost was one of 
the  reasons  for  this.  For  the  banking  sector,  retaining  this  resilience  in the  future, 
especially in view of the gradual phasing-out of the extraordinary measures for the 
provision  of  liquidity,  will  be  conditional  upon  dealing  with  the  fiscal  crisis,  which 
affects its functioning, and restoring market confidence in the future of the economy. 
Even after this happens, however, the new conditions that will emerge will be quite different 
from the ones in which the banks used to operate. The lessons drawn so far from the crisis 
will  lead  to  a  revision  of  the  supervisory  framework,  now  under  examination  by  the  Basel 
Committee.  Greek  banks  must  therefore  adapt  to  the  new  situation  with  insight,  bearing 
these impending changes in mind. At the current stage it is imperative that they: 
• 
regulatory  minimum  capital 
maintain  sizeable  capital  buffers,  above 
requirements;  
set aside adequate provisions for credit risk;  
rationalise their operating costs;  
manage available sources of funding flexibly and prudently;  
and, more importantly, adopt realistic and prudent medium-term strategies that will 
allow for consolidation. 
 the 
A sound financial condition, effective risk management and the establishment of bigger and 
more robust formations will be key conditions for enhancing banks’ shock absorbing capacity 
and for unfettered access to sources of funding. In my opinion, in the medium term changes 
in the banking sector are inevitable. The Bank of Greece, on its part, will continue to keep a 
close eye on developments and intervene as necessary to ensure that the next difficult steps 
can be made in the most effective manner. 
Economic policy  
In  order  to  address  the  major  challenges,  economic  policy  has  been  steered  toward 
decisions which, if effectively implemented and enriched with bold structural reforms, will lay 
sound foundations for the serious and far-reaching effort required. 
So  far,  the  decisions  have  mainly  aimed  to  reduce  the  fiscal  deficit  and  restore  market 
confidence  in  the  future  of  the  economy.  As  far  as  the  first  objective  is  concerned,  the 
supplementary  measures  announced  in  early  March  are  in  the  right  direction  and  were 
BIS Review 58/2010 
 3
favourably received by the EU institutions. Even after the announcement of these additional 
measures, uncertainty remained strong. The markets continued to maintain a wait-and-see 
attitude, as suggested by the subsequent ongoing widening of bond yield spreads. 
This attitude of the markets is basically due to the serious confidence and credibility deficit 
that the Greek economy still faces. To this, however, one must add the concerns about the 
competitiveness and the growth outlook of the Greek economy, i.e. the parameters which will 
determine the smooth servicing of the public debt in the future. In other words, the markets 
still have their attention focused on public debt dynamics. 
Against this background, it is particularly positive that the Greek government requested the 
activation of the support mechanism. 
It  is  assessed  that  the  use  of  this  mechanism  will  play  an  important  positive  role  in 
overcoming the crisis, for the following reasons: 
1. 
In the short term, it secures borrowing funds at relatively low cost, alleviates market 
pressures and contributes to the normalisation of liquidity conditions for the banking 
system as well. 
In  the  medium  term,  the  operation  of  the  mechanism,  with  the  involvement  of  the 
European  Commission,  the  ECB  and  the  IMF,  imposes  a  tighter  discipline  in 
respecting time schedules, provides a valuable source of know-how in elaborating 
and implementing economic policy, and bolsters market confidence. 
In the long term, the relatively lower cost of borrowing reduces the interest burden 
on public debt, thereby providing further support to fiscal consolidation. 
2. 
3. 
The aim of the support mechanism is to facilitate and ensure the implementation of structural 
reforms which, apart from being absolutely essential, should have been carried out long ago. 
Under  no  circumstances,  however,  should  the  existence  of  the  mechanism  lead  to 
complacency or a relaxation of efforts. The brunt of the task falls to the Greek State, which 
holds  full  responsibility  for  convincing  that  the  economy  is  irrevocably  engaged  on  a  new 
trajectory.  The  concerted  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  measures  announced  will 
help to gradually improve the climate. 
In  order  to  bring  about  a  definitive  reversal  of  the  negative  trends,  we  must  surpass 
ourselves  and  favourably  surprise  the  markets,  by  achieving  even  greater  improvements 
than the ones projected. In particular, it will be of crucial importance for the overall economic 
climate, if fiscal consolidation on the expenditure side progresses even further than currently 
planned  and  achieves  a  deficit  reduction  this  year  of  more  than  5%  of  GDP,  especially 
considering that the deficit figures for 2009 were revised upward to 13.6% and may undergo 
further  revision.  Such  consolidation  can  be  achieved  by  aiming,  with  greater  decisiveness 
and at a quicker pace, to curtail the squandering of public funds and to merge or eliminate 
public  sector  entities  that  are  not  really  productive.  Cutting  expenses  is  in  any  case  the 
suitable option for achieving the ambitious fiscal targets over the next two years, given that 
any further increase in tax rates would have very adverse repercussions on economic activity 
and would prove counter-productive – in the sense that it would lead to a contraction, instead 
of an increase in revenue. 
The recommended acceleration – as of this year – of fiscal consolidation, through reducing 
expenditure  and  rationalising  the  operation  of  the  public  sector,  will  indeed  favourably 
surprise  the  markets  and  contribute  to  restoring  confidence  faster.  This  will  help  reduce 
further the cost of government borrowing, with favourable chain reactions on bank borrowing 
costs  and,  consequently,  on  borrowing  costs  for  businesses  and  households.  Greece  can 
and must enter a lasting virtuous circle as soon as possible. 
Today, fiscal consolidation is the first and foremost tool for promoting growth. But it does not 
suffice by itself. Our response to the crisis must have twin targets, in response to the twin 
causes  that  have  led  us  to  where  we  stand  today.  Thus,  fiscal  consolidation  must  be 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2010
undertaken  together  with  a  systematic  effort  to  recover  the  losses  in  competitiveness,  by 
setting  specific  quantitative  targets  each  year.  Further,  under  the  present  circumstances, 
Greece’s  growth  model  cannot  be  based  on  consumption,  public  and/or  private,  as 
unfortunately  was  the  case  in  the  past.  Instead,  it  must  rely  on  investment  and  exports. 
Greece, one of the most closed economies in Europe, must now become more open. This, 
however,  will  be  impossible,  unless  competitiveness  is  effectively  restored,  through  bold 
structural changes. These changes must aim at: 
(a)  
reorienting the production model, with an emphasis on two interconnected elements: 
first, investment that raises productivity and, second, an orientation towards exports; 
increasing competition in the product and labour markets, so that, on the one hand, 
unit  labour  costs  can  support  an  improvement  in  competitiveness  as  well  as  job 
creation and, on the other, these costs are not unduly passed on to the final prices 
of goods and services; 
improving the business environment by reducing red-tape, stamping out corruption 
and modernising the functioning of public administration; 
prompt  and  efficient  utilisation  of  EU  funds  available  under  the  National  Strategic 
Reference Framework (NSRF); 
promotion of clean or “green” growth and change of the current pattern of energy 
production and consumption, and 
upgrading  the  education  system  and  encouraging  innovation,  research  and 
entrepreneurship. 
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
(e)  
(f)  
 The required reforms are of the utmost urgency. The big problems, which we were reluctant 
to address for years, stand before us now. This is why the responsibilities that we must all 
assume in the face of this huge challenge are of historical importance. The road to the exit 
from the crisis will be long and hard. This is why a greater effort will be required from all of us 
over  a  longer  time.  Our  course  in  the  forthcoming  years  will  largely  be  determined  by  the 
target we set ourselves and our commitment to achieving it. Do we want a country that is 
trapped in a low-level equilibrium or do we want to make Greece modern and dynamic? And 
since we obviously want the latter, what is certain is that we can no longer rely on recipes of 
the past, characterised by: 
• 
• 
a myopic focus on the present, at the detriment of the future,  
a consumption behaviour, verging on overindulgence, that has been exceeding the 
productive capacity of the economy by far,  
selective and at will compliance with laws and regulations,  
shifting of responsibility onto others,  
a refusal to make the slightest effort towards consensus-building,  
dogmatic interpretations of reality,  
claims to maintain acquired privileges which go against the interest of society as a 
whole,  
a short-termist and an easy-profit culture. 
• 
All these will have to change if we want to overcome the present deep crisis. We must now 
shift  our  focus  to  the  future  and  carry  out  the  necessary  reforms  at  a  rapid  pace.  Today’s 
crisis is unlike anything we have seen before, at least in our post-war history, and it cannot 
be  tackled  with  the  logic  of  the  past.  The  recognition,  by  all  of  us,  of  the  severity  of  the 
problems at hand will help build the social consensus that is needed on the difficult course 
 BIS Review 58/2010 
 5
that  lies  ahead  –  a  course  that  can  support  the  growth  prospects  of  the  economy,  thus 
securing social cohesion. 
This highlights the complex role that the government is assuming today, being called upon, 
with  perseverance  and  resolve,  to  overcome  obstacles,  break  up  the  rigidities  of  the  past, 
open up new pathways and demonstrate in a convincing manner that the gains to be reaped 
at the end of the long effort outweigh the costs that we will have to bear along the way. 
The  decisions  taken  so  far  are  promising,  as  economic  policy  is  gradually  shifting  in  this 
direction and is attempting to define a new course. On this course, it must have support from 
all of us. 
The  course  will  be  long  and  arduous.  However,  there  is  no  other  option:  we  have  the 
historical duty of pursuing it to the end, mobilising the forces, capabilities and talents of this 
nation, which have come to the surface in previous periods of crisis bringing about amazing 
results. 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2010
