 Shyamala Gopinath: Macroprudential approach to regulation – scope 
and issues 
Paper presented by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI) – Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara 
Malaysia/BNM)  Conference  on  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Stability  in  Asian  Emerging 
Markets, Kuala Lumpur, 4 August 2010. 
 1. 
Explicit  pursuit  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  can  be  said  to  be  the  single 
most significant take away from the recent crisis. More than the specifics, the importance of 
this mandate lies in decisively effecting a course correction with regard to the approach and 
philosophy  for  regulation  of  the  financial  system.  It  is  being  acknowledged  that  a  macro 
prudential  perspective  is  critical  in  designing  and  pursuing  micro  prudential  regulation  of 
institutions  and  markets.  Two  distinct  but  highly  inter-related  constructs  have  come  to 
epitomize  this  post-crisis  framework:  macro  prudential  regulation  and  systemic  risk 
management.  Both  these  concepts  are  philosophically  appealing  and  conceptually  sound, 
but  operationally  quite  challenging.  Understanding  the  nuanced  interplay  between  these 
would be crucial in designing an efficient operative framework for financial stability. 
Systemic risk management 
2.   Systemic risk is a much broader concept implying probability of sudden disruption to a 
large part of the financial system, reflected in failure of multiple institutions and freezing of 
markets, triggered by a common shock and propagated through interconnected exposures 
and correlated positions. Any framework for containing systemic risks would need to involve 
the following elements: 
 
Strengthening  the  financial  system’s  resilience  to  economic  downturns  and  other 
adverse aggregate shocks 
Sound  monitoring  of  common,  correlated  exposures  among  financial  institutions 
arising out of network linkages and developing measures to quantify the contribution 
of individual institutions to systemic risk 
Minimising  the  moral  hazard  associated  with  failure  of  systemically  important 
institutions  and  finding  mechanisms  to  restrict  the  contagion  impact  of  failing 
institutions during crisis 
  3.  
It is in the above context that the role of macro prudential approach in financial sector 
policies becomes critical. Macro prudential regulation can be considered as one of the tools 
of this larger policy framework. 
Analytics of macro prudential regulation 
4.   Macro-prudential  regulation,  as  it  has  come  to  be  generally  interpreted,  essentially 
envisages  that  the  key  instruments  of  prudential  regulation  viz.  capital,  liquidity  and 
provisioning vary dynamically according to macroeconomic circumstances. The macroeconomic 
triggers  could  arise  either  from  the  changes  in  the  normal  economic  cycle  or  sharp  asset 
price  movements.  Conceptually,  this  is  supposed  to  be  in  addition  to  stricter  prudential 
standards for capital, liquidity and leverage across the board. 
5.   The dynamics of macroprudential regulation is evident when seen in terms of the broad 
objectives: 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 1
 (i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
To address procyclical elements in the financial system: the basic idea is that 
cushions  should  be  built  up  in  upswings  so  as  to  be  relied  upon  when  the  rough 
times arrive – the counter-cyclical approach. The key measures under consideration, 
which  have  countercyclical  characteristics  and  could  act  as  “automatic  stabilizers” 
are the following: 
 
Building  buffers  through  capital  conservation  based  on  simple  capital 
conservation rules. The objective is to ensure that banks which have depleted 
capital buffers rebuild them by reducing discretionary distribution of earnings. 
A  buffer  range  will  be  established  above  the  regulatory  minimum  capital 
requirement  and  distribution  constraints  will  be  imposed  on  the  bank  when 
capital level falls within this range. 
A  countercyclical  capital  buffer  that  will  sit  on  top  of  the  conservation  buffer 
established as a range to take account of the macro financial environment in 
which banks operate. The buffer will be triggered only when excessive credit 
growth  compared  to  the  long-term  trend  is  judged  to  be  associated  with  the 
buildup of systemwide risk. In order to make this buffer effective it has to be 
combined with jurisdictional reciprocity. The upside of this will be that capital 
will  not  be  a  constraint  to  maintain  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy  during  a 
period of stress 
Promoting  forward  looking  provisions  through  a  change  in  accounting 
standards  towards  an  expected  loss  approach.  Current  standards  do  not 
permit credit losses based on events that are expected to occur in the future to 
be included in provisions. 
  To provide a mechanism to correct the inherently skewed pricing of credit risk 
by financial institutions through the cycle. One of the major causes of the recent 
crisis  was  that  in  the  pre-crisis  boom  period  there  was  general  euphoria  and  the 
financial sector was severely underpricing the risks. In a risk-based capital regime, 
during  booms  this  directly  implied  lesser  capital  for  risky  activities  and  hence 
increased  lending  to  risky  sectors  and  increased  trading  volumes  in  riskier 
instruments.  In  was  only  after  the  crisis  had  set  in  that  the  true  extent  of  risk 
underpricing  became  evident.  The  situation  swung  to  the  other  extreme  after  the 
crisis. The macro prudential tools including the leverage ratio are meant to address 
situations  like  this  by  effectively  influencing  the  costs  of  credit  exposures 
dynamically. 
To  attempt  pre-empting  asset  price  bubbles  in  the  economy  and  limit  the 
build-up of financial risks in the system. Asset price booms have invariably been 
identified  with  a  pre-crisis  economic  configuration  as  both  symptomic  as  well  as 
causative  factors.  Earlier,  though,  the  policy  frameworks  adopted  an  approach  of 
benign neglect of asset prices as they saw little role either for the monetary policy or 
prudential policy in addressing these. The recent crisis however has forced a rethink 
in this regard. There is now a broad consensus on the need to use credit channel as 
a macroprudential instrument. 
6. 
The Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision (GOHS), the oversight body of the 
BCBS have recently announced1 broad agreement on the overall design of the capital and 
liquidity reform package, though much of the work in regard to countercyclical buffers and 
forward looking provisions is still work in progress.  
                                                 
1   BIS  Press  Release,  The  Group  of  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  reach  broad  agreement  on  Basel 
Committee capital and liquidity reform package, July 26, 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 7.   The  recent  BCBS  consultative  document2  lays  out  a  broad  framework  in  regard  to 
countercyclical capital buffers, conceptually based on deviation of credit to GDP ratio from its 
long  term  trend.  Recognising  the  different  contexts  in  each  jurisdiction,  each  national 
supervisory  is  expected  to  apply  judgment  in  the  setting  of  the  buffer  after  using  the  best 
information  available  to  gauge  the  build-up  of  system-wide  risk.  However,  it  does  not 
envisage addressing sectoral credit issues through such countercyclical measures.  
8.   The  challenge,  particularly  in  growing  emerging  market  economies,  would  be  to 
reconcile this approach with the risk of credit constraints given the supply side issues which 
are qualitatively very different from advanced economies. Generalized credit increase higher 
than  the  trend  may  not,  in  itself,  be  a  matter  of  systemic  concern  in  view  of  the  changing 
structure of economies. The framework in these countries would therefore necessarily have 
to adopt a more nuanced, sectoral focus. There are challenges in trying to influence asset 
prices through the credit channel. First, it is really difficult to set an optimum level of asset 
prices as a target. Second, only bank financed exposures to asset markets can be influenced 
through  macro  prudential  tools  which  may  not  generally  be  the  dominant  funding  source. 
There  have  been  instances  where  asset  prices  build-up  is  due  to  leverage  outside  the 
banking  sector.  Third  sectoral  approach  will  inevitably  involve  an  element  of  regulatory 
judgement and discretion. 
9.  
In  this  context,  it  would  be  pertinent  to  recount  the  Indian  experience  in  applying 
macro-prudential  elements  in  view  of  apparently  excessive  credit  to  certain  sectors, 
particularly commercial real estate (CRE) which has been the cause of most banking crisis. 
The Indian experience 
10.   During  the  expansionary  phase  since  2004,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  taken  various 
measures to counter pro-cyclical trends. The potential adverse impact of high credit growth in 
some sectors and asset price fluctuations on banks’ balance sheets at various points in time 
were  contained  through  pre-emptive  countercyclical  provisioning  and  differentiated  risk 
weights for certain sensitive sectors. It was for the first time in October 2004 that the rapid 
growth  in  housing  and  consumer  credit  was  flagged  as  a  concern  and  as  a  temporary 
counter  cyclical  measure,  the  risk  weight  applicable  to  these  loans  was  increased  by 
25 basis  points.  In  the  context  of  continuing  high  credit  growth,  the  limitations  of  the 
prudential framework in capturing the ex-ante risks of pro-cyclical nature of bank credit were 
explicitly  recognized  in  October  2005  which  triggered  an  across  the  board  increase  in 
provisioning requirement for standard assets.  
11.   To counter the possibility of an asset bubble in addition to concerns about credit quality 
led to risk weight on banks’ exposure to the commercial real estate (CRE) and capital market 
being increased from 100 per cent to 125 per cent in July 2005. Given the continued rapid 
expansion in credit to the commercial real estate sector, the risk weight on exposure to this 
sector  was  increased  to  150  per  cent  in  May  2006.  Further,  the  general  provisioning 
requirement  on  standard  advances  in  specific  sectors,  i.e.,  personal  loans,  loans  and 
advances  qualifying  as  capital  market  exposures,  residential  housing  loans  beyond 
Rs.20 lakh and commercial real estate loans was increased from 0.40 per cent to one per 
cent in April 2006 and further to two per cent on January 31, 2007. 
                                                 
2   BCBS Consultative Document, Countercyclical capital buffer proposal, July 2010. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 3
 Year/Month  
CRE Risk 
Weight (%) 
CRE Provisions on 
Standard Assets (%)  
December 2004 
July 2005  
March 2006  
May 2006  
January 2007  
100  
125  
125  
150  
150  
0.25  
0.25  
0.40  
1.00  
2.00  
The backdrop of our countercyclical actions 
12.   While contemplating the measures, we did not have any disaggregated statistical data 
or evidence to support our concerns on the potential risks of rising bank exposures to real 
estate, among other sensitive sectors based on the incurred loss method. However, what we 
did have was a clear trend in significant year-to-year increase in aggregate bank credit. The 
Indian financial system is still largely a bank-intermediated system and for this reason, the 
bank  credit  channel  becomes  a  key  monetary  policy  transmission  instrument.  Thus  the 
aggregate  bank  credit  growth  has  always  formed  an  important  variable  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. The credit-deposit ratio, particularly on an incremental basis, has been an 
important indicator. 
13.  
In  view  of  the  rapid  credit  expansion  in  the  period  2003–2006,  in  addition  to  the 
countercyclical measures being taken, it was explicitly indicated by the RBI in April 2006 that 
growth of non-food bank credit, including investments in bonds/debentures/shares of public 
sector undertakings and private corporate sector and commercial paper, will be calibrated to 
decelerate  to  around  20  per  cent  during  2006–07  from  a  growth  of  above  30  per  cent. 
Inflationary expectations had also started firming up and as part of monetary management, 
the repo rate was increased by 175 basis points in stages to 7.75 per cent by April 14, 2007 
from its level of 6.0 per cent in September 2004. Further, the CRR was raised by 200 basis 
points in stages from 4.5 per cent in September 2004 to 6.5 per cent. 
Specific case of real estate 
14.   From  a  regulatory  perspective,  the  key  observable  features  that  tilted  the  balance  in 
favour of some kind of pre-emptive sectoral action, aimed primarily at preparing the banking 
sector to better manage the potential downsides, were the following: 
(i)  
The  onsite  inspections  of  banks  had  started  giving  indications  of  the  negative 
fallouts of the euphoria evident in lax underwriting standards and a few frauds that 
came to light; 
There were emerging signs of underpricing of risks as the real estate prices were 
spiralling fuelled by ample liquidity and the dominant wealth effect transmittal from 
the stock market boom. There were clear tax incentives at work here which made 
utilisation  of  stock  market  gains  into  real  estate  an  extremely  tax-efficient 
arrangement. 
A new factor in the housing credit market that was emerging was the mortgages for 
investment purposes – the trend for second homes, particularly in metros having a 
rising population of young, skilled job owners with salaries. Real estate, so to say, 
had crossed the rubicon to emerge as a true investment asset. 
(ii)  
(iii)  
4 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 (iv)  
(v)  
There  was  increasing  anecdotal  evidence  of  the  inventory  buildups  of  completed 
commercial  as  well  as  residential  units.  These  were  clearly  signs  of  real  estate 
having crossed the basic demand-supply equation to an investment asset. 
There was a visible steep increase in land prices coming from auction results. Large 
real estate companies could monetise the huge land banks on the back of the then 
booming stock market valuations with a simultaneous increase in bank lending for 
commercial real estate. 
It was in the above backdrop that it was decided to make it costlier for banks to finance 
15.  
loans  backed  by  real  estate.  It  was  felt  that  the  usual  sector-neutral  monetary  policy 
instruments would not be effective without posing significant costs to the economy generally. 
So while the monetary policy instruments were indeed used, the objective of this generalised, 
gradual  tightening  was  quite  different  from  the  requisite  stronger  action  in  respect  of  bank 
exposures to sectors such as real estate. 
16.  
It needs to be appreciated that in the Indian context, the sharp rise in bank credit to the 
real  estate  was  per  se  not  a  clear  indicator  of  any  asset  price  bubble  given  the  inherent 
demand-supply dynamics in the economy and the genuine needs of an economy on a high 
growth  path.  There  was  a  confluence  of  positive  factors  contributing  to  the  development 
including a decline in inflation and stable inflationary expectations, resulting in decline in both 
nominal and real interest rates and availability of ample systemic liquidity, contributed no less 
by  the  rising  tide  of  capital  flows.  Concomitantly,  there  was  a  shift  in  funding  by  the 
corporates to non-bank sources, including external borrowing, which forced banks to look at 
diversifying their lending portfolios. This shift also helped in meeting the increasing genuine 
demands on the commercial real estate front, including the office space largely accounted for 
by the IT boom and gradual expansion of organised retail to Tier II cities. 
17.   The objective, I must underline, was not to address the asset price bubble per se and 
not to curtail genuine credit needs of the economy but to prepare the banking sector to better 
manage the potential downsides related to selective sectors. In other words we adopted what 
is now called the “expected” as well as “unexpected” loss approaches. 
18. What are the key inferences? First, that harmonisation of the monetary policy objectives 
and  prudential  objectives  can  give  a  more  complete  picture,  which  may  not  be  possible  if 
banking supervision is separate from central banks; second that macro prudential policy is no 
substitute for monetary  tightening but should rather act as complement to monetary policy 
and  third,  that  supervisors  need  to  have  the  necessary  independence  and  flexibility  to  act 
timely on the basis of available information, which may albeit be incomplete. 
Going beyond macro prudential regulation 
19.   As with all ideas which gain currency and wide acceptance in a short period of time, 
macro prudential regulation runs the risk of being over applied. However, there is an equally 
strong  risk  of  making  it  too  narrow  in  focus.  It  must  be  reiterated  that  macro  prudential 
regulation  is  just  one  element  of  a  broader  macro  prudential  approach  and  needs  to  be 
supplemented  with  other  tools  to address systemic  risk  issues.  Such tools could be  in  the 
form of additional prudential measures applied to all institutions with a systemic objective. 
20.   Frankly it would be difficult to make a binary distinction between micro prudential and 
macro prudential policies – ultimately all macro risks translate into micro risks for financial 
institutions.  The  critical  thing  is  incorporation  of  systemic  perspective  while  designing 
policies. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 5
 21.   A recent survey conducted by the CGFS3 on macro prudential frameworks in various 
countries found that though conceptions of macro prudential policy aims and objectives were 
fuzzy, many countries had used various instruments keeping the broad systemic perspective 
in mind. The survey also found far more extensive use of macro prudential policies by policy 
makers  in  emerging  market  economies  as  opposed  to  their  counterparts  in  the  more 
advanced nations. It has helped enhance financial system resilience.  
22.   The survey clearly shows that the emerging markets were also open to target specific 
sectors.  The  most  widely  used  instruments  have  been  measures  to  limit  credit  supply  to 
specific  sectors  that  are  seen  as  prone  to  excessive  credit  growth.  These  included  limits 
calibrated to borrower risk characteristics (caps on LTV ratios or debt/income ratios) as well 
aggregate or sectoral credit growth  ceilings and limits on exposures by instruments. Many 
emerging economies, given their specific context already had placed measures to address 
specific risks – loan-to-deposit limits, core funding ratios, reserve requirements for liquidity 
risk and limits on open currency positions or on derivatives transactions for forex risk. 
23.  
elements of the prudential framework. I would like to briefly mention about the key areas: 
 
In  the  Indian  context,  I  can  say  that  this  perspective  was  writ  large  on  most  of  the 
Addressing interconnectedness 
– 
In  regard  to  wholesale  funding  markets,  prudential  limits  are  in  place  on 
aggregate inter-bank liabilities for banks as a proportion of their net worth. 
The overnight un-collateralised funding market is restricted only to banks and 
primary dealers and there are ceilings for both lending as well as borrowing by 
these entities. 
Investment  by  banks  in  subordinated  debt  of  other  banks  is  assigned  100% 
risk  weight  for  capital  adequacy  purpose.  Also,  the  bank’s  aggregate 
investment in Tier II bonds issued by other banks and financial institutions is 
limited to 10 percent of the investing bank’s total capital. 
Exposure  limits  apply  to  exposures  between  banks  and  non-bank  finance 
companies. 
       Forex  liabilities:  There  are  limits  on  the  proportion  of  wholesale  foreign  currency 
liabilities  intermediated  through  the  banking  system,  other  than  for  lending  for 
exports. Retail foreign currency deposits from non-residents are subject to minimum 
maturity requirements and interest rate caps. 
Banks are required to hold a minimum of 25 percent of their liabilities in the form of 
liquid domestic sovereign securities. This stipulation has worked both as a solvency 
as well as a liquidity buffer. 
The credit conversion factors (CCF) used for calculating the potential future credit 
exposure for off-balance sheet interest rate as well as exchange rate contracts were 
doubled across all maturities in 2008. This was done since it was felt that the CCFs 
as  per  the  Basel  norms  did  not  fully  capture  the  volatility  in  the  interest  rate  and 
forex markets in the Indian context. 
Profits  on  sale  of  assets  to  an  SPV  under  securitisation  are  not  allowed  to  be 
recognised  immediately  on  sale  but  over  the  life  of  the  pass  through  certificates 
issued  by  the  SPV.  Any  liquidity  facility  by  the  originator  or  a  third  party  is  to  be 
treated as an off-balance sheet item and attracts 100% credit conversion factor as 
well as 100% risk weight. 
                                                 
3   Macroprudential instruments and frameworks: a stocktaking of issues and experiences; CGFS paper No. 38; 
May 2010 
6 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 24.   The nature and sources of systemic risks are different in emerging market economies. 
This part of the world has seen many systemic crises over the past two decades and each of 
these  crises  have  demonstrated  the  importance  of  prudential  policy  to  minimize  risks  to 
financial  stability  and  to  reduce  the  impact  from  disturbances  domestically  and  globally. 
Financial markets in emerging markets tend to be less well developed and resilient than such 
markets  in  advanced  economies.  This  makes  the  system  more  vulnerable  to  even  small 
disturbances  and  increases  the  criticality  of  macro  prudential  safeguards.  It  therefore 
becomes imperative for the systemic stability perspective to guide other realms of economic 
policy framework as well. 
25. 
macro prudential approach has been used and found useful. 
(i)  
I  can  highlight  two  specific  areas  of  perceived  systemic  risk  in  our  context  where  a 
Volatile  capital  flows:  Excessive  volatility  of  capital  flows  could  impose  significant 
costs  to  the  economy  beyond  the  obvious  exchange  rate  impact.  There  are 
implications for financial stability in the form of induced risks of asset price bubbles 
and excessive foreign currency exposures in the financial system and external debt 
in  general.  Experience  shows  that  the  most  volatile  components  of  capital  flows 
have been portfolio flows. These flows as well as debt flows are also procyclical. 
While  capital  account  regime  in  India  has  accorded  substantially  large  freedom  to  equity 
flows – both FDI as well as portfolio flows, debt flows have been attempted to be modulated 
contextually  through  a  regulatory  framework  with  a  combination  of  quantitative  and  price 
based measures. Calibration of the debt flows into sovereign as well as corporate debt has 
been the most actively used instrument for this purpose.  
(ii)  
Management of sovereign borrowings – since the stop to automatic monetization of 
Government debt in the nineties, market borrowing by the Government has been a 
critical  variable  in  the  macroeconomic  framework.  The  stipulation  of  Statutory 
Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for banks needs to be seen in this context. Banks have been 
permitted to hold this mandated investment as “held to maturity”. 
Another  critical  factor,  which  buffered  sovereign  balance  sheet  from  vicissitudes  of  global 
crisis  is  that  India  does  not  have  foreign  currency  market  borrowing  and  only  a  limited 
dependence  on  foreign  investors  in  respect  of  domestic  currency  debt.  There  is  a  strong 
domestic  investor  base,  apart  from  banks,  in  the  form  of  insurance  and  pension/provident 
funds which has enabled India to elongate the maturity of its domestic debt. The experience 
in  general  of  emerging  market  countries  has  been  that  foreign  investors  in  sovereign  debt 
prefer short-term investments. 
Issue of systemically important financial institutions (SIFI) 
25.   The universally accepted post-crisis approach with regard to management of systemic 
risks  in  the  financial  system  accords  primacy  to  addressing  the  issue  of  “too  big  to  fail” 
(TBTF). The view is that resolution of systemically important financial institutions (SIFI), short 
of a public-funded bailout, is at the heart of the TBTF issue. SIFIs exaggerate the negative 
externalities  and  correlated  exposures  within  the  financial  system.  Their  scale,  complexity 
and interconnectedness also implies that their resolvability becomes extremely difficult and 
hence the “too big to fail” conundrum. 
The real challenge will be to have a non-discretionary framework for quantitatively defining 
the  SIFIs.  In  November  2009,  G20  finance  ministers  agreed  on  the  criteria  for  identifying 
institutions  and  markets  of  systemic  importance4,  based  on  the  joint  proposals  of  the 
                                                 
4   G20 Communiqué, Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, United Kingdom, 7 November 
2009. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 7
 International  Monetary  Fund,  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  Financial  Stability 
Board. Three main criteria are proposed:  
 
size: measuring the volume of financial services provided by an institution or group. 
Size  –  for  the  purposes  of  systemic  risk  identification  –  is  an  exhaustive  notion 
covering the exposures, or balance sheet and off-balance sheet risks of the entity in 
question. 
the lack of substitutability: assessing the financial system’s relative dependence 
on  the  financial  services  provided  by  a  single  entity  to  measure  the  system’s 
immunity to the disappearance of said entity. 
interconnectedness:  looking  at  the  direct  and  indirect  links  between  financial 
institutions that will contribute to the spread of systemic risk and its contagion to the 
real economy. 
  28.   The efforts at the FSB have since proceeded towards addressing three specific issues: 
(i)  reducing  the  probability  and  impact  of  failure  via  higher  prudential  requirements,  better 
supervisory  practices,  potential  limitation  on  the  size,  breadth  and  intra-group  connectivity; 
(ii) improving resolution capacity; and (iii) strengthening the core financial infrastructures and 
markets  to  address  interconnectedness  and  lessen  the  risk  of  contagion  in  case  of 
resolution. 
29.   The specifics of the broad template are still under preparation and it will indeed be a 
huge  challenge  for  global  regulators  to  arrive  at  an  agreed  framework.  Given  the 
heterogenous  country  situations  in  respect  of  banks  that  are  not  internationally  active,  a 
“constrained discretion” approach is being discussed which will help country jurisdictions to 
design  a  suitable  framework  for  SIFIs.  The  authorities’  choice  of  a  particular  measure  or 
combination of measures from the agreed range of policy options will depend on conditions 
in  each  financial  system  and  be  targeted  to  the  specific  risks  posed  by  SIFI  institutions  in 
each jurisdiction while agreeing to the broad, internationally accepted principles. 
30.   Reducing  the  probability  of  failure:  Pre-crisis,  the  twin  instruments  of  effective 
supervision and market discipline were expected to address the factors endogenous to the 
firms that increased their probability of failure – essentially the risk it took on its books. These 
instruments  were  found  insufficient  in  doing  so.  Further,  in  the  new  systemically  oriented 
regulatory philosophy, it was believed that apart from being a risk to themselves, many large 
institutions  posed  risk  to  the  system  at  large  through  significant  negative  externalities.  It 
therefore  became  a  sort  of  public  good  cause  to  contain  the  riskiness  of  these  large 
institutions.  The  exact  mechanism  for  doing  this  would  be  contingent  on  multiple  factors, 
including size, interconnectedness, complexity, business model and industry structure etc. 
31.   Alternate resolution mechanism: In spite of the above regime, if an institution fails on 
account of systemic stresses, the objective must be to minimise the cost for the taxpayers. 
Different models have been proposed with the objective to allow the orderly resolution of a 
systemically important nonbank financial firm, including a mechanism to cover the costs of 
the  resolution.  Various  approaches  that  have  gained  traction  in  policy  deliberations  for 
improving resolution capacity include limits to complexity of internal structures – preference 
for standalone subsidiaries, recovery and resolution planning, use of contingent capital and 
other instrument to absorb losses as a going concern, a special resolution regime for SIFIs 
which makes the shareholders and creditors share losses; and a bailout fund, contributed by 
the same entities expected to be bailed out. In the US, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform 
and Consumer Protection Act envisages a resolution regime which allows the government to 
impose  losses  on  shareholders  and  creditors,  unlike  the  normal  bankruptcy  provisions  for 
other  firms  where  the  aim  is  to  reorganise  or  liquidate  a  failing  firm  “for  the  benefit  of  its 
creditors”. 
32.   Strengthening markets and market infrastructure: The singular area of attention in 
this  regard  has  been  to  move  much  of  the  OTC  derivatives  market  to  a  central  clearing 
8 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 model.  There  is  broad  agreement  in  this  regard  though  few  important  concomitant  issues 
arising  out of  risk  concentration  in CCPs  will  need  be  addressed  carefully,  including  cross 
margining across CCPs or across different products. 
33.   There is also the issue of implicit or explicit liquidity support by the banking system to 
the  CCPs  in  the  form  of  lines  of  credit  or  to  intermediaries  such  as  brokers  and  market 
participants  in  the  form  of  margins  for  trades,  payment  commitments  or  other  forms  of 
guarantees.  It  is  likely  that  the  risk  of  transactions  undertaken  through  CCP  sit  in 
banks/regulated financial entities books either directly or indirectly and if so it needs to be 
ensured that they are subject to all the prudential norms and risks are captured appropriately. 
Ideally, regulators of CCPs should prefer collaterals in the form of liquid securities rather than 
bank deposits or guarantees. 
34.   However,  besides  the  issue  of  CCPs,  there  are  equally  important  issues  relating  to 
market practices which have bearing on the financial stability. One fundamental issue is the 
undisputable  faith  in  the  benefits  of  ever  increasing  volumes  and  liquidity  in  all  markets. 
Shifting to CCPs is only shifting the risks. There is need to regulate all derivatives markets in 
interest rate, credit and forex products from a systemic perspective – the concept of “market 
regulation” as practiced by many emerging countries may perhaps not be so anachronistic. 
35.   The regime for credit rating agencies is another such area. In spite of the systemic risk 
inherent  to  ratings,  current  efforts  to  regulate  rating  agencies  focus  mainly  on  micro-
prudential  issues  and  typically  aim  at  reducing  conflicts  of  interest  and  cliff  effects  by 
lowering  use  in  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  A  moral  hazard  created  by  rating 
agencies  is  the  use  of  support  ratings  wherein  implicit  sovereign  support  available  to 
systemically  important  institutions  is  taken  into  account  to  upgrade  ratings.  It  may  be 
necessary to require agencies to provide ratings without assumption of support. Addressing 
financial stability issues relating to potential procyclicality and systemic risk stemming from 
rating agencies is, an agenda for future work. 
36.   The other important issue I would like to flag, which is going to get accentuated by the 
move towards CCPs and collateral support arrangements, is the increasing collateralization 
of bank balance sheets. Leverage is one part of this aspect – a recent IMF paper5 clearly 
brings  out  the  risks  inherent  in  widespread  re-hypothecation  of  collaterals  in  many  of  the 
developed markets. The other part is the impact on bank balance sheets of the pro-cyclical 
collateralization  regimes.  If  a  large  part  of  the  good  quality  collateral  on  banks’  books  is 
locked up for their trading operations, what does it do to the resolvability issues in times of 
crisis and burden sharing? Both regulation of markets and close monitoring of interconnected 
exposures would be required to address the underlying risks.  
Existing framework in India for monitoring large financial conglomerates 
37.   The financial system in India is largely bank dominated and the banks are the parents 
of most of the large Financial Conglomerates. Incidentally, those FCs are not owned by any 
Holding Companies. Since 2004 there is a framework in place to closely monitor certain large 
financial  conglomerates  aimed  at  reducing  the  probability  of  failure  of  these  institutions. 
considered  to  be  systemically  important  in  view  of  concerns  relating  to  the  moral  hazard 
associated with the “Too-Big-To-Fail” proposition and the contagion or reputation effects on 
account of the “holding out” phenomenon. 
38.   The current practices being followed in supervision of these conglomerates include off-
site surveillance through quarterly Returns, regular interactions with the CEOs of the Parent 
                                                 
5   Singh,  Manmohan,  Aitken,  James:  The  (sizable)  Role  of  Rehypothecation  in  the  Shadow  Banking  System, 
IMF Working Paper, July 2010. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 9
 Companies  and  other  entities  in  the  Group,  periodic  reviews  by  a  Technical  Committee 
having members from sectoral financial market regulators.  
39.   The  two-pronged  structured  processes  in  the  nature  of  off-site  surveillance  and  the 
periodic  interface  with  the  conglomerates  has  proved  quite  robust  in  assessing  the  risks 
faced by these systemically important financial institutions. From time to time these groups 
have been advised to improve their corporate governance processes and risk management 
systems especially with respect to the management of credit concentration risks and liquidity 
risks on a group wide basis. 
40.   Recently  other  initiatives  have  also  been  launched  for  further  strengthening  of  the 
regulatory/supervisory approaches for the identified conglomerates. Discussion with the main 
auditor  of  the  Group  by  the  lead  regulator  is  being  contemplated.  Steps  are  already 
underway  to  tighten  the  capital  adequacy  norms  for  these  conglomerates  so  as  to  ensure 
that the amount of capital that the group possesses on a consolidated basis is adequate not 
only from the discretionary risks that the group entities take but also sufficient from the non-
discretionary  risks  like  operational,  reputational,  strategic  risks  especially  from  fiduciary 
activities.  
Perspectives on the Indian approach 
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
The above approach towards large financial conglomerates is focused primarily on a 
more intensive supervisory process aimed at capturing risk concentrations within the 
group; 
A  differential  prudential  framework  for  systemically  large  institutions  has  not  been 
considered  necessary  as  the  regulatory  framework  for  banks,  in  general,  tries  to 
address  issues  of  excessive  risk  taking  by  individual  institutions.  The  financial 
system is considerably less complex than most of the developed markets as many 
complex, high risk products are not allowed or are regulated.  
The sole metric of size has not been found to be much helpful as, apart from the 
largest  bank  which  is  state  owned  and  a  large  private  sector  bank  which  has  a 
relatively lower market share, the market share of the other larger banks is not that 
significant. Relative to the needs of the growing economy and the rapid growth in 
non-financial  conglomerates,  emerging  countries  will  require  a  larger  number  of 
banks with optimal size to meet the increasing demands. The focus has therefore 
been on differential and intensive supervision of large banks that are conglomerates 
(which includes the size metric). 
The  real  concern  from  the  inter-connectedness  perspective  arises  from  the  non-
banking  financial  sector  which  is  regulated  by  regulators  for  respective  sectors 
viz. insurance, securities broking, mutual funds, venture capital, housing finance. All 
the  other  non-banking  financial  activities  are  regulated  by  the  RBI  as  part  of  a 
separate regulatory framework.  
Many of the NBFIs which do not accept public deposits are significantly large and through 
their  interaction  with  other  financial  market  segments  could  pose  systemic  risk.  For  such 
entities, a stricter prudential framework on the lines of banks has been put in place. 
(v)  
Going forward, we will have to consider strong SIFI policies drawing on a range of 
policy levers. 
Conclusion 
41.   Macro-prudential regulation is essentially an inexact science. It has its limitations and 
needs to be used in conjunction with other policies to be effective. For leaning against the 
buildup of imbalances, a combination of monetary and macroprudential policies is required. If 
10 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 inflation risks are emerging, macroprudential measures cannot take the place of interest rate 
increases. Macroprudential measures are well suited to enhance resilience of the financial 
system  but  their  effect  on  aggregate  demand  and  inflationary  expectations  are  weak 
compared  to  interest  rates.  It  is  also  important  to  acknowledge  what  macroprudential 
regulation cannot do: it cannot manage economic cycles or target asset prices. It can only 
provide instruments to respond to these developments to cushion the financial system from 
potential  stresses.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  imperative  for  involvement  of  central  banks 
becomes  evident  as  otherwise  the  required  synergy  between  monetary  management  and 
macroprudential management will be lost.  
42.   The real challenge of macroprudential regulation is strong resistance to countercyclical 
actions  during  booms.  Having  a  rule  based  approach  will  to  a  large  extent  obviate  this 
problem but this approach has its own limitations. It is difficult to lay down simple rules as the 
financial  system  and  markets  are  evolving  and  banks  continue  to  be  dominant  source  of 
funding.  Suitability  of  tools  can  of  course  change  as  the  structure  of  the  economy  and 
financial system changes. But regulators may have to rely on continued use of discretionary 
adjustments. 
43.   As the global policy stance remains highly accommodative, there are concerns that the 
current two-speed recovery will imply short-term volatile capital flows or accentuation of carry 
trades  which  increase  foreign  currency  mismatches  of  the  non-financial  sector.  EMEs  will 
have to address these issues with a range of policy tools. 
44.   We also need to be realistic about what capital regulations can do. Banks need capital 
for  lending  and  to  be  resilient  against  shocks.  More  important  is  to  focus  on  the  business 
model and continuously monitor leverage and liquidity risks.  
45.   Going beyond macroprudential regulation, an issue which will be of critical importance 
to  the  EMEs  from  a  stability  perspective  is  the  nature  of  presence  of  foreign  financial 
institutions. This would determine the exposure of the domestic financial systems to the risk 
of  proxy  contamination  with  problems  in  global  markets.  A  recent  BIS  paper6  attempts  to 
make a distinction between multinational banks and international banks primarily based on 
their funding models. It argues that from the perspective of stability of banks’ exposures to 
borrowers,  local  funded  positions  as  in  the  case  of  multinational  banks  are  more  stable 
during  the  crisis  than  those  funded  across  borders  and  currencies,  as  in  the  case  of 
international banks. 
46.   For the host country, the key relevant issue from a market disruption perspective is the 
destabilizing  spillovers  on  local  lending  decisions  as  a  result  of  problems  in  the  global 
wholesale  funding  and  swap  markets.  This  fear  actually  materialised  for  many  borrowing 
countries during the recent crisis.  
47.   And lastly, the most important issue of the effectiveness and intensity of supervisory 
process.  There  is  clearly  a  link  between  the  depth  and  magnitude  of  the  crisis  to  the 
weakness  of  oversight  over  the  financial  system.  Stressed  environments  often  reveal 
weaknesses in supervisory framework and methods which were not readily apparent in times 
of stability. Regulators and supervisors should be better equipped to not just identify but also 
take appropriate action preemptively to address risks that have the potential to destabilize 
the system. This brings us to the critical factor of supervisory space. It is possible that, at 
times  the  sense  coming  out  of  supervisory  assessments  will  be  in  the  nature  of  potential 
leads more in the nature of anecdotal evidence rather than conclusive evidence. In such a 
scenario, the supervisors would be prone to making either a Type-I error or a Type-II error in 
their  judgment.  It  is  for  the  broader  political  economy  and  policy  setup  to  provide  the 
                                                 
6   McCauley, Robert; McGuire, Patrick; Goetz von Peter: The architecture of global banking: from international to 
multinational? BIS Quarterly Review, March 2010. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 11
 tolerance  for  each  of  the  two  errors.  This  would  largely  determine  the  decision  making 
framework and provide the necessary space for the regulators to take timely decisions given 
that dynamic judgement is necessary to deal with system risk that is constantly changing. 
12 
 BIS Review 116/2010
