Lars E O Svensson: Monetary policy after the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Second 
(IJCB)  Fall  Conference,  Tokyo, 
17 September 2010. 
International  Journal  of  Central  Banking 
 I thank Claes Berg, Marianne Nessén, Staffan Viotti and Barbro Wickman-Parak for comments on this speech. 
The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Riks-bank’s Executive 
Board or of the Riksbank’s staff. Gabriela Guibourg of the Riksbank’s staff has contrib-uted to this speech. 
As the world economy recovers from the recent financial crisis and the Great Recession that 
followed, a debate is going on regarding the causes behind the crisis and how to reduce the 
risk of future crises. The role of monetary policy and its relation to financial stability are also 
under  debate  and  some  argue  that  there  is  a  need  to  modify  the  framework  of  flexible 
inflation targeting and give a greater role to financial-stability considerations. Some blame too 
expansionary monetary policy by the Federal Reserve after 2001 for laying the foundation for 
the crisis.  
My  view  is  that  the  crisis  was  largely  caused  by  factors  that  had  very  little  to  do  with 
monetary  policy.  And  my  main  conclusion  for  monetary  policy  is  that  flexible  inflation 
targeting – applied in the right way and in particular using all the information about financial 
conditions that is relevant for the forecast of inflation and resource utilisation at any horizon – 
remains the best-practice monetary policy before, during, and after the financial crisis.  
A  related  conclusion  is  that  neither  price  stability  nor  interest-rate  policy  is  sufficient  to 
achieve  financial  stability.  A  separate  financial-stability  policy  is  needed.  In  particular, 
monetary  policy  and  financial-stability  policy  need  to  be  conceptually  distinguished,  since 
they have different objectives and different appropriate instruments, even when central banks 
have responsibility for both1.  
So today, I will first briefly summaries my view of the causes of the crisis, and then discuss 
what the possible lessons are for future monetary policy, and finally I shall emphasise the 
distinction between monetary policy and financial-stability policy.  
failures; 
The financial crisis had little to do with monetary policy  
As I see it, the financial crisis was caused by factors that had very little to do with monetary 
policy.  The  factors  were  the  macro  conditions;  distorted  incentives  in  financial  markets; 
regulatory  and  supervisory 
information  problems;  and  some  very  specific 
circumstances,  such  as  the  US  housing  policy  to  support  home  ownership  for  low-income 
households2.  
Regarding the macro conditions, global imbalances with large saving relative to investment in 
many emerging-market economies, and corresponding low saving relative to investments in 
industrialised countries – the so called global saving glut and investment shortage – lead to 
low real interest rates and high asset prices (Bernanke 2007). Low world real interest rates in 
combination with the Great Moderation, the long period of very stable growth and stable low 
inflation, led to a systematic underestimation of risk, very low risk premia in financial markets, 
and a large expansion of credit.  
                                                 
1   For a more detailed discussion of these issues, see Svensson (2010, section 5.2). 
2   See Bean (2009) for more discussion. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 1
Distorted incentives for commercial and investment banks to increase leverage to excessive 
levels,  together  with  lax  regulation  and  supervision  and  the  lack  of  an  appropriate  bank 
resolution regime, lead to a very fragile financial sector. Securitisation reduced the incentives 
to exercise due diligence in loan origination. It also led to regulatory arbitrage by setting up 
off-balance-sheet entities, which for various reasons nevertheless remained in effect on the 
balance sheet. Traders and fund managers also had distorted incentives to take excessive 
risks because of short-sighted and asymmetric remuneration contracts.  
There  were  eventually  enormous  information  problems  in  assessing  the  risks  of  extremely 
complex asset-backed securities, and the potential for correlated systemic risks was grossly 
underestimated.  None  of  these  causes  had  anything  to  do  with  monetary  policy,  except 
indirectly in that monetary policy may have contributed to the Great Moderation.  
Regarding  the  role  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  expansionary  monetary  policy  in  the  period 
preceding the crisis, opinion is divided as to whether or not it contributed to the build-up of 
the crisis. In my view, during the period in question there was a genuine and well-motivated 
fear  of  the  United  States  falling  into  a  Japanese-style  deflationary  liquidity  trap,  and  the 
optimal  policy  in  such  a  situation  is  a  very  expansionary  monetary  policy3.  Given  the 
empirically  limited  effect  of  policy  rates  on  house  prices,  a  very  tight  US  monetary  policy 
would have been required to prevent the house price boom, with a deep recession and the 
risk of the US falling into deflation and a liquidity trap4. And a tighter monetary policy would 
have had no impact on the global imbalances, regulatory problems, distorted incentives and 
information problems mentioned above (although it could have ended the Great Moderation 
with a deep recession and deflation).  
Lessons for monetary policy  
What conclusions can we draw so far from the financial crisis about the conduct of monetary 
policy  and  any  need  to  modify  the  framework  of  flexible  inflation  targeting?  One  obvious 
conclusion  is  that  price  stability  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability  (Carney  2009, 
White 2006). Good flexible inflation targeting by itself does not achieve financial stability, if 
anyone ever thought it did. Specific policies and instruments are needed to ensure financial 
stability.  
Another conclusion is that interest-rate policy is not enough to achieve financial stability. The 
policy rate is an ineffective instrument for influencing financial stability, and policy rates high 
enough  to  have  a  noticeable  effect  on  credit  growth  and  house  prices  will  have  a  strong 
negative effect on inflation and resource utilisation, even in sectors that are not experiencing 
any  speculative  activity.  The  use  of  the  policy  rate  to  prevent  an  unsustainable  boom  in 
house prices and credit growth poses major problems for the timely identification of such an 
unsustainable development, as well as for the assessment of whether policy-rate adjustment 
would have any noticeable impact on the development, and of whether, in the longer run, the 
development  of  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  would  be  better  (Bean  et  al.  2010,  Kohn 
2008, 2009).  
Other  instruments  like  supervision  and  regulation,  including  appropriate  bank  resolution 
regimes, should be the first choice for financial stability. Preventing a financial crisis requires 
not only improvements in the supervision of financial institutions, but also a greater emphasis 
on the supervision of the financial system as a whole. As regards the regulatory framework, 
generally,  to  the  extent  that  financial  instability  depends  on  specific  distortions,  good 
regulation should aim to attack these distortions as close to the source as possible. Macro-
                                                 
3   See Svensson (2003) for a discussion of policy options before and in a liquidity trap. 
4   See Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2009), Bean (2009), Bean et al. (2010), Bernanke (2010), Dokko et 
al. (2009), IMF (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2010
prudential  regulation  that  is  contingent  on  the  business  cycle  and  financial  indicators  may 
need to be introduced to induce better financial stability. Possible macro-prudential regulation 
includes variable capital, margin, and equity/loan requirements.  
However, one important lesson from the financial crisis is that financial conditions may have 
a  very  strong  and  deteriorating  effect  on  the  transmission  mechanism,  making  standard 
interest-rate policy much less effective. This motivates more research on how to incorporate 
financial conditions and financial intermediation into the standard models of the transmission 
mechanism used by central banks. Much progress has already been made in understanding 
these effects (see Adrian and Shin 2010, Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010 and Woodford 2010a). 
However,  even  with  much  better  analytical  foundations  concerning  the  role  of  financial 
conditions in the transmission mechanism, there will of course, as always, be considerable 
scope for the application of good judgment in monetary policy.  
What about “leaning against the wind”, the idea that central banks should raise the interest 
rate more than what appears to be warranted by inflation and resource utilisation to counter 
rapid credit growth and rising asset prices? It has sometimes not been entirely clear to me 
whether advocates of the leaning against the wind policy mean that credit growth and asset 
prices  should  be  considered  targets  and  entered  into  the  explicit  or  implicit  loss  functions 
alongside  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.  Or  whether  they  mean  that  credit  growth  and 
asset prices should still be considered just indicators, and that they emphasise them merely 
because credit growth and asset prices may have potential negative effects on inflation and 
resource utilisation at a longer horizon.  
In the latter case, leaning against the wind is a way to improve the stability of inflation and 
resource utilisation in the longer run. Then it is completely consistent with my interpretation of 
flexible inflation targeting.  
More  precisely,  flexible  inflation  targeting  aims  at  stabilising  inflation  around  the  inflation 
target  and  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level.  Monetary  policy  then  boils  down  to 
“forecast  targeting”,  choosing  a  policy-rate  path  such  that  the  corresponding  forecasts  of 
inflation  and  resource  utilisation  best  stabilise  inflation  around  the  target  and  the  resource 
utilisation  around  a  normal  level.  If  the  central  bank  uses  all  relevant  information  in 
constructing  these  forecasts,  including  the  impact  of  changes  in  financial  conditions  on 
inflation and resource utilisation at any horizon, monetary policy will automatically respond in 
the  best  possible  way  to  changing  financial  conditions  (Woodford  2007,  2010a).  Taking 
financial conditions into account becomes a special case of the general rule of “filtering all 
information  through  the  forecast”.  Only  information  that  affects  the  forecast  should  be 
responded to, whereas information that does not affect the forecast can be disregarded.  
However, suppose that, for some reason, the appropriate and effective instruments to ensure 
financial  stability  are  not  available,  for  instance,  because  of  serious  problems  with  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that cannot  be  remedied  in  the  short  run.  In  such  a 
second-best  situation,  if  there  is  a  threat  to  financial  stability,  one  may  argue  that,  to  the 
extent that policy rates do have an impact on financial stability, that impact should be taken 
into consideration when choosing the policy-rate path to best stabilise inflation and resource 
utilisation.  Such  considerations  could  result  in  a  lower  or  higher  policy-rate  path  than 
otherwise, in order to trade off less effective stabilisation of inflation and resource utilisation 
for more financial stability5. However, so far all of the evidence indicates that in normal times 
                                                 
5   Such considerations could include evidence of the “risk-taking channel” as in Borio and Zhu (2008). Adrian 
and Shin (forthcoming) and Adrian and Shin (2010) argue, in a model  with such a risk-taking channel, that 
short interest-rate movements may have considerable effects on the leverage of securities broker-dealers in 
the  market-based  financial  sector  outside  the  commercial-banking  sector.  If  we  assume  that  the  risk  of  a 
financial  crisis  increases  as  this  leverage  increases,  and  that  policy  rates  affect  leverage,  then  policy  rates 
would affect the risk of a financial crisis (Woodford 2010b). However, new regulation is likely to limit excess 
leverage and limit the magnitude of these affects. The size of the market-based financial sector may end up 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 3
that trade-off is very unfavourable, in the sense that the impact of policy rates on financial 
stability  is  quite  small  and  the  impact  on  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  is  significantly 
larger,  so  an  optimal  trade-off  would  still  have  little  impact  on  financial  stability.  A  good 
financial-stability policy framework is necessary to ensure financial stability. Monetary policy 
cannot serve as a substitute.  
the  policy 
the  suitable 
instruments  are 
The relation between monetary policy and financial-stability policy  
In  general,  it  is  helpful  to  conceptually  distinguish  financial-stability  policy  from  monetary 
policy. Different economic policies and policy areas, such as fiscal policy, monetary policy, 
labour  market  policy,  etc.,  can  be  distinguished  according  to  their  objectives,  the  policy 
instruments  that  are  suitable  for  achieving  the  objectives,  and  the  authority  or  authorities 
controlling the instruments and responsible for achieving the objectives. From this point of 
view,  it  is  clear  that  monetary  policy  and  financial-stability  policy  are  very  different,  and 
understanding this distinction is important.  
Monetary  policy,  in  the  form  of  flexible  inflation  targeting,  has  the  objective  of  stabilising 
inflation  around  the  inflation  target  as  well  as  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level. 
Under  normal  circumstances, 
rate  and 
communication.  In  times  of  crisis,  as  we  have  seen  during  the  current  crisis,  other  more 
unconventional  methods  can  be  used,  such  as  fixed-rate  lending  at  longer  maturities  and 
asset purchases (quantity easing) to affect longer interest rates and expectations of future 
short  rates,  and  foreign-exchange  intervention  to  prevent  currency  appreciation  or  even  to 
induce currency depreciation. The authority responsible for monetary  policy is typically the 
central bank.  
Financial-stability  policy  has  the  objective  of  maintaining  and  promoting  financial  stability. 
Financial stability can be defined as a situation where the financial system can fulfil its main 
functions  of  submitting  payments,  channelling  saving  into  investment,  and  providing  risk 
sharing without disturbances that have significant costs. The available instruments are, under 
normal  circumstances,  supervision,  regulation,  and  financial-stability  reports  with  analyses 
and leading indicators that may provide early warnings of stability threats. In times of crisis, 
authorities may use such instruments as lending of last resort, variable-rate lending at longer 
maturities  (credit  policy,  credit  easing),  special  resolution  regimes  for  financial  firms  in 
trouble,  government  lending  guarantees,  government  capital  injections,  and  so  forth.  The 
responsible authority or authorities vary across countries. In some countries it is the central 
bank, in other countries there is a separate financial supervisory authority, and sometimes 
the authority is shared between different institutions.  
Financial-stability policy and monetary policy are conceptually distinct, with distinct objectives 
and distinct suitable instruments. My point here is that this has to be taken into account when 
considering the lessons of the financial crisis for monetary policy. The interest rate is a blunt 
and  unsuitable  instrument  for  achieving  financial  stability  and  it  thus  makes  little  sense  to 
assign the objective of financial stability to monetary policy. However, it may make sense to 
assign  the  objective  of  financial  stability  to  the  central  bank,  if  the  central  bank  is  given 
control of the appropriate supervisory and regulatory instruments.  
The fact that financial-stability policy and monetary policy are different does not mean that 
there is no interaction between them. Similarly, monetary policy and fiscal policy are distinct 
policies but both have an impact on inflation and resource utilisation. The interaction between 
monetary  policy  and  financial-stability  policy  has  to  be  considered.  Monetary  policy  affects 
asset prices and balance sheets and can thereby affect financial stability. Financial-stability 
                                                                                                                                                      
being smaller after the crisis. In Europe, Canada and the Nordic countries, commercial banks dominate the 
financial sector. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2010
policy  directly  affects  financial  conditions,  which  affect  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary  policy.  This  motivates  more  research  on  how  to  incorporate  financial  conditions 
into  the  standard  models  of  the  transmission  mechanism  used  by  central  banks.  The 
outcome might very well be that financial conditions are considered to play a larger role in 
the transmission mechanism and as indicators of future inflation and resource utilisation. If 
so,  central  banks  would  end  up  responding  more  to  financial  indicators,  in  the  sense  of 
adjusting the policy rate and policy-rate path more to a given change in a financial indicator. 
But this would not mean that financial conditions and indicators would become independent 
targets for monetary policy. 
Conclusions  
My  main  conclusion  from  the  crisis  with  regard  to  monetary  policy  so  far  is  that  flexible 
inflation  targeting  –  applied  in  the  right  way  and  using  all  the  information  about  financial 
conditions that is relevant for the forecast of inflation and resource utilisation at any horizon – 
remains the best-practice monetary policy before, during, and after the financial crisis. But a 
better theoretical, empirical and operational understanding of the role of financial conditions 
and financial intermediation in the transmission mechanism is urgently required and needs 
much work, work that is already underway in academia and in central banks. Furthermore, 
monetary policy cannot guarantee financial stability. A separate financial-stability policy, with 
the objective of financial stability and with suitable instruments other than the policy rate, is 
required.  
References 
Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2010),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary 
Economics,”  in  Friedman,  Benjamin  M.,  and  Michael  Woodford  (eds.),  Handbook  of 
Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Elsevier, forthcoming.  
Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (forthcoming),  “Liquidity  and  Leverage,”  Journal  of 
Financial Intermediation, available as Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 328, 
2007.  
Assenmacher-Wesche,  Karin,  and  Stefan  Gerlach  (2009),  “Financial  Structure  and  the 
Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices”, working paper, www.stefangerlach.com.  
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2007),  “Global  Imbalances:  Recent  Developments  and  Prospects,” 
speech on 11 September 2007, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Bernanke, Ben S. (2010), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, speech on 3 January, 
2010, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu (2008), “Capital Regulation, Risk-taking and Monetary Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” BIS Working Paper 268, www.bis.org.  
Carney, Mark (2009), “Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilise Economic 
Activity”, in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Jackson Hole Symposium.  
Dokko, Jane, Brian Doyle, Michael Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim and Skander 
Van den Heuvel (2009), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, Finance and Economics 
Discussion Series 2009–49, Federal Reserve Board, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Gertler,  Mark,  and  Nobuhiro  Kiyotaki  (2010),  “Financial Intermediation  and  Credit Policy  in 
Business  Cycle  Analysis,”  in  Friedman,  Benjamin  M.,  and  Michael.  Woodford,  eds., 
Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Elsevier, forthcoming.  
International Monetary Fund (2009), World Economic Outlook, October 2009.  
BIS Review 118/2010 
 5
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices  Revisited”,  speech  on 
November 19, 2008, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2009),  “Policy  Challenges  for  the  Federal  Reserve”,  speech  on 
November 16, 2009, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Kohn, Donald L. (2010), “Monetary Policy in the Crisis: Past, Present, and Future”, speech 
on 3 January 2010, www.federalreserve.gov.  
White,  William  R.  (2006),  “Is  Price  Stability  Enough?”  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  205, 
www.bis.org.  
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003), “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The Foolproof 
Way and Others”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4), 145–166.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2010),  “Inflation  Targeting,”  forthcoming  in  Friedman,  Benjamin  M., 
and  Michael  Woodford,  eds.,  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics,  Volume  3,  Elsevier, 
forthcoming, www.larseosvensson.net.  
Woodford, Michael (2007), “The Case for Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007.  
Woodford, Michael (2010a), “Financial Intermediation and Macroeconomic Analysis”, working 
paper, Columbia University, www.columbia.edu/~mw2230.  
Woodford, Michael (2010b), “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability,” in progress. 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2010
