Njuguna Ndung’u: Strategies to increase the popularity of microcredits 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya, 
during the official opening of the Africa-Middle East Microcredit Summit, Nairobi, 7 April 2010. 
 Your Excellency Hon. Mwai Kibaki, President and Commander-In-Chief of the Armed 
Forces of the Republic of Kenya; 
Your Majesty Queen Sofia Margret Victoria Frederica of Spain; 
Your Royal Highness Princess Maxima of the Netherlands; 
Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance of the Republic 
of Kenya; 
Prof. Muhammad Yunus, Nobel Peace Laureate and Managing Director of Grameen 
Bank; 
Mr. Sam Daley-Harris, Director Microcredit Summit Campaign; 
Mrs. Lydia Koros, Chairperson, Association of Microfinance Institutions; 
Delegates, Distinguished Guests and Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  is  happy  to  be  part  of  this  very  important  Summit.  So  let  me 
extend a warm welcome to all the delegates who have come to this Summit. It is indeed an 
honour for Kenya to host the 14th Africa-Middle East Microcredit Summit. The Summit will 
focus on strategies for ensuring that the vast majority of the world’s poorest households can 
access markets for affordable credit. 
This  Summit  comes  at  an  opportune  time  when  the  microfinance  industry  in  Kenya  is 
experiencing  rapid  changes  and  legislative  support  following  the  enactment  of  the 
Microfinance Act, 2006 which became operational in May 2008. The major challenge prior to 
the enactment of the Act had been lack of a specific legal and regulatory framework as well 
as  appropriate  regulatory  oversight  to  guide  the  specific  operations  of  deposit  taking 
microfinance business in Kenya. 
I  should  also  point  out that  it  was  the  microfinance  practitioners  who  helped  to  initiate  the 
process  of  developing  Kenya’s  microfinance  legal  and  regulatory  framework  through  a 
consultative process. 
Your  Excellency;  The  MFI  sector  is  now  transforming  to  deposit  taking  institutions.  The 
Central  Bank  of  Kenya  has  so  far  issued  two  licences  to  Faulu  Kenya  DTM  and  Kenya 
Women  Finance  Trust  DTM  to  conduct  nationwide  deposit  taking  microfinance  business. 
Further,  a  total  of  eight  applications  for  deposit  taking  microfinance  licences  have  been 
received  and  are  in  different  stages  of  review  and  appraisal.  The  Central  Bank  has  also 
approved 34 business names, which is the first step in the licensing process of DTMs. 
While  considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  licensing  two  DTMs,  the  Central  Bank  is 
concerned  at  the  slow  uptake  of  this  new  avenue  for  Microfinance  Institutions  to  be 
mainstreamed into the financial sector. We are therefore engaging the microfinance industry 
through  its  umbrella  body  the  Association  of  Microfinance  Institutions  (AMFI).  This 
engagement aims at identifying the bottlenecks for Microfinance Institutions some of which 
include: 
 
 
Costs associated with roll out of branch networks and ICT infrastructure. 
Restructuring  of  shareholding  of  Microfinance 
to  comply  with 
shareholding  restrictions  specified  in  the  Microfinance  Act.  The  Act  restricts 
shareholding by an individual or entity to 25% of the institution’s share capital. 
Institutions 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 1
  MFIs  are  constituted  in  various  forms  including  Non  Governmental  Organisations 
and  Trusts.  Under  the  Act,  transforming  MFIs  are  required  to  be  incorporated  as 
limited  liability  companies  registered  under  the  Companies  Act.  The  incorporation 
process  takes  considerable  time  and  expense  and  may  deter  some  MFIs  from 
applying for a DTM license. 
Anecdotal evidence also seems to suggest a “wait and see” approach by a number 
of potential deposit taking MFIs as they assess the experience and performance of 
the pioneer regulated DTMs. The Central Bank would like to take upon itself the task 
of dislodging the “waiting option” from this sector of the market. 
The Central Bank of Kenya is currently drawing up proposals for review of the microfinance 
legal  and  regulatory  framework.  I  should  stress  that  the  Bank  will  continue  to  consult  with 
market  players  as  this  process  moves  forward.  We  therefore,  look  forward  to  drawing 
valuable  lessons  from  this  Summit  to  enhance  Kenya’s  microfinance  legal  and  regulatory 
framework. 
We stand ready to advice, cultivate partnership and only regulate when rules are flouted. 
With  these  few  remarks,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  honour  to  welcome  the 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta to make some remarks 
to this Summit and to invite His Excellency the President of the Republic of Kenya to officially 
open the Africa-Middle East Microcredit Summit. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2010
