Mario Draghi: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy  
Concluding remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  Ordinary  Meeting  of  Shareholders  2009  –  116th  Financial 
Year, Bank of Italy, Rome, 31 May 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  reorganization  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  branch  network  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  its 
essential functions, which was begun in September 2008, proceeded on schedule last year. 
A  total  of  39  of  the  original  97  branches  have  ceased  operations,  and  another  25, 
specializing in services to users, have been streamlined. In six provinces detached units of 
the corresponding regional branches have been instituted to perform banking and financial 
supervisory functions. The reorganization is to be completed this year with the specialization 
of six branches in cash handling. Permanent savings of some €80 million a year have been 
achieved. 
The  systematic  revision  of  organizational  arrangements  and  operating  processes  that  was 
begun in 2007 continued at the central administration as well, last year focusing on banknote 
production.  The  use  of  more  advanced  technology  and  the  changeover  to  simpler 
procedures produced gains in efficiency and in the quality of services to the banking system 
and to citizens. 
In a year of economic and financial crisis and of management and operational challenges to 
our organizational structures, the skill and dedication of the staff have been decisive. 
The Bank of Italy will contribute to next year’s celebration of the 150th anniversary of Italian 
unification with two initiatives. 
A research project entrusted to Italian and foreign historians, economists, and legal scholars 
will  examine  the  ability  shown  by  our  economy  to  adapt  to  changes  in  the  international 
environment over the past century and a half. 
Next  spring  we  will  hold  an  exhibition  on  Italian  monetary  unification  –  a  little  known  but 
crucial aspect of the broader process of national unification.  
The evolution of the crisis and international cooperation 
Twenty months ago the collapse of Lehman Brothers opened up grim prospects for global 
finance and the world economy. The action of monetary authorities and governments staved 
off the collapse of confidence among financial operators, savers, investors and consumers. 
In  the  G7  countries  as  a  group,  public  financial  support  for  the  economy  exceeded 
5 percentage points of GDP in 2009. Real short-term interest rates turned negative and the 
central banks provided unprecedented volumes of liquidity. 
Output declined by 2.4 per cent in the United States, 4.1 per cent in the euro area, and 5 per 
cent  in  Italy;  GDP  continued  to  expand  in  the  emerging  economies,  although  slowing  to 
growth of 2.4 per cent.  
This year the leading international institutions predict that world output will grow by more than 
4  per  cent.  However,  this  is  the  average  of  widely  disparate  rates:  high  in  the  emerging 
economies,  above  all  China;  substantial  in  the  United  States  and  Japan;  and  weak  in 
Europe, where output is still well below the pre-crisis level. 
Government  budget  deficits  and  public  debt  have  spiralled.  Relief  at  having  avoided 
catastrophe  has  given  way  on  international  financial  markets  to  apprehension  about  the 
sustainability of growing sovereign debt. Sales target the government securities of countries 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 1
with  large  budget  deficits  and  high  levels  of  public  debt,  in  particular  those  that  combine 
these  two  characteristics  with  weak  economic  growth.  The  weaker  this  growth,  the  more 
exacting and pressing are the demands by international investors for a rapid adjustment of 
imbalances in the public finances. 
These countries have no alternative but to map out promptly a path to restoring budgetary 
equilibrium,  with  a  reallocation  of  current  expenditure  and  with  structural  reforms  aimed  at 
raising potential output and competitiveness. 
These are difficult courses of action and unless coordinated at international level they risk 
extinguishing the hesitant recovery. The crisis has attenuated, not eliminated, the worrying 
geographical imbalances in world demand. The curbing of debt and increase in saving in the 
United  States  and  some  European  economies  are  compressing  consumption  and 
investment; they should be offset, more than is already happening, by stronger expansion in 
domestic demand in the countries that have built up large external surpluses. In Pittsburgh 
last  year  the  G20  launched  an  ambitious  programme  of  multilateral  surveillance  of 
macroeconomic  and  structural  policies.  It  is  important  that  this  be  translated  into  concrete 
strategies to restore balance and support growth. However, it is probable that the process 
will  not  be  rapid;  the  deficits  will  need  to  be  financed,  requiring  sound  and  transparent 
markets. 
Lessons from the crisis  
The roots of the crisis that has beset the world for nearly three years lie in regulatory and 
supervisory  deficiencies  in  the  main  financial  centres.  The  expansionary  monetary  policy 
conducted  by  the  United  States  from  the  end  of  the  1990s  helped  to  create  a  financial 
environment  conducive  to  the  explosion  in  private  debt  and  the  aggravation  of  global 
imbalances; these factors heightened the effects of the crisis and fostered their transmission. 
Clear  indications  derive  from  this  for  the  future,  regarding  both  the  system  of  financial 
regulation and monetary policies.  
From the start of the crisis the Financial Stability Board was entrusted by the world’s highest 
political  authorities  with  responsibility  for  designing  the  regulatory  framework  in  which  the 
financial industry will operate in the years to come. On several occasions I have described 
the  guidelines  that  continue  to  inform  this  plan;  how  they  draw  from  the  diagnosis  of  past 
weaknesses  a  model  for  present  and  future  action;  and  how  the  ultimate  objective  of  this 
work is to make the system more resistant to crises. Some crises may be prevented, others 
will be inevitable; but we can take action to limit their damage and contagion.  
The agenda develops in four directions:  
(i) 
draw  up  general  rules  for  the  banks:  a  more  robust  capital  base,  lower  financial 
leverage and control of liquidity risk are the pillars of this; 
introduce  specific  provisions  for  systemic  intermediaries  designed  to  reduce  the 
likelihood  of  their  failing,  enable  their  orderly  administration  if  this  should  happen, 
and prevent contagion; 
reduce the importance of ratings in supervision, while simultaneously increasing the 
competition  between  rating  agencies  and  exercising  effective  control  over  the 
integrity of their decision-making and the transparency of their evaluations; 
increase the transparency of trading on regulated financial markets; and bring over-
the-counter  markets  back  within  a  framework  of  universally  accepted  rules  that 
impose standard contracts and the settlement of trades with central counterparties 
that are subject to supervision. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The first set of reforms requires the utmost international convergence, otherwise regulatory 
arbitrage and market integration will preclude their effectiveness. For the second set it would 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2010
be more appropriate to talk of minimum harmonization: all countries should adopt measures 
in respect of systemic intermediaries, but it is illusory to imagine that the method and timing 
of their implementation will be the same across countries because differences in institutions, 
markets, business models and economic history are too great. Only when governments and 
regulators  can  allow  the  institutions  that  deserve  to  fail  to  do  so  without  causing  a 
catastrophe such as that following the collapse of Lehman Brothers will they have regained 
true independence from the financial services industry.  
In the United States an ambitious project to reform the regulation of the financial system is 
taking shape; for the aspects bearing most closely on international cooperation it is in line 
with the agenda of the FSB, whose work is proceeding according to schedule. However, this 
year’s appointments will be decisive. The most important deadline is the presentation to the 
G20 Summit in Seoul next November of the new rules reforming the Basel II Accord. 
The financial industry contends that the regulatory reform could impede the recovery. But the 
application of the new rules will be gradual and will not begin until the recovery has gathered 
force. The changeover to the new definition of banks’ capital will be long enough to render its 
effects on banks’ market value and on credit negligible during the transition. It is important 
that the difficulties of the moment not lead to a loosening of the long-term objectives, which 
must be kept firm. 
The experience of the crisis also influences the design of monetary policies. Their objective 
continues to be price stability, but they must be more prepared to counter developments in 
credit  and  money  that  can  fuel  financial  disequilibria,  even  in  the  absence  of  immediate 
inflationary dangers.  
Our analyses, among others, show that in order to attenuate the volatility of credit, financial 
asset  prices  and  economic  activity  it  is  also  necessary  to  prepare  instruments  such  as 
countercyclical  variations  in  banks’  capital  requirements  or  in  loan-to-value  ratios.  This  is 
what  is known  as  macroprudential policy.  The central  banks  must  play  a  role  in  designing 
and implementing it.  
In times of severe crisis the balance sheets of financial intermediaries are altered and, with 
them, the monetary policy transmission channels. The constraints on the availability of credit, 
which are only marginally binding in normal times, become stringent when the markets do 
not  function  in  an  orderly  manner;  support  for  credit  has  a  much  greater  effect  on  the 
economy  than  the  expansion  of  the  monetary  aggregates.  Changes  in  the  size  and 
composition of central banks’ balance sheets have proven useful in the efforts to stabilize the 
markets. This is what the ECB has done and is doing. 
The euro area 
Euro-area  monetary  policy  has  been  strongly  expansionary  for  some  time.  It  has  ensured 
orderly conditions in the credit system and provided support for the recovery of the economy 
in a context of moderate inflation expectations firmly anchored to price stability. 
The exceptional liquidity expansion measures averted a systemic crisis; they pushed down 
interest  rates  in  the  money  market  and  helped  to  reduce  those  on  loans  to  firms  and 
households. In order to extend intermediaries’ access to funds, refinancing operations were 
conducted  at  a  fixed  rate  and  with  full  allotment  of  the  amounts  requested;  the  range  of 
financial assets eligible as collateral was widened; the maturity of operations was lengthened 
to  twelve  months.  At  the  end  of  last  year,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  while  not 
renewing  some  exceptional  measures  it  deemed  no  longer  indispensable,  continued  to 
provide all the liquidity necessary to support the economy and the financial system. 
But in the last few months the consequences of the crisis have tested the cohesion of the 
euro area. The massive creation of public debt, in a phase in which extraordinary quantities 
of bank bonds are falling due on the markets, suddenly increased the risk premium on some 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 3
sovereign  debtors.  For  Greece,  the  question  had  been  posed  for  some  time:  the  loss  of 
credibility of the public finances, the magnitude of the budget deficit, the public debt and the 
external current account deficit, low growth, and the country’s weak industrial structure and 
unsustainable  wage  dynamics  were  pitching  Greece  into  a  fiscal  crisis  that  the  country’s 
authorities were slow to recognize. 
Just as in the case of American private debt, political indecision and the absence of crisis 
resolution mechanisms aggravated the situation. In the Greek case the difficulty of finding a 
European accord on a rescue plan, but also the unavailability of a process permitting orderly 
management of the debt crises of sovereign states, amplified the damage and the contagion 
and at the same time heightened moral hazard. 
What  was  paralyzing  the  markets  was  the  prospect  that  Greece’s  fiscal  crisis  might  lead, 
through  a  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  collateral,  to  a  collapse  of  the  country’s  banking 
system, which would no longer have had access to ECB refinancing. In addition, there were 
fears for other countries’ banks with large exposures to Greek counterparties. The risk was 
becoming systemic: interbank liquidity was evaporating, the stock markets were plunging.  
The  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  intervened  promptly,  maintaining  the  option  to 
accept  lower-rated  collateral;  reactivating  the  unlimited  supply  of  liquidity  in  long-term 
refinancing operations; and initiating, with the Securities Markets Programme, purchases of 
securities in order to resuscitate markets that had become illiquid. The governments of the 
euro-area countries and the European Union, in agreement with the International Monetary 
Fund, allocated €110 billion for loans to Greece and prepared a mechanism able to mobilize 
up  to  €750  billion  in  financial  assistance  to  euro-area  sovereign  debtors  hit  by  a  liquidity 
crisis,  with  a  contribution  of  the  IMF.  The  beneficiary  countries  will  have  to  draw  up 
adjustment  programmes  which,  if  approved  by  the  European  Council,  will  be  subject  to 
periodic verification.  
In  evaluating  the  exceptional  circumstances  that  justified  intervention  in  the  government 
securities market, the Governing Council of the ECB considered that the functioning of the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  was  endangered  and  the  stability  of  the  euro’s 
financial system at risk. The ECB sterilizes these interventions, which do not finance public 
deficits. Its independence is not in question. 
These measures will have to be discontinued as quickly as possible, as soon as the markets 
spontaneously  resume  trading  of  the  securities  of  the  countries  involved.  This  will  require 
rapid,  significant  and  discernable  progress  in  adjusting  government  budgets  and  the  fully 
operational status of the financing mechanism set up by the European Union and the IMF. 
But enduring stability of the markets can only come with the resumption of growth, for it must 
not be forgotten that this crisis is above all a crisis of competitiveness. 
The recent events pose, again and more powerfully, the old problem of European economic 
governance. 
A  strengthening  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  urgent.  The  commitment  to  achieve  a 
structural budgetary position in balance or in surplus must be made cogent by introducing 
sanctions,  including  political  sanctions,  for  non-compliance;  the  accuracy  of  statistical 
information, particularly public finance statistics, must be ensured. 
Cogent  constraints  and  commitments  must  also  be  introduced  for  structural  policies.  The 
disparities we have been witnessing for some time in actual and potential growth rates and 
the  seriousness  of  the  imbalances  in  intra-area  trade  in  goods  and  services  signal 
inadequacies  and  inconsistencies  in  national  policies.  Some  objectives  of  public  action  to 
enhance economic growth in the long run, for example those bearing on the labour market 
participation of both the young and the old and on competition in the markets for services, 
should be accompanied by controls and, in some cases, sanctions. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2010
The Italian economy 
In  the  two  years  2008–09  GDP  contracted  by  6.3  per  cent,  almost  half  the  entire  growth 
achieved in the ten preceding years. Households’ real income diminished by 3.4  per cent, 
their consumption by 2.5 per cent. Exports fell by 22 per cent. Rapidly spreading uncertainty 
and the deteriorating outlook for demand led firms to cut investment, causing it to contract by 
16 per cent. Wage supplementation rose to 12 per cent of total hours worked in industry at 
the end of 2009. Employment decreased by 1.4 per cent, the number of hours worked by 
3.7 per cent. 
Some 9,400 firms became involved in bankruptcy proceedings in 2009, a quarter more than 
in  the  previous  year.  The  firms  hardest  hit  are  the  smallest  ones,  which  often  depend  on 
subcontracted  work.  Those  that  had  embarked  on  restructuring  before  the  crisis  have 
withstood its effects better and now have the best prospects. According to the Bank of Italy’s 
periodic survey, they expect their turnover to increase in 2010 by 3 percentage points more 
than  that  of  comparable  firms  that  had  not  restructured.  Industrial  firms  with  50  or  more 
employees  that  had  invested  in  R&D  in  the  three  years  preceding  the  crisis  expect  their 
turnover to increase by more than 6 per cent. 
Economic  policy  limited  the  damage,  containing  the  fall  in  GDP  by  an  estimated  two 
percentage points, of which about one point can be attributed to monetary policy, half a point 
to the automatic stabilizers built into the budget and the rest to the recomposition of revenue 
and expenditure enacted by the Government. The extension of income support programmes 
attenuated the immediate costs of the crisis. The increase in the budget deficit was smaller 
than  in  the  other  main  advanced  economies,  thanks  in  part  to  the  solidity  of  the  banking 
system,  which  did  not  need  significant  public  support.  In  the  other  G7  economies  this 
amounted to 3.8 per cent of GDP on average.  
At the beginning of this year it was estimated that the Italian economy would return to the, 
albeit modest, growth of the ten years preceding the crisis. In the first quarter GDP grew by 
0.5 per cent compared with the previous quarter; there was an improvement in the opinions 
of firms, especially exporters, regarding the performance of orders and their expectations for 
production. Destocking appeared to have come to an end. 
The explosion of the Greek crisis could change the outlook. Some European governments 
have taken action to reduce their budget deficits.  
The  Italian  Government  has  reaffirmed  the  objective  of  bringing  the  deficit  below  the 
threshold of 3 per cent of GDP by 2012, confirmed the commitment to achieving budgetary 
balance over a longer time horizon, and brought forward the formulation of the adjustment 
measures for 2011–12. According to the official estimates, the measures recently approved 
by the Council of Ministers will reduce the baseline budget deficit in 2012 by €24.9 billion; the 
measures  bear  on  the  main  items  of  expenditure  and  focus  on  the  operating  costs  of  the 
public administration. The package is intended to slow the annual growth in primary current 
expenditure to below 1 per cent in 2011 and 2012, thereby reducing its ratio to GDP by more 
than  2  percentage  points.  Over  the  last  ten  years  expenditure  expanded  at  an  average 
annual rate of 4.6 per cent and rose by nearly 6 percentage points in relation to GDP. Careful 
monitoring of the effects of the package will therefore be needed to ensure the objectives are 
achieved. 
Italy’s  financial  structure  has  many  strong  points.  Household  wealth,  net  of  debt,  is  nearly 
2 times GDP, considering just the financial component, and about 5.5 times GDP, including 
real estate. These levels are among the highest in the euro area, while the household debt 
ratio  is  among  the  lowest  and  that  of  firms  is  below  the  average.  The  net  external  debt 
position of the entire economy can be estimated at 15 per cent of GDP, one of the lowest 
values in the euro area, except for Germany, which has a large credit position.  
The ratio of public debt to GDP declined by 18 percentage points between 1994 and 2007. In 
the last two years of recession it increased by 12 points, to stand at 115.8 per cent. In the 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 5
new  market  conditions  action  had  to  be  taken  even  though  the  budgetary  tightening 
adversely affects the prospects for economic recovery in the short term. 
Competitiveness and growth 
In the Monetary Union stagnation, unemployment and, in the long run, budgetary strains are 
the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  loss  of  competitiveness.  The  consolidation  of  the  public 
finances needs to be accompanied by the revival of growth.  
In the ten years preceding the crisis hourly productivity rose by 3 per cent in Italy, by 14 per 
cent in the euro area. In the same years the economy grew by 15 per cent in Italy, as against 
25  per  cent  in  the  euro  area.  Italy’s  employment  rate  remains  low,  57  per  cent  in  2009, 
7 percentage points less than in the euro area as a whole. The gap is wider for the young 
and reaches 12 points for women. 
On many other occasions we have addressed the question of structural reforms. The crisis 
makes them all the more urgent: the fall in GDP increases the burden of financing the public 
administration;  the  costs  imposed  by  tax  evasion  and  corruption  become  even  more 
unsustainable; stagnation destroys human capital, especially among the young. 
The  management  of  turnover  in  the  public  sector  and  the  cuts  in  the  discretionary 
expenditure  of  government  departments  recently  decided  by  the  Council  of  Ministers  must 
provide  the  opportunity  to  rethink  the  scope  and  structure  of  government,  rationalize 
resource allocation and reduce waste and duplication between different entities and levels of 
government.  A  reform  plan  covering  the  entire  public  sector  is  needed,  to  accompany  the 
measures already adopted to raise the productivity of the public administration by evaluating 
the performance of managers and the results of individual units. 
Fiscal federalism must enhance efficiency in the use of resources. Only a strong budgetary 
constraint,  together  with  the  necessary  taxing  power,  can  make  the  fiscal  cost  of  each 
decision transparent and cost centres accountable. The specification of the standard costs 
and financial needs with which central government transfers will be commensurate, with the 
necessary solidarity component, will need to refer to best practices. Each entity will have to 
balance  its  budget,  net  of  investment  expenditure,  as  laid  down  in  Article  119  of  the 
Constitution. The total amount of local investment expenditure must be fixed for a multi-year 
period, in accordance with the objectives for general government net borrowing. Continuing 
along the lines laid down for the regions with healthcare deficits, the system of constraints 
and disincentives for non-compliant entities will need to be strengthened. 
But the budgetary rules are not sufficient to guarantee efficient use of resources. Clear and 
comparable  information  is  needed  on  the  quality  of  the  services  provided  by  the  various 
entities  so  that  single  administrations  can  locate  the  weak  points  in  their  own  systems, 
citizens can evaluate the performance of administrators, and the State can apply sanctions, 
including the power to take over the management of entities that fail to guarantee essential 
service  levels.  Costs  and  results  vary  enormously  between  entities  providing  the  same 
services;  this  indicates  that  there  is  substantial  scope  for  improvement.  But  today  we  are 
beginning to get the data needed for evaluation and concrete action.  
A number of initiatives are moving in this direction. The Ministry of Health has drawn up an 
experimental set of indicators for healthcare quality, efficiency and appropriateness, both at 
regional  level  and  for  individual  hospitals  or  health  units.  The  Ministry  of  Education  has 
introduced  standardized  tests  into  student  evaluations  to  increase  the  comparability  of  the 
marks  awarded  and  their  weight  in  evaluating  teaching  effectiveness. The  High  Council  of 
the Judiciary has identified a methodology to define standard workloads for judges as a tool 
for assessing their productivity. 
Tax evasion is a brake on growth because it imposes higher taxes on those who do pay; it 
reduces the resources for social policies and obstructs interventions in favour of low-income 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2010
persons. The tax wedge on labour is about 5 points higher than the average for the other 
euro-area countries; the tax rate on low labour incomes and the corporate tax rate, including 
the regional tax on productive activities, are 6 points higher. Istat estimates that the shadow 
economy amounts to 16 per cent of GDP. Comparing national accounts data with tax returns, 
it  can  be  estimated  that  between  2005  and  2008  30  per  cent  of  the  VAT  tax  base  was 
evaded: in terms of tax receipts, this is more than €30 billion a year, 2 points of GDP.  
The Government has introduced measures to combat tax evasion. The immediate objective 
is to contain the deficit, but in the medium term the reduction of evasion must be a lever for 
growth by allowing tax rates to be lowered; the connection between the two must be made 
visible to taxpayers.  
Corrupt dealing between private agents and general government, in some cases encouraged 
by  organized  crime,  is  widespread.  In  the  international  rankings  that  are  compiled 
periodically,  Italy  stands  further  and  further  down  on  the  list.  Empirical  studies  show  that 
corruption  impedes  economic  growth.  There  is  a  close  connection  between  the  density  of 
organized crime and the level of development: in the three regions in the South where 75 per 
cent of Italy’s organized crime is concentrated, per capita value added in the private sector is 
only 45 per cent of that in the Centre and North.  
Action  to  prevent  and  combat  money  laundering  continues.  The  Financial  Intelligence  Unit 
and  the  Bank’s  Supervision  Departments  have  intensified  cooperation  with  the  judicial 
authorities  and  the  law  enforcement  forces,  especially  in  cases  where  there  is  a  close 
connection with criminal investigations. 
The  crisis  has  exacerbated  the  difficulties  of  young  people  in  the  labour  market.  In  the  
20–34 age group, the unemployment rate reached 13 per cent on average in 2009. The fall 
in the employment rate of younger workers with respect to 2008 was almost seven times that 
of  their  older  counterparts.  This  was  due  both  to  the  more  widespread  use  of  fixed-term 
contracts for young people and to a contraction of 20 per cent in new hiring. For some time 
now, the gap in employment conditions between the new generations and their predecessors 
has been widening to the disadvantage of the former. Entry-level wages have stagnated for 
fifteen years in real terms.  
A  slow  recovery  increases  the  likelihood  of  persistent  unemployment.  This  condition, 
particularly at the start of one’s working life, tends to be linked to permanently lower earnings 
later on. 
The  reform  of  the  labour  market  must  be  completed,  overcoming  segmentation  and 
stimulating participation.  
Young people alone cannot cope with the growing burden of an ageing population. Nor will 
the contribution of foreign workers suffice. Only 36 per cent of Italians aged between 55 and 
64  are  in  employment,  against  a  European  average  of  46  per  cent,  and  56  per  cent  in 
Germany.  
In Italy in the last thirty years, against a lengthening of more than five years in life expectancy 
at age 60, the average age at retirement in the private sector is estimated to have risen by 
about two years to around 61. Working life will have to be extended, partly to guarantee an 
adequate standard of living to the older people of tomorrow. The countries in Europe with the 
highest  employment  rate  in  the  55–64  age  group  are  also  those  with  the  highest  youth 
employment. 
In  2009  the  Government  took  an  important  step  by  automatically  establishing  a  link,  from 
2015, between the minimum retirement age and changes in life expectancy; a regulation now 
being drafted will implement this provision. Actions on the so-called retirement “windows” and 
on regulations for women employed in the public sector move in the same direction. INPS 
has  launched  initiatives  to  give  better  information  to  workers  about  their  personal  pension 
position.  The  process  of  pension  system  reform  could  be  completed  by  measures  that 
gradually  standardize  the  retirement  age  among  different  groups  of  workers,  speed  up 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 7
adjustments to the transformation coefficients of the contributions-based system, and provide 
greater retirement flexibility. 
Banks, supervision 
Lending  to  firms  declined  by  3.7  per  cent  on  an  annual  basis  between  September  and 
December 2009. In 2010 the pace of the contraction eased and in the three months ending in 
April came to 1 per cent. The sharpest decline has been in northern Italy, where industrial 
activity is most intensive; lending to firms in the South has begun to grow again. Credit to 
households has continued to expand, albeit slowly. 
Last year’s credit contraction largely reflected the weakness of demand for loans, but there 
were also supply-side tensions. According to the Eurosystem’s Bank Lending Survey, these 
gradually eased from mid-2009 onwards. We recently conducted the survey at regional level, 
expanding the sample; the results indicate improving supply conditions in the early months of 
this year in the North-West and the South. 
In Italy, as in other countries, the quality of bank loans deteriorates during recession. In 2009 
the  loan  losses  of  our  five  largest  banking  groups  absorbed  almost  70  per  cent  of  their 
operating results; their profits fell by over a fifth. The trend, though moderating in early 2010, 
has  continued  and  is  affecting  smaller  lenders  too,  who  were  less  badly  hit  in  the  early 
stages of the crisis.  
With  the  onset  of  the  Greek  crisis,  acute  liquidity  strains  in  the  interbank  market  have 
returned after subsiding last year. Transactions are mostly very short term. There is a large 
share  of  collateralized  contracts,  a  tendency  to  deal  with  domestic  counterparties  and 
frequent  recourse  to  bilateral  trades.  Banks  must  be  prepared  to  face  recurrent  and 
protracted periods of abnormal market conditions. 
As more and more public and private issuers have turned to the markets, in 2011 a flurry of 
bank bonds are due to mature for very large amounts; banks must continue to strengthen 
their sources of fund-raising, including by making greater use of covered bonds. 
Although 2009 was a year of reduced profits, Italian banks made encouraging progress in 
strengthening their capital base. Contributions came from market issues, asset divestments, 
dividend restraint, and injections of public capital. By March of this year the core tier 1 ratio of 
the five largest Italian banking groups had risen to 7.6 per cent, from 5.8 per cent at the end 
of 2008. 
Our  stress  tests  show  that  even  under  adverse  scenarios  in  line  with  those  used  in 
comparable  international  exercises,  such  as  GDP  growth  3  points  lower  than  current 
estimates in 2010–11, compliance with the minimum regulatory requirements and financial 
stability would not be at risk in Italy.  
However, in the face of persistent market volatility and uncertainty over the macroeconomic 
outlook, capital strengthening must continue.  
Preparations for the new international standards must be made. The analysis of the overall 
effects that the new capital and liquidity rules will have on Italian banks is still under way. The 
parameters  must  be  defined;  the  specific  regulatory  provisions  will  be  applied  flexibly  and 
with  a  calendar  permitting  a  smooth  and  gradual  transition.  Capital  instruments  already 
issued based on the old rules will continue to count towards the requirement for a long time 
(grandfathering). 
Supervisory  action  in  Italy  has  several  distinctive  features.  It  does  not  stop  at  establishing 
general prudential principles, leaving their interpretation up to the market. Nor does it limit 
itself to verifying compliance with the rules. Instead, it weighs intermediaries’ strategies and 
management;  without  interfering 
that  governance, 
organization, operating processes and control systems are consistent with the risks.  
in  business  decisions, 
it  verifies 
8 
 BIS Review 74/2010
Our off-site controls are supplemented by a high level of on-site supervision. In 2009 there 
were  over  200  inspections  of  banks  and  other  intermediaries.  Targeted  checks  increased 
substantially. In the largest banking groups the presence of inspectors is continuous and, in 
cooperation  with  the  other  European  authorities,  is  being  extended  to  their  cross-border 
operations.  
This  system  of  controls,  together  with  particularly  prudent  regulations,  proved  vital  in 
preserving banks’ stability during the crisis.  
The role of foundations as shareholders in banks cannot be other than that established by 
law:  investors  whose  sole  objective  resides  in  the  economic  value  of  the  investment.  The 
foundations,  in  their  autonomy,  will  be  the  first  to  safeguard  the  independence  of 
management. 
Major banks are also judged by how they are organized locally: maintaining and capitalizing 
on  relations  with  the  local  economy  means  basing  customer  assessments  on  knowledge 
accumulated over the years, which is much more reliable than that inferable from quantitative 
models; it means knowing how to discern a creditworthy firm even when the data are not in 
its favour; it means knowing your business as a banker. The response of large banks to local 
needs,  consistent  with  sound  and  prudent  management,  must  be  compatible  with  global 
strategies and vision. 
Thorough  supervisory  screening  of  the  requirements  of  officers  of  banks  and  other 
intermediaries  is  a  fundamental  instrument  of  control,  a  guarantee  of  stability.  So  is  the 
possibility of removing those responsible for mismanagement or highly risky conduct before 
the  situation  precipitates,  necessitating  crisis  measures  against  the  bank  as  such.  An 
extension  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory  powers  in  this  direction  would  be  welcome; 
supervisory  authorities  in  major  economies  already  have  such  powers.  The  Committee  of 
European  Banking  Supervisors  has  proposed  it  and  the  European  Commission  is 
considering its adoption at Community level.  
Customer  protection  is  now  a  supervisory  objective  in  itself.  We  carefully  follow  the 
implementation  of  our  rules  on  the  transparency  of  banking  and  financial  services  and  on 
correctness in relations between intermediaries and customers. 
The Banking and Financial Arbiter, in operation since October, is an independent body that 
provides  customers  with  rapid  responses  in  disputes  with  their  bank.  The  majority  of  the 
560 decisions  taken  to  date  –  on  current  account  and  consumer  credit  charges,  mortgage 
portability and payment card irregularities – have found in favour of the customers. 
 The  crisis  has  reminded  us,  brutally,  of  the  importance  of  joint  action,  common  objectives 
and policies, shared sacrifices. This lesson goes for the world, for Europe and for Italy.  
The reform of the rules governing finance transcends national borders. It requires consensus 
among  a  large  number  of  different  jurisdictions.  But  there  is  no  alternative:  a  globally 
integrated  financial  services  industry  requires  regulation  that  is  universal,  at  least  in  its 
fundamental  principles.  The  harsh  experience  of  the  last  few  years  must  not  be  forgotten. 
Excessive  risks  exact  an  extremely  high  price  from  the  community.  Strengthening  the 
defences  of  the  system  is  indispensable,  within  each  country  and  at  international  level. 
Banking will be less profitable, but also less risky. All will benefit. I am certain that the political 
project launched by the G20 will succeed.  
The  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  sounder  than  other  currency  areas.  Public  budgets  and  the 
external  accounts  are  more  balanced.  But  the  attack  on  it  now  under  way  is  not  directed 
against the area as a whole. Exploiting the opportunity offered by the unfinished state of the 
project, it isolates the weakest members. There is but one answer: the euro lives with all its 
members, large and small, strong and weak. If in the past it was an illusion to think that the 
currency  alone  could  “make”  Europe,  today  the  only  course  of  action  is  to  reinforce  the 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 9
construction of Europe: in the political sphere, with a more active government of the Union; in 
budgetary  discipline  and  in  progress  on  structural  reform,  with  a  new  stability  and  growth 
pact that is at once broader and more binding. 
Two  years  ago  I  devoted  a  good  part  of  my  concluding  remarks  to  the  persistent  gap 
between the North and South of Italy. And it was with that examination that, in practice, the 
Bank of Italy began the celebration of Italy’s 150 years of national unity. We are convinced 
that national unity must be honoured by strengthening it, ensuring its vitality and adapting it 
to a new era. This is not the first time in its history that Italy has been faced with an arduous 
collective challenge. It has faced and overcome many in the past century and a half. Let me 
mention two examples. 
The greatest challenge of all, in terms of structural reforms, arose when Italy, immediately 
after national unity, prepared to participate in the life of Europe with a population that was 
75 per cent illiterate, against 30 per cent in the United Kingdom and 10 per cent in Sweden. 
National political leaders, administrators, teachers, North and South, joined together to fight 
the battle for literacy. In the end we did come up to the level of the rest of Europe, and this 
was one of the factors behind the economic miracle after the Second World War. 
In 1992 we were confronted with a much more severe budget crisis than those facing some 
European countries today. The government of the day presented a financial adjustment plan 
which,  enjoying  national  consensus,  gained  credibility  in  the  markets  with  no  assistance 
either from international institutions or from other countries. The struggle was long drawn out: 
under  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  three  years  on,  spreads  still  exceeded  650  basis 
points.  Yet  the  battle  was  won,  because  the  successive  governments  maintained  fiscal 
discipline: stability had been incorporated into the country’s political culture. 
Today’s battle too – to combine fiscal discipline with the return to growth – must be fought by 
calling on those same values that have enabled us, together, to vanquish the difficulties of 
the  past:  the  capacity  to  act,  equity;  the  desire  to  know,  solidarity.  Let  us  take  up  this 
challenge  in  the  awareness  of  the  weaknesses  that  we  must  overcome  but  also  of  the 
considerable strengths on which we can draw. 
10 
 BIS Review 74/2010
