Budi Mulya: Indonesian economy – recent developments and challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Budi  Mulya,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Oversea-Chinese 
Banking  Corporation  (OCBC)  Global  Treasury  Economic  and  Business  Forum,  Singapore, 
9 July 2010. 
 First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  OCBC  Bank  for  the  invitation  to  join  in  today’s  global 
business community forum.  
The event like what we have today, become more important recently since authorities as well 
as business leaders worldwide, have been faced with one of the most challenging episodes 
post  2008  and  2009  global  crises.  Authorities  are  facing  high  uncertain  environment  and 
have  to  deal  with  more  delicate  policy  dilemmas  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  global 
economic recovery process. Hence, it is always a benefit to exchange view with market and 
business leaders to obtain a more convergence perception with regard to the stage of the 
economy and authority’s policy responds. This is because communication, such as through 
dialogue we have today, in particular with regard to the nature, the scope and the objective of 
policies taken by authorities, become more crucial to maintain market confidence and hence, 
to reduce uncertainty. 
Market confidence poses an important factor to ensure the efficacy of various policies taken 
by  authorities.  It  could  be  obtained  when  the  rationality  of  the  policies  taken  are  well 
understood as intended. Hence, it will gain in a convinced behavior with regard to the policy 
implementation.  
Further, maintaining market confidence is even more imperative in the aftermath of the onset 
of Euro zone crisis early this year, where coordination among authorities globally has been at 
the  most  challenging  stage.  This  is  because  country  specific  factor,  including  political 
involvement,  become  increasingly  materialize.  Yet,  from  various  international  coordination 
forums, such as the latest G-20 meeting in Toronto last month, we all observe that the nation 
leaders’  awareness  with  regard  of  policy  coordination  is  held  firmly.  The  agreement  to 
together pursue a sustain path of global economic recovery and to achieve a more balance 
global growth as reflected in “growth friendly fiscal consolidation plans”, is a strong evidence 
to that. 
One thing that I would like to highlight, with regard to the communication aspect as I have 
mentioned,  is  that  the  demand  for  policy  clarity  and  transparency  –  without  delay  –  is 
increasing, including the demand for very details macro economic data or statistic. This fact 
has also been one of Bank Indonesia’s concerns to always improve the policy transparency 
communication. 
With that background I would like to briefly share what Indonesia has been through and the 
macroeconomic strategy to ensure the sustainability of Indonesia’s economic performance in 
a very challenging and still fragile global economy and financial market environment. 
Recent economic development 
I  will  start  my  brief  description  on  the  development  of  the  Indonesian  economy  by 
emphasizing  that  what  Indonesia  has  been  through  and  achieved,  particularly  during  the 
most recent global turmoil, is mostly as a result of years of “post 1998 crisis” transformation 
process.  Indonesia  is  now  transformed  into  one  of  the  world  largest  democratic  and 
structurally different with what it was a decade ago. This is as a result of more than ten years 
of  consolidation  and  dynamic  transition  in  almost  all sectors.  The  extensive  transformation 
measures  that  became  a  continuing  agenda  with  full  commitment,  despite  its  challenging 
process,  have  provided  a  more  resilience  foundation  into  the  Indonesian  economic 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 1
development.  Of  course,  there  are  still  many  agendas  to  be  executed  to  improve  and  to 
increase the efficiency of the whole business and economic activities. But, the progress so 
far, particularly the consistent prudent practice of macroeconomic management, has proven 
to contribute to shelter the domestic economy from further adverse impact of the most recent 
global crisis.  
Among few countries in the region, Indonesia was still experiencing a positive growth of 6.0% 
in  2008  and  4.5%  in  2009.  While,  in  the  first  half  of  2010,  supported  by  a  better  than 
expected  global  the  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  grow  at  6%,  which  is  higher  than 
previously estimated of 5.7%. In 2010, the Indonesian economy is expected to grow at 6% 
and  slightly  higher  in  2011  and  2012.  These  were  mainly  sustained  by  high  and  inclusive 
growth  of  domestic  demand,  in  particular  consumption.  Yet,  export  performance  and 
investment has also showed a slight increase and expected to sustain their upward trend. 
Inflation has also moderated at 5.05 % (year-on-year) in June 2010, held by adequate supply 
responses and rupiah exchange rate appreciation, despite that there was a hike in volatile 
price  component.  Hence,  the  June  inflation  is  slightly  higher  than  previously  estimated. 
However  the  recent  increase  of  the  volatile  food  price  is  expected  to  be  temporary  and 
inflation is expected to be maintained within target range of 5% +/– 1% in 2010 and 2011. 
The core inflation figure is also supportive to Bank Indonesia inflation assessment. To this 
respect,  the  latest  monetary  policy  decision  to  keep  BI  Rate  at  6.50%,  is  considered  as 
adequate  to  ensure  the  inflation  expectation  within  the  target  range  and  supportive  to 
maintain the growth momentum, as well as to encourage bank lending. 
Meanwhile, the balance of payment figure shows a strong indication of improvement, brought 
about by strong domestic economic fundamental and conducive global economy. The current 
account balance in the second quarter this year to be higher than previously estimated and 
expected  to  be  around  USD  1.7  billion  surplus.  While,  overall  balance  surplus  will  also 
improve  to  be  at  around  USD  4.3  billion,  higher  than  previous  estimation.  These 
developments have contributed to the increase of the foreign exchange reserve which now 
amounted to USD 76.3 billion. The current foreign exchange reserve level is equivalent to 
approximately 7.4 months of imported good, higher than what is observed in the peer group 
countries. 
Those  progresses  have  contributed  to  the  IDR,  which  continue  in  an  appreciation  trend, 
despite  some  corrections  in  May  with  moderate  volatility  caused  by  market  concern  with 
regards to the rescue package in Euro zone. Since early this year, IDR has been appreciated 
at around 4% with a lower volatility in the second quarter this year. On this respect, Bank 
Indonesia’s policy, consistent with the free floating system, is to ensure that IDR fluctuates in 
line  with  the  economic  fundamental  and  to  avoid  excessive  volatility.  The  IDR  movement 
recently  is  considered  still  adequate  into  external  sector  while  supportive  into  anchoring 
inflation expectation. 
In addition, I would like to convince you that in dealing with the mounting recent debate on 
short  term  capital  flows  which  always  have  such  a  “double  edge  sword”  into  small  open 
economy  like  Indonesia,  the  approach  taken  is  consistent  with  the  free  capital  mobility 
regime  as  stated  in  the  foreign  capital  system  law  (The  Law  No.24/1999).  However,  to 
prevent  from  the  negative  impact  of  “hot  money”  flows,  Bank  Indonesia  emphasize  on  the 
banking  prudential  and  financial  market  deepening  measures,  as  well  as  directed  to 
encourage longer term investment. The six measures as in the latest Bank Indonesia’s policy 
package launched at June this year is also in view of this balance approach. 
Further, the banking industry and the domestic financial market also show a continued sound 
performance  and  maintained  in  well  capitalized  condition.  In  general,  domestic  financial 
market  has  recovered  well  from  pressures  observed  during  the  peak  of  the  crisis,  which 
mainly  triggered  by  liquidity  scarcity  perception  and  impact  of  flight  to  safety  panic 
phenomenon.  All  money  market  indicators  have  recently  returned  to  their  normal  pattern. 
The banking intermediation has also been showing an improvement. In the first half of this 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2010
year, bank lending grew at around 19% and for 2010 is expected to grow at 22%–24% range 
which will ensure the economic growth. While non-performing loans (NPL) is well maintained 
at low around 3% (gross) and capital adequacy ratio (CAR) in average at level of 18%. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  the  government  also  showed  a  strong  consistent  effort  in  budget 
management efficiency and discipline. The fiscal deficit keeps low level of below 3% of GDP, 
which  this  year  is  expected  to  be  2.1%,  and  will  be  in  a  declining  trend  for  years  ahead. 
While,  at  the  same  time  various  measures  are  taken  to  continually  improve  its  spending 
mechanism. Prudent fiscal policy has resulted in a significant decline in the debt to GDP ratio 
from 77% in 2000 to at below 30% recently. 
The  economic  performance  I  have  just  described  is  an  evidence  that  consistent  prudent 
macroeconomic  policies  taken  by  the  Indonesian  authorities,  as  part  of  the  more  than  a 
decade  transformation  process  within  the  very  dynamic  political  democratic  development, 
has provided a stronger foundation to sustain the further economic development. 
Those  achievements  has  partly  also  been  reflected  in  a  better  investor  risk  perception  as 
shown  in  the  decline  of  credit  default  swap  (CDS)  spread,  which  is  now  stable  at  around 
180 bps  for  5  years  CDS,  and  recent  sovereign  rating  improvement  from  major  rating 
agencies.  Yet,  with  regard  to  the  later,  I  believe  that  rating  agencies  still  tend  to  be  too 
conservative in assessing Indonesia’s risk profile. Hence, it is not yet fully reflects the result 
of the significant transformation progress that Indonesia have been through within more than 
a decade, while they still more in “traumatic” view relate to the 1998 crisis. 
Outlook and challenge ahead 
We are quite confident that the Indonesian economy is on track. The economy will move on a 
faster pace compare with our previous belief and will be around 7% growth within the next 
couple of years, given the already proven domestic resilience so far. Economic growth will 
also  be  boosted  by  the  upturn  on  export  and  investment.  Improving  external  demand  and 
better  risk  perception  toward  domestic  fundamental  economy  will  also  keep  the  current 
account  and  financial  account  in  a  good  shape,  and  contribute  to  the  increase  of  foreign 
exchange reserve. 
However, there is of course a risk that has to be taken into account and monitored closely 
with regard to global financial market and economic development. Despite the still ongoing 
Euro zone crisis, in particular with respect to its banking sector and global financial market is 
also still fragile, global economy has shown a quite significant improvement. Yet, we expect 
that the risk will be moderate given strong world leaders commitment as I have previously 
mentioned. 
One  thing  that  also  ensures  the  prospect  of  domestic  economy  is  a  continuous  strong 
commitment  of 
in 
transportation and energy sectors, and reform measures in investment climate. With respect 
to  the  later,  it  is  important  for  us  to  note  that  the  public  check  and  balance  mechanism  in 
ensuring  more  efficient  bureaucracy  and  improving  business  climate,  has  been  increasing 
significantly compare to a decade ago. 
While on inflation, we are quite confident to maintain within the target range of 5% +/– 1% up 
to  2011  and  expect  a  declining  trend  ahead.  In  this  regard,  monetary  policy  will  be 
consistently  directed  toward  achieving  low  and  stable  inflation  set  by  the  Government.  To 
achieve this low and stable inflation, which is now become more a common concerns, the 
Government  and  Bank  Indonesia  have  taken  measures  to  strengthen  relevant  policy 
coordination to better monitor and control inflation. 
I would like to convince you that our agenda is priorities on how to ensure that the economy 
always  move  on  the  right  track,  despite  some  risk  factors  to  take  into  account  as  I  have 
mentioned above. Also, I am optimistic in our strong commitment to implement, step by step, 
infrastructure  projects,  especially 
the  Government 
implement 
to 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 3
some  agendas  to  improve  the  environment  to  facilitate  a  sustainable  growth  and  a  better 
quality of economic development. 
Before  I  conclude,  I  would  like  to  also  share  that  with  regard  to  the  global  agenda  on  the 
financial sector reform and strengthening banking industry capital and risk management, as 
well  as  to  encourage  market  disclosure  and  the  adoption  of  a  more  convergence 
international accounting standard, Indonesia as a member of G-20 countries, also take step 
in the same spirit. Yet, the implementation will of course consider the stage and the structure 
of  domestic  financial  market  and  banking  industry.  This  is  as  partly  can  be  observed  in 
Indonesia participation in financial sector assessment program (FSAP).  
To conclude, I am optimistic into the prospect and the direction of the Indonesian economy 
ahead. I do hope that you will share the same optimistic view. 
Thank you. 
References 
Bank Indonesia, “Economic Report on Indonesia 2009”. Available at www.bi.go.id. 
Bank  Indonesia,  “Press  Release  No.12/31/PSHM/Humas,  5  July  2010”.  Available  at 
www.bi.go.id. 
Bank  Indonesia,  “Press  Release  No.12/28/PSHM/humas,  16  June  2010”.  Available  at 
www.bi.go.id. 
Bank  for  International  Statements  (BIS),  “General  Manager’s  statement”.  Statement  by 
Mr. Jaime  Caruana,  General  Manager  of  the  BIS,  at  the  BIS  press  conference  on  the 
occasion of the Bank’s Annual General Meeting, Basel, 28 June 2010. www.bis.org.  
G-20, “The G-20 Toronto Summit Declaration”, June 26–27, 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2010
