George A Provopoulos: The Greek economic crisis and the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Scholars 
Association of the Alexander S Onassis Public Benefit Foundation International Conference, 
Athens, 21 June 2010. 
 It is a great pleasure to take part in this conference on the “Financial and Economic Crisis” 
organised  by  the  Scholars  Association  of  the  Onassis  Foundation.  Aristotle  Onassis,  the 
originator of this foundation, was, among other things, a creative thinker and a philanthropist. 
He arrived in Greece in the early 1920s as a refugee and, through wise decision-making and 
hard work, became an internationally-prominent entrepreneur. 
However,  he  never  forgot  his  origins  and,  as  exemplified  by  this  foundation,  passed  on  to 
future generations the ability to advance scientific and artistic knowledge. 
My presentation will deal with the origins of the present crisis in Europe and the lessons of 
the crisis for Europe’s single currency, the euro. Greece is at the epicentre of the crisis; my 
presentation will, therefore, highlight the Greek roots of the crisis. 
The origins 
To  provide  some  perspective  to  the  present  situation,  let  us  look  back  just  a  year.  At  that 
time,  conferences  were  being  held  throughout  Europe  celebrating  the  tenth  anniversary  of 
the euro. Academic economists were writing articles speculating that the euro was poised to 
challenge  the  U.S.  dollar  as  the  leading  international  currency.  What  a  difference  a  year 
makes! Today, analysts are writing about a possible break-up of the euro zone, a notion that, 
as I will explain, is absurd. Meanwhile, the euro has fallen sharply against the dollar since the 
beginning of this year, and the speculation that the euro will soon replace the dollar as the 
leading international currency has subsided. 
How did we come so far so fast? How could Greece, a country with only about 2 ½ per cent 
of euro-area GDP, cause tremors of such magnitude that they have shaken the foundations 
of Europe’s single currency? To answer these questions, we need to consider the basis upon 
which monetary union in Europe has been built. 
The inception of the euro zone on January 1, 1999 marked a world premiere. For the first 
time  in  history,  sovereign  states  –  eleven  at  that  time  –  abandoned  their  own  national 
currencies in favor of a common currency, the euro, and surrendered their monetary-policy 
sovereignty  to  a  newly-created,  supranational  institution,  the  European  Central  Bank.  All 
previous monetary unions among sovereign states involved at least an element of coercion. 
For example, the fifteen countries that comprised the former Soviet Union had no choice but 
to use the rouble as their currency. In the case of the euro zone, in contrast, the members 
willingly gave up their national currencies for the euro. 
The euro was adopted because a monetary union confers a number of important advantages 
on participating countries. 
 
For  countries  with  histories  of  high  inflation,  such  as  Greece,  it  lowers  inflation 
expectations  and,  therefore,  nominal  interest  rates.  With  lower  nominal  interest 
rates,  the  cost  of  servicing  public-sector  debt  is  reduced,  facilitating  fiscal 
adjustment and freeing resources for other uses.  
With low inflation, economic horizons lengthen, encouraging borrowing and lending 
at longer maturities. The lengthening of horizons and the reduction in interest rates 
stimulate private investment and risk-taking, fostering economic growth.  
 BIS Review 87/2010 
 1
     For  all  participating  countries,  it  does  away  with  the  possibility  of  competitive 
devaluations, thus boosting intra-area trade.  
It  introduces  a  common  measure  of  value  across  countries,  increasing  price 
transparency and, therefore, competition.  
It  eliminates  the  costs  of  converting  currencies,  thereby  facilitating  trade  and 
investment.  
It  eliminates  exchange-rate  fluctuations  among  participating  countries,  thereby 
reducing risk premia.  
It  eliminates  the  need  of  foreign-exchange  reserves  for  intra-area  transactions, 
thereby reducing the cost of conducting business. 
These advantages of a common currency exist so long as the central bank of the monetary 
union delivers price stability and is credible. In the case of the euro zone, the ECB quickly 
established its anti-inflation credentials and became credible. 
So  much  for  the  benefits  of  the  euro.  What  about  the  costs?  In  joining  the  euro  area,  a 
country gives up two potential tools to adjust the domestic economy in the event of a country-
specific shock. First, it loses the ability to set its own domestic monetary policy. Second, it 
loses the ability to change the nominal exchange rate of its currency. To compensate for the 
loss of these two potential tools, a country should possess the following: 
 
relatively-low fiscal imbalances, so that fiscal policy can be used counter-cyclically in 
case a country-specific shock occurs, and  
flexible labour and product markets, so that the country can be competitive without 
having to rely on changes in the exchange rate of a domestic currency to achieve 
and/or maintain competitiveness. 
 The  need  of  low  fiscal  imbalances  and  flexible  labour  and  product  markets  is  especially 
important  in  the  euro  area.  Unlike  the  United  States,  for  example,  the  euro  area  does  not 
have a central fiscal authority that can redistribute fiscal resources from a low-unemployment 
region to a high-unemployment region to reduce the effects of asymmetric shocks. Moreover, 
because  of  language  and  cultural  differences  among  European  countries,  labour  is  less 
mobile among euro-area countries than it is among regions of the United States. For these 
reasons, it is all-the-more important to have adjustment mechanisms in place at the national 
level in the euro zone. Low fiscal imbalances and flexible product and labour markets provide 
mechanisms to smooth the adjustment to shocks. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  these  advantages  and  constraints  of  a  common  currency,  let  me 
describe some salient features of the Greek economy since it became the twelfth member of 
the euro area on January 1, 2001. 
The Greek economy: 2001–2009 
Entry into the euro area provided Greece with an improved, stability-oriented environment. 
The ECB was – and is – the guardian of monetary stability. The Stability and Growth Pact 
was supposed to help ensure fiscal discipline. These changes in the economic environment 
were  crucial  benefits  for  a  country  that  had  experienced  persistent  budget  deficits,  and 
inflation rates that were at double-digit levels from the early-1980s until the mid-1990s. 
Not surprisingly, the new environment, especially the low interest rates, contributed to robust 
real growth rates. From 2001 through 2008, real GDP rose by an average of 3.9 per cent per 
year  –  the  second-highest  growth  rate  (after  Ireland)  in  the  euro  zone  –  underpinned  by 
household  spending  for  consumption,  housing  investment,  and  business  investment. 
Inflation,  which  averaged  almost  ten  per  cent  in  the  decade  prior  to  euro  area  entry, 
averaged only 3.4 per cent over the period 2001 through 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2010
On the surface, therefore, the Greek economy appeared to have entered a new era marked 
by  robust  growth  and  low  inflation.  Beneath  the  surface,  however,  long-standing  problems 
were continuing. 
 
Fiscal policy was pro-cyclical throughout the period 2001 through 2009, with deficits 
consistently exceeding the Stability Pact’s limit of 3 per cent by wide margins and no 
durable progress in lowering the public debt-to-GDP ratio.  
Expansionary  fiscal  policy  was  mainly  expenditure-driven,  leading  to  a  rise  in  the 
share  of  government  spending;  in  the  three  years,  2006  to  2009,  the  share  of 
government spending increased from 43 per cent of GDP to 50 per cent.  
Although  inflation  in  Greece  during  2001  through  2009  was  low  by  the  country’s 
historical  standards,  inflation  was  relatively-high  by  euro-area  standards.  Inflation 
was, on average, more than one percentage point higher per year than in the rest of 
the  euro  area.  Wage  increases,  adjusted  for  productivity  changes,  also  exceeded 
the average increases in the rest of the euro area.  
With  both  prices  and  wages  growing  at  relatively  high  rates,  competitiveness 
declined.  In  the  period  2001  through  2009,  competitiveness,  as  measured  by 
consumer prices, declined by almost twenty per cent; as measured by unit labour 
costs, competitiveness declined by over 25 per cent.  
With  relatively  high  real  growth  rates  and  declining  competitiveness,  the  current-
account deficit, which already had topped 7 per cent of GDP in 2001, rose to about 
14 ½ per cent of GDP in both 2007 and 2008. 
    The  large  and  growing  fiscal  and  external  imbalances  were  not  sustainable.  On  various 
occasions, including the publication of our Annual Reports and our bi-annual Monetary Policy 
Reports, during the past several years the Bank of Greece has stressed the unsustainability 
of these imbalances and the need of urgent policy adjustments. Unfortunately, our calls for 
actions  were  not  heeded.  The  present  financial  crisis  is  the  outcome  of  the  lack  of  policy 
responses to the imbalances. 
The crisis in the Greek economy 
The  present  financial  crisis  marks  a  third  stage  of  the  crisis  that  erupted  in  August  2007, 
following the collapse of the US subprime mortgage market, and escalated with the demise 
of  Lehman’s  Brothers  thirteen  months  later.  Yet,  during  the  first  two  years  of  the  global 
financial  crisis,  the  Greek  economy  escaped  relatively  unscathed.  There  were  few,  if  any, 
forewarnings that the Greek economy would become the object of the speculators’ attention. 
The spread between Greek and German sovereign ten-year bonds, a key indicator of relative 
risk  as  perceived  by  credit  markets,  hovered  around  130  basis  points  during  the  period 
August through October 2009. Earlier in the year, at the height of the Lehman’s phase of the 
crisis,  spreads  had  climbed  to  over  300  basis  points.  That  earlier  widening  of  spreads 
occurred despite the fact that markets were expecting a fiscal deficit of less than 4 per cent 
of  GDP  and  a  debt-to-GDP  level  of  only  about  96  per  cent  of  GDP,  figures  that  would  be 
repeatedly revised upward during the remainder of the year. 
In  the  fall  of  2009,  two  developments  combined  to  disrupt  the  relative  tranquility  of  Greek 
financial markets. First, in October the newly-elected Greek government announced that the 
2009  fiscal  deficit  would  be  12.7  per  cent  of  GDP,  more  than  double  the  previous 
government’s  projection.  In  turn,  the  12.7  per  cent  figure  would  undergo  further  upward 
revisions, bringing it up to 13.6 per cent of GDP. Second, in November 2009 Dubai World, 
the  conglomerate  owned  by  the  government  of  the  Gulf  emirate,  asked  creditors  for  a 
six-month debt standstill. That news rattled financial markets around the world and led to a 
sharp increase in risk aversion. 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 3
In light of the rapid and sharp worsening of the fiscal situation in Greece, financial markets 
and rating agencies turned their attention to the sustainability of Greece’s fiscal and external 
imbalances. The previously-held notion that membership in the euro area would provide an 
impenetrable barrier against risk was shaken. It became clear that, while such membership 
provides  protection  against  exchange-rate  risk,  it  cannot  provide  protection  against  credit 
risk. 
The subsequent course of events has made global headlines, so I do not need to dwell on 
details. Allow me, however, to highlight the following. 
 
First,  in  contrast  to  the  origins  of  initial  stage  of  the  global  crisis  in  August  2007, 
which  involved  a  crisis  in  the  U.S.  banking  sector  that  spilled  over  to  the  real 
economy, in Greece the problems posed by both the fiscal and external imbalances 
spilled  over  to  the  real  economy.  The  Greek  banking  sector  has  had  sound 
fundamentals as reflected, for example, in high capital-adequacy and Tier 1 ratios.  
Second,  the  crisis  in  Greece  contributed  to  widening  spreads  in  other  euro-area 
countries judged to have large fiscal and/or external imbalances. The spread of the 
crisis to other parts of a geographical area represents a continuation of a process 
observed in other recent crises, including those in Latin America in 1994/95 and in 
Asia in 1997/98.  
Third, the commitment by the Greek government to reduce the fiscal deficit from last 
year’s 13.6 per cent of GDP to 8 per cent this year and below 3 per cent in 2013, 
and  the  110-billion  euro  support  package  agreed  between  the  Greek  government 
and the European Commission, the ECB, and the IMF, are unprecedented in terms 
of  magnitudes.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  government  will  take  whatever  measures 
are  needed  to  attain  its  fiscal  objectives  to  ensure  fiscal  sustainability.  It  will, 
however, take some time to convince the markets of the government’s determination 
to achieve those goals. Decades of fiscal mismanagement and faulty fiscal reporting 
have caused the markets to adopt Saint Thomas’s dictum: to see is to believe.  
Fourth, I am also confident that the government will implement the structural reforms 
and privatisations that are part of the support package. These are needed to reduce 
excessive bureaucracy and rigidities in the labour, product and service markets that 
discourage investments in high-value added sectors. 
   Allow me to say a few words about Greece’s debt situation. Some market analysts are of the 
opinion that Greece’s debt dynamics are unsustainable. They are wrong. They overlook the 
fact  that  a  crucial  element  underlying  the  evolution  of  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  the 
denominator  of  that  ratio,  which  includes  the  growth  of  real  output.  In  this  connection,  the 
combination  of  factors  comprising  the  support  program  –  that  is,  fiscal  discipline,  the 
liberalisation  of  markets,  privatisations,  and  measures  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the 
bureaucracy – will contribute to confidence, decrease the size of the public sector, reduce 
interest-rate  spreads,  and  boost  competitiveness  and  economic  growth.  In  turn,  higher 
growth, along with declining fiscal deficits, will cause a reversal of the rise in the debt-to-GDP 
ratio  observed  in  recent  years.  Moreover,  fiscal  discipline  will  add  to  saving,  thereby 
supporting  private  investment  and  growth  potential.  These  effects  may  not  be  visible 
immediately, but they will materialize and will revitalise the Greek economy. 
Some lessons 
What, then, are the lessons that can be drawn from the crisis? In my view, some of the key 
lessons concern the limits to the use of fiscal policy and are as follows. 
 
First, the view that fiscal policy can be used in a flexible way to smooth the effects of 
shocks in a monetary union has been shown to be overly simplistic. As the case of 
Greece  illustrates,  the  systematic  use  of  fiscal  policy  in  the  past  can  lead  to 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2010
   problems of debt-sustainability, constraining the current use of fiscal policy. I need to 
mention  that  fiscal  expansions  in  many  countries  with  relatively-low  debt  levels  in 
the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  Lehman  crisis  were  successful  in  lessening  the 
impact of the dislocation in their real economies. Even in those countries, however, 
there  is  now  a  need  for  decisive  actions  to  achieve  a  lasting  and  credible 
consolidation of public finances.  
Second,  rather  than  smoothing  the  adjustment  to  shocks,  in  Greece  pro-cyclical 
fiscal policy has been the major source of shocks. It has led to an increase in the 
size of the government sector in the economy, increasing bureaucratic inefficiency 
and crowding-out the traded-goods sector of the economy.  
Third, fiscal transfers in the face of permanent shocks can have the perverse effect 
of locking resources in place, and, thereby, preventing necessary adjustment. The 
remedy  for  non-competitive  areas  of  the  economy  is  not  to  channel  even-larger 
amounts of government spending into those areas but rather to introduce structural 
reforms that improve overall competitiveness by allowing the transfer of resources to 
the more-dynamic sectors of the economy.  
Fourth, as we have seen, a country with large fiscal imbalances that is in a monetary 
union can create negative spillover effects, raising interest rates and increasing the 
cost  of  debt  servicing  for  other  members  of  the  union.  The  credibility  of  the  ECB 
provides  the  potential  of  a  low  interest-rate  environment,  which  can  foster  higher 
growth and employment throughout the euro area. However, as recent events have 
underlined, monetary policy needs to be complemented by responsible fiscal policy 
to maintain such a low-interest-rate environment. 
Conclusions 
As I mentioned at the outset, the euro area has the capacity to deliver enormous advantages 
to its members. To benefit fully from those advantages requires fiscal responsibility and open 
and flexible markets. It also requires a governance structure that will ensure that the Stability 
and Growth Pact fulfills its role as a key pillar of the euro area. 
The  support  package  agreed  between 
the  European 
Commission,  the  ECB  and  the  IMF  provides  the  government  with  a  unique  opportunity  to 
adjust the economy. The package provides a blueprint for sharply reducing fiscal imbalances 
and for the undertaking of structural reforms. It will set-off positive growth dynamics that will, 
among other things, lower the debt-to-GDP ratio. The growth potential of the Greek economy 
is enormous. It is my firm belief that the present crisis will prove to be the catalyst that will 
reshape  the  economy,  making  Greece  a  competitive  and  prosperous  member  of  the  euro 
zone. It is also my firm belief that it will not be long before articles again start talking about 
the euro’s strong position as an international currency. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
the  Greek  government  and 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 5
