Caleb M Fundanga: Equal rights, equal opportunities – progress for all 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Official 
Launch  of  the  Financial  Institutions’  Exhibition  and  Workshop  in  commemoration  of 
International Women’s Day 2010, Lusaka, 5 March 2010.  
 to 
is  an  occasion 
The Deputy Permanent Secretary, Gender and Women in Development, Ms Christine 
Kalamwina; 
The International Labour Organisation Country Director, Mr Gerry Finnegan; 
The Deputy Governor – Administration, Bank of Zambia, Dr Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula; 
Chief Executives and Representatives of Exhibiting Institutions; 
Heads of Non Governmental Organisations; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It  is  my  honour  and  privilege  to  participate  in  the  launch  of  this  important  exhibition  by 
financial institutions in commemoration of the International Women’s Day for 2010 under the 
global theme “Equal Rights, Equal Opportunities: Progress for All.”  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  you  may  be  aware,  the  International  Year  for  Women  was 
declared  by  the  United  Nations  in  1975.  Since  then  many  countries  world  over  celebrate 
International  Women’s  Day  to  recognise  the  achievements  of  women  without  regard  to 
national, ethnic, cultural, economic or political divisions.  
International  Women’s  Day 
look  back  on  past  struggles  and 
accomplishments but even more importantly a time to look ahead to untapped potential and 
opportunities  that  await  future  generations  of  women.  Each  year  on  this  special  day, 
hundreds of International Women’s Day events occur all around the world. The events range 
from  small  random  informal  gatherings  to  large-scale  highly  organised  events  to  celebrate 
women’s advancement while highlighting the need for continued vigilance and action. 
A  good  number  of  Governments  around  the  world,  have  made  commitments  to  promote 
gender  equality,  by  among  other  things,  taking  initiatives  to  integrate  gender  perspectives 
into  national  budgets  or  development  plans  in  order  to  reflect  the  differentiated  needs  of 
women and men. Zambia is no exception.  
In  Zambia,  it  is  recognised  that  the  creation  of  the  Ministry  of  Gender  and  Women  in 
Development, is a deliberate effort by the Government to ensure that the needs of women 
are  addressed.  Through  the  Ministry  we  are  able  to  recognise  the  strides  that  have  been 
made  by  women  in  national  development  and  we  look  ahead  to  the  challenges  that  are 
before us as we strive to achieve our goal of gender equality.  
In  addition,  Zambia  is  a  signatory  to  the  SADC  Declaration  on  Gender  and  Development. 
This declaration calls for the equal representation of women and men in the decision making 
process of member states at all levels. I must concede here that, although we have made 
significant strides as a country in women representation, more still needs to be done. We are 
however encouraged that there are a good number of women with potential and ability to rise 
above any form of challenge. We need to use our national development plans as a platform 
to  achieve  our  Vision  to  be  a  prosperous  middle  income  country  by  2030,  by  equally 
empowering both women and men. Indeed, without the participation of women, who make up 
more than 50% of Zambia’s population, it will not be possible to achieve our Vision 2030.  
Distinguished  Participants,  as  you  are  well  aware,  over  the  last  decade,  Zambia  has 
recorded  positive  economic  growth  averaging  5%–6%  per  annum.  The  macroeconomic 
environment has improved with the achievement of low levels of inflation, a relatively stable 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 1
exchange  rate  as  well  as  reduced  interest  rates.  In  addition,  we  have  seen  increased 
investments  in  the  mining,  construction  and  other  productive  sectors.  This  improved 
environment presents great opportunities for our women to realise their economic potential. 
However, women can only realise their true potential, if they have access to education and 
play a full role in the decision-making processes at all levels of society.  
fact, in the developmental process, women often take centre stage in the running of small 
and medium-scale enterprises ranging from agriculture, mining and tourism to manufacturing 
as  well  as  cross  border  trading.  However,  in  order  to  grow  these  businesses,  access  to 
affordable financing is pertinent. The role played by the various players in the financial sector 
can,  therefore,  not  be  over-emphasized  as  businesses  depend  on  a  safe  place  to  save 
money, maintain working capital and also access loan facilities.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the 2005 FinScope Survey conducted under the Financial Sector 
Development Plan (FSDP) confirmed that levels of access to financial services in Zambia are 
extremely low. Only one third of Zambia’s adult population was reported to have had access 
to a financial service or product. Further, fewer than 15% of adult Zambians were reported to 
have access to commercial banks. The Survey further indicated that only 11.6% of women 
are banked compared to 17.5% of banked men whilst 82% of women have never had a bank 
account compared to 73% for men.  
A  follow  on  update  survey  was  undertaken  in  2009  and  the  results  are  expected  to  be 
launched during the second quarter of 2010. However, preliminary analysis indicates that the 
levels of access still remain low. This is no doubt an indication that more needs to be done to 
increase access to financial services.  
On its part, the Bank of Zambia has incorporated the promotion of financial inclusion as one 
of  its  strategic  objectives  for  the  2008–2011  Strategic  Plan.  We  believe  that  increased 
extension of financial services to ordinary citizens and small business enterprises will play a 
vital role in poverty reduction and economic growth. Further, by maintaining low inflation and 
promoting a safe and stable financial system, the Bank ensures that people’s incomes are 
safeguarded and prices of goods and services are stable.  
Furthermore, in 2009, the Government approved the extension to the initial five-years of the 
FSDP  in  order  to  continue  the  national  strategy  of  strengthening  our  financial  sector  and 
enhancing financial inclusion. The second phase of the FSDP will focus on three main pillars 
namely:  (i)  enhancing  market  infrastructure;  (ii)  increasing  competition;  and  (iii)  increasing 
access to finance. Overall, the vision is to have a dynamic and inclusive financial sector that 
supports all aspects of the economy.  
Therefore,  the  theme  for  this  workshop  and  exhibition  “Enhancing  Financial  Access  for 
Women: A Tool for Poverty Reduction” is timely and appropriate. Our aim is to recognise and 
heighten  awareness  of  women’s  issues  within  this  context.  More  specifically,  the  main 
objective of this forum is to showcase a variety of financial services and products available 
and sensitize the general public on:  
(i) 
(ii) 
how financial institutions are contributing to increasing gender financing in Zambia; 
bringing awareness to the women on the opportunities that are available for them to 
access finance and mitigate related challenges; 
the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  other  financial  institutions  in  meeting  the 
objective of financial inclusion; 
how  the  United  Nations  as  the  lead  international  organisation  and  other  local 
agencies are supporting women in Zambia; and 
sharing experiences in running businesses, and the opportunities and challenges in 
accessing finance in order to grow the income base. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2010
The exhibition gives us an opportunity to identify women’s potential and encourage them to 
stand up and be counted and, contribute to the development of this country. The workshop 
and exhibition also gives us an opportunity to make the “marginalized woman” aware of the 
various financial services and products that are available to them.  
Distinguished Participants, I am glad to note that many products on exhibit here include 
those  targeted  at  the  ordinary  citizen  and  more  specifically  women,  as  opposed  to  large 
corporates  and  men.  This  is  a  very  welcome  development  as  one  of  the  challenges  to 
women  accessing  finance  is  the  stringent  requirements,  which  most  women  are  unable  to 
meet.  
Furthermore, despite the recent marked improvements in macroeconomic indicators, alluded 
to earlier, interest rates and bank charges continue to be unaffordable to the majority of our 
people especially women. It is for this reason that I reiterate my appeal to all financial service 
providers especially those who are present here today, to make some meaningful efforts in 
addressing  the  high  cost  of  financial  services  in  the  country.  There  is  a  need  for  financial 
service providers to think outside the box and design financial products that are affordable 
and can easily be accessed by women for various projects at all levels of society including 
the community. I have in mind here, financing models used in most Asian countries such as 
the Grameen Bank model in Bangladesh which has demonstrated that women’s potential to 
contribute  towards  poverty  reduction  can  be  unlocked  through  provision  of  finance  at 
community level. Indeed the Grameen Bank model has also proved that women have a good 
habit of paying back their loans.  
It is also fitting that women’s potential to contribute to development should be acknowledged 
and their potential to drive change should be recognised. Although women are yet to gain 
equality, they are helping to move their families and communities out of poverty. With a little 
more  support,  so  much  more  could  be  achieved.  It  is  my  hope  that  access  to  finance  by 
women will be enhanced through this exhibition.  
I am however, pleased to note that, today, more financial institutions are providing financial 
services to women in Zambia. More women and girls are learning to read and write. We also 
see  throughout  the  country  that  women  are  discovering  a  new  level  of  economic 
independence. They’re contributing more to their families and communities. They’re gaining 
access to credit and jobs that can give them a decent standing of living. This is desirable and 
should be encouraged.  
As I conclude, let me extend my gratitude to all the participants and resource persons and 
commend  all  the  institutions  that  have  taken  part  to  organise  both  the  workshop  and 
exhibition.  Let  me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  appreciate  the  efforts  by  our  cooperating 
partners  in  the  financing  of  activities  promoting  gender  equality.  This  is  evident  by  the 
number of agencies and non-governmental organizations looking at women’s issues, most of 
which are represented, here, today.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  International  Women’s  Day  celebrates  the  collective  power  of 
women past, present and future. I believe the next few days will therefore be very informative 
and entertaining. I am certain that everyone will find this exhibition and forum beneficial and I 
wish you all a successful event.  
I thank you.  
BIS Review 26/2010 
 3
