 Sheku Sambadeen Sesay: Issues relating to Africa in the context of the 
global financial and economic crisis 
Statement by Mr Sheku Sambadeen Sesay, Governor of the Bank of Sierra Leone, at the 
dinner  in  honour  of  the  delegates  for  the  African  Caucus  Meeting,  hosted  by  the  Bank  of 
Sierra Leone, Freetown, 16 August 2010. 
 Ministers of Finance 
Governors of central banks 
Head of delegations 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, Dr. Ernest Bai Koroma and the 
Board  and  Directors  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone,  it  is  my  profound  pleasure  to  extend  a 
warm welcome to all distinguished personalities assembled here this evening. I believe that 
since  your  arrival  here  in  Freetown  you  have  had  a  taste  of  the  typical  African  hospitality 
which is very true of the people of Freetown.  
As you are aware this is my first meeting since my appointment as Governor of the Bank of 
Sierra Leone in June this year.  
Our meeting is taking place at a critical period. Our countries are experiencing the effects of 
the  slow  down  in  the  world  economy  triggered  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  As  we  are  all 
aware  this  recent  challenge  far  exceeds  the  capabilities  of  any  single  country.  These 
challenges  require  international  coordinations  and  inter-governmental  collaboration  which 
makes it imperative for us to work together.  
As we meet today we welcome the various measures taken by the Bretton Woods institutions 
to  reduce  the  impact  of  the  devastating  effects  of  the  turbulences  in  the  international 
monetary and financial markets and look forward to future reforms to help ease the burden 
on  our  economies.  Another  issue  I  will  like  to  mention  is  the  aspect  of  voice  and 
representation which is critical for us to be fully represented in these institutions and we are 
happy that these issues are being addressed.  
For  the  next  two  days  we  will  discuss  issues  relating  to  Africa  in  the  context  of  global 
financial and economic crisis, lessons learnt and the way forward at the Miatta Conference 
Hall. This Dinner gives the opportunity to set the scene and get familiar with each other as 
there  are  a  host  of  Bank  Governors  and  Finance  Ministers  here  coming  from  all  over  the 
continent, some, if not most, of us are meeting for the first time. I am certain it will not be 
hard  for  us  to  get  to  know  each  other  because  we  share  a  lot  in  common,  in  terms  of 
language, culture and socio-economic conditions. It is my belief that it is this common history 
and  economic  experience  that  brings  us  together  and  gives  us  a  unique  advantage  in 
understanding our collective situations to help us reach consensus on all of the issues on the 
table  for  discussion.  We  have  a  long  history  of  working  together  and  reaching  remarkable 
useful consensus on critical issues when it matters most, this time will be no different.  
Honourable Ministers and Governors  
I am sure we have all had a very hectic day on discussing all these issues and look forward 
to a very relaxed evening.  
For those that have not had time to look around this beautiful and historic city I implore you to 
find time to explore our beautiful beaches and various historic sites.  
BIS Review 115/2010 
 1
 I wish you fruitful deliberations and hope that Freetown would forever be remembered as the 
venue where key decisions affecting the African continent would be made.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2010
