European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
10 June 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Constâncio, the new Vice-President of the ECB, and I are very 
pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our  press  conference.  We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting, which was also attended by Commissioner Rehn. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. Taking 
into  account  all  the  new  information  which  has  become  available  since  our  meeting  on 
6 May 2010, we continue to expect price developments to remain moderate over the policy-
relevant  medium-term  horizon.  Global  inflationary  pressures  may  persist,  while  domestic 
price pressures are expected to remain low. The latest information has also confirmed that 
the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  continued  in  the  first  half  of  2010,  but  quarterly 
growth  rates  are  likely  to  be  rather  uneven.  Looking  ahead,  we  expect  the  euro  area 
economy  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace,  in  an  environment  of  continued  tensions  in  some 
financial market segments and of unusually high uncertainty. Our monetary analysis confirms 
that inflationary pressures over the medium term remain contained, as suggested by weak 
money and credit growth. Overall, we expect price stability to be maintained over the medium 
term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  Inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations remains of 
the essence.  
Monetary policy will do all that is needed to maintain price stability in the euro area over the 
medium term. This is the necessary and central contribution that monetary policy makes to 
fostering  sustainable  economic  growth,  job  creation  and  financial  stability.  All  the  non-
standard measures taken during the period of strong financial market tensions, referred to as 
“enhanced credit support” and the Securities Markets Programme, are fully consistent with 
our mandate and, by construction, temporary in nature. We remain firmly committed to price 
stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  and  the  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  overall 
provision of liquidity will be adjusted as appropriate. Accordingly, the Governing Council will 
continue to monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
After a period of sharp decline, euro area economic activity has been expanding since mid-
2009. According to Eurostat’s first estimate, euro area real GDP increased, on a quarterly 
basis, by 0.2% in the first quarter of 2010. While adverse weather conditions, in particular, 
dampened growth in the early part of the year, the latest economic indicators suggest that a 
rebound  took  place  during  the  spring.  Looking  ahead,  the  Governing  Council  expects  real 
GDP  to  grow  at  a  moderate  and  still  uneven  pace  over  time  and  across  economies  and 
sectors  of  the  euro  area.  The  ongoing  recovery  at  the  global  level  and  its  impact  on  the 
demand for euro area exports, together with the accommodative monetary policy stance and 
the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  should  provide 
support  to  the  euro  area  economy.  However,  the  recovery  of  activity  is  expected  to  be 
dampened by the process of balance sheet adjustment in various sectors and weak labour 
market prospects.  
This  assessment  is  also  reflected  in  the  June  2010  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, according to which annual real GDP growth will range between 
0.7%  and  1.3%  in  2010  and  between  0.2%  and  2.2%  in  2011.  Compared  with  the 
March 2010 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, the range for real GDP growth this year 
has been revised slightly upwards, owing to the positive impact of stronger activity worldwide 
in the short run, while the range has been revised somewhat downwards for 2011, reflecting 
mainly domestic demand prospects. The June 2010 Eurosystem staff projections are broadly 
in line with forecasts by international organisations. 
In  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment,  the  risks  to  the  economic  outlook  are  broadly 
balanced,  in  an  environment  of  unusually  high  uncertainty.  On  the  upside,  the  global 
economy  and  foreign  trade  may  recover  more  strongly  than  projected,  thereby  further 
supporting  euro  area  exports.  On  the  downside,  concerns  remain  relating  to  renewed 
tensions  in  some  financial  market  segments  and  related  confidence  effects.  In  addition,  a 
stronger  or  more  protracted  than  expected  negative  feedback  loop  between  the  real 
economy and the financial sector, renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, and 
protectionist  pressures,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of  global 
imbalances, may weigh on the downside. 
With regard to price developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.6% in May 2010, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  after  1.5%  in  April.  The  rise  in  inflation  over  recent 
months mostly reflects higher energy prices. During the second half of this year some further 
slight increases in HICP inflation cannot be excluded. Looking further ahead, inflation rates 
should overall remain moderate. Upward pressures on commodity prices may persist, while 
euro area domestic price pressures are expected to remain low. Inflation expectations over 
the medium to longer term continue to be firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s 
aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
This  assessment  is  also  reflected  in  the  June  2010  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation in a range between 1.4% 
and  1.6%  for  2010  and  between  1.0%  and  2.2%  for  2011.  Compared  with  the  ECB  staff 
projections  of  March  2010,  the  ranges  have  been  adjusted  somewhat  upwards,  mainly 
reflecting  higher  euro  prices  for  commodities.  Available  forecasts  from  international 
organisations provide a broadly similar picture. 
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments  are  broadly  balanced.  Upside  risks  over  the 
medium  term  relate,  in  particular,  to  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered  prices  may  be  greater  than  currently 
expected, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. At the same time, 
risks to domestic price and cost developments are contained. Overall, the Governing Council 
will monitor closely the future evolution of all available price indicators. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 was unchanged at –0.1% in 
April 2010. The annual growth rate of loans to the private sector increased somewhat further 
and turned positive, but remained weak at 0.1%. Together, these data continue to support 
the  assessment  that  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  is  moderate  and  that 
inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term  are  contained.  Shorter-term  developments  in 
M3  and  loans  have  remained  volatile  and,  given  the  renewed  tensions  in  some  financial 
market segments, volatility in M3 and its components may well continue. 
The actual growth in M3 continues to understate the underlying pace of monetary expansion, 
but  the  downward  impact  of  the  rather  steep  yield  curve  and  the  associated  allocation  of 
funds to longer-term deposits and securities outside M3 appear to be gradually waning. The 
same holds for the shifts within M3 that have been observed as a response to the narrow 
spreads between the interest rates paid on different M3 instruments. At 10.7%, annual M1 
growth is still very strong.  
The still weak annual growth rate of bank loans to the private sector conceals the fact that 
monthly  flows  have  now  been  positive  for  a  number  of  months.  At  the  same  time,  these 
aggregate developments continue to reflect mainly an ongoing strengthening in the annual 
growth of loans to households, while the annual growth of loans to non-financial corporations 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2010
has  remained  negative.  A  lagged  response  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  to 
economic activity is a normal feature of the business cycle. 
The latest data confirm that the reduction in the size of banks’ overall balance sheets has not 
continued since the turn of the year. However, further adjustments cannot be ruled out and 
the challenge remains for banks to expand the availability of credit to the non-financial sector 
when  demand  picks  up.  To  address  this  challenge,  banks  should  turn  to  the  market  to 
strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  and,  where  necessary,  take  full  advantage  of 
government support measures for recapitalisation. 
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Taking into account all the 
new information which has become available since our meeting on 6 May 2010, we continue 
to  expect  price  developments  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term 
horizon.  Global  inflationary  pressures  may  persist,  while  domestic  price  pressures  are 
expected  to  remain  low.  The  latest  information  has  also  confirmed  that  the  economic 
recovery in the euro area continued in the first half of 2010, but quarterly growth rates are 
likely to be rather uneven. Looking ahead, we expect the euro area economy to grow at a 
moderate pace, in an environment of continued tensions in some financial market segments 
and of unusually high uncertainty. A cross-check of the outcome of our economic analysis 
with that of the monetary analysis confirms that inflationary pressures over the medium term 
remain contained, as suggested by weak money and credit growth. Overall, we expect price 
stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of 
euro area households. Inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of 
inflation  expectations  remains  of  the  essence.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will 
continue to monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely.  
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  recent  decision  by  euro 
area countries to formally establish a European Financial Stability Facility. This needs to be 
accompanied by decisive action at the level of governments. It is essential that all countries 
stick to their commitments to correct high budget deficits and government debt and reduce 
fiscal  vulnerability.  To  this  end,  the  concrete  adjustment  measures  needed  to  achieve  the 
budgetary targets should be fully specified. All countries must ensure that confidence in the 
sustainability of public finances is guaranteed. The Governing Council welcomes the fact that 
a  number  of  euro  area  governments  with  the  highest  deficits  and  strongly  increasing  debt 
levels  have  adopted  additional  fiscal  consolidation  measures  and  set  out  more  ambitious 
fiscal targets. In this context, we took note of the spring 2010 orientations for fiscal policies in 
euro area countries agreed by the euro area finance ministers on 7 June, and welcome the 
commitment to take additional measures, where needed, in order to ensure the achievement 
of the budgetary targets for 2010 and beyond. It is indeed key that the new budgetary targets 
be achieved. The Governing Council fully agrees with the ministers on the priority of halting 
and reversing the increase in the debt ratio and welcomes the commitment to take immediate 
action to that effect.  
For all euro area countries, structural reforms leading to higher growth and employment are 
crucial  to  support  a  sustainable  recovery.  Existing  competitiveness  problems,  as  well  as 
domestic  and  external  imbalances,  need  to  be  urgently  addressed  by  the  countries 
concerned. To that end, wage-bargaining should allow wages to adjust appropriately to the 
competitiveness  and  unemployment  situation.  Likewise,  measures  that  increase  price 
flexibility and non-price competitiveness are essential. Finally, an appropriate restructuring of 
the  banking  sector  should  play  an  important  role.  Sound  balance  sheets,  effective  risk 
management  and  transparent,  robust  business  models  are  key  to  strengthening  banks’ 
resilience  to  shocks  and  to  ensuring  adequate  access  to  finance,  thereby  laying  the 
foundations for sustainable growth, job creation and financial stability. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
