Jean-Claude Trichet: Risk and monetary policy 
Lunch remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Stanford  Institute  for  Economic  Policy  Research  (SIEPR)  Economic  Summit,  Stanford 
University, Stanford, 12 March 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be in California today. I am delighted to have been invited by the Stanford 
Institute for Economic Policy Research to address the Economic Summit. Stanford University 
and the area that surrounds this spectacular bay are renowned across the world for a highly 
productive blend of scientific innovation and entrepreneurial business. 
Financial  innovation  is  part  of  scientific  progress.  It  is  an  engine  of  growth  and  prosperity. 
Yet, the key question, which I would like to highlight in my remarks today, is to what extent 
financial innovation serves the real economy and to what extent it only serves itself. At some 
point in our recent past, finance lost contact with its raison d’être. It ceased to be a source of 
services  for  the  real  economy  and  developed  a  life  of  its  own.  Finance  became  self-
referential. I will briefly review the driving forces that led to this situation and the profound 
crisis that followed. 
Financial crises have been a recurrent feature of human history. Let me take you back over 
two millennia in Europe to see how the great historian Tacitus described the financial crisis 
that hit the Roman Empire in the year 33 AD. In the Annales, he wrote: 
“The  destruction  of  private  wealth  precipitated  the  fall  of  rank  and  reputation.  At  last,  the 
emperor interposed his aid by distributing throughout the banks a hundred million sesterces, 
and allowing freedom to borrow without interest for three years, provided the borrower gave 
security to the State in land to double the amount. Credit was thus restored, and gradually 
private lenders were found.”1 
Replace “emperor” with “governments and central banks”, “sesterces” with “dollars” or “euro”, 
“security”  with  “collateral”:  this  two  thousand  year  old  quotation  could  sound  surprisingly 
familiar. 
Yet, even though two thousand years have passed, with many financial debacles in between, 
I think it is fair to say that we entered the current crisis less than ideally prepared. 
First,  we  had  to  improvise  with  an  economic  interpretation  of  the  causes  that  led  to  those 
unprecedented market disruptions. The dramatic fall in confidence revealed a source of risk 
that  macroeconomists  had  not  modelled  carefully  and  that  had  not  even  been  considered 
relevant by most theorists of finance. Now, the concept of “systemic risk” is almost common 
knowledge. 
Second, we had thought that the financial system would act as a shock absorber. Portfolio 
theory  had  demonstrated  that  the  dispersion  of  individual  risks  would  attenuate  aggregate 
risk. But the mispricing of risk multiplied exposures, and the assumption of similar risks by 
market  participants  increased  the  potential  for  contagion.  In  the  event,  we  learned  that 
dispersion does not necessarily mean effective diversification. 
Third, as central bankers we had to design intervention strategies that had not been studied 
in recent times. The extraordinary liquidity measures that central banks took at the height of 
the  crisis  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  had  been  expelled  from  the  economics  textbooks. 
                                                 
1   The  Works  of  Tacitus  translated  by  Alfred  John  Church  and  William  Jackson  Brodribb  (1864–1877). 
http://www.sacred-texts.com/cla/tac/a06010.htm. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 1
Modern  monetary  economics  had  suggested  that  unlimited  arbitrage  in  financial  markets 
would  make  such  measures  irrelevant  and  unnecessary.2  In  the  event,  amid  conditions  of 
extreme  uncertainty,  private  arbitrage  was  unavailable.  As  in  ancient  Rome,  public  credit 
became vital because private finance had – at least temporarily – disappeared. 
What are some of the long-term lessons we can draw from the current crisis? 
Just  as  we  have  had  to  re-evaluate  our  understanding  of  the  nature  of  risk  of  market 
disruptions and the potential responses in terms of implementation of monetary policy, so we 
must re-evaluate our understanding of the role of financial markets in our economies and our 
societies. The lack of a framework for monitoring and addressing systemic risk in the run-up 
to the crisis is part of the motivation for financial reform and improved market regulation. But 
we must also consider fundamental questions about the relative importance and limits of the 
pure financial “game” in markets, the potential abuse of market power, and, more generally, 
the role of the financial sector in the economy. 
Financial  reform  needs  to  go  beyond  the  banking  sector  on  which  so  much  attention  has 
been focused. We also have to look very closely at non-bank financial institutions and at the 
set-up  and  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Leverage  cycles,  for  example,  have  been  a 
constant source of instability for centuries. If left to their own devices, their ultimate outcome 
has  regularly  been  financial  disruption,  wealth  destruction  and  economic  hardship  for  our 
people. 
Let me start by elaborating first on risk before and after the crisis and then turn to monetary 
policy. I want to share with you the European Central Bank’s approach to dealing with the 
balancing  act,  in  which  we  have  sought  a  combination  of  bold  action  as  regards  non-
standard measures, while entirely preserving our clear focus on medium and long term price 
stability. 
Risk before and after the crisis 
Risk is inherent in economic activities because economic  pay-offs are uncertain. Even the 
prototype model of finance – the competitive economy studied by Gérard Debreu and Ken 
Arrow – is subject to stochastic shocks. Therefore, economic returns are risky, because they 
are not known with precision ex ante. 
But the type of risk that we faced in the crisis was of a different nature. It was not triggered by 
stochastic  variation  in  the  real  economy  –  by  shocks  to  “endowments,  technologies  and 
tastes” as theory would predict. At source, it was financial risk. The financial structures that 
we thought were in place to assess, absorb and neutralise risk were either dysfunctional, or 
worked – perversely – to magnify volatility. This is how financial risk was created, transmitted 
to the real economy and eventually became systemic. 
Key factors in creating this risk were opaque financial structures, particularly vulnerability to 
contagion and domino effects, and pro-cyclicality in financial markets. 
The lack of transparency in many financial instruments meant that market participants did not 
know  who  was  exposed  to  what  kind  of  risk.  In  this  state  of  incomplete  knowledge,  some 
market  players  could  exploit  –  for  their  own,  private  benefit  –  information  that  was  not 
generally available. 
                                                 
2   Neil Wallace (1981) has an early theorem on the ineffectiveness of open market operations. Gauti Eggertson 
and  Mike  Woodford  (2003)  prove  the  irrelevance  of  liquidity  measures  at  times  of  zero  interest  rates.  See 
Wallace (1981), “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open Market Operations”, The American Economic Review, 
Vol. 71 No 3, pp. 267–274, and Eggertson, G. and M. Woodford (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates 
and Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 212–219. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2010
Pro-cyclicality  acts  as  a  formidable  accelerator  of  financial  trends.  Demand  for  finance 
increases and declines in tandem with the cycle. But the supply of finance does not simply 
accommodate demand: it often amplifies the cycle. 
Where does pro-cyclicality stem from? To my mind, distorted incentives and herd behaviour 
are key explanatory factors. 
The role of distortions in economic incentives is probably better known as it had traditionally 
been  widely  appreciated  even  within  neo-classical  modelling.3  By  comparison,  herd 
behaviour  as  a  driver  of  pro-cyclical  patterns  in  financial  markets  still  needs  a  thorough 
explanation. 
It is difficult to rationalise herd behaviour. There are two possible explanations. One is that a 
market  player’s  own  evaluation,  pay  or  external  reputation  depends  on  its  performance 
relative  to  the  rest  of  the  market.  This  is  reminiscent  of  Keynes’  famous  beauty  contest 
analogy. To be successful in this contest you don’t need to make your own assessment of 
the  candidates;  all  you  need  to  do  is  figure  out  who  the  other  participants  think  is  most 
beautiful. Applied to financial markets this means that individual participants do not form their 
own opinion, but follow the general mood prevailing among financial market participants. One 
could call this a dereliction of responsibility. Everybody seeks to ride on the wave created by 
generalised sentiment, hoping to step out before the general sentiment turns. 
The  second  explanation  is  that  global  markets  are  in  fact  less  atomistic  than  we  think. 
Indeed, despite globalisation, increasing market concentration was already a long-term trend 
before the crisis. Derivatives activity in the U.S. banking system, for example, is dominated 
by a small group of large financial institutions. Five large commercial banks represent 97% of 
total  notional  amounts  and  88%  of  net  exposure.4  And,  of  course,  the  market  for  credit 
ratings  is  famously  dominated  by  three  signatures,  which  act  as  standard-setters  for  an 
enormous volume of financial transactions. 
Imitative  strategies  and  market  concentration  make  financial  trends  overly  dependent  on 
idiosyncratic decisions and market sentiment. What is clear is that while the end result – herd 
behaviour – seems to be individually rational, it is socially wasteful. 
Herd behaviour favoured the build-up of leverage. Leverage cycles have been a constant of 
many of the financial crises of the past. But the financial players that contributed to the boom 
before  the  crisis  were  able  to  use  previously  unavailable  ammunition.  In  the  run-up  to  the 
crisis,  we  saw  the  emergence  and  fast  development  of  a  new  set  of  complex  financial 
instruments  such  as  ABSs,  RMBSs  and  CDOs  as  well  as  hedging  instruments  like  CDS. 
These  were  invented  as  instruments  to  repackage,  disseminate  and  hedge  risks.  As  they 
became  available,  they  were  viewed  as  filling  a  gap  in  an  incomplete  market  structure.  In 
fact,  credit  derivatives  turned  into  potent  vehicles  for  pure  financial  market  participants  to 
leverage their views. 
The  distinction  between  arbitrage  and  directional  positioning  is  critical  here.  Arbitrage  is  an 
essential market force. By eliminating differences in risk-adjusted returns, arbitrage promotes 
price discovery and fosters market dynamics. Directional positioning or “pure speculation” does 
not necessarily eliminate existing discrepancies between risk-adjusted financial prices: it might 
amplify or even create price gaps. It does so by acting on expectations of future price changes. 
                                                 
3   For  example,  research  carried  out  at  Stanford  University  greatly  enhanced  our  understanding  of  the 
interactions between economic motives, incomplete regulation and market outcomes. And Douglass North, of 
course, had documented how the development and design of institutions – again, good or bad regulation – 
has shaped the fortune of countries throughout history. 
4   OCC’s Quarterly Report on Bank Derivatives Activities, Third Quarter 2009, US Treasury, Comptroller of the 
Currency. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 3
Unlike in the case of arbitrage, these price gaps are notional – indeed, speculative – and might 
be large only because they are not suitably discounted for risk. 
The state of “meta-stability” of financial markets is one in which large-scale positioning has 
become a leading force of market dynamics. 
Indeed, system-wide conditions of overexposure and illiquidity placed the markets in a state 
of meta-stability, i.e. potentially unstable, ultimately triggering systemic risk. An economy in a 
state of meta-stability is prone to shocks that are seemingly innocuous but can reveal facts 
that  were  either  unknown  or  little  appreciated  before.  This  new  knowledge  can  trigger  the 
crisis.5 
Monetary policy in times of crisis 
And  then  the  crisis  came.  Immediate  action  was  needed  to  fend  off  systemic  risk. 
Governments and central banks around the word were united in purpose. With their actions, 
central banks broke new ground which monetary theorists will be studying for years to come. 
The modern theory of central banking had a narrow focus on interest rates. Even in a crisis 
situation  –  in  conditions  of  collapsing  confidence  and  very  low  interest  rates  –  monetary 
theory  assumes  that  a  central  bank  will  always  be  in  a  position  to  influence  inflation  and 
demand  by  steering  expectations  of  the  future  path  of  its  interest-rate  instrument  in  the 
future.  These  theoretical  prescriptions  are  based  on  the  assumption  of  perfect  market 
arbitrage. 
Intertemporal  arbitrage  is  indeed  what  makes  monetary  policy  effective  in  normal  times.  It 
ensures that the return on a long-term security is equalised with the return on a strategy of 
holding a very short-term security – paying the policy rate – and rolling it over until the end of 
the policy commitment. 
In  this  crisis,  however,  market  arbitrage  was  simply  unavailable.  The  disappearance  of 
market arbitrage was a challenge for monetary policy. But by no means did it imply policy 
ineffectiveness. It called for central banks to engage in non-standard measures and play an 
intermediation role that the market was unwilling or unable to perform. The ECB fulfilled its 
role of market-maker in particular by providing liquidity to banks without limit, for “as long as 
was needed”, to restore normal market functioning. 
Note here a difference between the ECB and the Federal Reserve. Even in normal times the 
ECB conducts monetary policy through loans, rather than via direct purchases and sales of 
securities. Unlike Fed discount-window lending, however, our loans are untargeted. They are 
an  instrument  for  the  routine  provision  of  monetary  policy  liquidity,  rather  than  part  of 
selective assistance to distressed banks. It is a system centred on overnight and term credit 
to banks. 
So our system was tailor-made to be used as an instrument to resist a banking crisis. In the 
event, it was flexible enough to be activated – with only limited adjustments – in emergency 
conditions. The need to tackle the collapse of private arbitrage motivated two features of our 
enhanced  credit  support:  first,  the  full,  unlimited  accommodation  of  banks’  demands  for 
central bank credit at our policy interest rate contributed to repair the collapse of interbank 
lending; second, the extension of central bank credit provision to longer maturities, up to one 
year, was a substitute for market intertemporal trading. 
                                                 
5   For example, in late 2006 a new synthetic index became available for the first time which could be used to 
price sub-prime related tranches of credit derivatives. This new market price probably aggregated information 
about the quality of the underlying contracts, which was too dispersed or inaccessible before. This might have 
brought awareness of the precarious bases of the financial structures that were being traded. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2010
Our actions would not have been effective if they had not been enshrined in our medium-
term  monetary  policy  framework.  Our  definition  of  price  stability  steered  expectations  in  a 
sufficiently  firm  manner.  So  the  ECB  can  dispense  with  making  promises  about  the  future 
path of the monetary policy stance. The ECB’s approach to steering market expectations is 
based  on  comparing  inflation  outcomes  and  projections  with  our  quantitative  definition  of 
price stability. This can be done without making statements about the policy instrument in the 
future. Each month we provide the market with a comprehensive assessment of the risks to 
price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  This  allows  market  participants  to  form  expectations 
about the future course of monetary policy, conditional on our real-time assessment of the 
state of the economy. In this sense, the ECB is predictable, and this minimises the volatility 
of expectations in normal times. 
Our  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  and  our  medium-term  orientation  significantly 
reduce  the  likelihood  of  either  deflation  scares  or  inflation  scares.  The  firm  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations – throughout a time of crisis – meant that we could maintain the rate on 
our  refinancing  operations  at  positive  levels  without  having  any  materialisation  of  a 
deflationary risk or inflationary expectations. 
The phasing-out process 
I mentioned that we chose to expand our credit to banks. When executing lending policy, a 
central bank functions much like a private financial intermediary. Private credit extension is 
accompanied by restrictions on the borrower to limit its ability to take risks and to protect the 
value of the loan. If a central bank provides credit support, the analogy suggests that it must 
follow up with a continuous re-evaluation of the credit conditions to safeguard its funds and 
make sure its commitment is not abused. It also has to make sure that it does not subsidise 
certain economic activities nor permanently suppress the private interbank market. 
Overall  conditions  in  the  markets  for  capital  have  improved  greatly  from  the  autumn  2008 
paralysis.  The  functioning  of  money  markets  is  now  comparable  with  the  conditions  that 
prevailed  in  the  third  quarter  of  2007.  Money  market  spreads  are  close  to  levels  that  are 
reasonable to view as normal after the equilibrium re-pricing of risk that was needed and is 
likely to have taken place since then. Term lending has resumed on a satisfactory scale. The 
funding ability of banks is not a restraining factor for lending, as it was the case for some time 
after October 2008. Since the second half of last year, it appears to support bank profitability. 
Corporate and bond spreads have also declined steadily across the quality spectrum. 
Currently, these considerations are what motivate and guide a gradual phasing-out process. 
We  started  to  phase  out  our  enhanced  credit-support  measures  in  December  2009,  in  an 
environment  of  improving  financial  market  conditions  and  emerging  signs  of  recovery.  On 
4 March we came to the conclusion that the current pace of phasing-out is appropriate. 
With the resumption of longer-term loans in the private market, we have started to adapt the 
conditions  of  our  longer-term  credit  to  banks.  The  first  step  was  to  announce  a 
discontinuation  of  one-year  and  six-month  longer-term  refinancing  operations.  One-year 
refinancing now pays an interest rate indexed to the average rate that will be applied in our 
weekly main refinancing operations over its 12-month life. The pricing will be the same in our 
upcoming and last 6-month refinancing operation. 
This  underscores  the  fact  that  our  long-term  refinancing  operations  are  designed  to  assist 
banks  in  their  control  and  management  of  liquidity  risk.  They  are  not  an  instrument  of 
commitment to a future policy path. 
We will return to a competitive tender procedure for three-month operations in the second 
quarter of 2010. At the same time, we have made it clear that we will continue to conduct our 
weekly main refinancing operations and one-month operations as fixed-rate tenders with full 
allotment for as long as needed and, in any case, until 12 October 2010. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 5
While we monitor the conditions for a gradual phasing-out very attentively, we are convinced 
that  a  delayed  exit  from  extraordinary  liquidity  support  would  distort  market  behaviour  and 
misallocate credit. 
We  do  not  wish  to  breed  dependency.  Banks  might  become  dependent  on  today’s  very 
favourable access to central bank refinancing to such an extent that their incentives to repair 
their  balance  sheets  remain  weak.  Moreover,  permanent  extraordinary  liquidity  measures 
provide undifferentiated support to all banks, whether in liquidity deficit or in liquidity surplus. 
This  opens  the  door  to  opportunistic  bidding  behaviour  and  to  a  sort  of  arbitrage  across 
assets that is unproductive. 
What  is  our  end  point?  We  view  the  pre-crisis  operational  framework  as  a  very  natural 
reference  point  for  the  phasing-out  process.  Of  course,  we  are  reviewing  carefully  the 
potential lessons of the financial crisis for the design of our operational framework. It seems 
to  me,  however,  that  in  this  respect  the  ECB  has  relatively  little  reason  to  change 
fundamentally what has served our monetary policy well, both in normal and crisis times. 
The  speed  and  path  of  the  phasing-out  of  non-standard  measures  will  depend  on 
developments in financial markets and the economy. The current situation of ample liquidity 
in euro area money markets guarantees a continued positive impact on financing conditions. 
As regards the monetary policy stance itself, it will be designed as always to deliver price 
stability, in the medium and long term, in line with our definition. 
Crisis prevention 
Governments and central banks have been focused on financial reform since October 2008. 
The new financial architecture will build on the assumption that a re-pricing of risk around its 
fundamental value is needed. Price discovery within the market in pursuit of a fundamental 
equilibrium in risk pricing – one that can be sustained by long-term trends – is likely to take 
time and experience some further oscillations. 
A question that remains is: Where will this process end? 
As aggregate – undiversifiable – risk diminishes, this will be reflected in lower premia that 
financial markets pay for risk-taking. We know that the commitment by central banks to keep 
inflation low and stable, communicate clearly about their price stability objectives, and then 
act on those objectives, has all contributed to a long-term reduction in macroeconomic risk. 
The fraction of the reduction in risk compensation related to having a stable macroeconomic 
framework is a steady acquisition of modern societies. 
Instead,  the  complement  to  that  fraction  –  that  which  is  due  to  excessive  financial 
sophistication,  abnormal  risk  tolerance  and  shortcomings  in  risk  management  –  should  be 
gone for ever. 
That  is  why  my  conjecture  is  that  risk  premia  in  a  number  of  markets  will  continue  to  be 
reduced – but they are unlikely to reach the compressed levels that we saw prior to the crisis. 
Normalcy will probably be reached at a permanently higher level of risk compensation in a 
number of markets. 
In order to build an effective system of crisis prevention, we will all need to take on board this 
simple  fact:  compensation  for  risk  will  need  to  be  appropriate.  We  shall  prevent  “pure” 
speculative activities from becoming the dominant force on the markets. And we shall build 
financial infrastructures with sufficient buffers to make them bulwarks against instability and 
resist shocks. 
Let me mention some striking facts about the power of such buffers. There is a widespread 
perception  that  banking  crises  in  times  when  money  was  convertible  into  gold  had 
apocalyptic consequences for bank depositors. This is not true. The estimated average loss 
on assets born by depositors in banks that were closed down as a consequence of financial 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2010
crises was minuscule. Taking a yearly average between 1865 and 1920, it was six cents for 
every  one  hundred  dollars  of  deposits.  This  time-frame  covers  five  of  the  most  severe 
episodes of financial panic in recorded history, most notably the 1907 crisis.6 
Do you know why the losses were so small? Because banks were well capitalised and bank 
equity cushioned depositors – and the economy more broadly – against losses in the event 
of a bank failure. According to a study, the average capital-asset ratio fell from a high of 60% 
in 1880 to a low of 20% at the turn of the century. Then, after the crash of 1929, it rose to 
about 30% in the 1930s and 1940s.7 It is now much lower, as you know. 
Making  sure  that  banks  are  well-capitalised  is  the  foremost  life  jacket  of  our  system.  Life-
support  in  the  form  of  liquidity  assistance  cannot  act  as  a  surrogate  for  appropriate 
management practices inside the banking system. 
The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which will be hosted by the ECB, will assume a 
novel role in crisis prevention at the level of the 27 economies of the European Union as a 
whole. The ESRB will have the aim of identifying emerging systemic risk, and, if necessary, 
publishing early warnings as well as making recommendations to the competent authorities. 
The ECB is also fully involved in G20 reform efforts. International cooperation is absolutely 
vital  given  the  interconnectivity  between  financial  markets.  A  return  to  pre-crisis  business 
practices would be fatal. Financial market participants need to restore trust. But this alone 
will  not  be  sufficient.  We  absolutely  require  intelligent  regulation  that  will  prevent 
self-destruction. 
It seems to me that we are all – industrial countries as well as emerging economies – very 
much united in purpose: correct distorted incentives, improve very significantly the resilience 
of  the  financial  system,  and  counteract  pro-cyclical  mechanisms  and  behaviours.  We  are 
also convinced on both sides of the Atlantic – and here in Stanford, I would say also on both 
sides of the Pacific Ocean – that the success of the enlarged governance of global finance 
and the global economy through the G20, the Financial Stability Board and the cooperative 
activities of the Central Banks, is key for the stability and the prosperity of the present unified 
global economy. 
Concluding remarks 
At the height of the crisis – when irrational exuberance had turned into excessive pessimism – 
I repeatedly stated that regaining confidence was of the essence. Since then, confidence in the 
short term has been restored, not least because of bold and courageous policy actions around 
the  globe.  Going  forward,  we  need  to  strengthen  longer-term  confidence,  and  this  requires 
policy frameworks that will help to prevent a future crisis. 
I started with Tacitus’ example of bold policy action. I would like to end with Cicero’s fides. 
There  was  a  famous  controversy  between  Julius  Caesar  and  Cicero  80  years  before  the 
crisis described by Tacitus. Rome, at that time, was struggling with a debt overhang. Caesar 
proposed partly to remit the debt. Cicero strongly opposed such action. He argued that debt 
forgiveness would shake the foundations of the Roman Republic and destroy one of its most 
important values: fides. Fides is trust, confidence, good faith.8 
In  modern  terms,  Cicero  was  hinting  at  the  moral  hazard  that  can  –  but  need  not  –  be 
created by intervention in a crisis. The “lender of last resort” responsibility of central banks – 
                                                 
6   Data taken from the Annual Report of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (1940). 
7   See  Wesley  Lindow,  “Bank  Capital  and  Risk  Assets”,  The  National  Banking  Review,  Comptroller  of  the 
Currency, US Treasury Department, September 1963, pp. 29–46. 
8   Cicero, De Officiis II, 73 ff. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 7
that Walter Bagehot advocated 1800 years after Cicero and Tacitus – should always be a 
dual responsibility. It should be crisis management and future crisis prevention at the same 
time.  When  these  go  hand  in  hand,  the  result  is  confidence  in  the  medium  and  long  term 
(fides)  which,  ultimately,  helps  getting  out  of  the  short  term  crisis  as  well  as  contributes 
significantly to long-term growth and prosperity. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2010
