European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Lisbon, 
6 May 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  here  in  Lisbon.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Constâncio  for  his  kind 
hospitality  and  express  our  special  gratitude  to  his  staff  for  the  excellent  organisation  of 
today’s  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council.  We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  this 
meeting. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. Taking 
into  account  all  new  information  since  our  meeting  on  8  April  2010,  we  expect  price 
developments  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  Global  inflationary 
pressures – driven mainly by price developments in commodity markets and in fast-growing 
economic regions of the world – are still being counteracted by low domestic price pressures. 
The  latest  information  has  also  confirmed  that  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area 
continued in the early months of 2010. We expect the euro area economy to expand at a 
moderate  pace  in  2010,  but  growth  patterns  could  be  uneven  in  an  environment  of  high 
uncertainty.  Our  monetary  analysis  confirms  that  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium 
term remain contained, as suggested by weak money and credit growth. Overall, we expect 
price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing 
power of euro area households. Inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations remains of the essence. Monetary policy 
will do all that is necessary to maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium term. 
Accordingly, the Governing Council will continue to monitor all developments over the period 
ahead very closely.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro  area  economic  activity  has  been  expanding  since  mid-2009,  after  a  period  of  sharp 
decline.  Notably,  the  economy  has  benefited  from  the  ongoing  recovery  in  the  world 
economy,  the  significant  macroeconomic  stimulus  provided  and  the  measures  adopted  to 
restore  the  functioning  of  the  banking  system.  Recent  economic  data  –  including  positive 
survey  indicators  –  support  the  view  that  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is 
continuing in 2010. While adverse weather conditions, in particular, dampened growth in the 
early  part  of  the  year,  some  strengthening  appears  to  be  taking  place  during  the  spring. 
Looking ahead, the Governing Council expects real GDP to expand at a moderate pace. The 
ongoing recovery at the global level, and its impact on the demand for euro area  exports, 
should provide support to the euro area economy. At the same time, the financial crisis is 
expected  to  have  a  dampening  effect  on  economic  growth  given  the  ongoing  process  of 
balance sheet adjustment in various sectors and the expectation of low capacity utilisation 
and weak labour market prospects.  
The Governing Council continues to view the risks to this outlook as broadly balanced, in an 
environment of high uncertainty. On the upside, the global economy and foreign trade may 
recover more strongly than projected and confidence may improve more than expected, with 
the  result  that  the  recovery  becomes  self-sustained.  On  the  downside,  concerns  remain 
relating to renewed tensions in some financial market segments. In addition, a stronger or 
more protracted than expected negative feedback loop between the real economy and the 
financial sector, renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, and the intensification 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 1
of  protectionist  pressures,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of  global 
imbalances, may weigh on the downside. 
With regard to price developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.5% in April 2010, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  after  1.4%  in  March.  This  is  somewhat  higher  than 
expected a few months ago and appears to be related, in particular, to upward pressure in 
energy prices. Looking ahead, global inflationary pressures may increase, driven mainly by 
price  developments  in  commodity  markets  and  in  fast-growing  economic  regions  of  the 
world, while euro area domestic price pressures are still expected to remain contained. As a 
result, overall inflation rates are expected to be moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. 
Inflation expectations over the medium to longer term continue to be firmly anchored in line 
with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term.  
In  the  near  term,  given  the  developments  in  energy  prices,  risks  to  earlier  projections  for 
HICP inflation are tilted somewhat towards the upside, while risks to price stability over the 
medium term are viewed as still remaining broadly balanced. Upside risks over the medium 
term  relate,  in  particular,  to  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore,  increases  in 
indirect taxation and administered prices may be greater than currently expected, owing to 
the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  coming  years.  At  the  same  time,  risks  to  domestic 
price and cost developments are contained. Overall, we need to monitor closely the future 
evolution of all available price indicators. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 remained slightly negative, 
at –0.1%, in March 2010. Together with the continued negative annual growth in loans to the 
private  sector  –  –0.2%  in  March  –  the  latest  data  further  support  the  assessment  that  the 
underlying pace of monetary expansion is moderate and that the inflationary pressures over 
the  medium  term  are  contained.  Shorter-term  developments  in  M3  and  loans  have  also 
remained muted. 
The actual growth in M3 is seen as weaker than the underlying pace of monetary expansion, 
as  the  rather  steep  yield  curve  continues  to  foster  the  allocation  of  funds  into  longer-term 
deposits and securities outside M3. At the same time, the still narrow spreads between the 
interest rates paid on different M3 instruments imply low opportunity costs of allocating funds 
to  overnight  deposits  rather  than  other  M3  instruments.  This  is  reflected  in  the  continued 
marked  difference  between  weak  annual  growth  in  M3  and  strong  annual  growth  in  M1, 
which was 10.9% in March. However, with the current interest rate constellation already in 
place for some time, the latest data suggest that the large shifts in the allocations of funds 
are waning. 
The annual growth of bank loans to the private sector remained negative in March, but this 
conceals a further positive monthly flow. It also conceals ongoing opposite developments at 
the sectoral level, with positive, increasing annual growth in loans to households on the one 
side,  and  negative  annual  growth  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  on  the  other  side. 
While  the  lagged  response  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  to  economic  activity  is  a 
normal feature of the business cycle, the data over the past few months point to a possible 
discontinuation of the earlier downward trend in annual loan growth. 
The latest data also confirm that the reduction in the size of banks’ overall balance sheets 
has not continued since the turn of the year. However, further adjustments cannot be ruled 
out  and  the  challenge  remains  for  banks  to  expand  the  availability  of  credit  to  the 
non-financial sector when demand picks up. To address this challenge, banks should turn to 
the market and use present funding conditions to strengthen further their capital bases. 
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Taking into account all 
new information since our meeting on 8 April 2010, we expect price developments to remain 
moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. Global inflationary pressures – driven mainly by 
price  developments  in  commodity  markets  and  in  fast-growing  economic  regions  of  the  
world – are still being counteracted by low domestic price pressures. The latest information 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2010
has  also  confirmed  that  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  continued  in  the  early 
months of 2010. We expect the euro area economy to expand at a moderate pace in 2010, 
but growth patterns could be uneven in an environment of high uncertainty. A cross-check 
of  the  outcome  of  our  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  that 
inflationary pressures over the medium term remain contained, as suggested by weak money 
and credit growth. Overall, we expect price stability to be maintained over the medium term, 
thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  Inflation  expectations 
remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations 
remains  of  the  essence.  Monetary  policy  will  do  all  that  is  necessary  to  maintain  price 
stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will 
continue to monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely.  
As regards fiscal policies, we call for decisive actions by governments to achieve a lasting 
and credible consolidation of public finances. The latest information shows that the correction 
of the large fiscal imbalances will, in general, require a stepping-up of current efforts. Fiscal 
consolidation will need to exceed substantially the annual structural adjustment of 0.5% of 
GDP set as a minimum requirement by the Stability and Growth Pact. The longer the fiscal 
correction is postponed, the greater the adjustment needs become and the higher the risk of 
reputational  and  confidence  losses.  Instead,  the  swift  implementation  of  frontloaded  and 
comprehensive  consolidation  plans,  focusing  on  the  expenditure  side  and  combined  with 
structural reforms, will strengthen public confidence in the capacity of governments to regain 
sustainability  of  public  finances,  reduce  risk  premia  in  interest  rates  and  thus  support 
sustainable growth over the medium term. In this context, the Governing Council welcomes 
the  economic  and  financial  adjustment  programme  which  was  approved  by  the  Greek 
government  following  the  successful  conclusion  of  the  negotiations  with  the  European 
Commission,  in  liaison  with  the  ECB,  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  with  a  view  to 
safeguarding financial stability in the euro area as a whole.  
For all euro area countries, structural reforms leading to higher growth and employment are 
crucial to support a sustainable recovery. In view of the recent rise in unemployment, tax and 
benefit  systems  that  set  effective  incentives  to  work,  improved  training  schemes  and 
sufficient flexibility in labour contracts are required in order to avoid an increase in structural 
unemployment.  At  the  same  time,  existing  competitiveness  problems,  as  well  as  domestic 
and external imbalances, need to be urgently addressed by the countries concerned. To that 
end,  wage-bargaining  institutions  that  allow  wages  to  adjust  appropriately  to  losses  in 
competitiveness and the unemployment situation are indispensable. Likewise, measures that 
increase price flexibility and non-price competitiveness are essential. Finally, an appropriate 
restructuring  of  the  banking  sector  should  play  an  important  role.  Sound  balance  sheets, 
effective risk management and transparent, robust business models are key to strengthening 
banks’ resilience to shocks and to ensuring adequate access to finance, thereby laying the 
foundations for sustainable growth and financial stability. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 3
