Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Presentation of the Annual Report 2009 
Address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Governing 
Council  of  the  Bank  of  Spain  on  the  Presentation  of  the  Annual  Report  2009,  Madrid, 
16 June 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  presentation  of  the  Annual  Report  for  2009  is  taking  place  at  a  particularly  complex 
juncture  for  Europe  and,  most  especially,  for  the  Spanish  economy.  What  began  as  an 
isolated  ﬁscal  crisis  episode  in  a  euro  area  Member  State  has  turned  into  an  event  of 
systemic scope that has obliged the European authorities and national governments to adopt 
measures on an unprecedented scale to defend the stability of the area.  
At the same time, the spread and heightening of tensions have ﬁrmly focused analysts’ and 
markets’  attention  on  the  situation  and  on  economic  policy  responses  in  those  countries 
which,  like  Spain,  face  comparatively  more  demanding  challenges  and  are,  consequently, 
perceived as potentially more vulnerable.  
This is a demanding conjunctural situation, for which it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd points of reference in 
our recent past. And more than ever before, it is important to diagnose accurately the true 
scale of the challenges our economy faces, to prepare promptly the tools needed to meet the 
challenges and to use them as decisively and forcefully as the situation requires. We must, 
moreover, act with the urgency demanded by our responsibilities as active members of the 
common European project in defence of stability and the success of this project. The report I 
present today is speciﬁcally geared to contribute to this task.  
From  spring  last  year,  the  economic  indicators  offered  signs  that  the  world  economy  was 
emerging from the most critical phase of the gravest real and ﬁnancial crisis since the Great 
Depression. Progress since along the path to recovery has been much more evident in the 
emerging  economies,  for  which  the  latest  projections  indicate  growth  rates  above  6%  for 
2010. By contrast, the developed countries’ economies are recovering at a considerably less 
dynamic rate, of around 2%.  
This  turnaround  conﬁrms  that  the  rapid  and  energetic  economic  policy  action  to  support 
ﬁnancial  systems,  to  stimulate  demand  and  to  sustain  conﬁdence  was  pivotal  in  halting  a 
spiral of recession and ﬁnancial instability which, had it continued, would have undoubtedly 
had disastrous consequences for the world economy.  
Halting this recessionary spiral was crucial for placing the world economy once again on a 
path of sustained output and employment growth. But if the incipient recovery – still subject 
to considerable uncertainty and risks – is to take root, further measures on various fronts will 
be needed.  
The bulk of the measures adopted to check the accelerated economic and ﬁnancial downturn 
were  exceptional.  Accordingly,  they  have  to  be  withdrawn.  The  proper  timing  of  the 
withdrawal of these impulses that have sought to progressively restore economies’ capacity 
to generate growth autonomously is a challenge of the ﬁrst order for national economic policy 
management. And the challenge is heightened by the adverse effects that the crisis has had 
on  economies’  growth  potential,  which  will  call  for  measures  and  structural  reforms  that 
enable such potential to be restored and increased.  
Complicating  matters,  moreover,  is  the  pressing  need  to  tackle  the  effects  that  the  sharp 
economic  contraction  and  the  emergency  measures  applied  have  had  on  public  ﬁnances. 
This means ambitious and credible ﬁscal consolidation processes will have to be set in train 
which, while needed to prevent an unprecedented and practically irreversible deterioration in 
public ﬁnances, will tend to slow recovery.  
BIS Review 86/2010 
 1
Unfortunately, the sequence which begins with a ﬁnancial crisis evolving into a real crisis and 
ultimately prompting a ﬁscal crisis is a fairly common and recurrent pattern of behaviour in 
past  crises.  Tensions  like  those  witnessed  in  recent  months  on  European  sovereign  debt 
markets in the wake of doubts over the sustainability of Greek public ﬁnances are sufﬁciently 
illustrative of the scale of the risks that may arise from such a sequence.  
In  particular,  the  euro  area  had  to  face  a  crisis  of  unexpected  proportions.  As  in  other 
regions,  this  meant  large-scale  emergency  solutions  had  to  be  activated  to  check  the 
downturn  in  the  economy  and  curb  expectations  of  a  deepening  of  the  recession  and  an 
outbreak of ﬁnancial instability. The euro area is over the worst phase of the recession, but if 
ambitious supply-side policies are not pursued, recovery will prove particularly slow. All that 
has  been  said  on  the  need  to  revitalise  potential  growth  through  structural  reforms  and  to 
prevent  a  ﬁscal  crisis  through  credible  ﬁscal  consolidation  programmes  is  a  particularly 
pressing concern for the euro area.  
The emergence of the fateful “ﬁnancial crisis-real crisis-ﬁscal crisis” sequence in one of the 
Member  States,  namely  Greece,  is  a  particularly  serious  and  important  development.  Its 
effects have spread not only to other countries but also to the euro area as a whole, thus 
turning it into a new epicentre of global ﬁnancial instability. This episode has highlighted the 
weakness of the economic governance arrangements for the euro, and is forcing some of its 
working mechanisms to be reconsidered, with a view to setting sounder foundations in place.  
Events  triggered  by  the  Greek  ﬁscal  crisis  have  ultimately  exacerbated  signiﬁcantly  the 
complex  framework  in  which  the  Spanish  economy  operates.  Allow  me  to  depart  from  the 
traditional structure of this address to tackle the important issues raised by the Greek crisis in 
terms  of  the  consequences  for  the  Spanish  economy  in  this  exceptional  situation,  which 
poses a welter of challenges to Spain’s medium- and long-term growth possibilities.  
The shockwave of the Greek ﬁscal crisis hit the Spanish economy when we were facing the 
consequences of the deterioration in the labour market and in public ﬁnances and the need 
to  complete  the  banking  restructuring  process  under  way.  To  understand  the  implications, 
the starting point must be a sufﬁciently broad-sighted diagnosis of the current situation of the 
Spanish economy.  
An idea central to the Annual Report I present to you today is that exiting the recession in 
Spain involves the need to absorb and overcome the imbalances that built up during the long 
expansionary phase. That is a prerequisite if the new growth path is to be underpinned by a 
model  capable  of  generating  employment  and  by  a  more  efﬁcient  use  of  productive 
resources than in the past. This process can only be successful if economic policies adopt an 
active  and  ambitious  role  removing  the  obstacles  that  have  emerged  and  restoring 
conﬁdence  in  the  Spanish  economy’s  capacity  to  negotiate  this  critical  juncture.  This 
message, which I have attempted to convey in recent years, is now a matter of the utmost 
urgency. Indeed, the government’s latest ﬁscal, labour market and pensions measures are in 
keeping with this urgency.  
Let  me  begin  by  summarising  those  aspects  of  the  recession  in  Spain  that  are  key  to 
understanding the scale of the challenges we face. In 2009, there was an abrupt decline in 
Spanish economic activity, the biggest in recent decades. Furthering the fall in activity that 
had begun in the second half of 2008, this placed the level of GDP in the opening months of 
2010 at 4.6% below its peak in the second quarter of 2008.  
On the basis of this ﬁgure, the scale of the recession in Spain appears to have been in line 
with  global  trends.  However,  taking  into  consideration  the  magnitude  of  the  decline  in 
domestic spending (8% over the same period), the intensity of job destruction (over 2 million 
jobs lost since employment was at a peak) and the rise in the numbers unemployed (over 
4.5 million  at  the  start  of  this  year),  it  is  clear  there  are  singular  factors  involved  in  the 
contraction  in  Spain.  These  mirror  the  major  imbalances  built  up  during  the  expansionary 
phase – in particular, the excessive concentration of resources in the real estate sector and 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2010
high  private-sector  debt  –  and  the  persistence  of  serious  structural  deﬁciencies  in  the 
functioning of the labour market.  
This  series  of  factors  has  prompted  a  reduction  in  household  spending,  driven  by  the 
slowdown in income and the losses in wealth accumulated since the start of the crisis, and 
furthered  by  the  deterioration  in  conﬁdence  and  in  expectations  of  future  income,  the 
tightening of lending standards and households’ perception of the need to restore health to 
their ﬁnancial position. That explains the rapid increase in the household saving rate, which 
reached an alltime high in 2009 of close to 19%.  
The fall-off in household spending compounded the contraction in external demand and the 
highly adverse conditions for business investment, namely high uncertainty, a rise in the cost 
and availability of ﬁnancing, and falling proﬁts. The upshot was an unprecedented reduction 
in investment, with signiﬁcant effects on the economy’s level of capitalisation.  
Nonetheless,  in  late  2009  and  early  2010  there  was  some  improvement,  especially  in 
household consumption, which began to respond to the major stimulus packages adopted. 
The slight rise in consumption combined with the positive contribution of the external sector 
enabled Spain to join in the recovery already under way in other developed countries. The 
signs of recovery are still very muted and are largely sustained by temporary factors that will 
tend to peter out in the coming months. The recovery will foreseeably be gradual and take 
some time to gather the momentum sufﬁcient to generate employment.  
Accompanying  the  incipient  stabilisation  of  the  economy  are  certain  developments  which, 
while  they  may  be  interpreted  as  the  counterpoint  of  the  contraction  in  domestic  demand, 
contribute to creating conditions conducive to a return to growth. The sharp fall in domestic 
spending has contributed signiﬁcantly to altering the dynamics of inﬂation, the pace of which 
has clearly slowed to the extent of posting negative differentials with the euro area for most 
of  last  year,  something  unprecedented  since  the  start  of  EMU.  The  disinﬂationary  process 
has continued in 2010 to date, and there have even been falls in core inﬂation in a setting in 
which the slowdown in services prices has continued to intensify. It is too early yet to know to 
what extent this development is in response to a greater sensitivity of cost and price-setting 
to cyclical conditions. But this would be a signiﬁcant step towards improving the competitive 
foundations of the Spanish economy, a vital ingredient for any sustained recovery scenario. 
This is why it is essential to see through the liberalisation processes under way in the sector 
further to recent legislative initiatives and, in particular, to the transposition of the Community 
Directive on services.  
Diminished domestic demand has also exerted an inﬂuence on the reduction in the external 
deﬁcit, on a scale difﬁcult to imagine only two years back. As explained in the Annual Report, 
this correction is largely due to the reduction in the trade deﬁcit as imports ground to a halt 
and, from this standpoint, it appears to be chieﬂy attributable to cyclical factors. It should be 
stressed, however, that goods exports have shown a strong capacity for recovery in recent 
months, as has trade in services. Both developments are promising and need to ﬁrm in the 
future if the nation’s net borrowing is to be permanently reduced and if growth is to pivot on 
an export sector that is stronger and less reliant on imports.  
Despite  this  progress,  substantial  adjustments  have  still  to  be  made,  and  as  promptly  as 
possible, if they are not to act as a drag on the recovery. I refer in particular to the need to 
complete the absorption of excess capacity in the residential construction sector, to continue 
the  ﬁnancial  restructuring  of  the  private  sector  and  to  improve  the  Spanish  economy’s 
competitive position. And this must be done in tandem with tackling the problems that have 
arisen as the economic crisis has unfolded: the decline in employment and the deterioration 
of public ﬁnances.  
The  severity  of  job  destruction  has  been  due  to  the  persistence  of  serious  structural 
deﬁciencies  in  the  labour  market  that  were  not  corrected during  the  previous  upturn,  amid 
far-reaching changes in demographics and in the composition of labour supply. As explained 
in detail in the 2009 Annual Report, these shortcomings have meant that the labour market 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 3
adjustment  has  fallen  disproportionately  on  employment.  This  is  a  result,  above  all,  of  the 
prevalence of collective bargaining at the industry or territorial level which, naturally, is not 
sufﬁciently  tailored  to  the  different  environments  that  different  companies  face.  An 
institutional  characteristic  such  as  this  is  particularly  harmful  in  a  situation  like  that  the 
Spanish economy has undergone in the past two years, in which the crisis has very unevenly 
impacted  ﬁrms  and  industries.  Indeed,  the  crisis  has  ultimately  driven  a  large  number  of 
companies  and  workers  out  of  the  market,  causing  lasting  damage  to  productive  capacity 
and  human  capital.  The  bargaining  system  tends  to  aggravate  cyclical  oscillations  and 
contractionary spending trends, and it is not consistent with harmonious integration into the 
euro area.  
The  events  of  recent  months  have  highlighted  the  problems  posed,  as  regards  exiting  the 
crisis, by the rapid ﬁscal deterioration which took place during the recession and which was 
exacerbated  by  the  contagion  of  the  Greek  ﬁscal  credibility  crisis  to  other  potentially 
vulnerable economies, including Spain.  
To put the scale of this challenge in context, I shall review the factors which led the Spanish 
general government deﬁcit to a level of 11.2% of GDP, from a surplus position of 1.9% of 
GDP  two  years  earlier,  and  which  increased  the  public  debt  ratio  by  around  17  pp  of 
GDP over this same period.  
An  initial  factor,  while  not  the  most  important  one,  is  that  stemming  from  the  economic 
contraction  which  accelerated  expenditure  on  unemployment  beneﬁts  and  on  other  items 
linked to the cycle, and dented tax bases, causing a sharp reduction in revenue from certain 
taxes linked to labour and corporate activity and to spending. Adding to this was the impact 
of the exceptional support measures adopted by the government in the face of the depth of 
the recession, in line with agreed global action, and which in our country exceeded those in 
other developed countries. But what proved of great importance was the loss of tax revenue 
as a consequence of the sharp adjustment in the real estate sector and which, unfortunately, 
has  a  very  high  permanent  component.  All  these  developments  combined  with  a  rising 
trajectory of public spending systematically higher than that of the economy’s trend growth.  
Accordingly, much of the burgeoning ﬁscal deﬁcit that emerged during the crisis is eminently 
structural. And correcting this means the unavoidable adoption of a far-reaching budgetary 
consolidation  process  that  bears  down  precisely  on  the  most  permanent  and  inertial 
components of public spending. This process is all the more urgent given the seriousness of 
the repercussions of the Greek ﬁscal crisis and the pressing need to halt the deterioration in 
the perception of Spanish public ﬁnances.  
Indeed, the worsening of the ﬁscal crisis in Greece has substantially altered the conditions 
governing  the  design  and  execution  of  a  ﬁscal  consolidation  programme.  Systematic  and 
substantive  non-compliance  with  the  commitments  acquired  by  the  Greek  authorities  in 
respect of public ﬁnances, added to a repeated lack of informative transparency, resulted in a 
strong  loss  of  conﬁdence  by  the  markets  in  the  Greek  government’s  capacity  to  meet  its 
payment  commitments.  That  gave  rise  to  a  completely  new  situation  and,  what  has  ﬁnally 
proved most telling, one not foreseen in the institutional arrangements underpinning the euro 
area: the perception of a potential risk of insolvency of one of its members.  
This lack of foresight translated into difﬁculties in promptly setting up a sufﬁciently forceful 
institutional response. These difﬁculties were clearly identiﬁed by the markets and meant that 
the speciﬁc risk of insolvency of a Member State rapidly turned into a systemic risk for the 
whole of the area.  
Evidently, the spread of ﬁscal difﬁculties in one speciﬁc country to other Member States can 
run  through  many  channels,  which  may  include  the  exposure  of  ﬁnancial  institutions  to 
sovereign debt, the correlation between risk premia on markets and the effects associated 
with changes in trade ﬂows. The importance of these mechanisms is unquestionable. But the 
speed at which tensions have spread in this case and their initial and sharp impact on those 
Member States whose public ﬁnances have most deteriorated suggest that the weaknesses 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2010
perceived in the institutional arrangements for governance of the euro area may have played 
a central role.  
As has been brought home to us in these months, the rapid spread of tensions has meant 
difﬁcult  and  far-reaching  decisions  have  had  to  be  adopted  on  two  fronts:  the  common 
European front and the domestic front of each Member State.  
On  the  European  front,  the  Heads  of  State  and  of  Government  and  the  Ecoﬁn  outlined  a 
powerful  programme  of  ﬁnancial  support  for  the  Greek  authorities.  Implementation  of  the 
programme  was  conditional  upon  Greek  economic  policies  being  redressed  with  regard  to 
their ﬁscal consolidation strategy, which had to be strengthened and accelerated, and to the 
need  to  undertake  ambitious  structural  reforms  to  move  back  onto  a  path  of  sustained 
growth.  
Subsequently,  the  agreement  to  create  a  European  stabilisation  mechanism  strengthened 
this  ﬁrm  commitment  of  the  Member  States  to  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  euro  area. 
Although the details of this programme are still being worked out, the volume of the funds 
involved,  which  including  the  IMF  contribution  could  amount  to  as  much  as  €750  billion, 
seems  sufﬁciently  illustrative  of  the  determination  of  governments  to  defend  the  common 
European  project.  Naturally,  as  in  the  case  of  the  initial  support  package  for  Greece,  the 
possible ﬁnancial support will always be subject to a strict principle of conditionality, as an 
indispensable  factor  to  ensure  that  the  underlying  problems  are  addressed  with  sufﬁcient 
ambition  and  determination,  and  to  avoid  possible  situations  of  moral  hazard  which  could 
degenerate into the accumulation of new risks for the future.  
The European Commission and the European Central Bank have also contributed decisively 
to this task of strengthening the common pillars of the area. In this respect important steps 
have  been  taken  to  establish  a  sounder  framework  of  policies  to  preserve  the  smooth 
functioning  of  the  euro  area.  I  refer  in  particular  to  the  Commission’s  recent  proposals  to 
strengthen in various ways the Stability and Growth Pact and to extend the areas of mutual 
oversight  and  consultation  within  the  EU.  The  ultimate  aim  of  these  proposals  is  the  early 
detection and redressing of those imbalances which, as has become clear to us in these last 
few  months,  will  put  the  stability  of  the  euro  area  at  risk  if  allowed  to  continue  and 
accumulate.  
In this respect, the European Central Bank has also reacted to the emergency situation. It 
has  done  this  by  adjusting  its  schedule  for  withdrawing  the  extraordinary  crisis-combating 
measures  put  in  place,  so  as  to  attune  it  to  developing  ﬁnancial  market  tensions.  It  thus  
re-established its six-month liquidity-providing operations, resumed its ﬁxed-rate full-allotment 
tender  system  for  three-month  tenders  and  recommenced  dollar-denominated  liquidity-
providing operations.  
Furthermore, the ECB started up a public and private asset purchase programme with a view 
to remedying the dysfunctions in certain ﬁnancial market segments which were endangering 
the  normal  operation  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  that  is  essential  to 
ensure price stability.  
Along with these actions on the common European front, the other essential component of 
the response to the emergency situation is the reaction of national governments to ensure 
the sustainability of their ﬁnances and to undertake the reforms needed to restore vigorous 
and stable growth of both output and employment.  
In this regard, the sequence and content of the ﬁscal consolidation packages adopted by the 
Spanish government have naturally been inﬂuenced by recent developments. The Spanish 
government took a ﬁrst step towards ﬁscal consolidation when it deﬁned the State budget for 
2010  and,  later,  when  it  presented  the  Updated  Stability  Programme  in  January  this  year, 
following the recommendations of the ECOFIN. In this programme it committed to reducing 
the  budget  deﬁcit  to  3%  of  GDP  by  2013,  by  means  of  sharp  cuts  in  public  spending, 
although the programme was based on a relatively benign macroeconomic scenario, thereby 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 5
raising  the  question  of  the  need  for  additional  efforts  should  budget  deviations  arise,  an 
eventuality expressed by the ECOFIN Council in its recommendation on the programme.  
The scale of the ﬁscal crisis in Greece has led the Spanish government to strengthen and 
accelerate its ﬁscal consolidation programme in order to prevent market deterioration and the 
attendant  serious  consequences  for  the  economy  and  the  stability  of  the  euro  area.  The 
package of measures approved on 20 May brings forward a signiﬁcant portion of the effort to 
be made to reduce the deﬁcit in 2011, when it should stand at 6% of GDP, and acts directly 
on  its  structural  component,  which  is  projected  to  fall  by  somewhat  more  than  half  with 
respect to the estimated 2009 levels.  
The  government’s  unprecedented  austerity  drive  reﬂects  the  exceptional  nature  of  the 
situation  and  the  resolve  to  set  public  ﬁnances  on  the  right  track  and  thereby  dispel  the 
doubts  which  were  fomenting  contagion  and  instability.  The  unquestionable  costs  this  will 
entail for society will be compensated by the enhanced protection from instability and by a 
sounder position on which to base recovery.  
It  is  thus  absolutely  essential  to  meet  the  new  targets  set,  even  if  the  macroeconomic 
scenario  ultimately  proves  to  be  less  dynamic  than  envisaged  by  the  government.  In  the 
current circumstances any deviation from projections could have serious consequences for 
the  credibility  of  the  ﬁscal  consolidation  efforts.  To  ensure  strict  compliance  with  targets, 
monitoring and supervision procedures will have to be strengthened and contingency plans 
designed  to  ensure  that  targets  are  met  and  certain  expenditure  items  are  behaving 
adequately. The cooperation of local and regional governments is essential if the ambitious 
process of ﬁscal consolidation facing us is to be tackled successfully.  
The ﬁscal effort to be made by the Spanish economy, in a situation in which the available 
projections  point  to  moderate  growth,  is  considerable,  and  may  become  even  more  so  if 
nothing  is  done  to  correct  the  upward  path  of  interest  rates  triggered  by  the  Greek  ﬁscal 
credibility crisis and the contagion spreading it to other vulnerable economies. To make this 
effort  feasible,  the  ﬁscal  consolidation  programme  has  to  be  accompanied  by  structural 
measures  designed  to  strengthen  the  potential  growth  of  the  economy,  since  this  largely 
determines  the  sustainability  of  public  ﬁnances.  In  this  respect,  it  is  vital  to  correct  the 
inefﬁciencies which have grown up in the labour market, since here the required reform will 
largely determine Spain’s ability to become more competitive and generate employment. Nor 
should it be overlooked that a relatively signiﬁcant part of the increase in the budget deﬁcit in 
the last two years is directly or indirectly related to the rise in unemployment. The priority of 
the  labour  market  reform  in  no  way  detracts  from  the  importance  of  pushing  ahead  with 
reforms in the product markets, particularly in the services sector, aimed at ensuring more 
ﬂexible and efﬁcient overall functioning of the economy that will permit continued productivity 
growth.  This  is  a  ﬁeld  in  which  numerous  initiatives  have  been  adopted  and  in  which  the 
policy  followed  in  recent  years  has  earned  a  good  reputation.  The  main  challenge  lies  in 
timely and rigorous implementation of the measures announced and in maintaining the pace 
of reform.  
As part of the measures needed to successfully exit the crisis and overcome the problems of 
credibility  spread  by  contagion,  the  orderly  restructuring  of  the  ﬁnancial  system  is  vital  in 
order to complete the adjustment of the accumulated imbalances and pave the way for the 
recovery of economic growth, competitiveness and job creation.  
I  will  therefore  devote  the  last  part  of  my  address  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the 
restructuring  of  our  ﬁnancial  system,  a  process  which  has  to  be  set  against  that  of 
restructuring  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  of  the  international  ﬁnancial 
markets. In my presentation of the 2008 Annual Report, I explained in some detail why such 
an in-depth revision of the regulatory framework was necessary, so here I will limit myself to 
the key changes proposed in the work currently under way.  
Two main areas of change can be distinguished: the supranational organisational framework 
and a new regulatory system.  
6 
 BIS Review 86/2010
With  regard  to  how  the  supranational  institutions  competent  in  this  area  are  being 
reorganised, special mention should be made of the political impetus from the new extended 
G20,  since  without  its  contribution  the  reform  of  international  regulation  would  have  been 
unlikely to advance so  strongly. Also, the recently created  Financial Stability Board (FSB), 
which replaces the Financial Stability Forum and of which Spain has become a full member, 
is  playing  a  central  role  in  this  process  of  change.  The  FSB  is  charged  with  identifying 
vulnerabilities  of  the  international  ﬁnancial  system  and  coordinating  the  responses  of  the 
national  authorities  and  other  international  fora.  In  addition,  it  oversees  the  international 
application  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards,  promotes  the  development  of  the 
colleges  of  supervisors  and  prepares  the  contingency  plans  required  for  managing 
international ﬁnancial crises.  
Sweeping changes are also afoot within the European Union in micro-prudential and macro-
prudential  supervision.  In  the  ﬁrst,  although  ultimate  responsibility  will  continue  to  lie  with 
national  supervisors,  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  will  be  in  charge  of 
improving  the  quality  and  consistency  of  supervision,  strengthening  that  of  cross-border 
groups and establishing a single set of rules applicable to all European ﬁnancial institutions. 
In  the  macro-prudential  area,  which  can  be  deﬁned  concisely  as  that  entrusted  with 
identifying  systemic  risks,  responsibility  will  lie  with  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board, 
which  also  makes  the  recommendations  or  proposes  the  corrective  measures  it  considers 
appropriate.  
Noteworthy  in  the  area  of  regulation  are  the  proposals  made  by  the  Basel  Committee  for 
Banking Supervision, which directly address the need to increase the amount and quality of 
capital held by institutions to absorb potential losses, the advisability of introducing minimum 
liquidity standards, and the usefulness of creating capital cushions to help moderate credit 
cycles. Speciﬁcally with regard to the aim of dampening the tendency of markets to amplify 
economic  cycles,  headway  is  being  made  in  the  design  of  provisioning  systems  which,  in 
essence,  are  similar  to  those  in  place  in  Spain  since  mid-2000  (the  dynamic  or 
countercyclical  provision).  International  accounting  regulators,  particularly  the  IASB,  also 
seem to be converging towards these systems. Also with the aim of mitigating excessively 
procyclical behaviour of ﬁnancial markets, management compensation guidelines have been 
drawn up to discourage excessively risky strategies.  
Also  in  the  pipeline  are  major  regulatory  changes  to  mitigate  the  moral  hazard  problems 
posed by institutions which in various ways ultimately acquire what has come to be known as 
systemic signiﬁcance.  
Naturally,  this  regulatory  adjustment  will  have  a  signiﬁcant  impact  on  ﬁnancial  institutions. 
That means that, irrespective of how long a transition period is deemed appropriate, ﬁnancial 
intermediaries should now set in motion the adjustment process, to ensure the least possible 
upheaval. Spain’s ﬁnancial institutions have understood this and are notably strengthening 
both the level and quality of their capital.  
The restructuring process of the Spanish banking system runs alongside the reform of the 
global  ﬁnancial  system.  As  part  of  this  essential  restructuring,  all  institutions,  according  to 
their  individual  characteristics  and  circumstances,  must  strengthen  their  solvency,  resizing 
and  improving  their  efﬁciency  in  the  medium  term.  In  short,  the  challenge  consists  in 
adapting to the new reality in which the ﬁnancial sector will have to operate in the future.  
The  Spanish  banking  system  is  generally  in  a  sound  position  from  which  to  approach  this 
restructuring process. But the present situation is complicated. On the one hand, the need for 
loan loss provisions will continue to dent proﬁt and loss accounts, as defaults persist against 
a  continuing  weak  economic  backdrop.  And  on  the  other,  the  competition  to  secure  retail 
funding pushes up the cost of borrowing and drives down margins. Strains in the wholesale 
funding markets add further pressure. They also entail higher risk premia and, if they persist 
and intensify, could make access to the wholesale markets more difﬁcult.  
BIS Review 86/2010 
 7
Moreover, the sector must absorb the internal imbalances that built up in the years of strong 
growth in the economy and in banking activity. These imbalances, which are greater in some 
Spanish deposit institutions than in others, are essentially threefold.  
The ﬁrst imbalance derives from their over-reliance on wholesale market funding. Although 
the term structure of Spain’s ﬁnancial institutions’ debt is mostly medium and long-term, the 
severity  of  the  crisis  and  investor  ﬂight  in  view  of  a  widespread  loss  in  conﬁdence  put 
pressure on institutions, which responded by stepping up their efforts to attract deposits. But 
changing deposit structures is a lengthy process.  
The  second  imbalance  that  the  Spanish  banking  sector  must  overcome  derives  from  its 
continuing  high  exposure  to  the  construction  and  real  estate  sector,  which  after  a  lengthy 
period of excessive growth is now undergoing a severe adjustment. The Banco de España’s 
latest  Financial  Stability  Report  laid  bare  both  the  potential  scale  of  the  exposure  to  this 
sector of activity and the coverage existing to meet any associated risks.  
In  this  respect,  the  Banco  de  España  has  just  published,  for  public  consultation,  an 
amendment  of  its  ﬁnancial  reporting  standards,  in  particular  those  relating  to  estimation  of 
necessary credit risk coverage. Without going into further details here, sufﬁce it to say that 
the  reform  deals  with  transparency  and  with  the  establishment  of  minimum  criteria  for 
institutions;  criteria  which  have  been  simpliﬁed  and  made  more  consistent  and  which 
primarily  respond  to  the  lessons  learned  during  the  crisis.  Moreover,  and  although  in  this 
respect  there  was  no  need  for  regulatory  reform,  the  changes  clearly  reafﬁrm  the 
understanding  that  certain  banking  practices,  such  as  asset  foreclosures,  despite  being 
legitimate  problem  management  tools,  cannot  in  any  circumstances  warrant  delaying  the 
recognition of losses.  
The  third  imbalance  is  connected  with  the  Spanish  banking  industry’s  excess  capacity. 
During  the  growth  years,  banking  sector  activity  rose  very  signiﬁcantly.  In  a  retail  banking 
model based on proximity to customers, this continued upsurge in activity prompted sharp 
growth  in  organisational  structures  and  in  new  branch  openings.  Moreover,  in  a  highly 
competitive  environment,  many  institutions  whose  customer  base  was  typically  linked  to  a 
speciﬁc  region  responded  by  looking  for  new  markets,  opening  branches  beyond  their 
traditional geographical area.  
Clearly there was no sense in maintaining these organisational structures and such a dense 
branch network, with all the associated costs, at a time when the future outlook for banking 
activity  was  considerably  less  favourable  than  previous  to  summer  2007,  and  considering 
also the impact of possible margin squeezes.  
Restructuring  is  clearly  the  responsibility  of  the  banks  themselves.  But  the  authorities 
designed  the  FROB  (Fund  for  the  Orderly  Restructuring  of  the  Banking  Sector)  as  a 
mechanism to further this process in a way that would minimise the burden for the taxpayer. 
As a result, and as the banking sector overall is in a healthy position, Spain has been spared 
the voluminous and widespread recapitalisations, with no commitment to restructuring, seen 
elsewhere.  
The FROB envisaged action on two fronts. On the one hand, it gave the Banco de España 
broad powers to take control of any institution that were to fail. And on the other, on what we 
could call the preventive side, it allowed ﬁnancial support to be provided for the restructuring 
of viable institutions and their management teams, and helped them digest the process; that 
said,  the  institutions  themselves,  and  especially  those  that  had  experienced  management 
failures, would have to bear the attendant cost. This meant that private sector solutions were 
prioritised, as has been seen in the processes that have unfolded in the past few months.  
Today,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  Spain’s  ﬁnancial 
institutions  is  well  under  way.  It  is  now  just  a  case  of  formalising  and  implementing  the 
agreements  reached.  As  a  result,  Spain’s  deposit  institutions  that  did  not  already  have 
sufﬁcient capital have now secured it, either from the markets or from the FROB. The Banco 
8 
 BIS Review 86/2010
de España has conducted stress tests to verify that all institutions – banks, savings banks 
and  credit  co-operatives  –  will  actually  have  sufﬁcient  capital  available,  not  only  for  what 
would  currently  seem  to  be  the  most  reasonable  scenarios,  but  also  for  complex  growth 
scenarios in the near future. Accordingly, before end-June, the Banco de España will take 
the  steps  necessary  to  formalise  the  processes  already  agreed  and  to  ensure  they  are 
correctly implemented. If, by month-end, any of these processes has failed, or any institution 
has been left behind, the Bank will act, using the mechanisms envisaged for this purpose in 
the FROB legislation.  
Moreover,  the  Bank  intends  to  publish  the  results  of  these  stress  tests,  to  reveal  the 
deterioration  estimated,  the  consequent  capital  requirements  and  the  capital  funding 
committed, to provide the markets with a perfectly clear idea of the situation of the Spanish 
banking system.  
Thus, before the summer, the restructuring of the banking system should be complete, save 
for a legal reform allowing savings banks to obtain high-quality capital on the market, to meet 
the  new  Basel  standards.  The  government  has  the  agreement  of  Spain’s  main  opposition 
party for the successful passage of this legal reform through Parliament.  
The restructuring and reform of the ﬁnancial system, along with the budgetary adjustment, 
the  public  pension  reform  and  the  labour  market  reform,  are  the  most  urgent  measures 
needed  to  restore  conﬁdence  in  the  Spanish  economy,  and,  as  such,  should  be  passed 
before  the  summer  recess.  But  the  process  must  not  stop  there,  as  further  measures  are 
needed to stimulate the recovery in growth and the modernisation of the Spanish economy. 
Vital  tasks  remain,  such  as:  educational  reform;  the  modernisation  of  general  government 
and the removal of overlaps between the different tiers of government; guiding investment in 
infrastructure towards projects that enhance the competitiveness of Spanish ﬁrms; privatising 
or  streamlining  public  corporations;  increasing  competition  in  network  industries  and 
particularly in energy; promoting collective bargaining agreements in the private sector that 
raise the competitiveness of the Spanish economy and thus create employment, etc. And not 
only at national or central government level, but also among regional and local governments, 
trade unions, employers’ associations and other economic and social agents. At this point in 
time, we must all face up to our responsibilities, with the corresponding costs and sacriﬁces. 
Accordingly, let me conclude by expressing the Banco de España’s ﬁrm commitment to play 
its part, and to urge others to do the same. 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 9
