Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Has the financial sector grown too big? 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Nomura  Seminar  “The  paradigm  shift  after  the  financial  crisis”,  Kyoto, 
15 April 2010.  
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  Nomura  for  inviting  me  at  this  conference  in  this  historical  and 
prestigious city of Kyoto. I am particularly happy to be here today for at least two reasons. 
First it gives me the opportunity to finally deliver a speech at a Nomura Conference, after my 
previously failed attempt, in October 2006 when I was unable to deliver my prepared speech, 
because  of  a  knee  surgery.  In  that  speech  which  I  ultimately  sent  to  the  organisers  to  be 
distributed  to  the  participants  (the  title  was:  “Three  Questions  on  Monetary  Tightening”)  I 
asked  the  following  three  questions  related  to  the  process  that  central  banks  have  to  go 
through  in  tightening  monetary  policy:  When  to  start  tightening?  At  what  speed  tighten? 
When to stop tightening? 
Less  than  four  years  later,  after  having  gone  through  a  full  tightening and  loosening  cycle 
these  questions  might  still  look  pertinent.  I  looked  back  at  what  I  was  writing  at  that  time 
concerning the answer to the first question, i.e. when to start tightening monetary  policy. I 
made at that time three recommendations: 
1. 
Don’t  wait  too  long,  especially  if  the  signs  of  recovery  are  apparent  and  interest 
rates are at very low levels. The sooner tightening starts, the less tightening might 
be needed later on. 
To be sure, don’t wait to see inflation rising before raising rates. It will be too late. 
Use a wide set of indicators and arguments to explain to market participants and the 
public at large why tightening is needed. Money and credit aggregates, asset prices 
and the level of interest rates might be useful indicators of why the time has come to 
reduce accommodation. 
2. 
3. 
I leave it to you to judge how valid these recommendations are for the current conjuncture. 
The second reason for being pleased to be here today is that I am back in this beautiful city 
nearly after ten years. In May 2000 I attended a meeting of the G7 deputies, preparing for the 
Okinawa  Summit  in  July  that  year.  Among  the  participants  whom  you  might  know  were 
Haruhiko  Kuroda,  from  the  Japanese  Finance  Ministry  (now  President  of  the  Asian 
Development Bank), and Tim Geithner, at that time US Finance deputy. I was attending as 
Italian Finance deputy. 
The  discussion  in  those  days  was  largely  focussed  on  strengthening  the  financial 
architecture  after  the  1997  Asian  crisis.  The  focus  was  very  much  on  strengthening  the 
resilience of Emerging Markets in order to equip them for a possible next crisis. The other 
main  focus  was  debt  forgiveness  for  the  poorest  countries.  Looking  back  to  that  work 
agenda, it seems to me that much has been achieved in these countries. Where we have 
been  slightly  less  performing  is  in  our  own  financial  systems.  The  implementation  of  the 
reform  agenda  agreed  at  the  Cologne  summit,  in  June  1999,  concerning  the  advanced 
economies has been disappointing. 
Let me quote parts of the report of the G7 Finance Ministers to the Cologne Summit: 
“The  past  two  years  have  reminded  us  that  investors  and  creditors  often  tend  to 
underestimate  risks  as  they  reach  for  higher  yields.  In  periods  of  market  euphoria,  market 
participants can make credit and investment decisions that might not otherwise have been 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 1
made. In hindsight, the failures on the part of lenders and supervisors in the major countries 
include  poor  risk  management  practices,  inadequate  information  as  well  as  inadequate 
attention to available information, and capital standards that provide unintended incentives to 
lend to risky borrowers. Such excessive risk taking, combined with high degrees of leverage, 
can magnify the negative effects of any event or series of events.” 
Doesn’t it sound familiar? The risks inherent in financial markets were well known ten years 
ago.  The  problem  was  in  identifying  the  right  remedies.  Let  me  read  the  part  on 
recommendations: 
“Measures to induce creditors and investors to act with greater discipline (i.e., to analyse and 
weigh risks appropriately in their lending and investment decisions), should aim at avoiding 
excessive leverage and encouraging more prudent assessment of the risks associated with 
lending to ….. emerging markets!” 
The  main  concern  ten  years  ago  was  that  the  international  financial  system  would  be  put 
under  stress  again  by  emerging  markets,  not  by  the  core  of  the  system,  as  if  the 
underestimation of risks could not happen in advanced economies. We had to learn the hard 
way  that  sophisticated  financial  markets  are  also  prone  to  exuberance  and  contraction 
phases which hamper their proper functioning. We thus have to ask ourselves some difficult 
questions on how these markets can function better and better serve economic development. 
Before  getting  to  the  main  topic  of  my  speech  today,  which  concerns  the  size  of  financial 
markets, let me say a few words about some recent events in European financial markets, 
which  may  be  of  interest  to  you,  also  to  underline  how  complex  and  sometimes  irrational 
these markets tend to behave. 
Last  week-end  the  euro  area  member  states  agreed  on  the  procedure,  mechanism  and 
financial amount to support Greece in its fiscal adjustment programme, with a defined burden 
sharing  mechanism  and  non-concessional  pricing  scheme.  This  will  enable  Greece  to 
implement  its  adjustment  programme  without  loosing  market  access  and  ensuring  a 
sustainable burden of the debt. 
This  announcement  makes  it  clear  what  the  euro  area  authorities  have  said  since  many 
months,  i.e.  that  a  scenario  of  default  and  exit  from  the  euro  area,  which  some  market 
participants and observers had toyed with, was simply absurd. The cost of such a doomed 
scenario,  on  which  not  many  have  really  thought  thoroughly,  is  immensely  larger  than 
implementing the adjustment that the Greek society has to do in any case. This has been 
recognized not only by the Greek Government but also by its citizens. 
If it was so obvious – one might ask – why wasn’t the decision by the euro area countries 
and the Greek government taken earlier? It is indeed a good question. The answer has much 
to do with the political process and the time that it sometimes takes in our democracies to 
take certain decisions. It took months for the Greek Government to realise that, in light of the 
new data on the budget deficit, it had to backtrack from its election promises and reverse its 
budgetary policy by 180 degrees. It took time for the other euro area governments to realise 
that a support package was needed to ensure the credibility of the adjustment in the eyes of 
financial markets. 
While democracies need time to take decisions, financial markets act quickly, accelerating 
their  position-taking  at  any  sign  of  indecision  by  the  policy  authorities.  Furthermore,  the 
Lehman  Brothers  case  shows  that  democracies  are  not  always  able  to  deliver  the  most 
rational and efficient solution. Under certain circumstances it is thus rational for markets to 
bet  on  the  irrationality  of  the  democratic  decision-making  process.  It  was  irrational  to  let 
Lehman Brothers fail, but it happened. Those who bet on that failure earned a substantial 
amount of money. So why not bet on a possible irrationality of European decision-making? 
European  policy  makers  may  have  underestimated  the  self  reinforcing  nature  of  market 
trends.  If  a  speculative  strategy  based  on  a  certain  hypothesis,  such  as  the  default  of 
Greece, delivers capital gains over time – as has been the case since the fall of 2009 – it is 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2010
bound  to  attract  an  increasing  number  of  investors.  As  a  result,  the  market  pressure 
increases,  making  the  hypothesis  more  realistic.  The  action  needed  to  convince  market 
participants that the hypothesis is unrealistic and to stop the mounting speculative wave has 
to  be  firm.  Vague  statements  that  some  event,  such  as  a  default,  will  not  occur,  are  not 
sufficient to calm the markets. Concrete actions are needed. This was not fully understood 
over the last few months. 
But there is another element which might have been underestimated and needs to be further 
considered  in  thinking  about  how  our  democracies  can  cope  with  certain  financial  market 
developments.  As  an  increasing  number  of  investors  take  positions  based  on  the  same 
hypothesis, their ability to influence the final outcome increases. The incentive to do all that is 
needed to ensure that the outcome coincides with their underlying assumption is enhanced 
by the substantial capital gain that these investors would obtain if their strategy is successful 
and, conversely, the substantial loss they would suffer if their underlying hypothesis is not 
realised.  In  other  words,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  those  who  bet  on  a  sovereign  default  that 
ultimately the country defaults. They have thus the incentive to do what is in their power to 
induce  the  country  to  default.  This  applies  not  only  to  countries  but  also  to  individual 
companies or financial institutions. 
In a competitive financial market, with many players unrelated to each other, such incentives 
do  not  necessarily  create  distortions.  However,  in  markets  characterised  by  conflict  of 
interest, collusive behaviour and lack of transparency, actions by individual agents may lead 
to outcomes which do not reflect market efficiency and an optimal allocation of resources. 
Just  to  give  concrete  examples  of  what  may  and  has  happened  recently,  we  have  seen 
rating agencies not acting as rating agencies, when they stated that they had to wait for the 
reaction of the markets before assessing whether the corrective measures taken by Greece 
were sufficient to change their view. Market analysts and observers’ views have been widely 
publicised without revealing potential conflicts of interest, such as sitting in advisory boards 
or acting as consultants for major investment houses or hedge funds. This above is not an 
excuse for the slow decision making in the euro area, which is partly constrained by national 
processes.  But  the  fact  that  financial  markets  may  take  undue  advantage  of  any  sign  of 
weakness,  using  all  instruments  at  their  disposal  to  transform  uncertainty  into  profit,  has 
been underestimated. 
The agreement reached over the last week-end is very important and marks a key turning 
point in the crisis. But this experience should now be used to create a more efficient decision 
making process within the euro area aimed in particular at preventing similar situations from 
occurring in the future and eventually at solving them more efficiently. 
Let me turn now to the main topic of my speech today, which relates to the size of financial 
systems.  There  is  an  emerging  consensus  that  while  financial  markets  are  generally 
conducive to economic growth, in the run-up to the recent crisis they were operating on an 
excessive scale. While policy-makers’ efforts to prevent a systemic meltdown and mitigate 
the negative impact on the real economy after the bubble burst have been largely successful, 
the crisis caused the deepest recession since the 1930s, and imposed large fiscal and social 
costs on economies throughout the world. 
We need to re-examine our all-too-easy assumptions that a large financial sector invariably 
benefits the real economy. We have to acknowledge that the financial sector, not to mention 
some of its components, may sometimes become “too large”. It can end up posing a threat to 
both economic and financial stability, so we have to enhance our understanding of where the 
optimal threshold lies. We also need to identify the regulatory measures that can address the 
problem best: namely, preventing the financial industry from becoming too large and taking 
excessive risks, leading to the emergence of bubbles, and to the proliferation of complex and 
opaque  financial  instruments.  And  we  should  avoid  imposing  restrictive  measures  that  will 
prevent the financial sector from channelling resources towards productive opportunities. In 
doing so, we need to make sure that our measures target non-traditional financial markets as 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 3
much as traditional banking, in order not to encourage regulatory arbitrage and a return to 
“business as usual” outside the auspices of regulators. 
Today  my  remarks  will  revolve  around  four  main  points.  First,  I  will  claim  that  efficient 
financial markets enhance growth. However, if they grow “too large,” then they may lead to a 
misallocation of resources and cause costly crises. Second, I will present evidence showing 
that  in  the  build-up  to  the  crisis,  the  size  of  the  financial  sector  outgrew  its  trend.  Third,  I 
identify  some  of  the  main  reasons  why  this  occurred  and  discuss  how  to  avoid  that  such 
imbalances materialise again. To this end, regulation and supervision can play an important 
role. Fourth, while ensuring that the financial sector does not grow beyond its optimal size, 
the new regulatory framework should not reach the point of financial repression. 
The optimal size and role of the financial sector 
1. 
The debate on the relationship between financial markets and the real economy habitually 
occupies  the  intellectual  space  that  exists  between  Joseph  Schumpeter’s  insights  into  the 
ability  of  well-developed  financial  systems  to  stimulate  economic  growth,  and  Joan 
Robinson’s  observation  that  “where  enterprise  leads,  finance  follows”.1  The  experience  of 
recent decades from emerging as well as industrialised countries has mostly confirmed the 
first  claim,  namely,  that  deeper  financial  markets  improve  economic  efficiency,  lead  to  a 
better  allocation  of  productive  capital,  and  increase  long-term  economic  growth.  However, 
the frequent financial shocks associated with dynamic financial industries, and in particular 
the recent economic crisis, also highlight the role large financial markets play in downside 
risk.  This  combined  evidence  implies  that  there  is  a  trade-off  between  a  highly  vibrant 
financial sector and the overall stability of the financial system. In fact, some scholars have 
gone as far as to claim that financial instability can only be eliminated by restricting the same 
productive forces which are responsible for long-term growth.2 
What I will argue in this speech is that one aspect of the financial sector which can give us 
key insights into this trade-off is its size. When reasonably large, financial markets promote 
economic efficiency by identifying productive opportunities and transforming savings into the 
investment  necessary  to  finance  those  opportunities.  However,  when  they  become  “too 
large”,  relative  to  what  is  implied  by  economic  fundamentals,  problems  like  financial 
complexity, poorly understood financial innovation, herding behaviour, and endogenous risk-
taking  –  to  name  just  a  few  –  suddenly  outweigh  the  benefits.  The  recent  financial  and 
economic  crisis  is  a  stark  example  of  that.  The  pre-crisis  period  was  characterised  by  the 
growing  size,  complexity  and  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets,  with  subsequent 
detrimental  effects  on  the  global  economy.  In  order  to  address  the  problem,  regulatory 
measures are being taken to impose limits on the propensity of the financial sector to create 
downside risk. But a fine balance needs to be reached: these measures must be effective but 
not punitive; they need to address the crux of the problem without unduly limiting the ability of 
financial markets to sustain economic growth. 
In  general,  the  gradual  growth  of  the  financial  sector  is  driven  by  both  structural  and 
conjunctural factors. On the one hand, higher relative productivity, resulting in higher profits 
and  wages,  and  the  necessity  to  service  ever  increasing  global  savings  are  fundamental 
reasons why the financial industry has gradually expanded. These are structural issues, and 
they will hardly go away in the future – it is conceivable that emerging market economies will 
keep  exhibiting  high  savings  rates,  and  thus  large  and  efficient  financial  markets  will  be 
                                                 
1  Robinson,  J.  “The  Generalization  of  the  General  Theory.”  The  rate  of  interest  and  other  essays.  London: 
Macmillan, 1952, 67–142. 
2  Ranciere,  R.,  Tornell,  A.,  and  F.  Westermann,  2008.  Systemic  crises  and  growth.  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics 123, 359–406. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2010
required  to  service  them.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  cyclical  deviations  from  this  trend, 
driven by risk-taking, excessive leverage, the search for yield as well as the proliferation of 
opaque  financial  instruments,  among  other  things.  It  is  therefore  essential  to  think  of  the 
optimal “threshold” beyond which the financial sector is “too large” – not in absolute terms, 
but in terms of deviations from the trend. At such a point, the size of the financial industry 
starts to become detached from what economic logic would imply. 
Before I go into further detail on this front, it is perhaps useful to explain why we still need a 
large and dynamic financial industry. In general, deep and efficient financial markets improve 
economic  performance  both  by  raising  the  level  of  growth3  and  by  allocating  productive 
capital4 more efficiently, ultimately generating benefits for the society as a whole. Consider, 
for example, the long-standing point in academic and policy discussions on the differences in 
average GDP growth between the US and continental Europe. It has been suggested that 
deeper financial markets across the Atlantic are to a large extent responsible for the larger 
increases  in  productivity,  the  faster  pace  of  industrial  innovation,  and  the  generally  more 
dynamic  economy  of  the  US  compared  with  that  of  Europe.  For  example,  deeper  credit 
markets probably account for the higher rate of business start-ups in the US. The difference 
is  especially  visible  when  it  comes  to  the  financing  of  innovative  ideas,  where  the  much 
larger US venture capital industry has been credited over the years with the emergence of 
whole  new  industries  and  such  innovative  corporate  giants  as  Microsoft,  Cisco  Systems, 
Google (to name just a few). Out of the world’s 500 largest companies, 26 American ones 
have  been  founded  since  1975,  compared  with  only  3  European  ones,  showing  a  larger 
turnover  of  industry  leaders.5  These  two  aspects  of  “creative  destruction”  –  new  business 
creation and innovation – are crucial when we come to think of why deeper financial markets 
can benefit economic growth. 
The same pattern is seen when we compare European economies. Econometric estimations 
suggest  that  improvements  in  corporate  governance,  in  the  efficiency  of  legal  systems  in 
resolving  conflicts  in  financial  transactions  and  in  some  structural  features  of  the  less 
developed  European  banking  sectors  are  all  factors  that  are  likely  to  help  the  financial 
system reallocate capital faster from declining sectors to those with good growth potentials.6 
In addition, recent ECB research has pointed to the fact that large differences persist among 
European  countries  in  terms  of  new  business  creation  and  patenting  activity.  It  has 
concluded that much of this difference can be attributed to the existence of more developed 
credit markets and risk capital markets.7 
All  this  evidence  has  led  most  financial  economists  to  think  of  the  relationship  between 
finance and growth as one in which “more is better”. However, the recent crisis has revealed 
that a financial sector which goes beyond a certain threshold (or breaking point) can harm 
the economy and society as a whole. In particular, we have seen that an oversized financial 
industry tends to exacerbate information asymmetries, moral hazard problems, and the hunt 
for yield, leading to excessive risk-taking and over-leveraging of the system. The events of 
2007–2008 suggest that when financial sectors are “too large”, the allocation of resources 
may become inefficient. Examples of such misallocation were abundant during the dot-com 
                                                 
3  Rajan,  R.,  and  L.  Zingales,  1998.  Financial  dependence  and  growth.  American  Economic  Review  88,  
559–586. 
4  Wurgler,  J.,  2000.  Financial  markets  and  the  allocation  of  capital.  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  58,  
187–214. 
5  Philippon, T., and N. Veron, 2008. Financing Europe’s fast movers. Bruegel Policy brief 2008/01. 
6  Hartmann, P., Heider, F., Lo Duca, M, and E. Papaioannou, 2007. The role of financial markets and innovation 
in productivity and growth in Europe. ECB Occasional paper 72. 
7  Popov, A., and P. Roosenboom, 2009. On the real effects of private equity investment: Evidence from new 
business creation. ECB Working paper 1063. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 5
expansion, when many high-tech projects of little value were generously financed. Numerous 
examples of misallocation were associated with the credit growth of the early 2000s as well, 
of which the expansion of the US sub-prime mortgage market is just the most obvious one. 
We can think of examples in Europe too – for instance, growth in Spain relied for years on an 
ever-expanding real estate sector fuelled by increasing borrowing. 
Looking at specific market segments, there are plenty of examples showing the excesses of 
the  financial  sector,  and  also  illustrating  the  importance  that  the  “shadow”  banking  system 
has  played in  this  crisis.  For  example,  the  growing  use  of  securitisation  by  banks  led  to  a 
distinctly lax screening of loans.8 As a result, mortgage credit growth became disconnected 
from  both  relative  and  absolute  income  growth  in  the  sub-prime  market.9  The  crisis  itself 
started not as a traditional bank run on deposits, but as a securitized-banking run driven by 
the  withdrawal  of  repurchases  (“repo”)  agreements  from  the  balance  sheets  of  investment 
banks, which had been funding roughly half of their assets through repo markets.10 
During  financial  bubbles,  the  search  for  yield  intensifies,  risk-taking  is  everywhere,  and 
leverage in the system may increase at unsustainable rates. The exponentially rising volume 
of  financial  assets  and  transactions,  especially  by  highly  leveraged  and  interconnected 
institutions, can increase financial instability. Shocks to the system can lead to fire sales and 
asset price decreases, resulting in liquidity spirals and widespread bankruptcies.11 
On  the  “real”  side,  the  aftermath  of  the  busts  which  follow  unsustainable  booms  are 
frequently  associated  with  falling  housing  prices,  collapsing  equity  prices,  and  lasting 
declines  in  output  and  employment.  Under  certain  circumstances,  the  negative  impact  on 
potential  output  could  be  long-lasting  rather  than  transitory  (see  Figure  1).  In  addition, 
financial  crises  like  the  recent  one  tend  to  worsen  the  fiscal  position  of  many  countries. 
Government debt explodes in the wake of banking crises, fuelled not so much by the cost of 
recapitalising the banking systems but by collapsing tax revenue.12 
As can be seen from this rather sketchy argumentation, the damage caused by “oversized” 
financial markets can be quite substantial. But even if we are aware that there are limits to 
the “optimal” size of financial markets, we still run into practical problems if we try to establish 
the  right  “threshold”,  and  research  in  this  field  has  been  very  limited.  Just  a  handful  of 
researchers in recent years have studied the non-linearities in the relationship between the 
size  of  financial  markets  and  economic  growth  using  cross-country  evidence13,  and  they 
have  concluded  that  at  “too  high”  levels  of  finance,  the  effect  of  finance  on  growth 
substantially  weakens.  But  this  line  of  research  needs  to  be  pursued  much  further, 
incorporating  the  pre-crisis  years,  looking  at  various  types  of  financial  markets,  and  better 
motivating our analysis in terms of theory. 
Establishing an “optimal” threshold above which the size of the financial sector is harmful and 
below which it is beneficial for society is much more complicated than identifying multiples 
                                                
 
8  Keyes, B., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., and V. Vig, 2010. Did securitization lead to lax screening? Evidence from 
subprime loans. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307–362. 
9  Mian,  A.,  and  A.  Sufi,  2009.  The  consequences  of  mortgage  credit  expansion:  Evidence  from  the  U.S. 
mortgage default crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1449–1496. 
10  Hordahl,  P.,  and  M.  King,  2008.  Developments  in  repo  markets  during  the  financial  turmoil.  BIS  Quarterly 
Review (December), 37–53. 
11  Adrian,  T.,  and  H.  Shin,  2010.  Liquidity  and  Leverage.  Journal  of  Financial  Intermediation  (forthcoming); 
Brunermeier, M. and L. Pedersen, 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Review of Financial Studies 22, 
2201–2238. 
12  Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoff, 2009. The aftermath of financial crises. American Economic Review 99, 466–472. 
13  Deidda, L., and B. Fattouh, 2002. Non-linearity between finance and growth. Economic Letters 74, 339–345; 
Rioja, F., and N. Valev, 2004. Does one size fit all? A reexamination of the finance and growth relationship. 
Journal of Development Economics 74, 429–447. 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2010
that  deviate  from  their  long-run  trends.  While  some  parameters  of  financial  markets  –  like 
total loans outstanding, stock market capitalisation, or foreign financial flows – are relatively 
easy to observe and quantify, many are not. The financial system consists of a number of 
activities  that  do  not  necessarily  involve  credit  expansion.  Examples  include  proprietary 
trading,  or  some  of  the  activities  which  –  especially  in  the  US  and  the  UK  –  investment 
banks, broker dealers, hedge funds and the like have been engaged in. 
That “the financial sector is too large” simply  cannot be an  absolute claim. While it is true 
that, for example, financial sector employment as a share of total employment in the US has 
doubled in the past 50 years, this may be an efficient development associated, for example, 
with the necessity to manage ever increasing savings from booming East Asian countries like 
China. Therefore, we can only make the claim that the financial sector is too big relative to a 
certain well-defined benchmark. For instance, what is the size of financial markets beyond 
which  further  enlargement  leads  to  lower  economic  growth  because  of  the  emergence  of 
bubbles?  Or  to  lower  innovation  because  highly  skilled  labour  is  drawn  away  from  the 
R&D sector? Or to sub-optimal diversification because of herding by uninformed investors? 
Recent  research  at  the  ECB  has  shown  that  while  a  deep  financial  sector  leads  to  more 
optimal  economic  diversification,  when 
to 
diversification is substantially weakened.14 And in an emerging strand of academic literature, 
some  authors  have  looked  at  such  secondary  measures  of  “financial  market  size”  as 
excessive profits. They have shown that excessive rents reaped by the financial industry lead 
to  increased  risk-taking  which  can  endogenously  generate  boom  and  bust  episodes.15 
Others have argued that high relative wages in the financial sector can lead to lower rates of 
long-term  economic  growth  by  attracting  “talent”  away  from  the  productive  sectors  of  the 
economy.16  Continuing  work  in  this  direction  is  critical,  not  as  an  abstract  intellectual 
exercise, but because of the very tangible negative consequences of a “too large” financial 
sector, as recent experience has highlighted. 
it  becomes  “too 
its  contribution 
large”, 
Facts 
2. 
After discussing the negative consequences on financial stability and economic growth that a 
“too large” financial sector can generate, in this section I will analyse available evidence to 
show that the financial industry as a whole has grown to a sub-optimal size. 
While illustrating this point, it is important to keep in mind the difference between a beneficial 
long-term trend of gradual deepening of financial markets and the sizeable cyclical deviations 
towards  “too  large”  that  were  at  the  root  of  the  recent  crisis.  Let  us  look  first  at  one 
development within the long-term trend. Figure 2 shows the development since WWII of a 
very  intuitive  measure  of  US  financial  market  “size”,  namely  its  share  of  value  added, 
compensation  and  employment.  In  the  past  60  years,  its  share  of  GDP  has  almost 
quadrupled,  to  8%,  and  so  has  financial  sector  compensation  as  a  share  of  total 
compensation. Based on such shares in value added and total production for the 20 major 
industrial countries, some observers have made the point – drafted before the outbreak of 
the crisis – that financial instability may nowadays have more severe real effects than in the 
                                                 
14  Manganelli, S., and A. Popov, 2010. Financial markets, diversification, and allocative efficiency: International 
evidence. ECB Working paper (forthcoming). 
15  Biais,  B.,  Rochet,  J.-C.,  and  P.  Wooley,  2009.  Rents,  learning,  and  risk  in  the  financial  sector  and  other 
innovative industries. FMG Discussion paper 632. 
16  Kovrijnykh, A., and A. Popov, 2010. Financial vs. real innovation. ECB mimeo. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 7
past.17 And although the financial sector hasn’t grown in terms of employment since the late 
1980s, it is still more than twice as big as it was in the 1950s. 
If we, however, choose to focus more on compensation, an interesting development can be 
seen  regarding  financial  sector  wages  relative  to  an  economy-wide  benchmark  which 
illustrates the cyclical component of the “too much finance” concept. Figure 3 shows data on 
return to equity (ROE) for all domestic US and EU banks between 1994 and 2006. Clearly, 
bank  profitability  has  been  rising  gradually  for  quite  some  time.  In  the  US,  it  has  been  an 
average  of  14%  since  the  early  1990s,  up  from  an  average  of  9%  in  the  1980s.  And  in 
Europe, with the exception of the dot-com bust in the early 2000s, which was associated with 
a fall in profitability, the return on equity increased from 7% in 1994 to almost 19% in 2006, 
and in fact it doubled in only 5 years, between 2002 and 2006. Turning to another measure 
of  financial  sector  profit  –  average  compensation  –  Figure  4  demonstrates  that  while  on 
average wages in the financial sector have been higher than average US non-farm wages 
throughout  the  twentieth  century,  they  have  been  higher  by  30%  only  on  two  occasions  
– prior to the Great Depression and during the 2000s. In that second period, financial sector 
compensation  actually  decoupled  from  benchmark  compensation  by  more  than  40%.  It  is 
important to note that this is not due to rising compensation in “traditional” financial sectors 
like  credit  and  insurance,  but  due  to  the  large  increase  in  compensation  in  non-traditional 
financial activities like investment banks, hedge funds and the like (Figure 5). This is another 
reason why any changes to the regulatory environment aimed at preventing systemic crises 
in  the  future  will  have  to  deal  not  just  with  the  traditional  banking  sector,  but  with  the 
so-called “shadow” banking sector as well. 
Another  troublesome  parallel  with  the  Great  Depression  is  the  level  of  credit  market  debt. 
Figure 6 shows that during the twentieth century total credit market debt in the US was on 
average around 1.5 times GDP, standing at 2.5 times GDP in the 1930s, and at 3.5 times 
GDP in 2008. It is important to note the differences in the reason for this expansion: while in 
the 1930s debt rose in order to combat the 25% unemployment rate in the US at the time, its 
rise  in  the  1980s,  1990s  and  2000s  was  unrelated  to  crisis  management.  Thus  the 
accumulation of pre-crisis credit market debt stands as a stark example of the downside of 
financial market expansion. 
Of course, these developments are not confined to the US. Figure 7 shows the evolution of 
banking  sector  assets  in  the  UK  during  the  twentieth  century.  While  they  stood  at  around 
50% of GDP until the 1970s, they rose to 300% by 2000, and to 550% by 2007. While part of 
this  development  is  a  natural  consequence  of  being  an  international  financial  centre,  it  is 
difficult to justify such a dramatic expansion merely on the grounds of the rising importance 
of finance as a tool to fuel growth. In addition, the explosion in the size of the financial sector 
has posed major problems for regulators in the wake of the financial crisis, when they were 
faced with addressing the systemic implications of very large, individual banks. For example, 
in 2007 the liabilities of Barclays exceeded the UK’s GDP, the liabilities of Deutsche Bank 
stood at 80% of Germany’s GDP, and the liabilities of Fortis were several times larger than 
the GDP of its home country, Belgium.18 As some observers rather provocatively remarked, 
such financial institutions may not just be “too big to fail”, but in fact “too big to exist”.19 
These observations point to the fact that the expansion of the financial sector in the pre-crisis 
years was not an Anglo-American phenomenon. Indeed, as Figure 8 demonstrates, only in 
the past 20 years, the broad financial sectors (including real estate and business services) in 
France  and  Germany  have  expanded  by  about  25%  in  terms  of  share  of  GDP.  These 
                                                 
17  Ferguson,  R.,  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Panetta  and  R.  Portes,  2007.  International  financial  stability.  9th  Geneva 
Report on the World Economy, November. 
18  Gros, D., and S. Micossi, 2008. The beginning of the end game. Voxeu column, 20 September 2008. 
19  Ibid. 
8 
 BIS Review 50/2010
developments have been very similar in magnitude to the ones in the US and the UK. While 
they may simply be part of the process of gradual financial deepening, they bring to mind a 
similar financial sector expansion in Japan in the 1980s. As you will surely recall, by 1990 the 
world’s  ten  largest  banking  corporations  were  headquartered  in  Japan,  and  Japanese 
branches and subsidiaries accounted for almost 20% of all commercial and industrial loans 
to borrowers located in the US.20 This expansion is rivalled in magnitude only by the rapid 
decline of Japanese banking overseas during the 1990s. 
A crucial question in this respect is: to what degree was this worldwide expansion of finance, 
preceding the recent crisis, driven by fundamentals? Part of this process was most certainly 
associated  with  the  growing  global  imbalances,  fuelled  by  fast  growth  and  a  rapid 
accumulation of savings in emerging markets, like China. As Figure 9 demonstrates, while in 
the last 25 years the share of industrialised countries in world trade gradually declined, their 
share in cross-border financial positions quickly increased. But growth rate gaps are just one 
aspect  of  the  story  behind  these  uneven  advances  in  trade  and  financial  globalisation. 
Another,  perhaps  more  important,  one  was  the  fact  that  developed  countries  engaged  in 
rapid  innovation  in  the  field  of  financial  products,  allowing  them  to  channel  domestic  and 
global  savings  more  efficiently  towards  productive  investments,  while  emerging  countries 
remained  openly  sceptical  about  this  process.  Two  of  the  most  striking  developments  in 
recent  decades  in  this  respect  occurred  in  credit  default  swaps  (CDSs)  and  securitised 
products.  In  principle,  these  instruments  allow  for  insuring,  pooling  and  spreading  of 
idiosyncratic credit risk, and so for a long period they were hailed as top examples of how 
financial innovation can contribute to real economic activity. However, as Figures 10 and 11 
show,  the  enormous  jump  in  their  issuance  should,  in  hindsight,  have  been  viewed  more 
cautiously.  In  particular,  the  value  of  global  outstanding  CDSs  rose  from  less  than 
USD 1 trillion  in  2001  to  more  than  USD  60  trillion  in  2007.  And  in  the  context  of  the 
originate-and-distribute model widely adopted by banks in the 1990s, the value of securitised 
loans went from close to 0 in 1990 to almost USD 700 billion on the eve of the crisis. 
Unfortunately, it is not clear whether the crisis has imposed discipline on the financial sector. 
In theory, one would have expected the crisis to have resulted in, for instance, a new bonus 
structure with smaller rewards for short-termist behaviour, less proprietary trading and more 
trading on own resources, greater aversion to the accumulation of debt, etc. Some of this we 
have  seen  –  for  example,  proprietary  trading  now  accounts  for  10%  of  the  profits  of  the 
remaining investment banks (now transformed into bank holdings), down from 20% in 2005. 
Moreover, many financial players have shunned risk, and leverage has declined dramatically 
– for example, almost 80% of hedge funds in 2009 were borrowing a dollar or less for each 
dollar of investor capital.21 However, in January the largest investment banks in the London 
city paid GBP 40 billion in bonuses, suggesting that rewards in the industry have not been 
shifted to long-term performance. In addition, while many banks have paid back the bailout 
money they received in 2008 or 2009, the fact that these bailout funds were distributed in the 
first  place  has  certainly  increased  the  level  of  moral  hazard  in  an  industry  for  which  the 
concept  of  “too  big  to  fail”  has  been  applied  to  a  variety  of  market  players.  All  these 
arguments suggest that it could easily be “business as usual” for the financial industry, both 
traditional and non-traditional, unless our regulations are appropriately modified. 
For the sake of fairness, one should also mention that the reduction in some of the pre-crisis 
developments is not necessarily a positive change – for instance, the severe decline in the 
securitisation market (globally from almost USD 5 trillion in 2006 to USD 1 trillion in 2009, 
which  was  less  than  in  2000)  has  been  blamed  for  the  continuing  reluctance  of  banks  to 
                                                 
20  Peek,  J.,  and  E.  Rosengren,  1997.  The  international  transmission  of  financial  shocks:  The  case  of  Japan. 
American Economic Review 87, 495–505. 
21  “Europeans Favor Regulating ‘Shadow Banks’”, NY Times, 23 February 2009. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 9
extend business loans.22 This is one – perhaps isolated – case in which a return to some 
form of “business as usual” would be welcome. 
that, 
Causes and remedies 
3. 
To  find  possible  remedies  to  the  “excessive”  size  of  the  financial  sector,  it  is  important  to 
understand  the  factors  that  have  allowed  it  to  grow  too  big.  As  mentioned  before,  one 
obvious  reason  is  excessive  profits.  There  is  an  emerging  literature  which  links  financial 
sector profit – in terms of ROE and compensation – to the sub-optimality of financial sector 
size. While a gradual trend in higher return to equity and higher wages in the sector in recent 
decades  has  reflected  natural  developments  like  increased  productivity,  the  dramatic 
increase  in  profit  in  the  immediate  pre-crisis  years  should  have  served  as  a  cautionary 
message.  Obviously,  in  the  context  of  competitive  financial  markets,  increased  profits  will 
tend  to  come  hand  in  hand  with  the  increased  hunt  for  yield  and  risk-taking,  expanding 
financial intermediaries’ balance sheets even further. In the run-up to the crisis, this process 
was  especially  visible  in  the  shadow  banking  sector,  which  was  making  record  profits  and 
paying record wages, unseen in relative terms since the 1920s. Not only did rapid financial 
innovation enable Wall Street to encourage risk-taking through record pay, but this process 
also diverted human resources away from more traditional productive occupations towards 
the  shadow  banking  system.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests 
lured  by  record 
compensation, “30–40% Duke Masters of Engineering Management students […] chose to 
become investment bankers or management consultants rather than engineers”.23 
Of course, an equally important reason for the increase in the size of the financial sector is 
the global accumulation of savings over time. It has been argued24 that the pre-crisis boom in 
US real estate and securitisation markets reflected high foreign demand for safe US assets 
resulting  from  “excess  world  savings”  in  the  context  of  persistent  global  imbalances. 
According  to  this  interpretation,  foreign  asset  demand  not  only  pushed  down  the  risk-free 
interest rate in the US but also compressed the risk premia on risky assets. The low cost of 
financing,  in  turn,  fostered  an  increase  in  the  level  of  leverage  of  the  domestic  financial 
sector which exacerbated systemic risk. And while in the aftermath of the crisis the global 
imbalances  have  somewhat  improved,  with  savings  rates  in  the  western  world  slightly 
increasing,  I  expect  that  in  the  future  emerging  market  economies  will  continue  to 
accumulate  foreign  reserves  and  invest  them  in  advanced  economies,  in  the  process 
depressing long-term interest rates and intensifying again the search for yield. 
This  combination  of  structural  and  conjunctural  factors,  manifested  in  the  extraordinary 
nature  and  consequences  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  has  clearly  revealed  the  need  to 
revamp the regulatory and supervisory framework, both along the traditional micro-prudential 
dimension  and  the  new,  complementary,  macro-prudential  approach.  To  be  clear,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  proposals  (for  instance  the  so-called  Volcker  rule),  the  new  regulatory 
framework does not directly address the issue of downsizing a too large financial industry. 
Rather, its goal is to enhance financial stability, by reducing the riskness of the whole system 
via  macro-prudential  supervision,  and  by  curbing  the  risks  undertaken  by  single  financial 
institutions,  via  micro-prudential  regulation.  Nevertheless,  it  is  plausible  to  believe  that  the 
new measures will also have an impact on the size of the financial sector. While the recent 
increase in the profits of the industry was certainly due to improved financial innovation and 
                                                 
22  Gorton,  G.,  and  A.  Metrick,  2009.  Securitized  banking  and  the  run  on  the  repo.  Yale  ICF  working  paper 
No. 09–14. 
23  Vivek Wadhwa, Testimony to the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Education and the Workforce, 
16 May 2006. 
24  Caballero,  R.,  and  A.  Krishnamurthy,  2009.  Global  imbalances  and  financial  fragility.  American  Economic 
Review 99, 584–588. 
10 
 BIS Review 50/2010
technology, it can also be attributed to the higher risks that the financial sector undertook.25 
By curbing these risks, it will be possible to reduce the size of the financial sector as well. For 
instance,  suppose  that  risks  decrease  because  of  limits  to  leverage.  This  may  imply  that 
profits  will  go  down  as  well.  As  a  consequence,  the  financial  sector  will  attract  fewer 
resources, private capital will flow to more profitable industries, and its size will decrease. 
Let  me  first  briefly  recall  the  concept  and  the  rationale  behind  macro-prudential  policy. 
Macro-prudential  oversight  concerns  the  monitoring  and  assessment  of  systemic  risk  
–  meaning  the  risk  that  financial  instability  becomes  so  widespread  that  it  impairs  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system  to  the  point  where  economic  growth  and  welfare  suffer 
materially. The crucial idea is the recognition that systemic risk is endogenous to the financial 
system  as  it  depends  on  the  collective  behaviour  and  the  interconnectedness  of  financial 
institutions, financial markets and market infrastructures, as well as the interaction between 
the financial system and the macro-economy. The ultimate aim of macro-prudential policies 
is thus to assess and identify the build-up of systemic vulnerabilities and to ensure that the 
financial  system  is  able  to  withstand  their  unwinding,  minimising  potential  spillovers  to  the 
real economy.26 Therefore, macro-prudential supervision is unlikely to tackle the issue of an 
over-sized  financial  industry,  while  micro-prudential  regulation  can  have  a  more  direct 
impact. 
Recently,  there  have  been  developments  on  this  front.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS), under the aegis of the G20, has put forward a  major overhaul of the 
micro-prudential  framework.  The  ultimate  goals  of  the  measures  under  discussion  are  the 
enhancement of the capital and liquidity buffers as well as the reduction of leverage. As a 
consequence, the cost of funding for the financial sector is likely to increase and the returns 
on  equity  are  likely  to  decrease.  This,  in  turn,  is  likely  to  affect  the  size  of  the  financial 
industry. 
In addition, specific attention is given to make sure that systemic risk is not building up in 
unregulated sectors. To this end, the G20 leaders have agreed that all systemically important 
financial institutions, markets, and instruments should be subject to an appropriate degree of 
regulation  and  oversight.  It  is  crucial  to  make  sure  that  the  measures  designed  to  reduce 
excessive  risk-taking  and  excessive  leverage  are  not  restricted  to  the  “traditional”  financial 
sector,  while  the  shadow  banking  system  is  free  to  engage  in  the  type  of  excessive 
leveraging that was common in the run-up to the crisis. In trying to reduce the probability of 
bank holdings engaging in speculative activities, some proposals have even gone as far as 
banning proprietary trading by banks (the so-called “Volcker rule”). As regards hedge funds 
and other “pools of capital”, there is global consensus on the need for appropriate disclosure 
of information, including on their leverage, in order to be able to assess the systemic risks 
that  they  pose  individually  or  collectively.  At  EU  level,  the  recent  proposal  for  a  directive 
presented  by  the  Commission  would  consistently  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  supervisory 
authorities to gather information on the exposures of hedge funds, also in cooperation with 
the soon-to-be-established European Systemic Risk Board. 
Finally, initiatives are under way to enhance the resilience of credit derivatives markets, in 
particular  by  establishing  central  clearing  counterparties subject  to  effective  regulation  and 
supervision. Recent ECB research has demonstrated that derivatives contribute to systemic 
risk  by  building  up  financial  imbalances.  In  particular,  derivative  positions  create  hidden 
leverage  and  increase  risk-taking  incentives  in  the  financial  sector.  As  risk-taking  entails 
                                                 
25  See for instance, Alessandri, P., and A. Haldane, 2009. Banking on the State. Mimeo, Bank of England. 
26  In Europe, following the publication of the Report of the de Larosière Group in February and a proposal by the 
European Commission in May, the European Council in June 2009 agreed to set up a new independent body, 
the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which will be responsible for the macro-prudential supervision of 
the EU’s financial system. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 11
potential  costs  to  third  parties,  financial  institutions  should  be  required  to  hold  additional 
capital in relation to the size of their derivative positions. Initial margins, implemented via a 
central  counterparty,  are  beneficial  as  they  are  ring-fenced  from  risk-taking  by  financial 
institutions.  However,  this  has  to  be  complemented  by  capital  requirements,  as  insuring 
against  counterparty  risk  can  make  market  participants  more  complacent.  The  interplay  of 
margin requirements, capital requirements and central clearing houses will thus reduce the 
incentives  for  risk-taking,  the  ability  of  the  system  to  accumulate  leverage,  and  excessive 
returns  in  the  financial  sector,  resulting  in  a  leaner  financial  industry  operating  on  a  more 
sustainable scale.27 
4. 
Possible consequences of more stringent supervision and regulation on the 
real economy 
A  natural  question  is  how  the  new  regulatory  framework  will  affect  economic  growth. 
Ultimately,  the  new  capital  requirements  and  leverage  ratio  rules  might  impact  the  credit 
provision. Although it is necessary to ensure financial stability and curb excessive credit, at 
the same time this process should not go too far and impair economic growth. 
There  is  substantial  macro  level  evidence  that  the  depth  of  the  credit  markets  –  measured 
alternately as liquid liabilities and commercial bank credit to the private sector – is associated 
with higher economic growth.28 Changes in the supply of credit, both in terms of volumes and 
credit  standards,  have  been  shown  to  have  a  significant  effect  on  real  economic  activity 
through business lending; the evidence is stronger for the euro area than the US.29 Studies 
that have gone into the mechanisms of this effect have generally concluded that the positive 
effect of credit markets on growth comes from reallocation of investment from dying to booming 
sectors30,  from  higher  rates  of  new  business  entry31,  and  from  higher  growth  of  industries 
consisting  mainly  of  small  firms32.  In  that  sense,  credit  markets  are  crucial  to  the  growth  of 
continental European economies, where the vast majority of companies consist of SMEs. 
But  what  will  be  the  effect  of  redefined  capital  requirements  and  leverage  ratios  on  loan 
supply  and  ultimately  on  the  economy  at  large?  The  availability  of  capital  is  vital  to  bank 
lending,  and  this  has  been  highlighted  by  the  recent  crisis.  There  is  evidence  that  the 
worldwide contraction of credit that followed the bursting of the real estate bubble in the US 
was led by banks with too little regulatory capital on their balance sheets.33 
                                                 
27  Biais,  B.,  Heider,  F.  and  M.  Hoerova,  2010.  Risk-sharing  or  risk-taking?  Financial  innovation,  margin 
requirements, and incentives. ECB working paper (forthcoming). 
28  King,  R.,  and  R.  Levine,  1993.  Finance  and  Growth:  Schumpeter  might  be  right.  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics 108, 717–738. 
29  Driscoll,  J.C.,  2004.  Does  bank  lending  affect  output?  Evidence  from  the  U.S.  states.  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 51, 451–471; Cicarelli, M., Maddaloni, A., J-L. Peydró, 2009. Trusting the bankers: A new look at 
the  credit  channel  of  monetary  policy.  ECB  mimeo.  Cappiello,  L.,  Kadareja,  A.,  Kok  Sorensen,  C.,  and 
M. Protopapa, 2010. Do bank loans and credit standards have an effect on output? A panel approach for the 
euro area. ECB working paper 1150. 
30  Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital. Journal of Financial Economics 58, 187–214. 
31  Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88, 559–586. 
32  Beck,  T.,  Demirguc-Kunt,  A.,  Laeven,  L.,  and  R.  Levine,  2008.  Finance,  firm  size,  and  growth.  Journal  of 
Money, Credit, and Banking 40, 1379–1405. 
33  Jimenez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró, J-L., and J. Saurina, 2010. Monetary policy and credit crunch: Identifying 
simultaneously the bank lending and the balance sheet channels. ECB working paper (forthcoming); Popov, 
A., and G. Udell, 2010. Cross-border banking and the international transmission of financial distress during the 
crisis of 2007–2008. ECB  working paper (forthcoming); Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen, 2010. The impact of the 
US financial crisis on global retail lending. Duke University working paper. 
12 
 BIS Review 50/2010
It is also fairly certain that capital requirements are an efficient, albeit crude, tool to ensure 
the stability of the banking system. Traditionally, capital requirements tend to alleviate moral 
hazard problems in the banking sector in the presence of deposit insurance, and allow banks 
to form a “cushion” against losses for depositors. In particular, they protect depositors both 
by preventing bank managers from embarking on risky projects by making sure that banks 
have a sufficient equity at stake, and by allowing regulators to close and recapitalise banks 
before equity value falls to zero and debt holders start making losses. 
Given  the  trade-off  between  financial  stability  and  growth,  what  are  the  correct  capital 
requirements? And would “getting them wrong” endanger the economy? Comparisons between 
countries have shown that bank systems are capable of performing their intermediation role with 
very different levels of capital. In both the UK and the US, for example, banks in the past had 
much  higher  capital  ratios  and  much  lower  leverage,  and  still  managed  to  sustain  growing 
market economies. Of course, capital requirements that are too high will impose a cost on the 
banking system as bank capital is more expensive than senior debt or deposits. But even if “too 
high” capital requirements result in less lending, this is not necessarily detrimental to the whole 
economy.  As  I  mentioned  above,  the  expansion  of  sub-prime  lending  clearly  imposed  a 
negative externality on the whole economy, and so in hindsight regulatory measures that would 
have prevented such credit expansion could in fact have been beneficial. 
To summarise, capital requirements, and leverage ratios serve well to illustrate the trade-off 
between stability and growth I mentioned at the beginning. The examples I provided earlier 
show  that  the  costs incurred  when  an  “oversized”  financial  system  unwinds  are  very  large 
and  outweigh  any  pre-crisis  gains.  Therefore,  prudent  regulatory  action  to  restore  the 
balance between stability and growth is perfectly justified. 
Conclusions 
5. 
Financial markets are crucial players in a dynamic modern economy, channelling resources 
from savers to borrowers and allocating them to productive investment opportunities. At the 
same  time,  our  experience  in  the  past  decade  has  highlighted  the  dangers  of  allowing 
financial sectors to become “too large”. In doing so, negative developments like the hunt for 
rents,  the  propensity  to  herd  and  create  bubbles,  the  misalignment  of  incentives,  and  the 
proliferation  of  complex  innovative  financial  instruments  may  outweigh  the  benefits  of 
finance.  There  are  plenty  of  examples  pointing  to  the  fact  that  before  2007  the  financial 
sector  may  indeed  have  grown  “too  large”,  mainly  due  to  developments  outside  of  the 
traditional banking system. The consequences of this expansion have been disastrous and 
will perhaps be felt for years to come. 
Given the obvious negative impact of an excessively large financial industry, we keep asking 
ourselves whether limits should be imposed on the size of the financial sector itself. I hope it 
is clear from the evidence I have presented that the answer to this question is yes. However, 
it  is  also  essential  to  make  sure  that  we  do  not  repress  financial  markets  to  the  point  of 
jeopardising  their  contribution  to  growth.  Therefore,  the  measures  I  outlined  are  aimed  at 
making the industry safer rather than weaker, and should not be considered “punitive.” Their 
goal  is  to  “re-direct”  the  financial  sector  so  that  it  avoids  embarking  on  unsustainable 
patterns. These actions are aimed at commercial banks as well as at non-traditional financial 
players to make sure that excessive risk-taking is not taking place outside the auspices of 
regulators.  Ensuring  that  the  financial  sector  is  large  enough  to  strengthen  the  economy 
while not being “too large” is a task that we take very seriously. There is a clear trade-off 
between economic growth and financial stability, and it is a difficult but critical task to strike a 
good balance, ensuring that we end up neither with too little growth nor with too little stability. 
It is my firm belief that the recent reforms to the regulatory and supervisory process, as well 
the ECB’s new role in systemic risk management will contribute greatly to this process. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 13
The charts are also to be found on the website of the European Central Bank. 
 14 
   BIS Review 50/2010
   BIS Review 50/2010 
 15
 16 
  BIS Review 50/2010
 17
BIS Review 50/2010 
  18 
  BIS Review 50/2010
 19
BIS Review 50/2010 
  20 
 BIS Review 50/2010
 21
BIS Review 50/2010 
   BIS Review 50/2010
 22 
 