Brian P Sack: Dollar asset markets – prospects after the crisis 
Remarks by Mr Brian P Sack, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Financial Markets Association ACI 2010 World Congress, 
Sydney, 26 March 2010. 
These remarks were presented via video conference from New York. 
 Introduction 
The  recent  financial  crisis  provided  global  capital  markets  with  the  most  significant  stress 
event that they have faced in many decades. For U.S. asset markets, this episode revealed a 
wide range of outcomes in terms of their ability to function though a period of stress. Some 
markets demonstrated  remarkable liquidity and an unparalleled status as a safe haven for 
investors; others simply fell apart as investors shied away from illiquid assets with too much 
complexity and opacity and too much exposure to counterparty risk.  
Indeed, for many of the markets involved in the intermediation of credit in the U.S. financial 
system,  the  crisis  revealed  structural  deficiencies  that  made  the  system  unstable.  Once 
revealed,  this  instability  required  an  immediate  and  forceful  policy  response  to  limit  the 
damage.  As  certain  markets  ground  to  a  halt,  policymakers  took  extraordinary  actions  to 
mitigate  the  damage  to  the  broader  financial  system  and,  ultimately,  to  the  real  economy. 
Those actions, which included a range of liquidity facilities launched by the Federal Reserve 
and  by  central  banks  around  the  world,  proved  effective  and  brought  the  financial  system 
back from the brink of a complete meltdown. 
However, the provision of emergency liquidity and other forms of support were only a bridge 
to  bring  the  financial  system  to  a  more  stable  point.  It  is  now  necessary  to  work  towards 
creating  a  more  robust  financial  system  that  addresses  the  structural  deficiencies  that 
brought us to the brink in the first place. Many reform initiatives are now being debated, with 
the discussions involving a range of market participants, central banks, regulatory agencies 
and the U.S. Congress. It is important that these initiatives result in outcomes that reduce the 
chances and consequences of another financial crisis; and it is equally important that they 
not impede the effective functioning of financial markets during normal periods. 
My comments today will review the lessons that can be drawn from the performance of U.S. 
financial markets during the crisis and will describe some of the changes that may occur as 
we migrate toward a more stable and effective financial system. 
Capital markets that demonstrated resilience 
In many ways the crisis underscored the unique characteristics of dollar-denominated asset 
markets.  This  can  be  seen  in  one  simple  fact:  Despite  the  fact  that  most  of  the  troubled 
housing  assets  at  the  root  of  this  crisis  were  dollar-denominated,  the  dollar  rallied  sharply 
during the depths of the crisis. This pattern at least partly reflected strong investor demand 
for particular dollar-denominated assets in response to the financial turmoil. 
U.S. Treasury securities clearly stand out in this regard, as they again proved to be a key 
safe-haven asset. The combination of the size and liquidity of the market and the risk-free 
credit status of the instruments made Treasury securities extremely appealing at the height 
of the financial turmoil. Treasury bill yields actually went negative for a time after the Lehman 
bankruptcy,  as  investors  were  willing  to  pay  for  the  opportunity  to  hold  this  instrument. 
Longer-term  Treasury  yields  also  declined  sharply,  with  the  ten-year  yield  falling  to  nearly 
2 percent at one point. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 1
While  government  securities  around  the  world benefitted  from  safe-haven  flows  during  the 
crisis,  there  are  several  features  of  Treasury  securities  that  made  them  stand  out  even 
relative to other sovereign markets. At more than $7 trillion, the size of the Treasury market 
provides investors with a homogenous asset class in which they can place large amounts of 
funds.  Moreover,  Treasury  liquidity  seems  to  compare  favorably  to  the  liquidity  of  other 
sovereign debt markets, whether measured by average daily trading volumes, turnover ratios 
or other metrics. The Treasury market is supported by a sound and extensive infrastructure 
for  trading,  deep  financing  markets,  sizable  derivative  markets  and  an  active  dealer 
community. 
This is not to say that Treasury market liquidity was not tested during the crisis. Liquidity did 
suffer some in the face of greater volatility, strong investor flows and deleveraging by primary 
dealers. Despite these strains, however, investors were able to continue to trade Treasury 
securities in decent size at reasonable cost and with transparent pricing throughout the crisis. 
The effective functioning of sovereign credit markets was a critical development in the crisis, 
as  it  allowed  fiscal  authorities  around  the  world  to  respond  aggressively  in  a  manner  that 
helped  stabilize  financial  and  economic  conditions.  In  the  United  States,  net  borrowing 
through marketable Treasury securities jumped from about $200 billion in 2007 to $1.4 trillion 
in  2009  –  a  shift  that  was  achieved  through  a  notable  increase  in  issuance  across  all 
maturities. But the appetite for Treasury securities kept up with the increase in issuance, with 
auction coverage in 2009 even exceeding that seen in 2007. Moreover, the increase in gross 
issuance appears to be behind us, as the U.S. Treasury Department has indicated that the 
next adjustment to its issuance of coupon securities is likely to be towards smaller sizes. 
Markets for almost every asset class outside sovereign debt were adversely affected by the 
financial crisis. However, important distinctions can still be drawn across these affected asset 
classes  in  terms  of  their  relative  performance.  While  some  markets  completely  shut  down 
and have had difficulty recovering, others demonstrated aspects of resilience. 
The markets for U.S. equities and non-financial corporate bonds fall into this latter category. 
To be sure, holders of these instruments suffered sharp capital losses as the crisis unfolded. 
But a portion of the re-pricing was fundamental, in that it was driven by a significant revision 
to  the  economic  outlook  rather  than  to  poor  market  functioning.  Indeed,  equity  markets 
continued to operate throughout the crisis, in that investors were able to transact and price 
discovery  was  occurring.  The  same  was  true  for  most  high-quality  corporate  bonds,  even 
though that market had more notable episodes of illiquidity. The fact that these markets held 
up  better  than  others  in  part  reflects  that  they  were  less  dependent  on  the  availability  of 
leverage and on the continued value of the assets as collateral. 
Moreover, the crisis did not reveal any major structural flaws in equity and corporate bond 
markets, thus paving the way to a vigorous recovery of those assets. Indeed, risk premiums 
on  both  of  these  assets  have  narrowed  sharply  since  early  2009,  and  corporate  bond 
issuance  has  rebounded  impressively.  This  recovery  has  been  driven  by  market  forces. 
Firms have been motivated to issue bonds in order to reduce their reliance on bank funding 
and  other  sources  of  short-term  credit,  while  investors  have  realized  that  corporate  yield 
spreads offered appealing returns given that firms in most sectors appear fairly healthy. 
Lastly, while not a U.S. asset market, it is worth mentioning the performance of the foreign 
exchange markets, particularly for this audience. Foreign exchange markets also functioned 
relatively  well  during  this  period  of  turmoil.  This  resilience  has  been  highlighted  in  recent 
reports  issued  by  the  Foreign  Exchange  Committee  in  the  United  States  and  by  similar 
bodies  abroad.  Broadly  speaking,  trading  in  spot  foreign  exchange  markets  remained 
transparent, accessible and relatively liquid. There were signs of strain in particular segments 
of these markets, such as dislocations in forward exchange rates and a notable decline in the 
liquidity  of  currency  swaps.  However,  market  participants  were  generally  able  to  execute 
trades  and  manage  currency  exposures  in  these  markets  on  an  uninterrupted  basis.  The 
resilience  of  foreign  exchange  markets  owed  in  part  to  the  availability  of  CLS  Bank  for 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2010
eliminating  time  gaps  in  the  settlement  of  different  currencies,  to  the  efficient  collateral 
exchange  achieved  through  credit  support  annexes  and  to  the  standardization  of  trade 
documentation. 
Credit intermediation and market disruption 
While those capital markets demonstrated meaningful resilience to financial stress, that was 
not  the  case  for  other  parts  of  the  financial  system  –  namely,  those  involved  in  more 
complicated forms of credit intermediation. Many of the most acute problems were driven by 
a  build-up  in  leverage  in  which  large  amounts  of  opaque,  illiquid,  long-term  assets  were 
financed  by  short-term  liabilities.  These  activities  took  place  both  in  traditional  financial 
intermediaries and in what is often referred to as the shadow banking system. 
The  shadow  banking  system  performs  a  function  similar  to  that  carried  out  by  banks  and 
other financial institutions. In particular, it takes the short-term, highly liquid investments that 
households  and  other  investors  want  to  hold,  and  it  uses  them  to  fund  the  longer-term, 
relatively  illiquid  loans  that  businesses  and  households  demand  to  finance  their  economic 
activity. However, while a bank performs this transformation of maturity, liquidity and credit 
risk from end to end within a single institution, the shadow banking system involves a wide 
range of institutions and markets in the process. 
In  particular,  the  shadow  banking  system  has  included  money  market  mutual  funds, 
enhanced  money  funds,  other  real  money  accounts  and  securities  lenders  as  providers  of 
short-term  funding;  banks,  industrial  loan  companies,  independent  finance  companies  and 
other  non-bank  firms  as  originators  of  private  credit;  and  an  array  of  entities  including 
structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs),  securities  arbitrage  conduits,  real  estate  investment 
trusts,  broker  dealers,  clearing  banks,  hedge  funds,  mortgage  insurers,  monoline  insurers 
and  credit  rating  agencies  as  part  of  the  maturity  and  credit  transformation  between  the 
lenders and the borrowers. 
Given the number of steps and firms involved, the process of intermediating credit through 
this system was a complicated one. However, it is not the multiplicity of steps itself that was 
problematic; indeed, analogous steps would be taking place within a financial intermediary in 
the traditional banking system. What was problematic was that these steps involved a wide 
range of firms that did not have adequate coverage under any one regulatory umbrella and 
that did not operate with the benefit of either government-guaranteed liabilities or the Federal 
Reserve’s discount window. 
The shadow banking system grew rapidly in the years leading up to the crisis. By the middle 
of  2007,  the  volume  of  outstanding  credit  that  was  securitized  had  reached  more  that 
$4 trillion.  If  the  debt  securitized  by  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs)  is 
included,  the  amount  of  securitized  credit  had  reached  $9.5  trillion  in  2007.  Clearly,  the 
shadow  banking  system  was  not  in  the  shadows,  but  was  a  market-based  credit 
intermediation  system  that  was  at  least  on  par  with  the  banking  system  in  terms  of  its 
importance to the economy. 
Moreover, this system was not completely separate from the traditional banking system. In 
fact, much of the risk that the shadow banking system had assumed was ultimately borne by 
banking organizations. Banks had provided backstop lines of credit and had other contractual 
or reputational reasons to absorb structured credit and other assets back onto their books 
once they could not be financed in the shadow banking system. In effect, regulated banks 
functioned to some degree as the lenders of last resort for the shadow banking system. 
The  entire  financial  system,  both  in  the  banks  and  outside,  got  caught.  It  was  holding  too 
much risk on too narrow of terms, it did not have sufficient capital, and it was too leveraged 
and dependent on short-term funding. As it became clear that the value of the U.S. housing 
stock  had  to  decline  considerably,  these  financial  conditions  complicated  the  adjustment. 
Indeed, what started as a seemingly narrow concern about subprime residential mortgage-
BIS Review 40/2010 
 3
backed securities cascaded into a widespread and abrupt re-pricing of credit more broadly 
and a desperate scramble for liquidity. 
As market participants and investors came to realize that the system was overexposed, they 
began to withdraw funding. Credit lines were reduced, lending terms shortened and demand 
shifted towards high-quality collateral. Major funding markets came under tremendous strain 
and  experienced  run-like  threats,  including  the  triparty  repo  market,  interbank  lending 
markets, money market mutual funds and the commercial paper market. Facing significant 
redemptions,  money  market  mutual  funds  withdrew  from  wholesale  funding  markets, 
including  from  both  secured  and  unsecured  commercial  paper  programs,  which  further 
exacerbated those dynamics. The withdrawal of funding raised the possibility of fire sales of 
assets, which, in a vicious circle, further heightened concerns about financial exposures and 
accelerated  investors’  flight  to  safe  and  liquid  assets.  Asset-backed  securities  markets 
virtually  shut  down  as  distressed  asset  sales  by  SIVs  and  other  entities  prompted  sharp 
spikes in secondary market spreads. 
The fact that the regulatory structure had allowed the shadow banking system to operate with 
less  capital  and  liquidity  than  the  regulated  banking  system  added  to  the  stress  of  the 
situation.  However,  banks  and  other  traditional  financial  institutions  were  caught  up  in  the 
same  dynamics.  In  part,  their  involvement  reflected  the  connection  between  the  banking 
system and the shadow banking system noted earlier. As the shadow banking system came 
under  pressure,  regulated  banks  had  to  provide  funding  by  extending  lines  of  credit  or  by 
absorbing assets onto their balance sheets. As such, the shadow banking system effectively 
collapsed onto the regulated banking system. 
The bottom line is that the entire system was suffering from a self-reinforcing cycle of liquidity 
runs and concerns about the solvency of financial institutions. An effective policy response 
had to address both aspects of this cycle. 
Responding to the demand for dollar liquidity 
It took government actions on many fronts to stabilize the financial system. Many of these 
efforts were aimed at addressing the solvency problems facing the financial sector, including 
the injection of capital into financial institutions and two of the housing GSEs. These efforts 
were  critically  important  to  the  recovery  of  financial  markets.  However,  l  will  focus  my 
remarks on another important part of the government response – the actions taken by central 
banks and other government entities to address the liquidity strains in the markets. 
Central banks around the world responded vigorously to the erosion of liquidity conditions. 
The lender-of-last-resort function of central banks proved to be critical for supporting market 
functioning and stemming contagion. 
For the Federal Reserve, this function had to evolve in response to the nature and location of 
the liquidity disruptions it sought to address. The Fed’s traditional lender-of-last-resort tools 
are designed to ensure adequate liquidity for depository institutions. But the liquidity strains 
went  beyond  the  banking  sector  and  into  the  market-based  credit  system.  The  traditional 
tools  were  not  adequate  to  address  the  problems  faced  in  this  more  complicated 
intermediation  system,  and  hence  the  Fed  had  to  innovate  –  under  extreme  market 
conditions and with little time to spare. 
While some of the innovations were still aimed at depository institutions, most of the facilities 
introduced were intended to address liquidity pressures at sets of firms in various financial 
markets, including primary dealers, money market mutual funds, commercial paper issuers 
and  holders  of  asset-backed  securities.  In  the  end,  these  facilities  effectively  backstopped 
many of the different components of the shadow banking system. 
The efforts to ensure that the system had adequate liquidity also involved other government 
programs, such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s (FDIC) debt guarantee and 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2010
the  U.S.  Treasury  Department’s  money  market  guarantee.  Those  programs  in  effect 
broadened  the  insurance  provided  by  the  FDIC  on  bank  deposits  to  other  liabilities  in  the 
banking  and  shadow-banking  systems.  The  combination  of  the  liquidity  and  guarantee 
programs was instrumental in stabilizing the financial system. 
It is also worth noting that the demand for dollar funding proved to be global in nature, as 
financial institutions around the world faced an elevated need for dollar funding in response 
to market stress. This need was met by the liquidity swap lines that the Federal Reserve set 
up with fourteen central banks around the world. These swap lines provided dollar funding to 
foreign central banks so that they could inject dollar funding into their own markets, in order 
to address the funding demands of institutions operating during their market hours. 
The broad intent of all of these facilities was the same – to keep an extreme increase in the 
demand  for  liquidity  from  significantly  disrupting  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and 
impairing  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy.  The  facilities,  along  with  other  efforts  from 
governments,  helped  to  halt  the  downward  spiral  and  to  alleviate  the  pressure  on  global 
financial institutions and markets. In the absence of such effective actions, the implications of 
the crisis for real economic performance would have been much worse. 
The success of the programs has been apparent in a number of dimensions. Most clearly, 
the  degree  of  counterparty  concern  and  liquidity  hoarding  in  the  money  markets  has 
diminished, as reflected in the decline in term funding spreads. Moreover, issuance of both 
commercial  paper  and  some  types  of  asset-backed  securities  has  rebounded,  and  it  has 
done so increasingly without reliance on the Fed’s liquidity support. 
It  is  also  worth  noting  that  the  exit  from  the  Federal  Reserve’s  liquidity  facilities  has  been 
quite  smooth.  At  their  peak,  these  facilities  provided  about  $1.5  trillion  of  short-term  dollar 
credit. Today, the remaining balance across them is well under $100 billion. This reduction 
was achieved without creating any significant problems for financial markets or institutions. 
That success largely reflects the effective design of those programs, as most were structured 
to provide credit under terms that would be less and less appealing as markets renormalized. 
This design worked incredibly well, as activity in most of the facilities gradually declined to 
near zero, allowing the Fed to simply turn them off with no market disruption. 
Overall, central banks were able to accommodate the most extreme shift in the demand for 
liquidity  that  has  been  seen  in  a  generation,  and  to  do  so  in  ways  that  responded  to  the 
specific needs that arose in a market-based credit system. 
Structural changes in dollar asset markets 
Although U.S. authorities managed to provide the financial system with sufficient liquidity and 
support to stem the market panic, they must now find a way to foster more enduring changes 
that will result in a sounder financial system. The crisis revealed significant structural flaws, 
but reforms are being debated to address many of these issues. 
Some of the required changes are associated with the oversight of large and interconnected 
financial  institutions.  The  reform  efforts  underway  in  Congress  are  intended  to  address 
several points of weaknesses, including gaps in the coverage of systemically important firms 
and the absence of a resolution process for an orderly wind-down of failing firms. In addition, 
regulatory standards are being reevaluated to strengthen capital and liquidity requirements 
and to improve the risk capture of those standards. 
The crisis also revealed weakness related to specific financial markets involving structured 
products,  housing-related  GSEs,  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives,  triparty  repo  and 
money  market  mutual  funds.  Reforms  are  underway  in  each  of  these  areas.  For 
securitization markets, the U.S. Congress as well as regulators are considering changes to 
ensure incentives are properly aligned and that there is sufficient transparency around the 
underlying assets. For the housing GSEs, reforms are beginning to be crafted to reach an 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 5
appropriate  model,  as  described  in  the  testimony  by  U.S.  Treasury  Department  Secretary 
Geithner  earlier  this  week.  For  OTC  derivatives,  financial  reform  legislation  contains 
provisions  to  increase  the  transparency  of  the  market  and  to  clear  trades  through  central 
counterparties. For the triparty repo market, a task force is considering recommendations to 
make  the  market  more  robust  to  weather  financial  strains  among  its  participants.  And  for 
money market mutual funds, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has offered a 
reform proposal to better prepare those institutions for abrupt changes in investor demands. 
As  you  can  see,  the  efforts  are  extensive  and  affect  many  different  areas.  Together,  they 
should  be  aimed  at  achieving  some  common  goals.  We  should  have  a  system  in  which 
regulatory arbitrage is not the primary driver of where or how financial activity or innovation 
takes place. We should have a system in which government support is well defined and is 
priced  correctly.  We  should  have  a  system  in  which  investors  receive  adequate,  accurate 
and timely information to make independent judgments about credit risk through the life of a 
security. And we should have a system that ensures adequate capital and liquidity standards 
for firms with deep and intertwined linkages to the financial markets. Overall, the reforms in 
these  markets,  along  with  the  regulatory  reforms  to  the  oversight  of  financial  institutions, 
should  result  in  more  robust  system  of  credit  intermediation,  whether  it  is  taking  place 
through traditional intermediaries or through the markets more broadly. 
This reform process faces several important risks, though. First, there is a possibility that the 
process  will  stagnate  or  end  up  incomplete,  given  that  the  issues  are  complex,  the 
stakeholders are numerous and the solutions are not always obvious. Second, there is a risk 
that, with so many efforts taking place in so many areas, the results will not fit together into 
an effective, cohesive solution. And third, there is the risk that the pursuit of reform will be 
overly  zealous,  resulting  in  a  set  of  restrictions  that  will  significantly  undermine  the 
functioning of financial markets during normal periods and thereby impede employment and 
growth. 
On  this  last  point,  it  is  worth  making  a  few  observations  about  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets as we think about how to encourage a safe and yet efficient financial sector. These 
points may be obvious but are worth emphasizing. 
First,  securitization  is  a  powerful  vehicle  that  should  play  an  important  role  in  the 
intermediation of credit in the economy. Securitization can be quite effective at transforming 
illiquid  assets  into  negotiable  securities  and  transferring  risk  to  a  more  diversified  set  of 
holders.  To  be  sure,  the  expansion  of  securitized  credit  was  much  too  extensive,  and  its 
subsequent  collapse  was  terribly  disruptive,  contributing  significantly  to  the  damage  to  the 
economy.  However,  those  developments  do  not  mean  that  securitized  credit,  if  structured 
properly, should not return in size. Reform efforts, to be effective, should foster development 
of a securitization market that properly aligns incentives and provides adequate transparency 
about risk transfer. 
Second, the use of derivatives is integral to the broader functioning of financial markets and 
the intermediation of credit. Derivatives allow for the redistribution of risks through hedging 
activities,  and  they  foster  improvements  in  price  discovery  and  market  efficiency  by 
facilitating appropriate investments in long and short positions in some types of assets. But 
while OTC derivatives already provide important benefits, more could be done to enhance 
the  robustness  of  this  market.  The  measures  under  consideration  promote  greater  use  of 
central  counterparties,  increased  regulatory  and  public  transparency,  wider  involvement  of 
exchanges  and  electronic  trading  platforms  for  actively-traded  products,  and  stronger 
operational and risk management practices. 
Third,  the  financial  system  cannot  operate  efficiently  without  leverage.  The  preferences  of 
businesses  and  households  in  their  regular  economic  activities  require  that  intermediation 
and  maturity  transformation  be  conducted  somewhere  in  the  financial  system.  Of  course, 
much  of  the  turmoil  we  witnessed  across  financial  markets  was  due  to  the  build-up  of 
excessive leverage in the system, and we cannot miss the chance to learn from this painful 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2010
lesson.  But  we  should  also  understand  that  a  reduction  in  leverage  to  near  zero  in  the 
financial  system  is  not  desirable,  as  it  would  significantly  reduce  the  efficiency  of  credit 
intermediation. Instead, discussion should be focused on how to make the use of leverage 
less procyclical, to identify those sources of leverage that are most productive and to better 
monitor the vulnerabilities that can result from excessive leverage. 
Conclusion 
The  crisis  offered  a  rare  view  into  how  our  capital  markets  function  under  extreme  stress. 
Those  circumstances  revealed  vastly  different  degrees  of  robustness  across  alternative 
segments  of  our  financial  system.  At  one  end  of  the  spectrum,  markets  for  certain  dollar 
assets  demonstrated  considerable  resilience  to  financial  stress  and  were  extremely 
appealing to investors in stress circumstances. At the other end, the crisis highlighted that 
segments  of  U.S.  credit  markets  had  structural  shortcomings  that  must  be  addressed  to 
ensure the viability of these markets going forward. Those shortcomings have necessitated 
two waves of policy response. The first wave was aimed at putting out the fire. To that end, 
the  crisis  demonstrated  that  U.S.  and  global  authorities  have  the  ability  and  willingness  to 
respond in a manner that meets dollar funding needs in a time of crisis and that promotes 
broader market stability. The second wave is aimed at building a sounder financial system for 
the  future.  Those  efforts  are  still  underway,  and  the  reform  process  may  be  long  and 
involved. However, I am hopeful that many of the shortcomings are likely to be addressed, 
and that we will emerge from this episode with a more robust and efficient financial system. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 7
