Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Moving forward through stronger partnerships 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  2010  BSP  Stakeholders’  Awards  and  Appreciation 
lunch, Manila, 7 July 2010. 
 Our  esteemed  awardees  and  partners  from  both  private  and  government  sectors,  special 
guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  morning.  On  behalf  of  the  Members  of  the  Monetary 
Board  and  my  fellow  central  bankers,  I  thank  all  of  you  for  attending  this  year’s  Awards 
Ceremony and Appreciation Lunch for BSP Stakeholders.  
Today, we continue the tradition of recognizing our stakeholders who faithfully support the 
BSP’s statistical activities and advocacy programs.  
As  you  can  tell,  this  event  is  important  to  us.  Last  Monday,  we  celebrated  the  BSP’s 
17th anniversary;  two  days  later,  we  are  holding  today’s  event  –  our  7th  Stakeholders 
Awards.  
In other words, our Stakeholders Awards ceremony now represents one of the highlights of 
our anniversary celebration. For better measure, awarding ceremonies are held not only in 
Metro Manila but also in other parts in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 
We have also increased the number of awards this year to reflect BSP’s broader and deeper 
alliances.  This  year,  we  added  outstanding  respondents  to  our  Business  Expectations 
Survey in three regions, namely: Region V or the Bicol area; Region IX or the Zamboanga 
Peninsula; and Region XII or the SOCSARGEN area. 
Today,  we  will  also  recognize  the  contribution  of  selected  public  and  private  entities  as 
valuable sources of information for our balance of payments projections.  
The changes in this year’s ceremony extend to the awards we shall be handing out today as 
created by Filipino artist Sajid Imao, one of the leading sculptors in the country today.  
Even  the  BSP  logo  has  changed  to  reflect  the  changes  that  continue  to  take  place  in  our 
organization and the environment where we operate.  
The  principal  element  of  our  new  logo  is  the  Philippine  Eagle,  the  world’s  largest.  It 
symbolizes strength, freedom, and clear vision the qualities we aspire for as a central bank. 
Three  golden  stars  represent  the  three  pillars  of  central  banking:  price  stability,  stable 
banking system, and a reliable payments system. These elements are rendered on a blue 
background to represent stability. Our logo has a round shape, to symbolize our unending 
quest to become an excellent monetary authority committed to improve the quality of life of 
Filipinos.  
It  is  fitting  that  we  are  implementing  these  changes  just  a  week  after  the  assumption  into 
office of President Benigno Aquino III. He stood for change and received an overwhelming 
mandate from our people with a landslide win. Palakpakan po natin si Presidente Benigno 
Aquino III!  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  unite  and  join  President  Aquino  in  making  the  changes  our 
country  needs  to  become  a  better  place  for  all.  As  our  theme  says,  let  us  keep  “Moving 
Forward through Stronger Partnerships.”  
Indeed,  we  should  take  our  theme  to  heart,  given  the  many  challenges  and  uncertainties 
ahead. Why do I say this?  
First, we are looking at varying and uneven pace of recovery across the globe. Given global 
interdependencies and linkages, it could lead to slower growth over the medium term.  
BIS Review 96/2010 
 1
Second,  the  potential  heavy  influx  of  capital  inflows,  as  risk  appetites  perk  up,  can  also 
complicate  monetary  management.  Additionally,  the  rebound  of  the  global  economy  could 
create  upward  pressures  on  commodity  prices  and  fan  inflation.  There  could  be  positive 
surprises to investor confidence, which could foster a stronger-than-expected improvement in 
market sentiment and prompt a strong rebound in investment and demand.  
Third,  there  are  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook.  For  these  reasons,  the  BSP  is  watchful  of 
emerging  signs  of  inflation  that  could  be  disruptive  to  consumption  and  investment,  and 
ultimately have a corrosive impact on the economy.  
One clear strategy in addressing these challenges is to forge and nurture greater partnership 
between  the  BSP  and  its  stakeholders,  through  open  communication.  This  is  where  your 
inputs,  through  your  responses  in  the  Business  Expectations  Survey,  come  in.  Your 
responses  enable  us  to  discern  public  expectations  on  the  general  direction  of  economic 
indicators, particularly inflation, a crucial element in the BSP’s monetary policy settings.  
As in a jigsaw puzzle, each institution represents a piece whose absence will leave gaps that 
could adversely affect our proper appreciation of particular scenarios. This could potentially 
lead  to  weak  or  even  wrong  policies.  It  is  important  therefore  that  we  keep  on  working 
together to gain clear perspectives that give rise to appropriate and timely policies.  
Indeed, sound macroeconomic policies provided our economy with some insulation against 
the worst global crisis in post-war history. Among the key elements that enabled the BSP to 
calibrate well-informed and well-guided policies during the crisis was the constant supply of 
information from you, our partners in the BSP’s programs. For this, we thank and applaud 
you. Palakpakan po natin ang lahat ng respondents and partners ng BSP!  
Thus,  today,  the  inflation  environment  remains  benign  while  bank  lending  continues  to 
expand.  This  enabled  the  Philippine  financial  system  to  avoid  the  credit  gridlock  which 
paralyzed other financial markets overseas. 
Meanwhile, our external position remains healthy, with a balance of payments surplus, and 
Gross International Reserves reaching record levels of roughly $48.4 billion in June 2010. 
In particular, the data you share with us – through the Cross Border Transactions Survey, 
Foreign Direct Investment Survey, and Coordinated Portfolio Investments Survey – allowed 
us  to  derive  sound  baseline  estimates  critical  in  enhancing  compilation  of  our  external 
accounts  and  in  calibrating  well-anchored  balance  of  payments  projections.  These 
projections are vital in estimating forecasts for inflation and in crafting our monetary policy 
formulation. Let us thank our respondents with a round of applause! 
At  the  same  time,  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos  coursed  through  banks  have  been 
hitting  unprecedented  levels  and  helped  raise  our  international  reserves  to  record  high 
figures as well. This was made possible by our banks who have efficiently handled the billion 
dollar remittances of overseas Filipinos.  
In  effect,  your  reliable  service  provides  significant  benefits  not  only  to  our  hardworking 
overseas  Filipinos  and  their  families  but  to  our  economy  as  well.  Let  us  give  our  banks  a 
well-deserved round of applause.  
We also thank all our partners who have joined us in our economic and financial education 
programs as we push for a better-informed public. Your unqualified support and cooperation 
are valuable to the success of the BSP’s economic and financial education programs. Let us 
give our partners in our education programs a big hand! 
Once  again,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  thank  and 
congratulate all of you for being our active partners. You have empowered us to craft and 
implement  responsive  policies  that  promote  balanced  and  sustainable  growth  of  our 
economy. Growth that empowers and improves the quality of life of Filipinos.  
2 
 BIS Review 96/2010
Moving forward, all we have to do is to act as a single force and move forward as one. Henry 
Ford once said: “If everyone is moving forward, then success takes care of itself.” 
Ladies and gentlemen. Today, therefore, let us commit to work more closely together and act 
in  solidarity  to  be  a  single  force  and  to  move  forward  as  one  so  that  we  can  achieve  the 
change we need, sooner rather than later.  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
BIS Review 96/2010 
 3
