Heng Swee Keat: Achieving good regulatory outcomes – the way forward 
Welcome speech by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary  Authority of 
Singapore,  at  the  16th  International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors,  Singapore, 
22 September 2010.  
 1. 
Good  morning.  My  colleagues  and  I  at  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  are 
delighted to welcome you to Singapore, and to the 16th International Conference of Banking 
Supervisors (ICBS). We are honoured to join the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS) as organisers of the conference.  
Looking back on the crisis  
2. 
When we last met in Brussels in September 2008, the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
triggered  a  tail-spin  in  the  global  financial  system.  The  global  economic  outlook  was  then 
grim.  Decisive  policy  action  has  averted  the  worst  scenarios  of  the  crises,  and  the  overall 
situation  has  improved  significantly.  Still,  financial  vulnerabilities  and  uncertainty  over  the 
pace of global economic recovery remain.  
3. 
This  year’s  ICBS  comes  at  a  critical  juncture.  In  the  last  two  years,  all  of  us,  as 
national financial authorities, have undertaken extensive reviews to enhance the resilience of 
our financial systems. Globally, the FSB and IMF have been working to forge agreement on 
measures  to  prevent  and  mitigate  a  crisis  of  such  systemic  proportions.  In  particular,  the 
Basel Committee under the leadership of Governor Nout Wellink has been at the forefront of 
devising  a  new  regulatory  framework  that  underpins  and  fosters  a  more  resilient  global 
banking system.  
4. 
By  bringing  together  senior  officials  from  central  banks  and  supervisory  agencies 
from over 100 countries, this year’s meeting will provide the platform for us to move ahead 
on the core of the regulatory changes, and to chart the direction for the remaining areas of 
work.  
5. 
The  two  themes  for  this  year’s  conference  –  building  a  more  resilient  banking 
system,  and  creating  a  stable  financial  environment  for  sustained  economic  growth 
underscore  two  key  principles.  First,  the  financial  system  needs  to  be  resilient  to  avoid 
destabilizing  the  economy.  Second,  beyond  resilience,  rebuilding  the  nexus  between  the 
financial sector and the real sector is critical to supporting growth and development. This is 
particularly  important  in  many  emerging  economies  where  the  pace  of  financial  sector 
development has not caught up with that of the real economy.  
6. 
financial 
supervisory approach.  
Let me now share some reflections on three themes that permeate discussion on 
regulations,  and 
resilience  –  microprudential 
regulations,  macroprudential 
The Basel Committee’s reforms  
Many  banks  entered  the  crisis  with  too  much  leverage,  too  little  capital  and 
7. 
inadequate  liquidity  buffers.  We  need  better  micro-prudential  regulations.  Banks  need  to 
reduce leverage, have higher quality and quantity of capital to absorb losses, and maintain a 
higher proportion of liquid assets to withstand shocks in the funding markets.  
8. 
The  Basel  Committee  has  agreed  on  the  need  for  standards  relating  to  capital, 
liquidity  and  leverage.  These  first  set  of  parameters  for  core  capital  has  been  carefully 
calibrated after considering the conditions in the various economies, as well as the results of 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 1
the bottom-up Quantitative Impact Studies and the top-down macroeconomic impact of the 
proposed changes. The phase-in arrangement for the new benchmarks strikes an important 
balance  between  strengthening  the  financial  system  and  supporting  economic  recovery. 
Singapore supports the Basel Committee’s reforms, and the further work to be done.  
9. 
Going forward, our key challenge is to ensure robust implementation of these new 
capital  standards.  In  an  interconnected  global  system,  major  problems  in  one  part  of  the 
system  will  eventually  affect  us  directly  or  indirectly,  through  various  channels.  All 
economies, whether advanced or emerging, and whether they had a direct banking crisis or 
not,  have  therefore  a  shared  interest  in  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial 
system.  
10. 
However, as we phase-in these measures, we need to be vigilant that these do not 
have  unintended  consequences  on  credit  availability  and  economic  growth,  or  in  reducing 
diversity in the financial system.  
11. 
In  striving  towards  a  convergence  in  regulatory  standards  in  order  to  preserve  a 
level  playing  field  across  jurisdictions,  we  should  be  cognizant  that  the  starting  conditions 
and future challenges of countries differ. For many emerging economies, their priority lies not 
in  re-capitalising  banks  or  reducing  leverage,  but  in  continuing  the  reform  of  the  banking 
system  and  in  developing  deeper  capital  markets  to  support  future  economic  expansion. 
Moreover, banks in emerging markets vary in size, sophistication and systemic significance – 
some  are  small  and  domestically  focused,  while  others  have  sizeable  regional  footprints. 
Most emerging economies are also hosts to global banks, and rely on them to provide trade 
and project finance, and cross border remittances. Let me emphasise that these differences 
do  not  detract  from  the  need  to  have  higher  regulatory  standards.  However,  it  does  mean 
that in calibrating the details of the rules, we have to take into account these differences, so 
that financial intermediation is not adversely affected.  
The Macroprudential dimension  
12. 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  macroprudential  regulations.  Macroprudential 
regulations relate to the use of prudential tools to promote the stability of the financial system 
as a whole, and not just that of individual institutions. It recognizes that there are two sources 
of  systemic  risks.  One,  at  any  point  in  time,  interlinkages  and  common  exposures  across 
institutions can multiply aggregate risks. Two, over time, boom/bust cycles can be amplified 
and  destabilize  the  entire  system.  In  good  times,  low  volatility  and  low  risk  premia  induce 
excessive  credit  creation  and  rising  asset  prices  in  a  process  which  then  feeds  on  itself. 
When confidence turns, the credit excesses and asset bubbles unwind quickly, with prices 
overshooting as they head down, feeding a downward spiral.  
While  macroprudential  regulation  is  not  new,  the  financial  crisis  has  triggered  a 
13. 
renewed interest in it. Various ideas are being explored – such as systemic surcharges and 
counter-cyclical  capital  buffers,  and  the  viability  of  a  more  structured  and  rule-based 
framework for such measures. We should certainly explore new approaches and better tools. 
But let me make a few points on this.  
14. 
First,  unlike  monetary  policy,  research  on  macroprudential  tools  of  a  more 
structured,  rules-based  nature  is  at  an  early  stage.  There  are  no  simple  targets  like  an 
inflation target, or clear measures of success built on detailed analysis of a long data series, 
since  tail  risks  do  not,  by  definition,  materalise  frequently.  This  makes  the  task  inherently 
harder.  Nor  are  there  many  rule-based  tools  that  have  proven  their  efficacy  at  the  global 
level. Much more analytical work is needed.  
Second, we now have a better understanding that the systemic risk posed by a bank 
15. 
depends on its size, interconnectedness and substitutability. It does not come from just “too-
big-to-fail”,  though  sometimes  these  terms  are  used  interchangeably.  Many  small  banks 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2010
pursuing  similar  business  models  can  build  up  large  correlated  positions.  There  can  be 
systemic impact if these banks unwind their positions at the same time.  
16. 
In the coming years, we will be focusing on some new tools such as countercyclical 
capital.  Their  effectiveness  will  need  to  be  assessed  over  time,  and  against  other  options. 
We need to agree on the right set of policy tools to deal with systemic risks with the least 
unintended consequences.  
17. 
The test of resilience of a bank or a system lies in its ability to absorb losses when a 
shock  occurs  –  that  is,  its  loss  absorption  capacity.  For  an  individual  bank,  various  tools, 
apart from surcharges or levies, should be considered. At the system level, adopting similar 
rules across institutions to prevent regulatory arbitrage should not inadvertently reduce the 
diversity  in  the  global  financial  system.  A  variety  of  business  models  and  investors  with 
different  risk  appetites  and  liability-matching  requirements  may  make  for  a  more  resilient 
system.  
18. 
In the same vein, national regulators should explore a variety of approaches that 
are best suited to their conditions. Indeed, many emerging economies have banks that 
are  systemic  only  in  their  local  context,  and  national  regulators  need  to  consider  how 
best  to  deal  with  these,  even  as  we  work  together  on  global  banks  of  systemic 
significance.  
19. 
Third,  post  financial  crisis,  there  is  an  understandable  distrust  of  markets  and 
supervisory  judgment,  and  a  preference  to  “hard-wire”  most  measures  under  Pillar  1  on 
capital.  But  we  must  not  swing  too  far.  Supervisors  need  to  regain  confidence  and  be 
prepared to exercise supervisory judgment –  many economies have  used macroprudential 
tools with some success by applying discretion. There is also scope for greater disclosure 
and market discipline under Pillar 3. Indeed, in the proposals relating to contingent capital – 
whether convertible bonds or bail-in arrangements, an understanding of the market dynamics 
relating to these instruments is crucial to their success.  
20. 
Fourth,  a  sophisticated  approach  is  not  necessarily  superior.  Several  economies 
have  been  using  basic  tools  such  as  loan-to-value  ratios  and  concentration  limits  on 
particular sectors. These tools are simple to understand and enforce. While their application 
to  only  particular  sectors  appears  ad  hoc,  and  a  broader  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  to 
reduce credit growth across the board might seem more appealing, the experience has been 
that an approach that is targeted towards sectors such as a real estate has the merit of not 
reducing  credit  to  other  sectors  such  as  the  corporate  and  SME  sectors.  Their  efficacy 
probably stems from simplicity and consistent applications, which condition expectations in 
the market.  
21. 
Fifth, the term “macroprudential” suggests that these are essentially prudential tools, 
but with a “macro-orientation”. Indeed, many tools that are “microprudential” in nature also 
serve the macro-needs as well. Loan-to-value ratios not only raise the buffer for losses but 
can  also  constrain  credit  growth  in  the  economy.  Similarly,  macro-measures  such  as  the 
tightening  of  interest  rates  can  also  lean  against  the  build-up  of  asset  prices  and  serve  a 
microprudential purpose. Pursuing macroprudential objectives therefore does not mean that 
we  have  to  have  a  narrow  box  of  tools,  each  dedicated  to  a  specific  purpose.  In  fact,  the 
interaction of various tools is significant – they can work in the same or opposite directions, 
and their cumulative impact may be greater or smaller than we anticipate. It is probably more 
appropriate for us to take an eclectic and holistic approach.  
22. 
Finally,  as  a  corollary  of  the  above,  micro-  and  macro-supervision  should  not  be 
done  in  silo.  In  fact,  we  need  to  bring  together  the  perspectives  and  tools  from  different 
stakeholders – central banks and financial supervisors, as well as government agencies that 
can  contribute  to  financial  stability.  The  property  sector  cooling  measures  introduced  in 
Singapore  and  a  number  of  Asian  countries  recently,  involved  close  cross-agency 
cooperation  and  coordination  amongst  financial  regulators,  fiscal  authorities  and  the  land 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 3
offices  of  the  respective  countries.  Bringing  together  the  various  agencies  expands  the 
policy options to deal with systemic risks. Different countries have different institutional 
arrangements, so each country will need to decide on the optimal arrangements.  
Achieving regulatory outcomes through effective supervision and shared 
responsibility with industry  
23. 
Let me now say a few words on achieving regulatory outcomes, beyond good rules. 
Perhaps  the  most  striking  area  is  the  critical  need  for  all  of  us  to  strengthen  supervision. 
Effective supervision is unapologetically firm and intense, grounded on a good understanding 
of  the  nature  of  the  institutions  and  the  financial  system.  Supervisors  must  think 
independently,  avoid  regulatory  capture  and  be  willing  to  enforce  out-of-bound  markers 
rigorously. In this regard, I welcome the efforts of FSB and standard setters in developing 
recommendations for more effective supervision of complex and systemic institutions.  
24. 
Effective  supervision  requires  talented  and  trained  staff,  who  can  understand  and 
respond  constantly  to  new  markets,  new  services,  and  new  risks.  The  need  for  talent  is 
particularly  acute  for  supervisors  in  emerging  economies,  as  the  banking  system  grows 
rapidly.  With  the  growing  demand  for  risk  managers,  some  supervisors  are  facing  higher 
attrition.  We  have  to  significantly  expand  the  talent  pool,  and  work  with  international  and 
regional bodies like the FSI, the World Bank and IMF to step up our efforts.  
25. 
Finally, supervisors should not be acting alone in achieving the desired regulatory 
outcomes.  Good  outcomes  cannot  depend  on  a  “cat-and-mouse”  game  of  supervisors 
prescribing rules and then checking for compliance. The primary responsibility of having a 
sound bank must rest with the Board and senior management of the bank. They need to take 
ownership  of  and  responsibility  for  managing  risks,  and  to  have  the  requisite  knowledge, 
skills and experience to discharge their responsibilities effectively.  
26. 
In this regard, MAS recently proposed a number of enhancements to the corporate 
governance framework for locally incorporated banks. We welcome the Basel Committee’s 
present  initiative  to  revisit  its  2006  corporate  governance  guidance,  and  to  address 
weaknesses identified during the crisis.  
27. 
In  promoting  shared  outcomes,  political  support  is  crucial  in  various  areas.  It  is 
difficult to build a strong banking system on weak macro-economic foundations. Supervisors 
in all countries, but more so in emerging economies, are sometimes under political pressure 
to  tilt  credit  growth  in  certain  directions,  or  to  exercise  forbearance.  While  the  financial 
system has to be responsive to the needs of the economy, a politicised supervisory process 
will almost certainly bring adverse consequences down the road.  
Conclusion  
28. 
In conclusion, as we embark on financial reforms, we have to be forward looking, to 
ensure  that  we  do  not  just  have  a  resilient  global  financial  system,  but  also  one  that  can 
support sustainable economic growth. We need better regulations, better appreciation of the 
macro-financial  linkages,  and  firmer  supervision.  Globally  coordinated  efforts  and  strong 
cross border cooperation in some areas, as well as local efforts that are context-specific are 
both needed to achieve the desired regulatory outcomes.  
29. 
Singapore is honoured to host the 16th ICBS on our common supervisory journey. I 
wish  you  a  meaningful  and  fruitful  discussion,  as  well  as  a  pleasant  and  memorable  stay 
here in Singapore. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2010
