Muhammad Al-Jasser: Compliance and combating money laundering 
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Dr  Muhammad  Al-Jasser,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian 
Monetary  Agency (SAMA), at the Symposium on Compliance and Anti-Money Laundering, 
Institute of Banking, Riyadh, 23–24 March 2010. 
 In  the  name  of  Allah  the  Merciful,  and  blessings  and  peace  be  upon  His  Prophet  and 
Messenger, 
Dear audience, 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  this  symposium,  which  is  organized  by  the  Institute  of 
Banking  (IOB)  and  deals  with  two  important  and  interrelated  issues:  compliance  and 
combating money laundering. 
Decision-makers  and  legislators  have  paid  increasing  attention  to  the  issue  of  compliance 
with regulations, criteria and guidelines because of its importance to financial institutions in 
achieving better performance, avoiding risks and enhancing their success. At the same time, 
compliance maintains the reputation and credibility of financial institutions and protects them 
against  regulatory  sanctions.  It  also  protects  the  interests  of  shareholders  and  depositors. 
Compliance is a comprehensive and multifaceted responsibility, and achieving compliance is 
a  duty  that  all  employees  in  any  financial  institution  have  to  undertake,  each  according  to 
entrusted powers and tasks. 
Recognizing  the  importance  of  compliance,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision, 
with the participation of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA), approved and issued 
the paper pertaining to principles of compliance and its function at banks, in April 2005. The 
paper was designed in the form of fundamental principles of compliance with the regulations, 
covering a number of areas, the most important of which are the responsibilities of the board 
of directors and senior management, controls on the independence of compliance function at 
banks,  support  of  compliance  department  and  its  work  program,  and  the  relationship  of 
compliance department with internal audit department. 
In May 2005, SAMA directed banks operating in the Kingdom to adopt the principles stated in 
this paper and incorporate them with the procedures and programs regarding risks of non-
compliance that have already been applied and developed by banks under the instructions of 
SAMA.  
Dear audience,  
You are also dealing in this symposium with an important topic, which is combating money 
laundering. As you know, money laundering is one of the most serious crimes at the security, 
economic  and  moral  levels.  This  heinous  crime  is  carried  out  by  organized  networks 
practicing crime as a profession and having a high potential for coordination, planning and 
deployment  throughout  the  world.  These  networks  take  advantage  of  the  globalization  of 
capital markets and technological developments in the banking industry.  
Because  of  the  negative  impacts  of  money  laundering  and  the  large  scale  of  this  activity, 
which is estimated by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) at 2 to 5 percent of global GDP, 
there  have  been  international  and  regional  concerted  efforts  to  combat  it.  The  Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF) was established by the end of the eighties of the last century and 
the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  for  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  (MENAFATF)  was 
founded in the middle of this decade. The Kingdom is an active member in these two groups.  
BIS Review 54/2010 
 1
In 2003, the Anti-Money Laundering Law, which provided for criminalizing offenses related to 
money laundering was issued, followed by its Executive Regulations. The issuing of this Law 
and its Executive Regulations has helped government organs and their subordinate entities 
concerned  with  combating  money  laundering  to  develop  necessary  mechanisms  and 
procedures to implement the Anti-Money Laundering Law and related rules and ensure that 
they  are  fully  complied  with.  These  organs  have  established  specialized  departments 
responsible for  implementing  these rules  (compliance  function),  appointed  qualified  human 
resources (compliance officers), and allocated human and financial resources necessary to 
enable  them  to  perform  their  functions  properly.  At  the  same  time,  each  supervisory 
government authority has enacted rules and regulations derived from the provisions of the 
Anti-Money Laundering Law and its Executive Regulations and included them in its by-laws 
in a way commensurate with the work of those organs. 
Within the framework of the kingdom’s efforts to combat money laundering, I would like to 
highlight the following: 
1. 
The  Permanent  Committee  for  Combating  Money  Laundering,  which  consists  of 
representatives  from  seven  ministries  and  government  departments,  has  been 
established at SAMA to deal with issues related to money laundering.  
The  Kingdom  has  hosted  numerous  domestic  and  international  conferences  and 
symposiums,  and  offered  training  courses  on  anti-money-laundering  issues.  The 
first meeting of the FATF outside Paris was held in the Institute of Banking (IOB) in 
1994.  In  addition,  there  has  been  effective  participation  of  the  Kingdom  in  the 
membership of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and permanent participation 
in the FATF’s meetings. 
The  Anti-Money  Laundering  Unit  was  established  at  SAMA  and  is  provided  with 
highly qualified and trained staff. Since 1995, commercial banks have been obliged 
to set up similar units to cooperate with each other, with SAMA’s Unit and with the 
concerned security authorities. 
In  1995,  SAMA  issued  guidelines  to  all  banks  operating  in  the  Kingdom  on 
preventing  and  combating  money-laundering  operations.  These  guidelines  are 
derived from the Forty Recommendations and the subsequent recommendations, in 
particular  applying  the  principle  of  “Know  Your  Customer”,  monitoring  suspicious 
transactions,  and  informing  competent  security  authorities  (Financial  Investigation 
Unit)  of  suspicious  activities.  These  guidelines  were  updated  once  in  2003  and 
again in 2008. 
For  the  past  ten  years,  SAMA  has  collected  information  on  the  methods  and 
techniques of money laundering, and provided banks operating in the Kingdom with 
such information for the purpose of building a database in this regard to be linked 
automatically with the goal of tracking money laundering activities. 
SAMA’s inspection team makes periodical inspection visits to banks to insure their 
proper application of instructions and regulations. Any irregularities are detected and 
reported to concerned authorities to take actions for continually checking that they 
are corrected. 
SAMA  has  established  a  permanent  committee  for  regular  monitoring  of  financial 
crimes  in  general  and  money  laundering  crimes  in  particular.  The  committee  is 
made  up  of  members  from  SAMA  and  banks  to  review  the  instructions  and 
procedures taken in this regard so as to be applied as required. 
SAMA  has  attached  great  importance  to  training  in  the  field  of  combating  money 
laundering.  SAMA’s  IOB  held  47  training  courses  benefiting  800  trainees  during 
2009.  Several  government  authorities,  which  are  concerned  with  anti-money 
laundering issues, have also made great efforts to train their employees. A number 
of  conferences  and  symposiums  at  the  domestic  and  regional  levels  have  been 
BIS Review 54/2010
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
2 
 hosted to raise awareness of the issue of money laundering and strengthen human 
and technical capabilities to combat it. Your meeting today in this symposium is only 
part of SAMA’s efforts to raise the level of compliance and anti-money laundering. 
Dear audience, 
Despite  considerable  efforts  made  to  promote  the  principle  of  compliance  and  anti-money 
laundering that have had a significant positive impact, money laundering criminal activities 
always seek new techniques to be able to continue. Hence, we always need to be alert and 
cautious,  and  we  should  enhance  our  capabilities  and  do  our  utmost  to  fulfill  the  tasks 
entrusted  to  us.  Achieving  success  also  requires  cooperation  among  all  concerned 
authorities and exchange of information that would help achieve our goal of dealing positively 
and effectively with the challenges we face. 
Dear audience,  
I  have  looked  into  the  program  of  this  symposium  and  found  it  packed  with  a  range  of 
important and useful topics which will be presented by an elite of specialists in this area, and 
I call on everyone to benefit most from this symposium which will in my view, be reflected 
positively on our efforts to enhance the principle of compliance and anti money-laundering.  
I welcome you again to the Institute of Banking, wishing you a pleasant stay in Riyadh.  
Wassalam Alaikum Warhmatullah Wabarakatuh. 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 3
