Xolile P Guma: South Africa’s macroprudential policy framework and 
economic overview 
Introductory remarks by Dr Xolile P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve 
Bank, at the launch of the March 2010 Financial Stability Review, Pretoria, 28 April 2010. 
 Members of the press, other guests and colleagues, 
The Financial Stability Department has existed since 2001, its task being to identify possible 
threats to financial stability and suggest ways in which these could be mitigated. In pursuit of 
this objective the department, on behalf of the Bank, publishes the Financial Stability Review 
semi-annually. Today the Bank releases the March 2010 edition of this publication. 
Following  the  international  financial  crisis,  the  financial  stability  responsibilities  of  various 
central banks have become more explicit. The financial crisis has demonstrated, in general, 
that, although microprudential supervision makes a valuable and indispensable contribution 
to financial stability, it may be insufficient on its own to ensure systemic financial stability. For 
this  reason,  a  macroprudential  approach  to  policy  formulation  is  necessary  to  complement 
microprudential supervision, and in fact monetary policy. The aim of such a policy would be 
to smooth the impact of the economic cycle on the financial system and contain the build-up 
of systemic risks in the financial system as a whole. The Bank is, therefore, currently in the 
process  of  developing  an  integrated  framework  for  a  macroprudential  policy  approach  to 
achieve  its  financial  stability  objective,  and  to  help  co-ordinate  financial  stability  policy  of 
other authorities.  
The global financial crisis has also led to wide-ranging debate on the need to enhance the 
international  regulatory  framework  in  order  to  strengthen  the  global  financial  system  and 
improve its resilience to shocks. The proposals for reform have gone beyond banking sectors 
and have been expanded to include insurance industries, rating agencies, hedge funds and 
accounting standards. 
Since  the  release  of  the  September  2009  Financial  Stability  Review,  the  risks  to  global 
financial  stability  have  eased  and  systemic  risks  have  continued  to  subside  as  the  global 
economic  recovery  has  gained  momentum.  The  recovery  has  been  instrumental  in 
moderating  earlier  high  levels  of  uncertainty.  Financial  stability,  nevertheless,  remains  to 
some  extent,  fragile  in  many  economies,  including  those  emerging-market  economies 
hardest hit by the crisis. Advanced economies, in particular, are still faced with the challenge 
of repairing damaged financial systems, on the one hand, and introducing regulatory reform, 
on  the  other.  Relatively  conservative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  and  structural  reforms 
before the global financial crisis have helped many African countries to withstand the effects 
of the crisis better than during previous crises. The main risk facing Africa remains a stalling 
of the global economic recovery. This could place downward pressure on commodity prices, 
which  could  also  undermine  government  revenues  and  raise  public  debt  to  unsustainable 
levels. 
In  South  Africa,  economic  performance  started  improving  in  the  third  quarter  of  2009  and 
continued  at  a  markedly  stronger  pace  in  the  fourth  quarter,  as  the  economy  gradually 
emerged from the recession. Confidence in the financial services sector increased further in 
the fourth quarter of 2009, boosted mainly by higher levels of confidence among investment 
managers and life insurers.  
The banking sector continued to maintain levels of capital well above the minimum prudential 
requirement.  Despite  the  recovery  in  real  economic  activity,  bank  loans  and  advances 
contracted  during  the  period  under  review.  The  contraction  in  credit  extension  had  both 
demand  and  supply-side  elements.  On  the  demand  side,  it  would  appear  that  households 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 1
continue to be reluctant to incur more debt, while on the supply side lending standards have 
remained  tight.  Although  credit  losses  had  been  increasing  consistently  over  the  past  two 
years, the pace of deterioration in the asset quality of banks moderated during the second 
half  of  2009.  Banking  profitability  dropped  somewhat  during  the  second  half  of  2009,  but 
efficiency has remained fairly stable over this period. 
The financial strength of long-term insurers in South Africa was assessed as being generally 
sound, based on the capital-adequacy levels. Other financial soundness indicators for typical 
long-term insurers, however, suggest that this sector continued to experience some strain. 
Financial  conditions  in  the  short-term  insurance  sector  also  deteriorated  during  the  fourth 
quarter of 2009. In line with developments in international equity markets, the upward trend 
in the domestic equity market, which started in March 2009, continued in the second half of 
the year. 
Business  confidence  increased  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2009,  following  persistent  declines 
since the third quarter of 2006. The improvement in business confidence is consistent with 
some of the other leading indicators that generally precede a recovery in economic activity, 
and  currently  herald  an  improvement  in  economic  conditions.  Other  indicators  for  the 
corporate sector, however, confirmed that the sector was still under pressure. 
Confidence  in  the  residential  property  market  also  showed  some  signs  of  recovery.  In 
addition, the decelerating growth in mortgage advances, as reported by banks, bottomed out 
in December 2009 and started to show signs of an upward trend. The business operations of 
non-residential building contractors were, however, still constrained by a lack of demand for 
building work. 
The  household  sector  experienced  some  financial  strain  as  job  losses  constrained 
disposable income. Although most indicators show that the decline in the real economy had 
bottomed out in the first half of 2009, consumers were, until the third quarter of 2009, still 
somewhat  pessimistic  about  the  prospects  for  future  performance  of  the  economy  and  its 
impact  on  their  finances.  The  elevated  rate  of  unemployment  continued  tight  lending 
conditions  and  a  need  to  address  weaker  household  balance  sheets  are  expected  to 
continue to impact consumption expenditure negatively. Also, on average, the credit standing 
of consumers has continued to deteriorate. 
I  have  briefly  highlighted  the  key  issues  raised  in  the  Financial  Stability  Review.  More 
detailed analyses are available in the publication itself, and will be highlighted by the authors’ 
presentations.  I  trust  that  you  will  find  these  interesting,  stimulating  and  relevant  to  the 
current environment and invite you to provide comment as part of the important process of 
ongoing debate on financial stability. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2010
