Choongsoo Kim: The challenges ahead for the Bank of Korea in 2010 
Inaugural address by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, on the opening up of 
a new chapter of the Bank of Korea commensurate with its role as the central bank of the chair 
country of the G20, Seoul, 1 April 2010. 
The following is an unofficial English translation. 
 Dear members of the Bank of Korea, 
Countries  around  the  world  are  at  this  time  putting  every  effort  into overcoming  the  global 
financial  crisis.  And  in  contrast  to  past  cases,  international  policy  coordination  toward  this 
end  has  taken  the  form  of  practical  actions  rather  than  words.  Even  though  the  world  is 
shaking off the crisis, however, we know that it is impossible for the global economy to return 
to  its  anterior  state.  But  which  way  should  the  world  now  be  heading?  The  world  is  now 
seeking a new post-crisis economic paradigm. In this global economic environment, no one 
can relax its vigilance for even one moment. We have experienced the stern reality that any 
country can be dragged in an instant into the vortex of economic crisis. At this point in time, I 
have been named Governor of the Bank of Korea, the central bank of our country. For an 
economist, the honor of this appointment goes beyond anything words can possibly express. 
At  the  same  time,  of  course,  I  must  confess  that  I  feel  the  pressure  of  a  very  heavy 
responsibility now weighing down on my shoulders. 
Let me begin by taking this opportunity to bow my head in deep gratitude and tribute to my 
forebears  at  the  Bank  of  Korea,  for  their  devoted  dedication  in  establishing  the  Bank’s 
standing in a constant and righteous way, following several drastic changes, ever since the 
Bank  was  founded  60  years  ago.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  express  my  thanks  to  my 
predecessor  Governor  Lee,  Seong  Tae,  who  has  contributed  so  much  to  overcoming  the 
global  financial  crisis.  I  would  like  to  ask  Governor  Lee  for  his  unstinting  guidance  and 
encouragement in the times ahead. 
I have previously declared as my principle that I will contribute to upholding the authority of 
the  Bank  of  Korea.  The  independence  of  the  central  bank  is  legally  guaranteed,  and  the 
concepts  of  neutrality,  autonomy  and  initiative  define  its  very  nature.  These  are  sacred 
values of the central bank, and unless they are upheld we can never say that our mandate 
has been properly fulfilled. I am now proposing to establish the Bank’s authority in enhancing 
these values. We must, in this regard, work to make sure that the public pays close attention 
to what the Bank says. And such authority is not bestowed from the outside, but must be built 
up  from  within  ourselves.  It  can  be  established  only  when  we  cultivate  our  abilities.  Our 
words and our will alone do not suffice. It also goes without saying that credibility must be 
underpinned by true ability. 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
The crisis that the world economy is now undergoing is an abnormal situation. What is clear, 
however,  is  that  overcoming  it  does  not  mean  a  return  to  the  pre-crisis  situation.  The 
economy  has  a  tendency  to  change  dynamically,  a  characteristic  that  has  been  further 
reinforced  by  the  modern  trends  of  rapid  globalization  and  informatization.  There  is  a 
likelihood of risk and uncertainty growing greater the more dynamic the economy is, and at 
the same time spreading rapidly the more informatized it is. As the  world moves closer to 
forming a single economy, we have learned the hard way that sectors have become much 
more  inter-connected.  We  must  redouble  our  efforts  to  adapt  to  changes,  so  as  not  to 
become  estranged  or  left  behind  in  this  process  of  global  transformation.  Efforts for  policy 
adjustment  between  the  United  States  and  China  to  resolve  the  global  imbalances, 
overcoming the challenges to euro system stability posed by the fiscal crises in some euro-
zone  countries,  the  global  wealth  shift  following  the  emergence  of  the  G20  and  the  rapid 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 1
expansion of Asian economic powers, fixing the financial system so as to rein in economic 
risk and uncertainty, and redefining the roles of the international financial institutions: those 
are  just  a  few  of  the  core  elements  that  will  shape  our  drive  to  establish  a  new  global 
economic framework. 
An  appropriate  solution  to  our  country’s  domestic  problems  can  only  be  derived  from  the 
understanding of all these challenges. Regrettably, however, we must bear in mind that there 
is  no  textbook  solution  to  guide  us  in  the  future.  We  will  be  unable  to  find  the  correct 
prescription through approaches based upon our previous understandings of the economy. 
The current state of affairs requires that we respond wisely by thinking deeply and mustering 
all our wits to grasp the natures of the problems. International policy coordination may, on the 
one hand, currently be emphasized because the effects of particular policies adopted by any 
one  country  are  limited  in  an  open  economy.  This  means  that  individual  countries  must 
cooperate  with  one  another  to  maximize  their  policies’  impacts.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
current  international  policy  cooperation  may  also  have  the  positive  result  of  reducing  the 
market  uncertainties  arising  from  the  various  policy  directions  different  countries  suggest. 
The  characteristics  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  stipulated  in  the  Bank  of  Korea  Act,  such  as 
harmonization with government policy, public nature and transparency, may be interpreted 
as  having  been  defined  in  this  way  so  as  to  reduce  uncertainties  to  the  maximum  extent 
possible by mitigating asymmetries of information. 
Friends and colleagues, 
We  are  living  in  an  age  of  mounting  economic  uncertainty  at  home  and  abroad.  A  new 
international financial architecture is in the course of formation, and the Bank of Korea must 
very actively seek out its appropriate role as the central bank of the chair country of the G20. 
Our  Bank  therefore  has  much  work  to  do,  and  we  will  have  to  concentrate  particularly  on 
solving the following tasks.  
First of all, given the risks uncertainty poses to price stability, the Bank of Korea must devote 
even greater efforts to achieving its mandate of price stability. In essence, economic policy is 
composed of two pillars: the goals of full employment and of price stability. We must bear in 
mind that, just as an economy without job growth will be unsustainable, so for an economy 
without price stability will be prone to crises. Price stability is not only necessary to steer the 
macroeconomy  on  a  stable  course,  but  is  also  an  indispensable  element  for  preventing 
worsening  of  the  distribution  structure,  and  particularly  for  stabilizing  the  livelihoods  of  the 
people. 
Secondly,  in  the  course  of  overcoming  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  has  now  become 
generally acknowledged that the central bank’s role in preserving financial stability is more 
important  than  ever  before.  Of  course,  the  definition  of  the  role  of  each  individual  central 
bank reflects the characteristics of its own nation’s economy, which is influenced by historical 
changes in the particular local environment. In our current global economic climate, however, 
central  banks  are  shifting  towards  going  beyond  the  unique  circumstances  of  their  own 
individual  countries,  and  dealing  collectively  with  common  issues  in  the  world  economy 
through  policy  coordination.  The  latest  trend  is  toward  a  reinforcement  of  the  financial 
stability role of the central bank. And we, too, at the Bank of Korea, must meet and overhaul 
various relevant institutions and practices, a task that is emerging as an important priority for 
our national economy. Dedicated efforts should also be devoted toward cooperating closely 
with the government and the supervisory authorities, for the sake of financial stability. 
Thirdly, the Bank must endeavor to communicate seamlessly with the markets. In a democratic 
society, the best of intentions and their outcomes vary more often than not. Further, a well-
intended  policy  may  even  bring  about  bad  results.  This is  because,  at  times,  the thoughts 
and actions of economic agents are dictated merely by what is perceived to be real, rather 
than  by  reality  itself.  Accordingly,  we  must  always  seek  to  appropriately  bridge  the  gap 
between  reality  and  their  perception  of  it.  This  is  exactly  why  the  importance  of 
communication  is  being  emphasized.  The  central  bank  also  performs  the  role  of  providing 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2010
important  information  that  the  markets  need,  including  of  course  information  on  monetary 
policy. Such information must be provided in a timely manner, and the greatest care must be 
taken so as not to lead economic agents into confusion. 
Fourthly,  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  capacity  as  a  central  bank  to  carry  out  research  and  study 
must be heightened even further. The Bank’s analytical capabilities should be enhanced, so 
that its research output is actively sought after in the formulation of not just our own monetary 
policy,  but  also  the  government’s  policies.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  quality  of  a 
country’s policy-making depends to a large degree upon the stature of its central bank as a 
storehouse of reliable information. 
My dear colleagues, 
Korea is recognized as one of the economies that have been the fastest to recover from the 
global financial crisis among OECD member countries. Let me emphasize once again that 
the Bank of Korea has made a great contribution to this achievement. Although we are lucky 
to have staged such a rapid recovery, I would like to state clearly that we cannot as a result 
become  self-complacent.  We  should  never  forget  that  the  global  financial  crisis  had  the 
greatest impact, among all nations, on Korea. We should also endeavor to fully fathom why 
Korea was hit harder by the crisis than other economies were, and showed negative growth 
of over 20%, on an annualized rate, just after the crisis erupted in the fourth quarter of 2008. 
What  are  the  weak  points  of  our  economy?  What  do  we  know  about  them?  Other  OECD 
countries  are  busy  analyzing  the  damages  inflicted  on  their  growth  potentials.  What  about 
our own growth potential – is it sound? Although crises are invariably accompanied by pain, 
we can also learn a lesson from a crisis. As the saying goes, “Don’t waste a crisis”. I would 
deem  crises  as  providing  their  sufferers  with  very  valuable  lessons.  From  a  historical 
perspective we should never overlook the fact that crises have a tendency to recur. If we go 
back to “business as usual”, we cannot possibly say that we have learned from the crisis. Did 
our way of thinking change? Did our way of conduct change? Did our organization change in 
response to the global financial crisis? 
I  believe  that  public  expectations  of  the  central  bank  and  the  importance  of  its  role  are 
greater  now  than  ever  before.  An  exit  strategy  refers  to  the  unwinding  of  the  various 
emergency measures that were introduced in the process of overcoming the financial crisis. 
We need to marshal our combined wisdom to seek the most appropriate ways to exit, while 
paying  attention  to  changes  in  the  economic  environment  both  at  home  and  abroad.  We 
must be able to chart a course for the future and take carefully thought-out measures that the 
markets  will  voluntarily  comply  with.  On  the  other  hand,  thinking  on  the  new  roles  of  the 
central bank must also take on a new dimension. These ponderings should be raised to a 
level at which they ultimately contribute to the development of our nation. It is true that we 
have as rivals our peers within the organization and elsewhere in the domestic sphere. But at 
the same time, we must regard the central bankers of other nations and entities, such as the 
US,  the  EU,  Japan,  China  and  the  UK,  as  our  true  competitors.  If  we  fall  behind  them  in 
terms of contributions made to national development, we cannot say that we are fulfilling our 
responsibilities. This should be the yardstick for judging the international competitiveness of 
a  central  bank.  Please  always  bear  in  mind  that  your  competing  counterparts  are  in  the 
central bank of other nations. It goes without saying that we must also step up our efforts to 
enhance cooperation with them. I expect such efforts to shift our thinking and behavior from 
being retrospective and inward-looking to a future-oriented and global-looking one. 
As Governor of the Bank of Korea, I have unbounded confidence in your ability and highly 
value your pride in the Bank. It is inconceivable that the Bank, made up of the most talented 
people  in  Korea,  cannot  come  up  with  solutions  to  Korea’s  economic  issues.  I  have  held 
various posts before coming here. I think all of them will together serve as a cornerstone for 
me to fulfill my responsibilities as Governor of the Bank of Korea. At this difficult time, all of 
us working for the central bank must rethink the mission for our time. In the global age in 
which  economic  borders  are  disappearing,  we  must  boldly  break  down  barriers  that  have 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 3
limited our scope for thinking and behavior. Let us not be entrapped by outdated ideologies 
or theories but gather our wits for us to overcome new challenges with courage and wisdom. 
Of  course,  we  need  to  hold  ourselves  to  stricter  standards  in  order  to  exercise  such 
leadership.  No  change  enforced  by  others  can  ever  be  effective,  but  the  initiative  for  the 
change  needs  to  come  from  within.  Nowadays  “national  dignity”  is  at  the  center  of  public 
concerns. In order to elevate our nation’s dignity, a shift in the values of all members of our 
society is required. The leadership of our society, in particular, is expected to be bound by 
lofty moral obligations, such as “noblesse oblige”, and businesses are required to carry out 
faithfully their corporate social responsibilities. If we succeed in elevating the authority of the 
Bank both nationally and internationally, that will be a way to contribute greatly to elevating 
the dignity of the entire nation. Let us join hands to do our best and move forward with pride 
in being members of the central bank of the G20 chair country. May we together resolve to 
open a glorious new chapter in our history as the central bank of Korea in this year that sees 
the 60th anniversary of its foundation. It may still be recognized in years yet to come as a 
central bank that paved the way for the long-term development of the nation. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2010
