Choongsoo Kim: 60th anniversary of the Bank of Korea 
Address by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, on the occasion of the Bank of 
Korea’s 60th anniversary, Seoul, 11 June 2010. 
The following is an unofficial English translation. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
Today we gather to commemorate that day 60 years ago when the Bank of Korea took its 
first  steps  as  the  central  bank  of  the  Republic  of  Korea.  Let  me  begin  by  taking  this 
opportunity to express my very deepest gratitude to all former members of the Bank, for their 
dedication to development of the Bank and the national economy. I feel sincere appreciation 
also  to  all  of  those  who  have  taken  interest  in  the  Bank  over  the  years,  and  been  so 
unstinting  in  their  encouragement  and  sage  counsel  to  make  the  Bank  what  it  is  today.  I 
would like to give warm thanks as well to all current members of our staff, for carrying out 
your responsibilities so faithfully. 
Looking  back  over  the  years,  the  Bank  of  Korea  has  contributed  more  than  any  other 
institution to the course that has taken our nation, ever since the Bank’s foundation in 1950, 
from a newly emerging poorest country to one that has grown into OECD membership and 
further into the position as this year’s G20 chair. 
Early on, the Bank of Korea actively underpinned both the operation of a wartime economy 
during  the  Korean  War,  immediately  after  its  foundation,  and  the  work  of  economic 
reconstruction that followed the war’s cessation. From the 1960s, the Bank endeavored to 
raise investment resources through promotion of savings and to supply money for economic 
growth,  making  it  possible  for  the  economy  to  maintain  continued  rapid  growth  for  many 
years. From the early 1990s, the Bank of Korea pushed ahead very actively with interest rate 
liberalization,  the  realignment  of  policy  financing,  and  capital  and  foreign  exchange 
deregulation – in the course of economic opening, internationalization, and the shifting into a 
market economy in Korea. During the recent global financial crisis, by putting into place bold 
and  resolute  policies  to  counter  it,  the  Bank  also  contributed  notably  to  the  Korean 
economy’s rapid recovery. 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
The  accomplishments  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  over  the  last  60  years  should  be  highly 
evaluated. We can never be satisfied with what we are now, however, if we are to open a 
glorious  new  chapter  in  our  history,  commensurate  with  the  dignity  of  our  entire  nation 
reaching out to the world. 
All political, economic and social phenomena are caught up in a process of endless change. 
And nowadays, with the rapid progress of globalization and informatization, the pace of that 
change is accelerating still further. Under these circumstances, if we follow the old ways of 
thinking and patterns of behavior, from when the pace of change was slow and predicting its 
directions was to some extent feasible, we cannot but slip back onto a path of decline. 
We need to think deeply now, to identify what changes in the Bank of Korea’s role this new 
era  demands,  so  that  our  Bank  may  stride  proudly  forward  to  take  its  place  as  a  leading 
central bank in the 21st century. The theme of the “Changing Role of Central Banks” was in 
this regard chosen for the 2010 Bank of Korea International Conference, held on May 31 and 
June  1  in  celebration  of  our  Bank’s  60th  anniversary.  This  was  one  part  of  our  efforts  to 
discern  the  new  role  of  our  Bank  in  the  changed  environment  following  the  recent  global 
financial crisis. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 11
Dear friends and colleagues, 
The  global  financial  crisis  following  the  Lehman  Brothers  collapse  inflicted  unprecedented 
shocks  on  the  world  economy,  raising  fundamental  questions  concerning  the  economic 
theories and principles that had long been received wisdom. In this context, perceptions as to 
the desirable role of the central bank are now shifting greatly. 
Until  now,  the  belief  has  been  that  the  central  bank  can  facilitate  sustainable  growth  by 
attaining price stability through its operation of monetary policy. This crisis has demonstrated, 
however, that even under low and stable inflation, imbalances such as sharp run-ups in asset 
prices can occur, and that this can bring about a financial crisis and severe real economic 
downturn. In consequence, the argument that ex-post monetary policy response to crisis is 
by no means simple and gives rise ultimately to massive social costs has gained influence. 
The opposing view, that a pre-emptive policy response to asset price bubbles could have too 
many  negative  side  effects,  has  meanwhile  lost  support.  Against  the  background  of  such 
changing  perceptions,  argument  has  arisen  recently  at  home  and  abroad,  about  the 
proposition that the central bank should exercise its financial stability role in a more assertive 
manner. 
To move ahead with strengthening its financial stability role to meet the needs of the times, 
the  Bank  of  Korea  has  many  tasks  to  carry  out.  Above  all,  the  Bank  should  establish  the 
appropriate scope of its financial stability role, while at the same time obtaining the required 
policy tools and expanding the range of the counterpart financial institutions embraced by its 
policy  –  all  of  which  require  wide-ranging  social  consensus.  The  problem  of  realigning  its 
monetary  policy  framework  and  methods  of  conducting  policy  also  needs  to  be  studied  in 
depth  with  a  view  to  securing  the  maximum  degree  of  harmonization  between  the  Bank’s 
prime  goal  of  price  stability  and  its  financial  stability  role.  Proposals  must  in  addition  be 
carefully  arranged  to  bring  about  a  proper  sharing  of  roles  and  ensure  organic  policy 
cooperation with the other authorities in charge of financial stability, including the government 
and the supervisory authorities. 
In  today’s  global  economy,  meanwhile,  it  is  very  difficult  for  Korea  to  maintain  financial 
stability, and to obtain sustainable growth, through its own efforts alone. Our experience of 
the  previous  foreign  exchange  crisis  had  taught  us  the  necessity  of  building  up  foreign 
currency  reserves  as  a  buffer  against  external  shocks.  Korea’s  foreign  currency  reserves 
have accordingly continued to increase. As shown during the recent global crisis, however, 
as a small open economy, Korea can inevitably suffer massive shock even despite its greatly 
increased  foreign  reserves  –  due  to  abrupt  outflows  of  overseas  capital  caused  by 
international financial market turbulence. 
The drive for international policy cooperation must consequently be strengthened still further, 
in concert with individual countries’ own efforts for financial stability. The Bank of Korea will 
pursue its policy cooperation with other central banks more resolutely. It also needs to play 
an  active  part  in  the  international  discussions  on  such  issues  as  construction  of  a  global 
financial safety net and the framing of preventive measures against crisis recurrence. 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
The Bank of Korea, as an institution with its hands on one major lever of national economic 
policy,  must  strengthen  still  further  its  overall  capacity,  so  that  it  can  better  carry  out  its 
leading role in helping the nation respond proactively to new trends in the world economy. 
Expanding our capabilities in research and study is the top priority in this regard. In today’s 
rapidly evolving economic environment, we need to constantly question whether the familiar 
economic  theories  and  results  of  empirical  analysis  still  hold.  At  the  same  time,  we  must 
redouble  our  efforts  to  seek  theoretical  understandings  that  accord  with  the  realities  we 
observe. There are inevitably limitations on trying to grasp or estimate economic realities that 
are changing day by day on the basis of conventional theories, models and experiences. We 
12 
 BIS Review 82/2010
must  therefore  devote  our  best  efforts  to  developing  new  approaches  and  analytical 
techniques, that correspond more closely to the real world. 
We  will  also  work  to  ensure  that  the  outcomes  and  publications  of  the  Bank  of  Korea’s 
research  can  be  utilized  more  productively  and  effectively  for  the  sake  of  the  national 
economy. In any country, the results of research undertaken by its central bank should be 
put to good use by a wide range of economic agents, in the government, academia and the 
financial  markets.  By  accessing  the  information  provided  by  the  central  bank,  economic 
agents  are  assisted  in  their  own  economic  activities,  while  coming  also  to  thoroughly 
understand  both  the  significance  of  the  central  bank’s  existence  and  its  policy  intentions. 
Consequently,  reinforcement  of  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  research  capacities  will  contribute  to 
increasing its monetary policy effectiveness, while at the same time enhancing its credibility 
and prestige. 
The Bank of Korea must also equip itself as soon as possible with the capacity to assume its 
proper role in international financial circles. From the experience of this global financial crisis, 
we  have  realized  how  crucial  it  is  to  make  connections  with  major  central  banks  and 
international  financial  organizations.  In  this  respect  the  importance  of  strengthening  the 
cultivation of our international capabilities cannot be overemphasized. 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
While striving consistently toward these development objectives, from a medium and long-
term perspective, we must also pay close attention to a number of tasks facing us, whose 
pursuit should be emphasized in the second half of this year. 
Recently,  we  have  witnessed  sovereign  debt  problems  in  several  southern  and  central 
European  countries  and  rising  tensions  surrounding  the  Korean  Peninsula.  The  financial 
markets  have  as  a  result  shown  repeated  patterns  of  unrest  –  characterized  by  the 
heightened  volatility  of  price  variables  including  share  prices  and  exchange  rates.  In 
consideration  of  the  linkages  between  the  share,  bond  and  foreign  exchange  markets,  we 
must  closely  analyze  the  possibility  of  risk  spreading  between  these  markets,  and  if 
necessary  act  energetically  to  ensure  market  stability  through  such  means  as  our  open 
market operations. 
Interest  rate  policy  will  be  operated  by  taking  into  overall  consideration  prices,  economic 
activity and financial market conditions. In this process, particular attention needs also to be 
paid to the impacts of internal and external risk factors on the trend of economic recovery, as 
well as to the possibility of imbalances arising from our continued financial easing stance. 
At times like the present, when there is great uncertainty surrounding the economy at home 
and  abroad,  the  likelihood  is  strong  of  economic  agents  reacting  quite  sensitively  to  even 
mild  shocks.  Especially  in  this  situation,  we  must  devote  ourselves  even  more  to 
strengthening our communication with the markets, in order to prevent any amplification of 
financial market volatility due to transitory developments. 
At  the  next  Meeting  of  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors,  ahead  of  the  G20 
Summit in Seoul this November, we will in addition do our utmost, as joint chair, to facilitate 
meaningful and practicable agreements regarding the principal agenda items. 
Dear Bank of Korea members, 
At the time of its 60th anniversary, the Bank of Korea must work to improve its organization 
in  line  with  the  changing  environment  –  in  order  to  be  reborn  as  a  leading  central  bank 
carrying out the role demanded of it by the times and whose prestige is well recognized by 
the public. The future vision of the Bank, toward which its organizational reform is directed, 
should incorporate not only the hopes of its members but also the opinions of outside users 
of central bank services including the government, financial institutions and academia. Case 
studies of major central banks in advanced countries should of course be considered as well. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 13
As you are aware, a fundamental diagnosis of the Bank of Korea’s organization is currently 
under way. After identifying the tasks required to reform our organization, through a process 
of opinion gathering both within and without, we plan to employ a consulting agency with a 
reputation  for  expertise  and  objectivity,  and  request  a  proposal  for  a  specific  restructuring 
plan. 
The actual initiative to achieve successful organizational reform must come from within the 
Bank itself, however. I think it desirable to adopt a firm policy, of moving consistently forward 
on the basis of agreement among and participation by all members of our staff, rather than a 
strong policy that is unilateral and one-off in character. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
On  this  special  day,  marking  the  60th  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  foundation,  all 
members of staff should stand ready, with fresh will and resolution, to bring about our Bank’s 
advancement to the level of a leading central bank in the 21st century. As agents of change, 
all of us are marching strongly toward the future, so that the Bank may before long stand on 
a par with the central banks of advanced countries and gain recognition as a central bank 
whose prestige is widely respected. I truly appreciate the great pride, sense of responsibility, 
and sincerity of our staff. I will devote my utmost efforts to ensuring that these capabilities are 
focused to contribute greatly to the development both of our organization and of our nation’s 
economy. 
Drawing my remarks to a close, I should like to express my particular gratitude to all those of 
you who have worked so hard in preparing the 60th anniversary ceremony. I wish you and 
those that you hold dear the best of health and the greatest of happiness. 
Thank you. 
14 
 BIS Review 82/2010
