Paul Jenkins: Beyond recovery – sustaining economic growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Jenkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Economic Club of Canada, Toronto, 29 March 2010.  
 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here. 
John  Maynard  Keynes  said  the  objective  of  “analysis  is  …  to  provide  ourselves  with  an 
organized  and  orderly  method  of  thinking  out  particular  problems  .…  This  is  the  nature  of 
economic thinking.”1 
This is very much the tradition of the Economic Club of Canada, which offers an important 
forum  for  analysis  and  discussion  of  economic  issues,  certainly  those  we  have  had  to 
address  since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  Bank  of  Canada  has  offered  its 
analysis and perspective on these issues, especially global and domestic developments, the 
policy  actions  needed  to  address  the  situation,  and  how  best  to  position  the  Canadian 
economy to the benefit of all Canadians over the medium-to-longer term.  
In  the  wake  of  the  global  financial crisis  and  the  “Great  Recession”,  economic  recovery  is 
under  way,  supported  by  exceptional  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus.  In  many  countries, 
however,  large  output  gaps  remain  and,  given  the  need  to  repair  the  balance  sheets  of 
households and financial institutions in these countries, the return to full resource utilization 
will be protracted.  
What I’d like to discuss today is the economic environment beyond recovery. I’ll set the stage 
by discussing, in general terms, the kind of global economic landscape we’re likely to see 
five to ten years ahead. Then I’ll look at several important areas of public policy that will help 
to shape that outcome and promote sustained economic growth. Finally, I’ll focus on some of 
the challenges and opportunities that a significantly different global economic landscape will 
pose for Canadian business. 
A changing global economic landscape 
The global economic landscape will change considerably over the coming decade. To get a 
sense of what it may look like, it’s useful to consider both the developments that are required 
for global economic growth to be sustained, and the likely impact of the powerful trends that 
have been shaping, and will continue to shape, the world economy. 
It  is  clear  that,  as  a  nation,  Americans  need  to  save  more  and  rebuild  household  sector 
wealth.  For  too  long,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  consuming  more  than  it  has  been 
producing. This means that, in the future, more U.S. economic growth must come from net 
exports – a combination of higher exports and lower imports. Consumer demand will be a 
relatively less important source of growth. China, on the other hand, will need to rely more on 
domestic demand as the engine of growth. This rotation of global demand is needed as part 
of the solution to the global (current account) imbalances that were a significant part of the 
genesis  of  the  financial  crisis.  Without  this  rotation  of  demand,  resources  will  not  be  fully 
utilized, and global economic growth will be neither as strong, nor as sustained, as it could 
be.  
In  addition  to  these  requirements,  powerful  forces  are  changing  the  economic  landscape. 
One is the difference in the growth rates of potential output (the rate of growth that can be 
                                                 
1   J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Unemployment, Interest, and Money (London: Macmillan / St Martin’s 
Press, 1936; reprinted 1970), p. 297. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 1
sustained over time without inflationary or deflationary consequences) that we are likely to 
see over the next five to ten years. For the major industrial economies, that rate of growth of 
potential output is estimated to be between 2 and 2 1/2 per cent. For the major emerging-
market  economies,  the  rate  is  estimated  at  between  5  and  8  per  cent.2  Much  of  this 
difference can be attributed to the fact that emerging-market economies have “catching up” 
to do – by combining labour and more intensive use of capital in production – and to the fact 
that they have a large and growing pool of labour to draw upon.  
This  rotation  of  demand  and  the  differing  rates  of  growth  of  potential  output  will  have 
significant implications for trading patterns and investment flows. While it’s not possible to be 
precise, and it depends on whether one uses market or purchasing-power-parity exchange 
rates,  major  emerging-market  economies  will  likely  account  for  over  55  per  cent  of  global 
output by 2020, compared with about 45 per cent today.3 
To be sure, there are many variables and uncertainties at play that will affect how the global 
economic landscape will look ten years out. Some refer to these uncertainties as the “known 
unknowns”. But, one thing seems clear – the economic landscape ten years from now will be 
significantly different from that of today. 
An  important  task  for  public  policy  will  be  to  shape  that  outcome  –  remove  some  of  the 
unknowns – for the benefit of everyone. On the heels of the global financial crisis and the 
Great Recession, one element of that task is to restore trust in markets, particularly financial 
markets. Trust is needed if financial markets are to price assets correctly and allocate capital 
efficiently.  More  broadly,  a  price-based  system  remains  the  most  efficient  way  to  allocate 
resources  and  generate  growth  that  is  led  by  the  private  sector.  The  reality  is  that  for 
sustained  growth  to  take  hold,  private  sector  demand  must  become  the  primary  source  of 
that  growth.  Public  policy  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  supporting such  an  outcome  by 
establishing  coherent  medium-term  policy  frameworks  that  will  guide  expectations  and 
reduce uncertainty. 
The role of public policy  
I’d like to discuss three areas of public policy that will contribute to this goal. Let me start with 
financial sector reform. 
A  stable,  efficient  financial  system  is  a  cornerstone  of  a  healthy  and  dynamic  economy. 
Policy-makers  are  currently  at  an  important  stage  in  multilateral  discussions  about 
fundamental reform of the financial sector. The core of the G-20 reform proposals is aimed 
at:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing the amount and quality of bank capital; 
introducing complementary leverage caps; 
increasing levels of liquidity; 
mitigating procyclicality; 
improving over-the-counter derivatives markets; and 
developing 
systemically important institutions. 
internationally  consistent  contingency  and 
resolution  plans 
for 
                                                 
2   Within the G-20, these economies include Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, and Russia. 
3   Taking a longer perspective, in two decades the emerging-market economies will account for about two thirds 
of global output, compared with about one third in the mid-1980s. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2010
This is important work. The objective is to make the financial sector more resilient through 
better and more effective regulation – not more burdensome regulation.  
The  second  area  of  public  policy  receiving  attention  is  fiscal  consolidation.  While  the 
recession made it necessary for governments to step in and provide considerable economic 
stimulus to offset a decline in private spending, sustained growth requires that this stimulus 
be removed as private spending gains strength. Another way to think about this is that the 
savings  being  generated  in  economies  need  to  be  funnelled  back  for  use  by  the  private 
sector.  The  IMF  estimates  that  “government  debt  for  advanced  G-20  countries  [will]  reach 
118 per cent of GDP on average by 2014”, compared with a pre-crisis level of about 78 per 
cent.4 For 2010, the combined fiscal deficits of these countries is estimated at nearly 9 per 
cent of GDP.  
One  important  factor  will  be  clear  guidance  from  governments  about  the  means  and  the 
timing  of  fiscal  consolidation.  Given  the  size  of  the  deficits,  tough  choices  will  need  to  be 
made.  Clear  communication  in  this  regard  can  help  to  manage  market  expectations  and 
reduce uncertainty. 
The  third  area  of  public  policy  concerns  the  openness  of  markets.  One  lesson  not  to  be 
drawn  from  the  global  financial  crisis  is  to  impose  controls  on  the  movement  of  goods, 
services, capital, and labour. Protectionism and controls are detrimental to everyone. As a 
trading  nation,  we  understand  that.  The  focus  must  be  on  opening  markets  and  removing 
barriers to trade and capital flows so that all can participate in the changing global landscape. 
This focus is equally important for our internal markets. A renewed push is needed to remove 
barriers  to  internal  trade  in  Canada.  The  goal  is  to  have  the  most  efficient  allocation  of 
resources possible to enable us to capitalize on the opportunities of a new global economic 
order.  
Let  me  conclude  this  section  with  a  few  additional  thoughts  on  what  this  changing  global 
landscape means for the major emerging-market countries. These countries have achieved 
considerable successes in recent years. They responded in a forceful and timely manner to 
the financial crisis, and they have been the strongest-growing regions in the global economy. 
Building  on  these  successes,  these  countries  should  have  the  confidence  to  allow  market 
parameters  to  play  a  more  active  role  in  their  economies.  Doing  so  would  include  greater 
exchange  rate  flexibility  to  allow  relative  price  signals  to  contribute  to  rebalancing  and 
sustaining  global  economic  growth,  thus  strengthening  the  global  trading  and  international 
monetary systems. Indeed, another thrust of the G-20 process is mutual recognition of the 
need for a collaborative effort with regard to policy actions on those fronts I have just been 
discussing – financial, fiscal, openness of markets, and exchange rate – to the benefit of all. 
Let me turn now to the private sector in Canada, and discuss some of the implications of the 
changing economic landscape for business here at home. 
Implications for Canadian business  
What will the new global landscape mean for Canadian business? I said earlier that, going 
forward,  private  sector  demand  must  replace  public  support  as  the  engine  that  drives 
sustained  economic  growth.  This  transition  implies  change  for  business,  but,  most 
importantly,  beyond  the  transition,  the  new  international  economic  order  will  bring  many 
opportunities. To take full advantage of them, business will need an appetite for change.  
Significant  restructuring  is  already  occurring  in  many  sectors.  The  forest  products  sector 
continues  to  go  through  a  difficult  adjustment.  In  Ontario,  we  are  all  well  aware  of  the 
                                                 
4   See “The State of Public Finances Cross-Country Fiscal Monitor: November 2009”. IMF Staff Position Note, 
3 November 2009, SPN/09/25, pp 13–15. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 3
challenges facing the automotive sector. More generally, Canada’s export sector has had to 
adapt  to  a  strong  Canadian  dollar,  intense  competition  from  emerging-market  economies, 
and the shift in the relative weight in global demand from advanced economies to emerging-
market economies. Herein lies one of the most important issues facing Canadian business – 
how  best  to  deal  with  the  opportunities  and  challenges  posed  by  the  dynamic  emerging-
market economies.  
The  strong  demand  in  these  countries  for  materials,  finished  products,  and  services  – 
ranging from legal to financial to educational services – presents tremendous opportunities 
for Canadian business. And these possibilities offer additional opportunities – including those 
of developing innovative products and services, working with new partners, and optimizing 
the mix of global and domestic activities. In other words, the opportunities will be substantial, 
and they come on a two-way street, with benefits for everyone. But taking advantage of them 
will require a willingness to actively engage with these new markets. Make no mistake. To 
recognize the potential growth of these markets is to recognize the rising purchasing power 
of these countries and their citizens.  
Encouragingly,  many  Canadian  companies  are  acting  now  and  are  entering  markets  in 
emerging  economies  with  strategic,  long-term  initiatives.  A  common  thread  of  these 
initiatives  is  that  they  are  taking  advantage  of  Canada’s  comparative  advantages,  which 
include a stable financial system, reliable infrastructure, plentiful natural resources, and an 
educated, multilingual workforce. 
Of course, with this opportunity comes a broad set of challenges – challenges that apply to 
all facets of Canadian business. These include acquiring, developing, and retaining the right 
people, applying technology to enhance research, operational work, and the management of 
value chains, addressing environmental issues, and recognizing and dealing with increased 
global interdependencies.  
At the risk of oversimplifying, a critical element in dealing with both these opportunities and 
challenges  is  investment  in  modern,  productivity-enhancing  equipment  and  structures.  Our 
track  record  in  this  regard  has  not been  impressive,  even adjusting  for  the  cyclical  factors 
and  uncertainties  of  the  past  two  and  a  half  years.  Compared  with  previous  decades, 
productivity growth has weakened substantially in the past ten years. This poor performance 
appears  to  be  at  least  partly  attributable  to  insufficient  “capital  deepening”  –  that  is,  the 
amount of capital with which workers are equipped. Another part of the problem appears to 
be that capital investment is not always well integrated into the workplace.5  
Let me expand on this last point. I’m referring here to what we call multifactor productivity. 
You have a computer on your desk, and the question is: Are you making full use of what that 
technology  can  do  for  you?  Are  you  integrating  that  investment  to  full  benefit  in  terms  of 
organizational practices and producing end products? We ask ourselves these questions at 
the Bank of Canada, whether they relate to investments in our analytic computing capability 
or the handling of bank notes. They are the right questions to ask. 
With our trading partners, including the United States, continuing to invest and make strong 
gains in productivity growth, it is all the more imperative that firms in Canada make concerted 
efforts to boost productivity. And from one perspective, they are well equipped to do so. 
                                                 
5   One possible explanation for this poor productivity performance lies in the shifts in capital and labour that have 
occurred  in  Canada  in  recent  years  as  a  result  of  changes  in  relative  prices,  notably,  during  periods  of 
commodity-price  shocks  and  periods  of  structural  adjustment.  For  further  details  on  Canada’s  productivity 
challenge, see M. Carney, “The Virtue of Productivity in a Wicked World”, remarks delivered to the Ottawa 
Economics  Association,  Ottawa,  24  March  2010;  and  T.  Lane,  “The  Canadian  Economy  Beyond  the 
Recession”,  remarks  delivered  to  the  Canadian  Association  for  Business  Economics,  Kingston,  Ontario, 
25 August 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2010
Corporate balance sheets in Canada are healthy. Profitability is good, with the ratio of profits 
to GDP back to its long-term average of 10 per cent. Leverage – i.e., debt-to-equity – ratios 
are low and liquidity levels are high. Corporate tax rates have declined. Absolute borrowing 
costs are low. And while the non-price terms for borrowing have been a restraining factor, 
our  Senior  Loan  Officer  Survey  indicates  that  these  terms  are  beginning  to  ease  as  the 
recovery takes hold. From this perspective, then, there should be little holding corporations 
back from modernizing their capital stock.  
But there’s an additional perspective, and that is the extent to which firms can access funds 
for making productivity-enhancing investments. The role of the financial sector is to channel 
savings to the real economy. Given the importance of small and medium-sized enterprises in 
Canada,  it  is  critical  that  this  sector  invest  in  productivity-enhancing  improvements. 
Compared with similar-sized firms in the United States, these Canadian firms rely more on 
individuals  for  financing  and  less  on  financial  institutions.6  This,  to  me,  suggests  a  market 
opportunity for our financial institutions. As well, additional sources of higher-risk capital are 
needed  for  Canada  to  be  successful  in  modernizing  the  economy’s  productive  capacity 
through  innovation  and  new  technology.  For  our  part,  the  Bank  of  Canada,  together  with 
financial market participants, is helping by working to make our financial system more robust 
through  continuously  open  commercial  paper,  interbank,  and  repo  markets,  and  through 
stronger  infrastructure  arrangements.7  These  initiatives  provide  greater  efficiency  in  the 
allocation of financial capital, which benefits all sectors of the economy. 
Allow me to conclude. 
Conclusion 
The  world  is  emerging  from  the  most  serious  economic  dislocation  since  the  Great 
Depression. While the global economy is on a steadier footing, the pace of change will not 
slow down. Indeed, five to ten years from now, the global economic landscape will be greatly 
altered.  
Public policy has recently played an important role in helping the economy to heal. It must 
also  play  an  important  role  in  ensuring  that  the  conditions  are  in  place  for  sustained  and 
balanced growth over the coming decade. That includes public policies that focus on creating 
an attractive and certain economic environment, an environment that promotes investment 
and innovation. Progress is being made internationally to meet the major policy challenges of 
our  time  –  but  work  must  continue  until  the  job  is  done.  Domestically,  our  frameworks  for 
macroeconomic and regulatory policy served Canadians very well through the financial crisis, 
and have positioned us to move forward. But we have more work to do here at home – to 
further open internal markets and to strengthen our ability to address systemic risks to the 
financial  sector  that  can  arise  from  the  collective  actions  of  institutions  and  market 
participants. 
For Canadian business, a rapidly changing economic landscape presents new possibilities 
and  hurdles  –  chief  among  them,  seizing  the  opportunities  presented  by  emerging-market 
economies,  and  stepping  up  to  the  challenge  of  improving  our  productivity  record.  This 
should be one of the next waves of economic progress in Canada. 
The Bank of Canada will do its part by contributing to sustained, solid economic performance 
by  providing  Canadians  with  confidence  in  the  future  value  of  money.  An  environment  of 
                                                 
6   See D. Leung, C. Meh, and Y. Terajima, “Are There Canada-U.S. Differences in SME Financing?” Bank of 
Canada Working Paper No. 2008–41. 
7   For related comments, see, for example, M. Carney, “Principles for Interesting Times”, remarks delivered to 
Carleton University, Ottawa, 11 March 2010; and M. Carney, “What Are Banks Really For”, remarks delivered 
to the University of Alberta School of Business, Edmonton, 30 March 2009. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 5
stable prices lowers uncertainty, reduces the cost of capital, and enables Canadians to plan 
for the future with greater confidence.  
I’d be happy now to respond to comments or questions. 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2010
