Ilmārs Rimšēvičs: Structural reforms to pave the way to prosperity in the 
future 
Speech  by  Mr  Ilmārs  Rimšēvičs,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  at  the  Baltic  Economic 
Forum 2010, Riga, 23 September 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen! 
I  think  only  very  few  would  have  missed  out  that  the  Baltics  have  attracted  a  lot  of 
international  attention  during  the  recent  years.  I  would  even  venture  to  say  that  the  three 
small countries located by the Baltic Sea – and Latvia above all – have stretched out their 
boundaries  considerably  to  occupy  an  increasingly  large  part  of  the  globe:  they  have 
suddenly  become  more  noticeable  than  ever  before.  Obviously  there  must  be  something 
unique about these countries that has made them stand out during the recent crisis. 
It might be the flexibility of the Baltic tigers: they have shown themselves capable of making 
great leaps in both directions – forward and backward. The real uniqueness obviously lies in 
the way the economies have adjusted to the crisis and the magnitude of the economic swings 
they  have  experienced.  Just  a  few  short  years  ago  we  were  amongst  the  strongest 
performers in the entire world and clearly the fastest growing economies within the EU. With 
Latvia  leading  the  race,  its  GDP  grew  in  the  double  digits  on  average  for  four  consecutive 
years after the EU accession. Other Baltic neighbours followed suite. Blown up by the massive 
inflows of foreign funds and breathtaking lending growth, by the expansionary fiscal policy and 
remittances or repatriated wages – domestic demand ballooned bringing along an accelerating 
inflation  and  a  widening  current  account  deficit.  Latvia  was  unique  in  recording  a  current 
account deficit as high as 27% of GDP during the peak quarters, and stunned the world by 
sustaining it above 20% for two years in a row. Inflation peaked at 18%, and real estate prices 
more than doubled in just a few years. Similar, but somewhat less extreme developments were 
observed in Lithuania and Estonia, with both inflation and current account deficits staying in the 
double digits during the boom years. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
  1
 The  booming  economies  rewarded  their  citizens  with  generous  income  flows.  Labour 
markets  soon  became  caught  in  a  vice  between  massive  demand  pressures  and  limited 
supply  of  workers  that  was  significantly  constrained  by  labour  outflows  after  the  EU 
accession.  This  gave  the  rise  to  uncontrolled  wage  developments  that  by  far  outstripped 
productivity.  Conventional  wisdom  told  us  this  was  leading  to  dead  end.  However,  the 
temptation  to  reach  the  prosperity  of  Western  Europe  overnight  prevailed,  and  the 
vicious circle of wages and prices kept tightening. Economies kept going and wage increases 
of 20–30% a year became a fact of life. In Latvia, salaries more than doubled between 2004 
and  2008  opening  a  wide  wage-productivity  gap.  Similar  developments  were  recorded  in 
Estonia,  and  somewhat  less  pronounced  but  still  significant  departure  of  wages  from 
productivity  was  observed  in  Lithuania.  Consequently  all  three  countries  suffered  from  a 
significant deterioration of cost competitiveness. 
2 
  BIS Review 122/2010
 All these developments weakened the economies and made them extremely vulnerable to 
sudden  changes  in  investor  sentiment  and  global  woes.  Initially  it  seemed  that  the  Baltic 
countries were easing into a soft landing. This was supported by banks cutting lending in a 
controlled way at the outset of the global financial crisis. However, the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers uncovered the real weaknesses – flushing away most of the wealth created in an 
unsustainable way. Throughout 2009, GDP fell by close to 14% in Estonia and Lithuania, and 
by an even more shattering 18% in Latvia. 
 BIS Review 122/2010 
 3
Many suggested devaluation as the best solution to support economy and to solve old 
problems.  However,  that  was  clearly  not  an  option  for  the  Baltic  countries  given  their 
openness,  flexibility,  large  foreign-currency-denominated  debt  and  long  history  of  fixed 
exchange  rate  regimes  serving  as  an  anchor  for  macroeconomic  stability  for  the  Baltic 
States, and also Bulgaria. Already now Baltic performance has reassured many sceptics that 
the internal adjustment strategy simply works, making a good case for other countries 
to move forward with fiscal consolidation and much needed reforms. I mentioned the internal 
adjustment strategy – there was actually such strategy: the State Treasury was running out 
of funds and there is simply no other alternative.  
The reform agenda in the Baltics has been ambitious. To ensure fiscal sustainability, the 
adjustment  burden  undertaken  ranged  from  an  estimated  9–10%  of  GDP  in  Lithuania  and 
Estonia to 14% of GDP in Latvia throughout 2009–2010 – something that the world had not 
seen  before.  And  yet  we  did  not  get  stuck  in  a  protracted  recession  as  sceptics 
predicted. We have already reached a significant progress in regaining cost competitiveness, 
have made our economies structurally more resilient and are moving towards sustainable 
growth.  
 So far I have addressed the Baltics as a region rather than the individual economies that they 
are  and  therefore  it  might  seem  that  developments  there  were  rather  similar.  Despite  the 
many  similarities,  however,  there  were  also  significant  differences  that  are  extremely 
important if one is to draw lessons from the recent crisis. One may also say that while all 
three  being  tigers  –  a  metaphor  commonly  used  to  describe  the  past  exceptionally  strong 
expansion of the Baltic economies – each of the three had and still has its own – unique – 
character. 
One of the obvious differences among the Baltic countries was their policy stance in the run-
up to crisis. Fiscal discipline differed considerably among the three countries throughout 
the boom years that largely shaped their performance during the crisis. 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2010
 Latvia  was  clearly  the  most  quick-tempered  one  on  the  fiscal  front.  Experiencing  the 
fastest  economic  expansion  and  extremely  strong  cyclical  upturn  in  tax  revenue,  we  still 
managed  to  spend  more  than  we  earned  and  recorded  a  budget  deficit  every  single  year 
during the boom. While being rather moderate in nominal terms, the deficits were extremely 
large when cyclically adjusted – amounting to 7–8% of GDP, in turn adding extra fuel to the 
already  severely  overheated  economy.  Budgetary  discipline  was  extremely  weak.  Every 
single year when revenue performance turned out better than expected, budget laws were 
amended  to  further  boost  expenditure.  Between  2004  and  2008,  expenditure  picked  up 
2½ times,  and  most  of  that  was  of  a  structural  nature.  As  many  of  you  know  –  there  was 
really one industry which was overheating – namely construction and nothing was done to 
prevent it. This meant an accumulation of an enormous fiscal gap – over 20% of GDP – 
that was temporarily obscured by the economic boom but became obvious with the burst of 
the bubble. As authorities rapidly ran out of available liquidity and no investors were ready to 
finance  the  massive  fiscal  needs,  Latvia  had  to  turn  for  international  support,  becoming  a 
program country under the IMF Stand-By Arrangement and European Commission support. 
Lithuania  was  not  materially  better  in  terms  of  fiscal  management,  but  was  lucky  to  lag 
behind in terms of the economic cycle, which resulted in a less overheated economy before 
the crisis took off. Estonia, however, showed much more prudence in pursuing counter-
cyclical policies accumulating considerable liquidity cushion to support economy during the 
downturn.  Every  single  year  since  2002  Estonia  ran  budget  surpluses  that  increased  over 
time as the economy accelerated. This made a significant difference in the way economies 
adjusted  during  the  crisis  with  strong  implications  to  their  future  growth  prospects.  While 
Latvia  and  Lithuania  ended  up  with  skyrocketing  public  debts,  Estonia’s  debt  remained 
contained, allowing for a greater fiscal space and stronger growth potential in future. Already 
now Estonia has a faster GDP growth and its future looks much brighter. In other words – it 
is the combination of prudent fiscal and monetary policies which is behind the most notable 
difference with the other Baltic States. A by-product of Estonia’s persistent prudent policies 
or – should we say – a prize for its very top stands during last 10 years, that is also going to 
be its membership of the Euro area as early as 2011. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 5
 The euro is not a solution to all problems and it does not mean a automatic welfare gains for 
converging economies like ours, but if policies are kept on track, the euro helps boosting 
growth potential and provides vast opportunities for future development. While we have 
been  struggling  to  simply  stay  afloat,  Estonia  has  strategically  moved  towards  its  aim  of 
joining the euro. I can only express a friendly envy regarding their pragmatism, strategic 
mindset  and  ability  to  move  in  unison  to  make  use  of  synergies  and  reach  common 
targets. “Yes We Can!” sounds like Estonia, and I would like to wish every success to the 
Estonian authorities in their future endeavours of making their country a better place to live 
and advance. 
What  can  we  learn  from  Estonia?  Our  northern  neighbour  is  a  good  example  that  any 
target can be reached, but this requires strategy and ambition. Latvia has shown that it 
can  brace  up  and  make  hard  but  necessary  steps  forward  when  cornered.  However,  all 
determination tends to fade away with the situation becoming less pressing. When afloat we 
start drifting downstream instead of heading towards the river bank. I am afraid, as we 
hear, that Latvia has done a good job, that we are leaving the crisis behind us, there could be 
less motivation to continue the adjustment. 
Hopefully,  this  has  been  changed  by  the  recent  crisis.  Latvia  is  gradually  heeling  its 
economic wounds and, hopefully, has learned the lesson that a county cannot live beyond its 
means  without  endangering  its  future  prospects.  To  create  a  stable  economy,  which 
generates  more  prosperity,  is  clearly  the  target  for  the  undertaken  reform  agenda  in  this 
country.  In  any  case,  we  need  another  round  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural 
reforms to bring public finance on a sustainable footing and economy back on a sustainable 
growth track. At the moment, unsustainable public finance is significantly hampering lending 
activity,  investment,  economic  activity  and  new  jobs,  reduction  of  the  state  debt.  In  other 
words – deficit can hamper future growth should this problem remain unsolved.  
6 
 BIS Review 122/2010
 While  the  economic  and  financial  situation  in  Latvia  has  improved  significantly  since  the 
onset  of  the  recent  crisis,  we  are  not  out  of  the  woods  yet.  According  to  our  estimates 
another  400  million  in  expenditure  cuts  backed  by  structural  reforms  that  make  them 
permanent are needed to bring the recently high budget deficit towards a more comfortable 
level  in  2011.  The  resulting  budget  deficit  of  6%  is  not  a  magic  number,  though! 
Circumstances  permitting,  the  deficit  could  be  even  smaller,  provided  Latvia  with  higher 
rating, lower interest rates, new investments and new jobs. This would also bring us much 
closer to the euro introduction in 2014 as an exit from the international support program. I am 
perfectly  aware  that  this  is  not  an  easy  task;  however,  it  is  realistic  should  we  have  a 
strategic mindset and enough ambition. 
In conclusion let me quote the Estonian president Toomas Hendrik Ilvess from what he said 
back in April 2009 during a meeting with his Latvian counterpart Valdis Zatlers: 
“In  Estonia  we  know  that  tax  revenue  is  lower  than  expected  and  additional  steps  are 
required. (..) At times when money runs out, there are no simple or pleasant solutions 
left  –  expenditures  have  to  be  cut.  It  is  an  illusion  to  think  that  we  will  be  able  to  spend 
money, which we actually do not have. That is impossible – for individuals and states alike. 
Therefore  –  if  one  does  not  have  the  money  to  spend,  expenditures  have  to  be  cut.  The 
question then naturally is – where to cut. I believe that both Estonia and Latvia are clearly 
aware that it is fiscally responsible to make these complicated choices now and not 
dump these complicated choices on the future generations. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 7
