Miyako Suda: The current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
and the conduct of monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Ms Miyako Suda, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, 
at a meeting with Business Leaders, Wakayama, 3 June 2010. 
 I. 
A. 
Japan’s economy and prices and the conduct of monetary policy 
Developments in financial markets 
Developments in global financial markets and the situation in Greece 
1. 
The topic I would like to discuss today is the current situation of, and outlook for, Japan’s 
economy and the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy. Let me begin by looking at 
developments in global financial markets. 
Following  the  unprecedented  turmoil  triggered  by  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September 2008, global financial markets regained stability from around the spring of 2009 
due  to  various  measures  taken  by  governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world.  The 
LIBOR–OIS  spread,  an  indicator  of  counterparty  credit  risk,  has  narrowed  to  levels 
significantly  below  those  seen  before  the  Lehman  shock.  Recently,  however,  signs  of 
instability  have  reemerged  due  to  concerns  over  fiscal  problems  in  some  European 
countries,  particularly  Greece,  and  uncertainty  regarding  financial  regulation  in  the  United 
States and Europe. The crisis in Greece has caused large fluctuations in stock prices and 
foreign exchange rates around the world, increasing investors’ risk aversion and deepening 
the  fiscal  woes  of  other  European  countries.  In  what  follows,  I  would  like  to  review  recent 
developments in global financial markets, focusing in particular on the situation surrounding 
Greece.  
The Greek debt crisis was triggered by a loss of confidence in Greece’s official statistics and 
its  ability  to  repay  its  debt.  In  October  2009,  the  new  administration in  Greece  announced 
that the country’s budget deficit in 2009 would be far greater than previously estimated. The 
significant revision gave rise to concerns about the reliability of Greece’s official statistics and 
fiscal discipline, prompting a large rise in Greece’s sovereign risk premium. In January this 
year, the Greek government submitted to the European Commission a three-year plan to cut 
its budget deficit, and in April, the 16 euro area member states agreed on a 30-billion euro 
financial  support  package.  At  that  stage,  Greece  was  still  able  to  procure  funds  relatively 
smoothly through the issuance of government securities. However, Greece’s sovereign risk 
premium increased rapidly from the end of April to early May, following a further revision to 
its  budget  deficit  estimate,  a  sharp  downgrading  of  Greek  government  bonds  by  a  major 
credit rating agency, and successive news reports about the escalation of street protests in 
Greece. In response, worldwide stock prices tumbled and foreign exchange rates fluctuated 
sharply.  For  example,  the  Dow  Jones  Industrial  Average  experienced  its  largest  recorded 
intraday points fall on May 6, 2010.  
To address this situation, the European Union agreed on a 500 billion euro emergency loan 
package, the European Stabilization Mechanism, with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
pledging  additional  funds.  The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  for  its  part,  decided  to 
intervene  in  euro  area  public  and  private  debt  securities  markets  through  the  Securities 
Markets Programme, while adopting a fixed-rate tender procedure with full allotment in the 
regular three-month longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs), a six-month LTRO with full 
allotment, and U.S. dollar liquidity-providing operations. Furthermore, the Greek government 
announced additional fiscal consolidation measures, which gradually are helping to ease the 
severe  strains  in  financial  markets.  However,  fiscal  deficits  are  not  a  problem  for  Greece 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 1
alone. Rather, this problem is shared by all countries that responded to the rapid economic 
deterioration with large-scale expansionary fiscal measures in the aftermath of the Lehman 
shock. However, the problem has become particularly acute in the euro area, with its strict 
fiscal rules enshrined in the Stability and Growth Pact and its single common currency, which 
means  that  countries  cannot  use  exchange  rate  adjustments  to  modify  trade  between 
member  states.  This  basic  constraint  is  identical  for  countries  other  than  Greece,  such  as 
Portugal, Italy, Ireland, and Spain, on which attention has recently focused. These countries 
face structural problems in terms of managing fiscal policy and maintaining competitiveness 
under a single currency. Consequently, fiscal reconstruction is likely to be a painful and time 
consuming process and financial markets are likely to remain wary of the sovereign risks of 
these five countries and the credit risks of financial institutions with large exposure to them. 
Against this background, stock prices have remained weak in the United States and Europe, 
while the LIBOR–OIS spreads for the U.S. dollar and euro are expected to continue to widen. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  euro  is  tending  to  be  weak.  In  sum,  global  financial 
markets remain unpredictable, requiring continued close monitoring.  
Developments in Japanese financial markets  
2. 
Turning to Japanese financial markets, interest rates, particularly those on term instruments, 
have  been  declining  since  the  beginning  of  2009  in  tandem  with  the  improvement  in  the 
functioning of various markets as a result of the stabilization in global financial markets. In 
December  2009,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  market  operation,  which  provides  funds  at  a 
fixed rate against pooled collateral, to counter instability in global financial markets following 
the  financial  crisis  triggered  by  the  surfacing  of  payment  rescheduling  problem  of 
government-affiliated firms in Dubai, and to quell any concerns that market confidence might 
deteriorate  in  the  face  of  increased  news  reports  about  deflation.  In  addition,  in  order  to 
further lower interest rates on term instruments, the Bank, in March 2010, sharply increased 
the volume of funds provided through the new funds-supplying operation, and interest rates 
on term instruments have been declining since. On the other hand, while stock prices were 
on an upward trend from the spring of 2009 due to improved economic sentiment, they have 
been  falling  sharply  since  the  beginning  of  May  in  tandem  with  the  decline  in  U.S.  and 
European stock prices reflecting the emergence of the problems surrounding Greece. Along 
with the fall in stock prices, risk avoidance among investors has grown, leading to increased 
purchases of government bonds and a moderate downward trend in long-term interest rates. 
In the foreign exchange market, the dollar has been trading at around 90 yen, while the euro 
has weakened significantly against the yen.  
As  for  the  environment  for  corporate  financing,  firms’  cash  inflow  has  improved,  reducing 
demand for external funds and narrowing the issuing spreads even on debt securities issued 
by  firms  with  low  credit  ratings.  In  view  of  the  improvement  in  the  corporate  financing 
environment, the Bank terminated the special measures introduced after the Lehman shock: 
outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds were wound up at the end of December 2009, 
while special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing were terminated at 
the  end  of  March  2010.  The  termination  of  these  measures  has  had  no  major  impact  on 
markets, but given the current marked instability in stock prices and foreign exchange rates, 
the Bank is paying close attention to the effects of developments in risk aversion.  
The current situation of the economy and prices  
B. 
As  I  explained  earlier,  uncertainty  remains  regarding  developments  in  global  financial 
markets, but an increasing number of recently released economic indicators show that signs 
of  an  economic  recovery  in  Japan  are  becoming  more  broad-based.  Following  the 
assessment at the Monetary Policy Meeting on April 6 and 7, 2010, that Japan’s economy 
“has been picking up,” the Bank raised its assessment at the meeting on May 20  and 21, 
stating that the economy shows further signs of a moderate recovery. However, as I have 
repeatedly  mentioned,  developments  in  global  financial  markets  have  recently  been 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2010
unstable, and attention should be paid to how they affect economic activity in Japan. I would 
now  like  to  discuss  in  detail  the  current  situation  for  each  demand  component  and  then 
consider the outlook as well as risk factors for the economy.  
First,  real  exports,  the  main  engine  of  Japan’s  economic  growth,  have  been  increasing, 
especially to emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and here particularly those in 
Asia. Let us look at the global economic and price situation forming the background to the 
increase  in  Japan’s  exports.  The  U.S.  economy,  for  example,  is  recovering  at  a  moderate 
pace.  Private  nonfarm  payroll  employment  has  started  to  clearly  increase,  and  retail  sales 
data  provide  signs  of  a  recovery  in  a  broad  range  of  business  areas.  However,  with  the 
unemployment  rate  still  high  and  the  average  duration  of  unemployment  at  a  new  peak, 
credit  card  lending  remains  tight  and  the  pressure  on  households  to  adjust  their  balance 
sheets continues to weigh on the recovery of private consumption. Similarly, in the housing 
market, home price indices have been slow to recover, and mortgage delinquency rates and 
the number of foreclosures have been rising. Against this background, the pace at which the 
recovery in the corporate sector has been spreading to the household sector has remained 
moderate.  
Economic activity in the euro area has been picking up as a whole, with some differences in 
growth by country. The pace of recovery, however, remains moderate compared to that in 
the United States. In the euro area, exports and production continue to increase, but private 
consumption  has  been  weak,  reflecting  persisting  adjustment  pressure  on  households’ 
balance sheets against the background of the severe employment situation and the fact that 
consumer sentiment has deteriorated somewhat due, for example, to the growing severity of 
the situation in Greece.  
On the other hand, emerging and commodity-exporting economies continue to show robust 
growth underpinned by strong domestic demand. In China, due mainly to the effects of the 
expansionary macroeconomic policies, bank lending has expanded by more than 20 percent 
from a year earlier and retail sales and fixed asset investment are at much higher levels than 
in  2009.  The  strong  domestic  demand  in  China  has  stimulated  economic  activity  in  other 
countries in the region such as the NIEs and the ASEAN countries through increased exports 
to China. As a result, these economies continue to show high growth supported by a virtuous 
circle of growth in production, income, and spending.  
As for the price situation in overseas economies, a disinflationary trend in the United States 
and Europe continues. Specifically, in the United States, the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  energy  and  food,  or  the  core  CPI,  has 
continued to slow, registering 0.9 percent in April, the smallest increase since January 1966. 
In the euro area, the year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI declined to 0.8 percent in 
April, the lowest since the introduction of the index. These developments in the United States 
and  Europe  imply  that  the  deterioration  in  the  aggregate  demand  and  supply  balance  in 
these  economies  has  been  exerting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  On  the  other  hand, 
inflationary  concerns  are  intensifying  in  emerging  economies.  In  China,  in  particular,  real 
estate prices in 70 major cities in April marked the largest year-on-year increase on record 
and the year-on-year increase in the CPI in April was the highest in a year and a half.  
Turning  to  domestic  demand  in  Japan,  public  investment  has  been  decreasing  since  the 
second  half  of  fiscal  2009.  On  the  other  hand,  corporate  profits  have  been  following  a 
recovery trend due mainly to increased production and labor cost restraint. Reflecting these 
developments,  business  fixed  investment  has  leveled  out  and  started  to  show  signs  of 
picking  up,  as  evidenced  by  the  continued  increase  in  shipments  of  capital  goods,  a 
coincident  indicator  of  business  fixed  investment.  The  employment  and  income  situation 
remains severe, but gradually signs of a recovery are emerging: the unemployment rate has 
peaked out, and nominal wages per employee increased by 1.5 percent in April year on year, 
registering  a  positive  figure  for  the  second  consecutive  month.  Against  this  background, 
private  consumption,  notably  of  durable  goods,  has  picked  up  due  to  the  effects  of  policy 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 3
measures  such  as  tax  reductions  on  purchases  of  environmentally  friendly  cars  and  the 
introduction  of  the  eco-point  system,  which  favors  energy-efficient  products.  It  should  be 
noted, however, that the substantial increase in sales of electrical appliances through March 
was due to a rush of demand prior to tighter application of the eco-point system for flat panel 
televisions, and that sales at department stores, which marked a quarter-on-quarter increase 
in  the  first  quarter  of  2010  for  the  first  time  since  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007,  have  been 
sluggish  since  the  beginning  of  April,  largely  due  to  weak  sales  of  apparel  reflecting 
unfavorable  weather  conditions.  Although  some  market  participants  regard  the  improved 
sales of luxury goods as a sign of a self-sustaining recovery, I believe that the situation in 
private  consumption  still  requires  careful  monitoring.  Meanwhile,  the  decline  in  housing 
investment has almost leveled out, as evidenced by, for example, improved sales of newly 
built condominiums in the Tokyo metropolitan area.  
Reflecting the situation in domestic and overseas demand I just described, production has 
been rising. The decline in inventories has almost leveled out, and the shipment-inventory 
balance,  on  the  whole,  has  improved  to  a  level  where  there  are  no  inventory  adjustment 
pressures.  
Looking at developments in prices in Japan, the pace of the year-on-year decline in the CPI 
(excluding  fresh  food)  –  which  posted  the  largest  fall  on  record,  minus  2.4  percent,  in 
August 2009  –  has  started  to  decelerate  with  the  effects  of  the  drop  in  the  prices  of 
petroleum products following their surge in 2008 waning. The moderating trend in the pace of 
decline in the CPI has continued against the background of the gradual improvement in the 
aggregate demand and supply balance. Recently, the rate of change in the CPI has been 
hovering around minus 1 percent once the effects of subsidies for high school tuition fees are 
taken out.  
Outlook for the economy and prices  
C. 
Japan’s economy is starting to recover moderately, induced by the improvement in overseas 
economic conditions. The Bank’s projections for economic activity in Japan are as follows: 
while  the  effects  of  various  policy  measures  are  likely  to  wane,  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting  economies  are  likely  to  maintain  high  growth,  and  the  momentum  for  a  self-
sustaining  recovery  in  Japan’s  domestic  private  demand  is  expected  to  gradually  gather 
pace; Japan’s economy therefore is likely to be on a recovery trend.1 For these projections to 
materialize,  it  is  important  that  improvements  in  the  corporate  sector  feed  through  to  the 
household  sector  supported  by  a  virtuous  cycle  of  increased  production,  income,  and 
spending.  However,  considering  Japan’s  experience  during  the  economic  recovery  phase 
since 2002, the pace with which improvements in the corporate sector feed through is likely 
to  remain  moderate.  Moreover,  uncertainties  regarding  the  economic  outlook  have  been 
heightening  due  to  instability  in  global  financial  markets  reflecting  concerns  over  fiscal 
problems in some European countries. I will discuss these risk factors later on, and would 
now like to address the outlook for each demand component.  
To  begin  with,  Japan’s  real  exports  are  likely  to  continue  increasing,  especially  those  to 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  Examining  developments  in  the  world 
economy,  on  which  developments  in  Japan’s  exports  depend,  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies are likely to continue achieving strong growth led by domestic demand, 
which in turn should contribute to a continued moderate recovery in the U.S. and European 
economies.  Specifically,  the  momentum  for  a  self-sustaining  recovery  is  expected  to 
gradually become more pronounced in the U.S. economy with a continued improvement in 
the  employment  and  income  situation.  Nevertheless,  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  will 
likely  remain  moderate,  given  that  it  will  take  considerable  time  for  the  housing  market  to 
                                                 
1   For details, see the April 2010 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices released on May 1, 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2010
recover, and that adjustment pressure on households’ balance sheets will continue to be a 
constraint on a recovery in consumption. The economy of the euro area is also expected to 
continue recovering moderately, with exports, partly due to the weak euro, expected to grow, 
which in turn will boost production. However, the pace of economic recovery in the euro area 
is expected to be more moderate than that in the United States, not only because adjustment 
pressure on households’ balance sheets and sluggish consumer confidence stemming from 
unstable financial market conditions are likely to persist for some while at a time when the 
employment  and  income  situation  remains  severe,  but  also  because  stringent  fiscal 
consolidation  measures  required  of  countries  facing  serious  fiscal  problems  will  exert 
downward pressure on economic activity in the euro area.  
Turning  to  domestic  demand  in  Japan,  the  momentum  of  recovery  in  private  consumption 
might temporarily weaken in the latter half of fiscal 2010 as the effects of policy measures 
gradually  wane.  Nevertheless,  the  underlying  trend  of  a  recovery  is  not  likely  to  be 
interrupted  given  the  continued  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation. 
Business  fixed  investment,  which  has  stopped  declining,  is  expected  to  gradually  start 
picking  up,  given  that  machinery  orders  (private  demand,  excluding  orders  of  shipbuilding 
and  orders  from  electric  power  companies),  which  are  a  leading  indicator  of  machinery 
investment,  are  expected  to  have  risen  in  the  April–June  quarter  for  the  third  consecutive 
quarterly  increase.  Housing  investment  will  likely  continue  recovering  moderately:  the 
number of housing starts – a leading indicator of housing investment – is starting to recover 
as  a  result  of  support  measures  and  adjustments  in  condominium  prices.  Reflecting  such 
developments in demand both at home and abroad, production is likely to continue rising as 
a  trend.  The  industrial  production  index  may  temporarily  become  weak  in  the  October–
December quarter, that is, the quarter immediately after the purchase support for eco-friendly 
cars expires, but the uptrend in production is expected to remain intact with the continued 
increase in demand both at home and abroad.2 
As for prices, under the assumption that medium- to long-term inflation expectations remain 
stable, there are prospects that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh 
food)  could  turn  positive  in  fiscal  2011  as  the  aggregate  demand  and  supply  balance 
moderately improves.  
Risk factors  
D. 
Next, I will discuss the risk factors relevant to the outlook I have just talked about. The three 
risk factors that I am particularly concerned about at present are: (1) developments in global 
financial  markets;  (2)  the  sustainability  of  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies;  and  (3)  a  decline  in  the  expected  growth  rate  of  the  economy.  The  outlook  is 
becoming increasingly uncertain due to these risk factors which at present I see as tilted to 
the downside.  
Regarding the first factor, global financial markets have become volatile due to a number of 
reasons  including:  (1)  the  fiscal  deficit  problem  in  some  European  countries;  (2)  balance-
sheet  problems  at  European  financial  institutions;  (3)  the  effect  on  the  United  States  and 
Europe of the adoption of more stringent financial regulations, including the restrictions on 
short  selling  in  Germany;  and  (4)  expectations  that  monetary  policy  will  be  tightened  in 
China. While all of these factors require close attention, I am particularly concerned about 
developments with regard to the fiscal deficit problem in some European countries, such as 
Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain. As I pointed out at the beginning of this speech, 
                                                 
2   When assessing developments in the industrial production index, it should be noted that the index is greatly 
influenced by the distortion caused by seasonal adjustments. For details, see footnote 8 of the May issue of 
the  Monthly  Report  of  Recent  Economic  and  Financial  Developments,  released  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  on 
May 25, 2010. 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 5
the  fiscal  deficit  problem  in  some  European  countries  arises  from  the  difficulties  of  an 
economic system based on a common currency, the euro. Therefore, the road to recovery 
may be long and painful due to the need for severe fiscal consolidation. Such worries are at 
the  root  of  the  significant  volatility  in  stock  prices  and  foreign  exchange  rates  around  the 
world, which in turn may have a negative impact on private consumption and business fixed 
investment  not  only  in  Europe  but  also  in  Japan  through  a  deterioration  in  household  and 
corporate sentiment. Furthermore, a possible downturn of the economy of the euro area as a 
result of rigorous fiscal consolidation measures may affect Japan’s exports to some extent. 
There  is  also  a  risk  that  weakness  in  European  financial  markets  could  spread  to  other 
countries through losses incurred by European financial institutions. Other risks that require 
attention include that expansionary macroeconomic policies in countries such as China are 
adjusted too quickly or too slowly.  
The  second  risk  factor  concerns  the  sustainability  of  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies. At present, these countries are enjoying high economic growth and are 
expected to maintain high levels of growth. However, a further increase in the inflow of funds 
to these countries as a result of global monetary easing could lead to excessive investment 
activity and position-taking, possibly triggering an overheating of these economies or a surge 
in primary commodity prices. A price surge in primary commodities could affect the Japanese 
economy by leading to a downturn in corporate profits through a deterioration in the terms of 
trade  or  by  pushing  down  private  consumption.  Furthermore,  if  economies  overheat,  the 
subsequent unwinding of excesses could cause a sharp downturn of the global economy and 
destabilize financial markets. In fact, in China, expectations of a tightening of monetary policy 
have recently induced volatility in stock prices, while international commodity prices, such as 
those of crude oil, have started to fall as investors are becoming more cautious about taking 
on risks. If these trends gain further momentum, prices in industrialized countries, including 
Japan, may be affected somewhat  through funds flowing out of emerging and commodity-
exporting  economies  and  international  commodity  markets,  causing  a  further  decline  in 
international commodity prices.  
The third risk factor is a decline in the expected growth rate resulting from domestic structural 
trends such as: (1) corporate efforts to restrain wages to survive global competition; (2) the 
growing economic divergence between large and small firms as well as between large cities 
and  regional  areas;  and  (3)  the  aging  and  shrinking  of  the  population.  A  decline  in  the 
expected growth rate could hamper the virtuous circle of production, income, and spending. 
Furthermore, it could lead more firms to increase business fixed investment overseas rather 
than in Japan. In fact, the results of the Annual Survey of Corporate Behavior (Fiscal 2009) 
conducted by the Cabinet Office show that 55.7 percent of responding manufacturers were 
planning 
if  expansionary 
macroeconomic  policies  are  maintained  for  longer  than  is  necessary,  this  could  lower  the 
expected  medium-  to  long-term  growth  rate  of  domestic  demand  by  slowing  down  the 
response  to  structural  changes,  keeping  resources  in  inefficient  areas,  and  delaying 
improvements in productivity in the economy as a whole.  
increase  and  strengthen  overseas  production.  Also, 
to 
Monetary policy for the immediate future  
E. 
So  far,  I  have  talked  about  developments  in  financial  markets  at  home  and  abroad,  the 
economy, and prices, as well as the risk factors relevant to the outlook with regard to these. I 
will now move on to the issue of the Bank’s monetary policy.  
The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end, the Bank 
will  continue  to  consistently  make  contributions  as  the  central  bank.  In  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy,  the  Bank  will  aim  to  maintain  the  extremely  accommodative  financial 
environment.  Furthermore,  in  view  of  the  current  state  of  the  Japanese  economy,  and 
recognizing  the  need  to  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  the  Bank  has 
decided to introduce a new initiative to contribute to the strengthening of the foundations for 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2010
economic growth. Specifically, the Bank decided, through the provision of funds, to support 
efforts  by  private  financial  institutions  that  would  help  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
economic growth, and on May 21, 2010 announced a preliminary framework for this initiative. 
At present, the Bank is exchanging views with a wide range of financial institutions and firms 
in order to formulate concrete plans for the initiative.  
The  provision  of  funds  by  a  central  bank  specifically  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
economic  growth  is  an  unprecedented  measure.  Such  a  move  could  increase  the  risk  of: 
(1) distorting resource allocation in the private sector; (2) reducing the flexibility of monetary 
adjustments  by  lengthening  the  duration  of  assets  held  by  the  Bank;  and  (3)  negatively 
affecting  the  soundness  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet.  The  decision  to  resort  to  such  a 
measure  reflects  the  acute  concern  of  the  Bank  over  the  prolonged  weakness  of  the 
Japanese economy. In the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook 
Report)  released  on  April  30,  the  Bank  stated  at  the  opening  that:  (1)  the  presence  of 
emerging  and  commodity  exporting  economies  in  the  global  economy  is  growing;  (2)  in 
advanced  economies,  the  outstanding  amount  of  public  debt  has  risen  to  unprecedented 
levels;  (3)  discussions  have  proceeded  regarding  a  review  of  financial  regulation  and 
supervision;  and  (4)  Japan  –  where  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  decline  against  the 
backdrop of an aging and shrinking population – faces the critical challenge of raising real 
economic growth and productivity. The report also states that the Bank takes into account 
“these  medium-to  long-term  changes  in,  and  challenges  facing,  the  global  economy  and 
Japan’s  economy”  when  examining  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices.  This 
statement is based on the belief that firms’ expectations for economic growth, and hence the 
outlook for growth, will change if each and every one of us moves forward and takes action 
to tackle these structural changes.3  
These problems ailing the Japanese economy are already well known. Various prescriptions 
have been provided on how to deal with these structural changes and problems. However, 
the  absence  of  any  effective  measures  and  concrete  results  has  given  rise  to  a  growing 
sense of despair among the public. Estimates of future population trends in Japan underline 
the  pressing  need  for  per  capita  productivity  to  rise  if  growth  expectations  are  to  be 
maintained.  
The potential growth rate and deflation  
II. 
I will now talk about the vital necessity to raise the potential growth rate in order to get out of 
the deflationary impasse. A comparison of the growth rate of consumer prices in the United 
States,  Europe,  and  Japan  shows  that,  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  CPI 
(excluding food and energy prices, which tend to be volatile) declined in Japan alone, even 
though  Japan  was  outside  the  epicenter  of  the  financial  crisis.  In  terms  of  the  downward 
trend in inflation, this has been quite similar in the United States, Europe, and Japan, so that 
the reason why prices in Japan have been falling is that the inflation rate was low to start 
with.  In  any  case,  in  order  to  find  out  why  Japan  alone  is  experiencing  deflation,  it  is 
necessary to look into why the inflation rate has been low in Japan compared with the United 
States  and  Europe  from  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s.  I  will  now  look  into  this  issue  from  a 
medium- to long-term perspective.  
                                                 
3   On this point, I agree with the view of Yutaka Yamaguchi, a former Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, 
outlined in a speech delivered to the Colloque Monétaire International at the Banque de France on October 8 
and 9, 1999: “Nevertheless, looking back on the experiences of the Bank of Japan during the 1990s, I believe 
that central banks are counted on to determine quickly any major structural changes in economies, analyze 
accurately their implications, and explain them persuasively to the public at large.” For details, see “Monetary 
Policy  and  Structural  Policy:  A  Japanese  Perspective,”  available  on 
the  Bank’s  web  site  at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/index.htm. 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 7
Negative productivity shocks  
A. 
A major factor behind the prolonged deflation in Japan since the 1990s is the negative output 
gap,  which  has  prevailed  for  a  long  time.  One  of  the  reasons  often  cited  recently  for  this 
negative  output  gap  is  the  slowdown  in  productivity  growth  –  that  is,  negative  productivity 
shocks.4  I  will  now  discuss  these  negative  productivity  shocks  and  their  relation  with  the 
output gap, which is the cause of deflation.  
The  reasons  for  Japan’s  slower  growth  trend  from  the  1990s,  compared  with  those  of  the 
United States and Europe, can be attributed to successive negative productivity shocks. The 
first shock is the rapid advance in population aging and decline. The second is the continuing 
IT  revolution  and  the  intensification  of  global  competition  based  on  the  increased  supply 
capacity of emerging markets. It has been argued that against the background of these major 
structural  changes,  corporate  governance  in  Japan,  being  bound  by  past  success,  has 
shown  insufficient  adaptability  and  flexibility.5  The  third  factor  is  that  these  negative 
productivity shocks coincided with the disposal of nonperforming loans following the burst of 
the real estate bubble.6 To be more specific, following the burst of the real estate bubble of 
the  late  1980s,  manufactures  were  busy  dealing  with  excesses  in  production  capacity, 
employment,  and  debt,  while  financial  institutions  were  unable  to  perform  their  credit 
intermediation  function  properly  because  they  were  preoccupied  with  the  disposal  of 
nonperforming  loans.  It  is  thought  that  these  factors  combined  put  downward  pressure  on 
labor input, capital input, and total factor productivity.7 Indeed, the pace of labor productivity 
growth  in  Japan  moderated  from  the  1990s  onward.  Also,  during  this  period,  there  was 
limited  room  for  reducing  interest  rates  and  it  therefore  was  impossible  to  ease  monetary 
policy to the extent required for countering the decline in the potential growth rate.  
At the same time, growth expectations for the economy have also been weighed down by 
anxiety  about  the  future  stemming  from  the  large  fiscal  deficit  and  problems  regarding  the 
pension system. The decline in growth expectations has pushed down people’s permanent 
income  expectations,  leading  to  general  restraint  in  consumption  and  investment.  Since 
supply can be adjusted only relatively slowly, the demand and supply balance deteriorated, 
exerting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Thus,  the  significant  and  prolonged  downward 
pressure on prices in Japan has been caused by the intermittent negative production shocks 
that occurred during the 1990s. Given this environment, firms placed greater emphasis on 
profitability  by  further  restraining  wages  against  the  background  of  the  slow  rise  in  labor 
productivity,  causing  unit  labor  costs  (labor  costs  per  unit  of  output)  to  trend  downward  in 
contrast  with  the  situation  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  The  downward  pressure  on 
wages  has  been  strong  because  of  (1)  the  tendency  in  Japan  to  restrain  personnel  costs 
through wage adjustments rather than job cuts, (2) the increased tendency of firms to shift 
production overseas in the search for low-cost labor, and (3) the weakening of labor unions. 
In addition, fierce competition particularly among nonmanufacturers also contributed to lower 
inflation rates. It has been argued that the productivity gap of the nonmanufacturing sector 
vis-à-vis manufacturing was partly responsible for pushing up services prices (according to 
                                                 
4   For  details,  see  Fumio  Hayashi  and  Edward  Prescott,  “The  1990s  in  Japan:  A  Lost  Decade,”  Review  of 
Economic Dynamics, 5, pp. 206–235, 2002. 
5   See Yoshikazu Morimoto, Wataru Hirata, and Ryo Kato, “Global Disinflation,” research paper released by the 
Bank of Japan in June 2003 (available on the Bank’s website). 
6   See Masaaki Shirakawa, “Japan’s Economy and Innovation,” speech given at the Japan National Press Club 
in Tokyo on May 31, 2010 (available on the Bank’s website). 
7   See Masayuki Nakayuki, Akira Otani, and Shigenori Shiratsuka, “Distortions in Factor Markets and Structural 
Adjustments  in  the  Economy,”  IMES  Discussion  Paper  Series,  No.  2004-E-4  (available  on  the  Bank’s 
website). 
8 
 BIS Review 106/2010
the  structural  inflation  theory),  but  this  tendency  has  lessened  as  a  result  of  increased 
competition since the 1990s.8  
Furthermore,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  –  another  large  factor  affecting 
prices  –  appear  to  be  lower  in  Japan  than  in  other  countries.  This  is  probably  due  to  the 
decline in growth expectations mentioned earlier, coupled with the fact that inflation rates in 
Japan have been comparatively low in the past. Survey results suggest that long-term price 
expectations have been relatively stable in a range between 0 and 2 percent since the latter 
half  of the 1990s  and  that  fluctuations  in  expectations  seem  to  correlate  with  the potential 
growth rate. Based on these findings, it may be said that the decline in the potential growth 
rate in Japan since the 1990s exerted downward pressure on prices by triggering a decline in 
demand  exceeding  that  in  the  potential  growth  rate,  which  in  turn  lowered  the  expected 
growth  rate  at  the  time,  which  then  negatively  affected  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations. In other words, the main cause of deflation appears to be the decline in the 
potential growth rate brought about by various external shocks, which in turn gave rise to a 
more guarded view with respect to growth prospects.  
As  for  the  outlook,  the  potential  growth  rate  is  likely  to  remain  low.  The  aging  of  the 
population will not only reduce the ratio of the working population, but will lead to a fall in 
investment  and  the  capital  stock  as  the  saving  rate  declines,  and  increase  the  downward 
pressure on economic growth per capita. In addition, the decline in the population must also 
be  taken  into  account.  This,  over  time,  will  add  further  downward  pressure  on  economic 
growth overall. If these developments lower the expected growth rate even more, prices will 
come under further downward pressure.  
Importance of maintaining the public’s confidence in policymakers  
B. 
It follows from the foregoing that in order to achieve sustainable economic growth with price 
stability,  it  is  essential  to  raise  the  potential  growth  rate.  In  view  of  the  limited  room  for 
lowering  interest  rates,  the  opinion  has  been  voiced  that  fiscal  spending,  which  has  an 
immediate  effect,  should  be  increased  without  hesitation.  However,  given  the  huge 
outstanding amount of public debt in Japan, thoughtlessly increasing fiscal spending could 
damage  public  confidence  in  the  conduct  of  fiscal  policy.  Especially  amid  the  growing 
concern about fiscal sustainability following the escalation of fiscal strains in Greece, a policy 
of fiscal expansion could rouse anxiety about possible tax increases and the health of the 
pension scheme, and, in turn, restrain consumer spending. If this happens, the demand and 
supply balance of the overall economy will deteriorate, increasing deflationary pressure. Loss 
of confidence in the conduct of fiscal policy will not only lead to a rise in interest rates and the 
cost  of  repayments,  but  also  damage  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions  holding 
government securities and exert downward pressure on the economy from the financial side.  
Credibility is also vital for central banks. If a central bank provides funds or is perceived to be 
doing  so  for  fiscal  spending  when  the  room  for  increases  in  fiscal  spending  is  limited,  its 
credibility as an independent policymaker will be tarnished. Its ability to achieve price stability 
through  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  will  be  in  doubt  and  interest  rates  will  rise  as  a 
result.9 Let us consider this by focusing on the government’s budget constraint. Since fiscal 
deficits  require  the  issuance  of  government  securities,  the  government’s  intertemporal 
                                                 
8   On the low labor productivity in the nonmanufacturing sector, see “Stagnation and Structural Adjustments of 
Nonmanufacturing  Industries  during  the  1990s,”  research  paper  released  by  the  Research  and  Statistics 
Department  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  February  1999.  This  is  a  summary  of  the  Japanese-language  original 
released in February 1999. 
9   For  details,  see  “Central  Bank  Independence,  Transparency,  and  Accountability,”  remarks  by  Ben 
S. Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  at  the  Institute  for 
Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, on 25 May 2010. 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 9
budget constraint, in real terms, and taking the present discounted value of the fiscal surplus, 
is given by the following equation: 
Outstanding balance of government securities issued/price level = present discounted value 
of the fiscal surplus (in real terms).  
Fiscal expansion lowers the present discounted value of the fiscal surplus. Thus, if we take 
the interest rate level as given, for the outstanding balance of government securities in real 
terms  to  decline,  the  price  level  needs  to  rise.  However,  although  such  a  rise  in  the  price 
level  would  spell  the  end  of  deflation  in  Japan,  it  would  give  rise  to  concerns  that  the 
government was planning to accumulate debt and then inflate it away. Therefore, no matter 
how strongly the central bank is committed to ensuring price stability, it will find it difficult to 
maintain credibility. Ultimately, such a path will destabilize the economy and prices. Lessons 
learned from the past are that credibility, once lost, is hard to be restored.  
For the present, the economy and prices are moving largely in line with the main scenario 
presented in the April 2010 Outlook Report, and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is 
likely to return to positive territory in fiscal 2011. In this situation, efforts should be made to 
raise the productivity of the overall economy and increase the potential growth rate in order 
to end deflation and reduce the fiscal deficit. 
10 
 BIS Review 106/2010
