Ardian Fullani: Latest economic and financial developments in Albania   
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  monetary  policy  decision-making  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania, 
Tirana, 30 June 2010. 
 In its meeting of 30 June 2010, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania analyzed and 
approved the Monetary Policy Monthly Report. After being introduced to the latest economic 
and  financial  developments  at  home  and  their  projections  for  the  future,  at  the  end  of 
discussion, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged at 5.25 percent. 
 Global economy attested to higher economic activity in the early months of 2010 fuelled by 
the  recovery  of  demand  in  emerging  countries,  stimulating  policies  pursued  by  advanced 
economies  and  higher  foreign  trade.  The  prospects  for  global  economy  suggest  that  the 
recovery  will  persist  in  most  economies.  However,  unemployment  remains  high,  reflecting 
the  low  business  confidence  and  scarce  investments  in  expanding  production  capacities. 
Inflation pressures, albeit low, maintained their upward trend in 2010 owing to the recovery of 
global  demand.  The  financial  markets  were  highly  volatile  in  response  to  the  key  market 
players’ concerns over the public debt-related issues in some Euro area countries. The need 
for budget consolidation in most of these countries due to the deteriorated fiscal indicators is 
expected to affect the future economic developments on a large scale.  
The last G20 meeting, which represents the world’s premier forum for discussing economic 
policies,  came  up  with  a  clear  message  about  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  and 
immediate efforts to rein in public debt.  
Concerning the Albanian economy, the available data attest to slow economic performance 
in the first four months of 2010. The poor performance of domestic demand components was 
offset by the higher contribution of foreign demand due to the considerable growth in exports. 
However, in line with our expectations, the Bank of Albania considers that economic activity 
has recovered gradually during this period. The recovery is expected to persist in the second 
half  of  2010  as  well.  Inflation  has  maintained  downward  rates  due  to  the  low  inflation 
pressures generated by the domestic economic environment.  
The  financial  markets  have  been  stable,  featuring  downward  interest  rates,  an  improved 
liquidity situation in the banking system and a more relaxed exchange rate.  
Consumer spending continued to be affected by the restrained financial resources and low 
consumer confidence in the first half of 2010.  
Indirect indicators like:  
 
 
 
attest to slower private consumption in the early months of 2010.  
Private  investments  have  provided  a  negative  contribution  to  economic  growth.  The 
historical low of the free capacity utilization, the worsened figures of business confidence, the 
contraction  of  the  import  of  intermediate  and  capital  goods  and  the  slowdown  in  credit 
suggest that investments were low during this period.  
the low growth of retail sales;  
the decline of remittances and consumer loans; and 
the slower employment indicators,  
BIS Review 98/2010 
 1
On the other hand, the slight recovery of credit for investment purposes and the increase in 
the  imports  of  intermediate  goods  in  the  first  months  of  the  second  quarter  of  2010  may 
signal  a  possible  shift  of  this  aggregate  demand  component  in  the  second  quarter  of  the 
present year.  
The public sector continued to pursue a stimulating fiscal policy in the first five months of 
2010.  Budget  deficit  amounted  to  ALL  11.6  billion,  owing  to  the  annual  growth  of  budget 
revenue by 4 percent and the annual contraction of public spending by 3 percent.  
After  careful  monitoring  of  the  current  and  expected  economic  performance  and  its 
implications for fiscal indicators, the Bank of Albania considers that fiscal policy should be 
watchful at keeping the budget deficit and public debt levels in check.  
Keeping  the  budget  deficit  within  sound  parameters  increases  confidence  in  the  long-term 
sustainability  of  public  debt,  hence  lowering  the  risk  premiums  in  the  financial  markets.  In 
addition, the lowering of pressures in the domestic financial markets helps to keep the long-
term interest rates in check, hence facilitating the private sector access to the credit market. 
Therefore, the projected revision to the 2010 state budget needs to be based on a realistic 
budget  revenue  plan,  making  at  the  same  time  projections  of  the  required  correction 
measures for the reduction of public spending and control of budget deficit.  
Net  exports  increased  their  positive  contribution  to  aggregate  demand  in  the  first  four 
months  of  2010.  This  performance  was  triggered  by  the  annual  increase  of  exports  by 
47 percent,  while  imports  were  comparable  to  the  previous  year.  Hence,  in  the  first  four 
months of the present year, trade deficit narrowed further by 14 percent y-o-y. In addition to 
the positive impact on economic growth, this necessary correction aided the stability of the 
national currency. Lek’s exchange rate was more stable and less volatile during this period.  
The performance of other balance of payments items in the first quarter of the present year 
attests  to  the  significant  reduction  of  foreign  financing.  Remittances  declined  6.7  percent, 
hence financing only 40.6 percent of the trade deficit.  
Despite the positive performance of foreign direct investments, posting an annual growth of 
26  percent,  the  surplus  in  capital  and  financial  account  financed  only  41.2  percent  of  the 
current deficit. The surplus was 63 percent lower than the previous year.  
The  long-term  stability  of  the  external  position  of  our  economy  remains  a  weakness  that 
requires constant consideration in terms of the formulation and implementation of economic 
policies.  
The slow growth rates of domestic demand were reflected in the low demand for money. In 
April, money supply posted an annual nominal growth of 7.5 percent. The creation of money 
in economy continues to be primarily sustained by the growth of the banking system’s net 
foreign assets. In April, private sector credit posted an annual growth of 7 percent.  
Banking  loan  data  show  a  positive  dynamics  for  the  last  two  months,  displaying  higher 
monthly  growth  rates  of  loans  and  particularly  of  investment  loans.  However,  the  lending 
growth rates are still low owing to the economic agents’ moderate demand for loans and the 
tight lending standards applied by the banking system as a result of its increased prudence.  
The  growth  of  deposits  improved  the  banking  system’s  balance  sheet  and  its  liquidity  and 
capitalization  indicators.  This  positive  performance  needs  to  be  reflected  in  a  more  active 
role of the banking system in terms of lending.  
The  improved  liquidity  indicators,  the  contained  public  sector  borrowing  in  the  domestic 
financial market, the lower risk premiums and the anchored inflation expectations have led to 
lower interest rates in the financial market. The latter appears more relaxed and the trading 
volumes have increased. The decrease of interest rates on deposits, loans and Government 
securities  persisted  in  the  last  two  months;  hence  providing  appropriate  conditions  for 
boosting economic activity. The Bank of Albania considers that the same tendency should 
continue to be sustained by the contribution of all abovementioned factors.  
2 
 BIS Review 98/2010
This year’s economic developments have yielded low inflation pressures. CPI annual inflation 
marked 3.1 percent in May, close to the Bank of Albania’s target. Annual inflation rate was 
downward for the third consecutive month, confirming our expectations and forecast for the 
transitory  supply-side  shock  effects.  On  the  other  hand,  domestic  demand-side  pressures 
have been downward; this has been attested by the historical lows of core and non-traded 
inflation, 1.2 and 1.3 percent, respectively.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  pursued  a  prudent  monetary  policy.  In  full  observance  of  the 
inflation  target,  the  Bank  of  Albania  continued  to  be  present  in  the  market  through  the 
provision of the required liquidity to the banking system.  
In  its  meeting  today,  the  Supervisory  Council  approved  the  change  of  its  monetary  policy 
operational objective, which as from today will be steering the short-term interest rates in the 
interbank market close to the Bank of Albania’s key interest rate.  
This change enhances the efficiency and transparency of monetary policy and promotes the 
further  development  of  the  interbank  market.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  taken  all  the 
necessary measures to successfully implement this project. 
 In  its  discussions  today,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  concluded  that  in 
absence of unanticipated shocks, CPI inflation will be in line with the Bank of Albania’s target 
in  the  medium-term.  In  addition,  the  Supervisory  Council  concluded  that  the  monetary 
conditions are fully adequate to observe this target. In conclusion, the Supervisory Council 
decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged at 5.25 percent. 
This  decision  is  considered  appropriate  for  the  situation  the  Albanian  economy  is  in, 
providing  at  the  same  time  the  necessary  monetary  conditions  for  sustaining  its  sound 
development.  
Concerning the future, the Bank of Albania remains fully committed to consider and follow up 
the  actual  and  expected  performance  of  economic  indicators  in  view  of  maintaining  price 
stability and firm up macroeconomic balances at home.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  invites  all  economic  stakeholders  to  join  this  philosophy  and  provide 
their contribution to the stable and long-term growth of Albania.  
BIS Review 98/2010 
 3
