Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Europe, the United States and the new challenges 
to the global economy 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at a conference organised by The Council for the United States and Italy in Venice, 
Venice, 11 June 2010. 
 is 
to 
the 
that 
read 
relationship 
transatlantic 
in  crisis  and 
It is a pleasure to attend this workshop, and especially to have an opportunity to consider 
relations between Italy – as well as Europe more generally – and the United States. I must 
admit to having felt, in recent months, a growing frustration to hear it claimed at conferences 
and 
is  
in  articles 
disintegrating – irredeemably. 
I  won’t  go  into  the  arguments  put  forward  by  those  who  hold  this  view,  but  I  would  rather 
report  on  how  far  it  is  from  reality  –  at  least  from  the  perspective  of  those  working  in  an 
institution responsible for the conduct of economic policy. The starting point of my analysis is 
the  common  challenge  we  face,  which  is  to  restore  sustainable  growth  after  the  deepest 
economic  and  financial  crisis  of  the  post-war  period,  against  a  background  of  great  global 
change.  This  challenge  has  been  approached  by  Europe  and  the  United  States  mainly 
through three lines of action: macroeconomic policies; financial market reform; and relations 
with the other major players in the world economy. 
I would like to examine these three factors, indicating where perspectives and transatlantic 
action converge. 
Let’s  start  with  the  economic  situation.  I  won’t  dwell  on  describing  Europe’s  economy, 
particularly that of the euro area, or the US economy. Both started to grow during last year, 
at  a  pace  that  looks  faster  in  the  US,  as  is  typically  observed  in  this  phase  of  the  cycle. 
Domestic demand seems stronger on the other side of the Atlantic, thanks to the dynamism 
of  private  consumption,  which  for  now  remains  subdued  in  Europe,  where  exports  are  the 
main engine of growth. 
The main risk factors underlying the recovery are the same for the two areas, namely: 
 
uncertainty about whether growth can be self sustained, without relying mainly on 
the  policies  aimed  at  stimulating  demand  which  have  been  put  in  place  by  most 
industrial countries in response to the crisis; 
turbulence in financial markets, which has shifted to sovereign risk; 
unemployment, which remains high, although it seems to have peaked; 
the situation on the capital markets, particularly the soundness of banking systems 
in  the  aftermath  of  the  economic  and  financial  crisis,  and  their  ability  to  provide 
adequate credit to the economy. 
 The  economic  policies  implemented  in  the  two  areas  in  response  to  the  crisis  have  been 
broadly  similar.  Monetary  policies  have  mainly  aimed  to  ensure  market  liquidity.  Technical 
modalities  have  differed  somewhat,  due  to  the  different  structure  of  the  financial  markets, 
which are typically more bank-centred in Europe than in the US. Interest rates have fallen 
rapidly,  both  in  the  euro  area  and  in  the  United  States,  although  the  decline  across  the 
Atlantic took place earlier, in line with the lead in the cycle. Throughout the crisis there has 
been  close  coordination  between  the  monetary  authorities,  which  even  led  to  a  joint 
reduction in interest rates in October 2008, immediately after the failure of Lehman Brothers. 
The  fiscal  policy  of  the  US  has  been  relatively  more  expansive  than  that  of  continental 
Europe, largely because of the smaller role played by automatic stabilisers in the US federal 
34 
 BIS Review 82/2010
budget,  which  demanded  a  much  larger  discretionary  adjustment.  The  reservations 
expressed in Europe at the time about very expansionary measures were later found to be 
justified in the ongoing financial turmoil. I’ll come back to this point shortly. 
Looking  ahead,  the  economic  policy  objectives  look  similar.  There  is,  however,  a  debate 
about  the  extent  to  which  economic  activity  can  quickly  return  to  pre-crisis  levels;  in  other 
words,  a  debate  about  whether  the  crisis  has  had  a  permanent  impact  on  the  growth 
potential of economies, reducing it. This issue is crucial when assessing the suitability and 
sustainability of economic policy, particularly that of the budget. If the pre-crisis situation is 
regarded  as  an  achievable  goal  in  the  medium  term,  it  is  justified  to  implement  highly 
expansionary policies, in particular fiscal ones, designed to stimulate aggregate demand to 
achieve  the  objective  as  quickly  as  possible.  If,  however,  the  pre-crisis  situation  is  not 
considered as sustainable because of the structural – as well as economic – nature of the 
recession, a strong fiscal expansion risks being excessive and producing unsustainable debt 
dynamics over the medium term and jeopardising the soundness of public finances. 
One gets the impression that across the Atlantic there is a more optimistic view of the ability 
of the US economy to get back onto a growth path like the one before the crisis. The large 
difference  built  up  in  these  two  years  concerning  potential  revenue  would  justify  the 
continuation  of  policies  to  stimulate  demand  in  the  near  future.  The  envisaged  return  to 
sustained growth rates would allow the deficit and debt to be quickly reabsorbed. In Europe 
attitudes are more cautious. The pre-crisis situation was probably unsustainable everywhere, 
partly due to the over-indebtedness of the private sector. Trying to return to those levels of 
activity may bring about financial conditions that could reinflate the bubble or turn it into a 
public debt bubble. 
This  diversity  of  views  may  partly  reflect  differences  in  the  underlying  positions  of  the 
economies. There is no doubt that the potential for US growth is higher than Europe’s, if only 
because  of  the  stronger  demographics  and  greater  market  flexibility.  Several  European 
countries,  where  growth  was  stronger  before 
loss  of 
competitiveness and will have to profoundly reform their markets in order to grow again. On 
the  other  hand,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  pre-crisis  economic  growth  in  the  US  was 
accompanied  by  large  internal  and  external  imbalances,  influenced  by  the  expectations  of 
firms and households being above potential. Growth was also favoured by deregulation and 
policies to stimulate demand that fed the imbalances. Trying to return to high growth rates 
may  lead  to  behaviour  that  could  again  prove  unsustainable  and  lead  to  new  excessive 
fluctuations. 
Financial markets are assessing the policies implemented in different countries also on the 
basis of countries’ ability to meet their commitments over time, particularly as regards debt 
repayment. This has an impact on the effectiveness of fiscal policy. As long as agents have 
confidence in a state’s ability to repay its debts, owing to higher future tax revenues, fiscal 
policies can stimulate aggregate demand and offset the decline in private consumption and 
investment caused by the economic slowdown. If, however, agents are concerned that future 
growth will not be enough to generate sufficient tax revenue to ensure the sustainability of 
public debt, they will tend to increase savings, weakening the effectiveness of the stimulus 
and exacerbating in this way the debt dynamics. 
This  brings  us  to  address  current  issues,  particularly  as  regards  the  euro  area.  As  I 
mentioned  earlier,  the  euro  area  has  generally  implemented  a  more  restrained  fiscal 
stimulus,  and  has  more  contained  debt  dynamics  than  other  countries.  However,  some 
countries within the area have experienced a much greater deterioration in public finances 
than  others,  with  higher  debts.  Moreover,  the  euro  area  is  not  a  fiscal  federation. 
Furthermore,  individual  countries  no  longer  have  their  own  money  to  tackle  public  finance 
problems or to stimulate growth in the short term. This is why financial markets have focused 
their attention on the euro area and on some of its member countries. 
the  crisis,  have  shown  a 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 35
There are – in theory – two ways to tackle the crisis. The first is to question the euro, and 
give back to the member countries the opportunity to resort to devaluations or revaluations of 
their  currencies.  The  second  is  to  ensure  that  countries  restore  fiscal  discipline,  possibly 
providing them financial support in the adjustment period. 
Europe has clearly and unambiguously chosen the second path. I dwell briefly on this point 
because  while  this  choice  was  strongly  supported  by  the  political  authorities  of  the  United 
States  and  other  G7  and  G20  countries,  it  seems  instead  to  be  questioned  by  several 
observers, academics and financial professionals across the Atlantic. 
The  choice  made  by  Europe  is  based  both  on  economic  and  on  political  reasons.  Some 
observers  believe  that  the  euro  was  created  solely  for  political  reasons,  for  example,  as  a 
counterweight  to  German  unification.  According  to  this  view,  the  sustainability  of  the  euro 
would be at risk if the political integration process were to stop or go into reverse. The events 
of the last few months do not suggest at all that the integration process has stopped, on the 
contrary. Full support has been expressed for the euro and there is no intention to challenge 
it.  All  governments  and  national  parliaments  have  adopted  not  only  the  financial  support 
measures to Greece but also taken the necessary measures for the creation of the European 
Financial Stability Facility. The Heads of State and Government have agreed to strengthen 
the economic governance of the euro and will take concrete decisions in that respect, based 
on proposals of the Van Rompuy task force which has already started working.  
Some object that the political process underlying the European integration is restricted to the 
elites of the member states, but not shared among the population at large. They interpret the 
dissatisfaction  expressed  by  several  Europeans  about  the  euro  as  an  element  of  political 
fragility  and  as  a  risk  of  going  into  reverse.  These  opinions  are  based  on  the  results  of 
opinion  polls  showing  that  in  some  countries  two  third  of  citizens  would  like  to  get  their 
national currency back. However, it is often forgotten to clarify that in the same countries a 
vast majority answers positively when asked if they believe that the euro will still exist in ten 
years time.  
I  do  not  want  to  deny  that  European  institutions  currently  have  a  problem  of  affection. 
However, European institutions, and the euro, are expected to be here to stay.  
Let me also remind that the reactions we are observing in Europe, and in particular in some 
member  states,  to  the  recent  crisis  –  which  is  the  worse  since  World  War  II  –  is  not  that 
different from the one experienced in other parts of the world, in particular the US in the face 
of  disruptive  developments  associated  with  financial  turmoil.  Let  me  just  remind  the 
opposition  of  the  US  Congress,  and  the  US  people  in  general,  to  support  with  20  billion 
dollars the rescue of Mexico in 1995. Many of the arguments used today against the support 
for  Greece  are  similar  to  those  used  against  Mexico.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  the 
decision taken in 1995 by the US Administration is now widely praised, as will be the case in 
a few years – I believe – for the European decision to support Greece. Let me also recall the 
lack  of  support  of  the  American  people,  and  of  Congress  itself,  for  providing  the  US 
Administration with the funds necessary to sustain the US financial system through the TARP 
programme  in  September  2008.  The  US  President  had  to  go  public,  stating  that  “the 
instability can ripple throughout and affect the working people and the average family and we 
won’t let that happen” before Congress finally voted the package.  
Let me move to the economic reasons underlying the choices which have been made over 
the  past  few  months,  which  are  equally  important.  They  are  not  always  clearly  perceived, 
especially across the Atlantic. Let me list a few. 
First, past experience has shown clearly that within an economically integrated area like the 
euro area a currency devaluation does not allow a growth stimulus that would support faster 
fiscal  consolidation.  The  countries  which  had  to  make  strong  corrective  fiscal  manoeuvres 
before the euro – as was the case in Italy after leaving the ERM in September 1992 – have 
suffered large interest rate spreads for a protracted period, because of renewed uncertainty 
about  the  monetary  regime  after  the  devaluation,  as  well  as  about  the  fiscal  system.  With 
36 
 BIS Review 82/2010
every  devaluation,  inflationary  risks  rapidly  appeared,  which  required  more  monetary 
tightening than would be the case within the euro. Several countries, like Belgium, Ireland 
and the Netherlands implemented fiscal consolidation while maintaining a stable exchange 
rate and a high primary budget surplus (i.e. net of debt interest). 
Another forgotten aspect is that the possibility of revaluing the currency has not allowed more 
virtuous  countries  to  insulate  themselves  from  the  exchange  rate  instability  affecting 
neighbouring  countries,  particularly  in  those  which  devalued.  After  the  exchange  rate 
realignments, Germany recorded in 1993 a recession comparable in size to that of France 
and Italy. 
Another aspect that is also often ignored is that the return to a national currency is not an 
event comparable with a change in the exchange rate parity. It would involve a renegotiation 
of all contracts, especially financial ones, within individual countries and between residents of 
different countries, with conflicting interests between debtors and creditors. One can expect 
that in case of disputes the international courts would rule against the country which took the 
decision to change its currency of denomination. This means that residents of that country 
would be severely affected by a change in the denomination of their contracts. This applies 
both in the case of a debtor country that devalued its currency against the euro and in the 
case of a net creditor that revalued its new currency. A debtor country which imports capital 
from the rest of the euro area and devalues its currency would immediately suffer from an 
increase in its debt burden, which would further exacerbate its difficulties. A creditor country 
with substantial financial assets from other euro area residents which revalues its currency 
would  suffer  huge  capital  account  losses,  particularly  for  its  financial  institutions,  with 
consequent severe effects on its public finances. 
The  contagious  effect  on  other  countries  would  be  devastating,  as  demonstrated  by  the 
correlations in place on financial markets. 
To sum up, given the financial and economic integration achieved over recent years in the 
euro area, the hypotheses voiced by some about a country abandoning the euro or about 
reconstituting  the  euro  area  in  a  reduced  form  would  have  highly  detrimental  effects  on 
everyone, be they net creditors or debtors. The impact would be far more expensive than the 
alternative – standard – approach, which is to implement a strict plan of fiscal consolidation 
in all countries, starting with Greece, accompanied by structural reforms aimed at sustaining 
growth,  and  a  plan  to  strengthen  the  economic  governance  of  euro  area.  This  is  the  way 
chosen  by  the  countries  of  the  euro  area  and  implemented  in  the  form  of  successive 
decisions both at national and European level. 
As  I  mentioned  before,  there  is  a  consensus  among  our  partners  within  Europe  but  also 
across the Atlantic in the G7 and G20 that this is the correct path to take. This consensus 
stems from the conviction that financial markets would be seriously affected by an event that 
calls into question the solvency of a developed country. That is why our partners, in particular 
the  US,  have  strongly  supported  the  action  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  which  has 
provided Greece with the highest funding in history in proportion to the country’s IMF quota. 
This is also why the euro area countries have approved the support package for Greece and 
then the funds necessary for the creation of the European Financial Stability Facility agreed 
this week by Ecofin. 
The consolidation of public finances will remain a major theme in the coming years, not only 
in Greece but also in the rest of Europe and in the developed countries. The experience of 
recent months highlights some points on which it is worth reflecting. 
First, it is best to take the necessary steps before being put under pressure by the financial 
markets, which often do not move in a linear fashion and tend to go from white to black in an 
instant. And when something passes to the black part of the markets’ radar screen it takes a 
long time to convince them that it can get back in a quiet location. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 37
Second,  in  assessing  the  sustainability  of  budget  measures  financial  markets  seem  to  be 
taking into account not only the direct effects, namely the impact on the deficit and debt, but 
also  indirect,  i.e.  the  effect  of  specific  measures  on  economic  growth.  A  highly  restrictive 
move allows a reduction of the deficit but may adversely affect growth and thus slow down 
the  adjustment  of  the  debt.  An  extreme  interpretation  of  this  view  has  pushed  some  to 
consider that a strong restrictive fiscal action may create a negative spiral between debt and 
growth  that  worsens  even  further  the  public  finance  situation  and  makes  budgetary  rigour 
politically  unsustainable.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  hypotheses  necessary  for  this  spiral  to 
occur  are  quite  exceptional,  requiring  the  fiscal  multiplier  effect  to  be  greater  than  1.  The 
empirical evidence does not seem to be consistent with such a hypothesis.  
An alternative interpretation of the risks associated with fiscal retrenchment is that they are 
not easily sustainable politically, especially if they have strong negative effect on growth. The 
hypothesis is that public opinion in many advanced societies might not be fully prepared to 
cope with the budget cuts needed to restore public finances on a sustainable path, because 
these cuts would lead to a substantial downsizing of the current welfare system – a system 
which may no longer be financially sustainable in an environment of slower economic growth, 
partly due to lower population growth and the higher public debt burden. So this is not just a 
matter of discussing the economic sustainability of the move that many developed countries 
have to make, but its political and social sustainability. 
I do not want to dwell further on this, but the lesson to be learnt is that to be credible fiscal 
consolidation must be accompanied by deep reforms of the functioning of our economies, in 
particular  as  regards  labour  and  goods  markets,  so  as  to  restore  economic  growth.  The 
objective is to increase labour productivity, so as to make the welfare system sustainable. 
The  problem  is  no  different  for  societies  like  the  US,  where  the  funding  of  welfare  rests 
largely  on  the  private  sector,  rather  than  the  public.  If  the  economic  growth  potential  is 
reduced, investors must also adjust their expectations of being able to finance their health 
care, education plans and their pensions. 
I  would  now  like  to  move  on  to  the  second  area  of  intervention  –  aimed  at  restoring 
sustainable  growth,  to  which  the  US  and  European  authorities  are  committed.  It  concerns 
financial  regulation.  There’s  close  cooperation on  this  agenda  item  and  it’s  taking  place  in 
various  working  groups,  in  particular  in  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  Financial  Stability 
Board,  which  includes  representatives  of  20  major  industrial  countries.  Coordination  is 
undoubtedly more difficult in this field, not only because of the structural differences between 
the  financial  markets  but  also  because  these  markets  are  partly  in  competition  with  each 
other,  and  operators  are  seeking  to  influence  the  respective  authorities  to  shift  regulatory 
changes in the desired direction. 
I do not want to list here the areas of convergence and divergence between the two sides of 
the Atlantic in negotiations that are not yet finished. I would rather express – in my personal 
capacity – a number of concerns on issues which have not yet been clarified and are still 
marked by much uncertainty. 
The  first  concerns  the  scope  of  application  of  financial  regulation,  which  should  be 
strengthened to give greater credibility and stability to the system. The Basel Committee is 
focusing  mainly  on  the  banking  system  in  order  to  strengthen  the  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements,  and  particularly  to  reduce  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  rules.  There  is  a 
commitment  to  establish  new  rules  no  later  than  the  G20  summit  this  autumn,  for  gradual 
implementation by the end of 2012. However, while in Europe it is already known that the 
new rules, once agreed, will be included in a Community Directive with immediate application 
in  all  Member  States,  it  is  unclear  what  the  degree  of  implementation  in  other  countries, 
particularly the US, will be. In the light of what happened with Basel II, the risk of only partial 
application is a concern. 
Another  source  of  concern  is  the  “shadow”  financial  system  not  previously  subject  to 
regulation. The G20 summit a year ago in London indicated the general commitment not to 
38 
 BIS Review 82/2010
leave significant parts of the financial sector, such as investment banks, hedge funds, private 
equity funds and so forth, outside the regulatory perimeter. Work on this part of the financial 
system  is  not  progressing  as  hoped,  however.  There  is  a  risk,  again,  of  focusing  only  on 
banking,  and  overlooking  an  important  part  of  the  financial  system,  whose  influence  has 
come  to  dominate  the  overall  stability  of  markets,  with  contagion  effects  on  the  banking 
system  itself.  Europe  has  recently  adopted  what  may  appear  as  somewhat  restrictive 
legislation in this regard. In particular, equity and investment funds from outside Europe are 
only authorised to operate to the extent that the law of the country of origin is comparable 
with  European  law.  This  has  caused  concern  across  the  Atlantic  about  the  risk  of 
protectionism. On the other hand, the failure of the strategy pursued in recent years, of trying 
to convince our partners that this area should be regulated like any other, has necessitated a 
turnaround of the basis of the discussion. The talks now start on a more precise basis. 
One  area  in  which  there  is  broad  convergence  between  the  US  and  Europe  concerns  the 
concentration  of  derivatives  trades,  which  would  allow  the  supervisory  authorities  to  have 
adequate information so that they can monitor the ability of financial institutions to cope with 
risks  that  are  taken.  However,  financial  lobbies  are  actively  working  to  try  to  break  this 
convergence of views. 
These are just a few areas of financial system reform currently under discussion in the main 
fora. The stakes are high. The deadline for the work is the G20 summit in South Korea this 
autumn,  two  years  after  the  crisis  intensified.  It  is  essential  to  meet  deadlines  to  lend 
credibility to the financial system and ensure that it plays a supporting role in real economic 
activity. 
Now I come to the third area of common interest, which concerns international cooperation, 
based not only on the G7 but extended to the G20, with the participation of key developing 
countries. Both Europe and the United States have an interest in the G20 functioning as a 
new forum for international cooperation. 
The G20 agenda currently has two main items. The first, as just indicated, is the reform of 
the  financial  system.  The  success  of  the  ongoing  work  is  in  the  hands  of  the  developed 
countries, which are largely to blame for the current crisis and must agree on how to reform 
the system. Other countries are basically waiting for signs of reform and have shown, overall, 
a willingness to comply with the new rules in due course. 
The  other  item  on  the  G20  agenda  concerns  the  economic  policies  needed  to  promote 
sustainable growth of the world economy. There is less agreement on this point. At the heart 
of  the  financial  and  economic  crisis  there  were  –  without  doubt  –  excessive  imbalances, 
within and among major economies. These imbalances were derived from the savings and 
investment  flows  not  adequately  spread  among  the  various  countries.  After  the  temporary 
reduction  in  imbalances  in  international  payments  linked  to  the  recession,  the  recovery  is 
broadening imbalances again. China’s current account surplus, in particular, is expected to 
increase  again.  The  accumulation  of  international  reserves  by  many  developing  countries, 
particularly  those  in  Asia,  is  continuing.  The  mechanisms  that  fuelled  the  destabilising 
financial flows before the crisis are reappearing. In emerging countries there is a substantial 
capital inflow, which is not, however, finding an equivalent outlet in domestic investment and 
consumption;  it  is  thus  being  recycled  to  the  developed  countries.  The  economic 
performance in developing countries should encourage them to tighten domestic monetary 
conditions and sever their ties with the policies of the developed countries, deriving from the 
fixed or semi-fixed exchange rate regime. The fear of letting the exchange rate appreciate, 
so as not to damage the sector exposed to international competition, leads to an overheating 
of  economic  activity  that  may  inflate  a  bubble  not  unlike  the  pre-crisis  one  in  developed 
countries. The risk is that, by maintaining the currency link with the developed countries, the 
emerging countries import financial instability. The accumulation of international reserves can 
offer  a  partial  protective  buffer,  but  it  won’t  necessarily  be  sufficient  to  avoid  the 
repercussions on the real economy. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
 39
Europe and the United States would both benefit from a better functioning world economy, 
but  they  depend  on  decisions  taken  by  other  G20  countries.  The  rigidity  of  the  Chinese 
monetary  regime  is  slowing  down  the  adjustment  of  relative  competitiveness  and  the 
recovery of the developed countries. 
In this area, Europe and the US have common interests, and are more likely to succeed if 
they pursue them in a joint and coordinated strategy. The experience of recent years shows 
that separate action is unlikely to succeed. 
However, the cooperative mechanisms developed within the G20 are  still at an embryonic 
stage. Not all countries are willing to openly discuss their economic policies, accepting critical 
comments, as happened within the G7. Some issues are neither discussed nor mentioned in 
communiqués if views are not unanimous. This limits the capacity for self-examination and 
peer pressure, which has been the basis of international cooperation. 
There is a risk that, once the crisis has passed, the pressure on G20 countries to develop an 
open method of cooperation, geared to the challenges of our times, may fade away. If this 
occurs, it will confront Europeans and Americans with a new dilemma on the way towards 
global economic relations.  
But  one  thing  is  certain:  whatever  form  the  international  cooperation  takes,  the  US  and 
Europe will be part of it, not only because they are currently, and will be for many years, the 
two  main  economic  and  financial  areas  worldwide,  but  also  because  they  share  important 
values – such as the freedom of private enterprise, freedom of expression, social equity – 
without which there can be no cooperation. 
These values could be put to the test in the future, especially in this difficult phase for the 
world economy. Defending these values will require even stronger transatlantic relations. 
Thank you for your attention. 
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
40 
 BIS Review 82/2010
