Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Secure banknotes vis-à-vis non-cash 
instruments in Uganda 
Speech  by  Prof  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
launch of the new family of banknotes, Kampala, 3 May 2010. 
 The Chief Guest, 
Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning & Econ. Development 
The Speaker of Parliament 
The Deputy Speaker of Parliament 
Hon. Ministers 
Hon. Members of Parliament 
His Worship the Mayor of Kampala 
Visiting Governors – Central Bank of Kenya and Bank of Tanzania 
Members of the Board, BOU 
Development Partners 
Chief Executives of Financial and Other Institutions 
Representatives of Currency Printers and Suppliers of Currency Notes 
The Artists 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  wish  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  occasion  when  the  Bank  of  Uganda  launches  a  new 
banknote series. 
I am glad that Honourable Syda Bbumba, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic 
Development, is here to launch the new Uganda Shilling banknotes. Her presence reflects 
the support the Bank enjoys from its parent Ministry and from Government in its efforts to 
serve the public better. 
I  am  also  particularly  delighted  to  welcome  the  Governors  from  the  central  banks  of  the 
partner states of the East African Community. 
As  you  are  aware,  one  of  the  roles  assigned  to  the  Bank  of  Uganda  is  to  issue  currency 
notes and coins.  
Over  the  past  20  years,  the  Bank  has  stepped  up  efforts  on  four  fronts.  Firstly,  the  Bank 
widened the range of denominations. 
We popularized the use of low denomination coins which are useful in small value transactions 
especially in the rural areas. Secondly, we adopted a clean banknotes policy to maintain the 
integrity of our banknotes. We acquired notes processing machines that automatically sort 
out clean notes for reissue in line with clean note policy. Thirdly, the Bank has continually 
reviewed the security features of the banknotes to keep ahead of counterfeiters. Fourthly, we 
have  widened  features  on  the  notes  to  assist  the  public  to  easily  differentiate  the  genuine 
notes from counterfeits in addition to assisting members of the public who may suffer from 
sight impairment to easily identify legal tender in its various denominations. I am pleased to 
recognize the presence of a delegation from Uganda National Association for the Blind.  
Their presence is a manifestation of the Bank’s efforts to help the visually impaired to identify 
banknotes with the aid of a special design feature using the sense of touch.  
This is the first major change of currency design in over twenty years in Uganda.  
It is a result of collaborative efforts between our own Bank staff, Ugandan artists who came 
up with images that are strongly rooted in indigenous art, the security printers and suppliers 
of security inks.  
BIS Review 61/2010 
 1
The video which we will see after the speeches will show all the designs on the new currency 
notes. I would like to thank all those who participated in this important project. 
In 2003/2004, the Bank introduced the Electronic Funds Transfer system (EFT) followed by 
the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  system  (RTGS)  in  2005.  These  are  intended  to  be 
alternatives to cash in the transfer of value between persons. Today, all commercial banks 
and  some  tier  2  financial  institutions  use  the  RTGS  to  handle  high  value  transactions.  All 
government  payments  are  carried  out  using  the  EFT  system.  However,  in  spite  of  these 
achievements,  cash  remains  the  predominant  and  preferred  method  of  settlement.  Only 
about 3 million bank accounts are operated for a population of over 30 million people.  
We  must  respond  to  the  demands  of  the  public  for  banknotes  in  parallel  to  our  efforts  to 
deepen the use of non-cash instruments.  
Over the years, the Bank has issued various banknote series. In greater part, the banknotes 
were changed for political reasons, usually after a change in government.  
This time, the change in currency design is driven by the need to comply with international 
best  practices  and  taking  advantage  of  innovations  in  the  banknote  industry  since  the 
introduction  of  the  1987  series.  The  move  will  support  the  integrity  of  our  banknotes  by 
helping in the fight against counterfeiting whilst keeping the notes user friendly.  
A  new  Shs.  2000  denomination  is  also  being  introduced  to  improve  the  divisibility  of  the 
shilling.  We  shall  therefore  have  six  banknotes;  Shs.  1,000,  Shs.  2,000,  Shs.  5,000, 
Shs 10,000, Shs. 20,000 and the Shs. 50,000 in the new currency structure, one note more 
than we have currently. The Bank considered that the most efficient way of introducing these 
changes was through a normal currency redesign which was now due in the case of Uganda.  
The banknotes have been designed with ease of handling as a major consideration. 
Ugandan  images  have  been  used  to  provide  a  Ugandan  look  not  only  through  the  main 
images,  but  also  the  design  patterns  inspired  by  mats,  pots  and  ornaments  in  Ugandan 
homes and the Ugandan way of life.  
It is hoped that these images will be the outside world’s window to Uganda’s gifts of nature 
and heritage. 
The  notes  have  been  especially  made  for  the  Ugandan  public  with  highly  visible  security 
features that are easy to identify by visual inspection and the feeling of touch to protect users 
against counterfeits.  
The security features are only effective if they are understood by the general public. For this 
reason,  the  Bank  has  planned  a  national  public  education  programme  to  ensure  that  the 
public know how to identify genuine banknotes. In this endeavour, the Bank will work with the 
media and civic organizations to ensure that the public throughout Uganda is familiar with the 
features on the banknotes.  
The new banknote series will circulate alongside the current banknotes. Both series will be 
legal tender and should continue to be used in cash transactions until the public is informed 
otherwise.  
Therefore,  there  will  be  no  special  exercise  by  Bank  of  Uganda  Currency  Centres  to 
exchange the current banknotes for the new banknotes. The public is advised not to rush to 
banks to exchange the notes.  
I would like to make it clear that the introduction of a new family of bank notes should have 
no effect whatsoever on the prices of goods and services in Uganda. The amount of money 
in  circulation  will  not  be  changed  by  the  introduction  of  new  bank  notes  and  therefore  no 
inflation should arise from these changes. Also there are no changes in the Uganda coins.  
Once again, I would like to thank everyone who has contributed to the success of the project 
of  the  “New  Family  of  Banknotes”  specifically  the  artists,  designers,  the  consultant,  the 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2010
printers  and  our  own  BOU  staff  who  have  worked  tirelessly  to  ensure  the  success  of  the 
project. I can now confidently say that our banknotes are more secure, convenient, pleasant 
and truly Ugandan.  
I  now  invite  the  Honourable  Syda  Bbumba,  to  address  us  and  launch  the  new  family, 
2010  series  banknotes,  which  will  be  issued  to  the  public,  and  become  legal  tender  on 
May 17th, 2010. 
Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 3
