Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial education – worthy and worthwhile 
Comments by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Reserve 
Bank  of  India-Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (RBI-OECD) 
International Workshop on Financial Literacy, Bengaluru, 22 March 2010. 
 Mr.  Pranab  Mukherjee,  Hon’ble  Finance  Minister  of  India,  Ambassador  Richard  Boucher, 
Deputy Secretary General, OECD, Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of 
India, Mr. V.K. Sharma, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India, Distinguished Guests and 
my colleagues from the Reserve Bank 
1. 
First of all, I want to say that the Reserve Bank of India attaches immense value to 
this workshop on “Financial Literacy”. The year 2009/10 marks the Platinum Jubilee of the 
Reserve Bank. Over the last one year, we have celebrated this milestone in diverse ways. By 
far  the  most  enduring  part  of  the  celebrations  has  been  the  outreach  programme  which 
involved the top management of the Bank including the Governor and the Deputy Governors 
fanning  out  across  the country,  visiting  typically  off-main  road,  away  from  urban  influence, 
unbanked villages. The outreach programme was driven by two objectives. The first was to 
understand  the  needs  and  aspirations  of  emerging  India  living  in  the  villages,  mainly  as  a 
reality check on the Bank’s programmes and policies. The second objective was to demystify 
the Reserve Bank and explain to people at large what it does, why what it does is important, 
and how it makes a difference to peoples’ every day lives. 
Outreach programme 
2. 
I am happy to claim, with a deep sense of fulfillment of course, that between all of us 
in the top management of the Reserve Bank, we have visited at least one village in every 
state  and  most  union  territories.  Given  that  India  has  over  600,000  villages,  our  coverage 
was, by all accounts, miniscule. Even so, it has been an enormously rewarding experience 
for us as individuals and for the RBI as an institution. We learnt more this way than what we 
could  have  by  reading  hundreds  of  reports  and  attending  scores  of  meetings  and 
conferences. And what is more, it was a lot more fun than sitting in air-conditioned offices in 
skyscrapers.  If  I  were  to  single  out  one  important  lesson  from  these  visits,  it  is  about  the 
growing  aspirations  and  the  rising  awareness  of  rural  people.  We  were  all  struck  by  how 
much rural women knew about saving and investment and struck even more by how eager 
they were to learn more about saving and investment. 
3.  
It  is  axiomatic  that  when  income  levels  rise,  the  time  horizons  of  households 
become longer. From thinking about the next agriculture season, they start thinking about the 
next  five  years,  and  then  about  their  children’s  future  and  their  own  old  age.  These  are 
healthy  concerns  on  which  we  must  capitalize.  This  realization  sensitized  all  of  us  in  the 
Reserve Bank that we will be failing in our mandate if we do not address the challenge and 
the  opportunity  of  financial  literacy  head  on.  That  is  the  reason  why  learning  from  this 
workshop on furthering financial literacy is important and valuable to us in the Reserve Bank. 
Partnering with OECD 
4. 
It  is  our  privilege  and  good  fortune  to  have  the  OECD  as  a  co-sponsor  for  this 
workshop. The OECD has been an intellectual leader in the field of financial literacy. It has 
been  involved  in  supporting  research  and  evaluation  in  financial  literacy  and  has  been 
proactive in spreading awareness about the importance of financial education. The OECD is 
by  far  the  most  valuable  repository  of  knowledge  on  grass  root  experiments  in  financial 
literacy. Learning from these international best practices can certainly help India to “leapfrog” 
BIS Review 41/2010 
 1
over several stages of the process. Partnering with OECD is therefore a huge and valuable 
learning opportunity for India.  
Why is financial literacy important? 
5.  
Let me step back a bit and spend a few minutes on why financial literacy is so vital. 
There  is  virtually  no  country  whose  economy  has  developed  and  matured  without  a 
corresponding deepening of the financial sector. And such deepening is possible only when 
individuals  and  households  are  financially  literate  and  are  able  to  make  informed  choices 
about how they save, borrow and invest. Indeed, it is possible to argue that the sub prime 
problem  would  not  have  grown  to  the  explosive  proportions  that  it  did  if  people  had  been 
financially more “literate”. 
6. 
Beyond the individual level – and this is equally important – greater financial literacy 
can aid a better allocation of resources and thereby raise the longer-term growth potential of 
the economy. India clocked average growth of around nine percent in the period 2004–08 
before the global financial crisis interrupted the growth trajectory. One of the key drivers of 
this growth has been the increased savings rate in the economy, which reached a high of 
36 percent of GDP in 2007/08, the year before the crisis.  
7. 
The  increase  in  savings  itself  has  been  a  consequence  of  the  changing 
demographics and the welcome trend of rise in household savings. However, nearly half our 
population still lacks access to banking and other financial services. If we can redress that 
and provide this “left behind” population access to the entire gamut of banking services, we 
could raise household and overall domestic savings even further, and that will fulfill one of 
the necessary conditions to achieve the double-digit growth that we aspire to. 
8. 
To make that happen, we need to deepen the penetration and expand the coverage 
of financial services to all sections of society and to all regions of the country in a meaningful 
way, particularly to those at the bottom of the economic pyramid. Lack of financial awareness 
and literacy is one of the main reasons behind lack of access to financial products or failure 
to use them even when they are available. An NCAER and Max New York Life study shows 
that in India, around 60 percent of laborers surveyed indicated that they store cash at home, 
while borrowing from moneylenders at high interest rates – a pattern which increases their 
financial vulnerability.  
9. 
Financial  literacy  and  awareness  are  thus  integral  to  ensuring  financial  inclusion. 
This is not just about imparting financial knowledge and information; it is also about changing 
behaviour. For the ultimate goal is to empower people to take actions that are in their own 
self-interest. When consumers know of the financial products available, when they are able 
to evaluate the merits and demerits of each product, are able to negotiate what they want, 
they  will  feel  empowered  in  a  very  meaningful  way.  They  will  know  enough  to  demand 
accountability and seek redressal of grievances. This, in turn, will enhance the integrity and 
quality of financial markets. One big lesson we have learnt in our outreach programmes is 
that financial literacy is not just a public good; it is a merit good. What this means is that by 
deepening  financial  literacy,  not  just  individuals  and  households,  even  the  society  at  large 
stands to benefit. 
Reserve Bank’s initiatives  
10. 
In the Reserve Bank, we treat financial inclusion and financial literacy as twin pillars. 
Financial literacy stimulates the demand side – making people aware of what they can and 
should  demand.  Financial  inclusion  acts  from  the  supply  side  –  providing  in  the  financial 
market  what  people  demand.  While  we  have  traditionally  focused  more  on  addressing 
financial exclusion through many supply-side measures so as to help “connect people” with 
the  banking  system,  we  have  come  to  recognize  the  demand  side  imperative  also  –  that 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2010
financial literacy and education should be developed hand in hand with improving access to 
financial services. 
11. 
We  have  taken  a  number  of  measures  over  the  last  few  years  to  further  financial 
inclusion and financial literacy. We have intensified these efforts in the last one year. I do not 
want  to  go  into  them  as  you  will  have  opportunity  to  discuss,  and  I  hope  critique,  these 
measures in the course of this workshop. But I do want to highlight what the Reserve Bank 
and commercial banks have agreed upon.  
RBI’s advice to banks on financial inclusion 
12. 
Specifically, we agreed upon three things. First, the lead bank in each district has 
been asked to draw a roadmap by the end of this month (March 2010) for ensuring that all 
villages  with  a  population  of  over  2,000  will  have  access  to  financial  services  through  a 
banking outlet, not necessarily a bank branch, by March 2012. There will be an intermediate 
target to be achieved by March 2011. Banks will have to harness technology and innovate 
low cost business models to accomplish this. Second, all domestic public and private sector 
commercial  banks  have  agreed  to  come  up  with  their  specific,  Board  approved  Financial 
Inclusion Plans (FIPs) by March 2010 to be rolled out over the next three years. These Plans 
will  have  both  qualitative  indicators  and  quantitative  milestones.  Third,  we  have  urged  all 
banks to include criteria regarding financial literacy and financial inclusion in the performance 
evaluation of their field staff.  
Research on the way forward 
13. 
In the Reserve Bank, we attach value and priority to deepening financial literacy. We 
know  it  is  a  formidable  challenge  but  also  a  huge  opportunity.  We  do  not  have  all  the 
answers; I am not sure we even have all the questions. But we are eager to learn. I know this 
workshop  will  take  us  closer  to  the  answers  to  some  existing  questions,  and  maybe  even 
raise some new ones. Just to get you all started off on that, I want to raise a few ideas where 
further research will get us a lot of mileage.  
• 
First, given the significant commitment to financial education by the government and 
a host of stakeholders, it is important to determine the impact and effectiveness of 
such programs so as to understand what works and what does not. We are aware 
that  India  is  a  diverse  country  that  has  typically  allowed  its  development  to  go 
forward by letting a “thousand flowers bloom” across the country. It will be useful to 
do  a  survey  and  evaluation  of  these  grass  root  experiments  to  draw  up  the  best 
practices. In particular, we need to study the link between financial literacy on the 
one hand and financial inclusion and improved financial outcomes on the other so 
as to understand which models have been effective.  
Second, financial literacy programs require trained instructors. To be most effective, 
these instructors or counsellors must be available to clients at the time when they 
are making important financial decisions. The awareness and timeliness of financial 
advice, are important to make financial literacy useful and relevant. In this context, it 
would be useful to study successful experiments from NGOs such as SEWA which 
started  a  financial  counseling  training  service  for  poor  self-employed  women, 
including a training for trainers, and identify how we can mainstream those one-off 
successes in a cost effective way.  
Technology has the potential to enhance the development of financial literacy, both 
as  a  delivery  channel  (e.g.,  the  Internet)  and  as  an  intrinsic  part  of  the  learning 
process  (e.g.,  instructional  computer).  Technology  can  also  bridge  distances  for 
those  living  in  rural  and  remote  communities.  How  can  we  best  leverage 
communications and technology in ways to engage and empower people in the area 
  BIS Review 41/2010 
 3
of financial literacy? Recognizing that people receive, learn and digest information in 
different ways, it would be useful to survey all possible avenues of communication to 
determine  the  best  way  of  capturing  people’s  attention  and  interest.  The  use 
technology in the training of trainers could also be explored.  
Let  me  stop  there  so  that  you  can  get  on  with  the  serious  business  of  engagement  with 
issues in financial literacy. Once again my thanks to OECD for partnering with the Reserve 
Bank and best wishes for the success of this workshop.  
4 
 BIS Review 41/2010
