Michael C Bonello: The Maltese economy – the recession and the 
challenges beyond 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, to the Committee 
on  Economic  Affairs  and  Development  of  the  Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of 
Europe, Attard, 28 May 2010. 
 With a GDP of €5.7 billion and a population of around 400,000 living in an area of 316 km2, 
Malta is the smallest and most densely populated country in the EU. With an average trade-
to-GDP ratio of 82% since membership in 2004, it has the second most open economy in the 
Union. Malta’s business cycle is closely synchronized with that of its main trading partner, the 
EU,  which  accounts  for  61%  of  its  exports  of  goods  and  services.  The  small  size  of  the 
country  necessarily  implies  a  narrow  export  base  and  a  dependence  on  strategic  imports, 
such  as  fuels  and  industrial  supplies.  These  characteristics  constitute  a  challenge  for 
policymakers in that the economy’s performance is highly sensitive to external events and to 
sector specific shocks.  
The impact of the recession 
It was thus inevitable that the headwinds unleashed by the global recession would test the 
resilience of the Maltese economy. Although euro area membership helped to cushion the 
impact, as expected in such an open economy the shock was transmitted primarily through 
the trade channel as external demand shrank. The downturn was particularly pronounced in 
tourism  and  manufacturing,  two  sectors  that  are  highly  dependent  on  demand  abroad. 
Tourist  arrivals  declined  by  8.4%  in  2009  while  the  manufacturing  industry’s  gross  value 
added fell by more than 18%. On the upside, several service activities that have expanded 
thanks to access to the Single Market have proved quite resilient to the global recession and 
their performance helped the external balance on goods and services to move into surplus 
for the first time since 2002. 
As  a  result,  the  domestic  recession  was  less  severe  and  shorter  than  elsewhere.  Malta’s 
GDP fell by 1.9% in 2009, compared to 4.1% in the euro area, while the peak-to-trough drop 
in  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  been  similarly  less  pronounced,  3%  against  4.7%.  A  sharp 
decline  in  investment  acted  as  a  major  drag  on  demand  in  2009,  but  private  consumption 
held up. The reduction in exports was less marked than might have been expected given the 
severe  contraction  in  world  trade  such  that,  together  with  a  steeper  drop  in  imports,  net 
exports contributed positively to GDP. 
This limited slowdown in economic activity was in turn reflected in labour market trends. The 
unemployment rate rose moderately in the first half of the year from 6% at the end of 2008 
and has stabilized at around 7% since then. 
On the inflation front, consumer price trends in 2009 again did not fully mirror those in the 
euro area, converging only during the second half of the year when energy and food prices, 
which had risen sharply in the early part of the year, decelerated substantially. As a result, 
inflation  in  Malta  was  lower  than  in  the  euro  area  for  most  of  the  last  six  months,  partly 
compensating for the higher rates registered previously. 
In the context of an economic recession, Malta’s public finances performed relatively well in 
2009, although the country is still subject to an Excessive Deficit Procedure. The deficit-to-
GDP ratio declined from 4.5% to 3.8% in spite of an outlay of some 0.7% of GDP by way of 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 1
targeted assistance to manufacturing firms and other stimulus measures.1 To a large extent, 
however, the fall in the deficit ratio is explained by the presence of one-off expenditure items 
in 2008.2 The general government debt ratio rose by around five percentage points to end 
the year at 69.1% of GDP, still below the estimated 78.7% euro area average. 
These developments helped to underpin confidence in Maltese government bonds, which are 
primarily held by domestic residents. In fact, all the government and corporate bond issues 
launched in 2009 were oversubscribed, in spite of the fact that the issuance volume doubled 
compared  with  2008.  Credit  rating  agencies  have  confirmed  Malta’s  sovereign  credit 
standing, with Moody’s giving an A1 rating with a stable outlook. Spreads over the German 
benchmark ten-year bond yield have remained stable over the past year at around 123 basis 
points. 
Sources of economic resilience 
The relative resilience of the Maltese economy is mainly attributable to four factors. The first 
is the adoption of the euro. The single currency has provided a valuable anchor during the 
intensification of the financial turmoil as Malta did not have to carry the risks inherent in a 
small and vulnerable national currency.  
The threat posed by the financial crisis was further mitigated by the strength and stability of 
Malta’s  banking  system.  Our  banks  benefited  from  an  approach  based  on  traditional 
intermediation  between  retail  depositors  and  borrowers.  Their  funding  model,  in  fact, 
eschews  reliance  on  wholesale  markets.  Exposures  to  asset-backed  securities  or  failed 
institutions were small, while lending in foreign currency to residents was limited. Throughout 
the crisis, moreover, capital and liquidity ratios remained well above the regulatory minimum, 
which  helped  to  retain  investor  confidence.  Malta’s  banking  system  was  ranked  as  the 
13th soundest  in  the  world  in  the  World  Economic  Forum’s  Global  Competitiveness 
Report 2009–2010. 
The  health  of  the  domestic  banking  system  is  also  reflected  in  its  uninterrupted  ability  to 
respond to the demand for credit in 2009. The annual rate of increase in bank loans to the 
private sector, at 8.3%, was only slightly slower than in 2008.3 This contrasts with the euro 
area,  where  private  sector  credit  outstanding  has  been  contracting.  It  is  significant  that 
according to a recent survey, the majority of small and medium-sized enterprises, which form 
the backbone of the Maltese economy, did not consider access to finance as a main source 
of concern.4 
The  third  source  of  resilience  in  the  face  of  the  global  downturn  was  the  ongoing 
diversification  of  the  economy  towards  higher  value-added  services  such  as  financial 
services  and  various  business-related  activities.  The  combined  share  of  these  services  in 
total gross value-added has increased from 25% in 2004 to 35% in 2009.5 Success has also 
been  registered  in  attracting  new  manufacturing  activities  such  as  pharmaceuticals  and 
aircraft maintenance, although these have not reversed the declining role of manufacturing, 
as traditional sectors like textiles and clothing continue to shrink in the face of competition 
from low-cost producers. 
                                                 
1   European  Commission  Malta:  Macro  Fiscal  Assessment:  An  analysis  of  the  February  2010  update  of  the 
Stability Programme, April 7, 2010, pages 6, 10. 
2   For example, the voluntary redundancy schemes offered to the workers of Malta Shipyards Ltd. 
3   Latest figure, for March 2010. 
4   Flash Euro Barometer No. 271. 
5   These  services  include  NACE  categories  J  (financial  intermediation),  K  (real  estate,  renting  and  business 
activities) and O (other community, social and personal service activities). 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2010
Finally, the provision of direct budgetary assistance to manufacturing companies that found 
themselves  in  difficulty  helped  to  limit  the  impact  of  the  weaker  external  demand  on  the 
labour  market.  This  approach  was  deemed  more  appropriate  than  a  broad-based  fiscal 
expansion,  which  would  have  mostly  leaked  out  through  imports.  This  stimulus  was 
complemented by the initiation of a number of infrastructure and environmental projects. 
The economy today and near-term prospects 
The  Maltese  economy  emerged  from  recession  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  and  is 
currently  in  a  moderate  cyclical  upswing  underpinned  by  more  favourable  external 
conditions.  Merchandise  exports  increased  markedly  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  and 
survey indicators point to a sustained improvement in economic sentiment. Tourism activity 
also seems to be recovering. The latest unemployment rate – 6.9% in March 2010 – is one of 
the lowest in the euro area, where the average stands at 10%. 
Looking ahead, forecasts by the Central Bank of Malta and the European Commission (EC) 
anticipate GDP growth of 1.1% and 1.2%, respectively this year, followed by 1.7% and 1.8% 
in 2011.6 Domestic demand is expected to be the main engine of growth, mainly driven by a 
pick-up in investment,  but the contribution of net exports is thought to be negative in both 
years, as imports are projected to grow at a faster pace than exports.  
Labour market conditions are expected to remain soft, reflecting the usual lagged response 
to the recovery in output. The unemployment rate is thus foreseen to stay slightly above 7% 
in both years. Inflation is also projected to remain subdued at around 2%, but it will still be 
somewhat  higher  than  the  euro  area  average.  Similarly,  compensation  per  employee  is 
forecast  to  rise  by  around  2%.  As  this  increase  in  nominal  wages  is  more  reflective  of 
inflation  developments  rather  than  productivity  gains,  it  could  put  pressure  on  cost 
competitiveness.7 
Forecasts are of course subject to uncertainty at the best of times. In the present period of 
renewed crisis, the risk to the projections is clearly on the downside, mainly because of the 
clouded outlook for demand in Malta’s main trading partners and the likely spillover from the 
deflationary fiscal policies being adopted in many countries. The recovery in Europe is also 
constrained by the deleveraging process currently underway in the banking sector and in the 
private sector generally. Together with the fiscal tightening, this balance sheet consolidation 
largely explains why the EC is forecasting only a modest recovery in the euro area and the 
EU this year, with growth rates of 0.9% and 1.0%, respectively. 
Lessons learned and the way forward 
Several lessons can be drawn from the crisis, but two come to mind more readily. The first is 
that those countries which entered the recession already burdened with imbalances – both 
internal  and  external  –  have  performed  more  poorly  than  those  with  sounder  economic 
fundamentals. The second is a universal law that often tends to be forgotten: like individuals, 
countries cannot afford to live beyond their means indefinitely. Sooner or later, the excesses 
of the past have to be paid for, often at a high economic and social cost.  
The  recent  proposals  by  the  EC  to  strengthen  economic  policy  coordination  and  fiscal 
discipline are grounded in precisely such thinking.8 They call for improvements in both the 
preventive  and  corrective  arms  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  more  emphasis  on  debt 
                                                 
6   European Commission European Economic Forecast, Spring 2010. 
7   European Commission European Economic Forecast, Spring 2010, page 118. 
8   EC Document COM (2101) 250, entitled Reinforcing economic policy coordination published on 12 May 2010. 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 3
sustainability  and  the  extension  of  peer  surveillance  beyond  the  budgetary  dimension  to 
other  macroeconomic  imbalances,  such  as  losses  in  competitiveness,  asset  price  booms 
fuelled by excessive credit growth and rigidities in product and labour markets. 
While Malta’s situation is clearly less worrisome than that of some of the peripheral euro area 
countries,  these  proposals  would  benefit  our  economy  as  well.  The  persistence  of  current 
account  deficits,  for  example,  suggests  an  erosion  of  competitiveness  and,  therefore,  the 
need for higher productivity, the removal of remaining constraints on market efficiency and 
increased investment in high value added, export-oriented activities. 
Indeed, the economy’s strong performance up to 2006 owed more to domestic consumption 
than  to  exports.  Export  growth,  upon  which  the  sustainability  of  a  small,  open  economy 
depends to a large extent, has been insufficient over the past decade, and the consequent 
loss  of  market  share  partly  explains  why  Malta’s  income  gap  with  the  euro  area  has  not 
narrowed in recent years. 
With regard to the internal imbalance, the events of the last two years have brought to a halt 
the substantial fiscal consolidation that was achieved in the run-up to euro adoption. While 
the deficit had been reduced from almost 10% of GDP in 2003 to 2.2% in 2007, it widened in 
the following two years and the latest projections, those of the EC, suggest that the shortfall 
will increase further to 4.3% this year, before declining to 3.6% in 2011.9 These projections 
imply  that  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  in  2011  will  stand  at  roughly  the  same  level  as  in  2004, 
around  72%.  These  ratios  are  higher  than  those  contained  in  the  Government’s  Stability 
Programme since the EC follows the “no policy change” rule and also because of differing 
macroeconomic assumptions. 
A credible fiscal consolidation strategy involves achieving a primary surplus that is sufficiently 
large to place the public debt on a stable, and eventually declining, path. For this purpose, 
additional  measures  beyond  those  announced  in  the  latest  Stability  Programme  would  be 
required in order to comply with the recommendation under the Excessive Deficit Procedure 
to bring the deficit below 3% by next year. This accelerated consolidation is also necessary 
in view of the anticipated increase in spending on health care and pensions associated with 
an ageing population. Life expectancy in Malta in 2008 was 76 years and 81.1 years for men 
and women, respectively, and the population aged 65 or over as a proportion of the working 
age population is expected to rise progressively from 21.2% today to 59.1% in 2060.10 
Looking ahead, the ability of the economy to benefit from the incipient recovery in external 
demand through export growth hinges on its competitiveness. This is a multi-faceted concept 
incorporating  both  higher  product  quality  and  lower  costs  than  those  of  competitors.  The 
erosion in competitiveness experienced since the start of this decade is partly explained by 
relatively higher prices and unit labour costs than in our trading partners. 
This  process  needs  to  be  reversed.  One  way  of  addressing  this  challenge  would  be  to 
ensure  more  competition  in  certain  product  markets.  Another  would  be  to  replace  the 
national wage indexation mechanism with a productivity-linked wage adjustment system at 
the enterprise level. Yet another would be to step up efforts to ease the bottlenecks that are 
constraining the country’s growth potential. The revamped EU2020 Agenda could be a useful 
guide in this respect since it focuses on a number of supply-side initiatives in areas where 
Malta  has  lagged  behind  in  the  past,  such  as  employment  rates,  spending  on  R&D, 
education-related indicators and clean sources of energy. 
The  achievement  of  such  goals  does  not  depend  only  on  releasing  substantial  resources 
through a reordering of fiscal spending priorities. It also requires the adoption of micro-level 
                                                 
9   European Commission Forecasts. 
10   Sustainable Report 2009, pp. 23, 125. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2010
policies that create incentives to encourage private initiative and risk taking, that make work 
pay and that help to change the still prevalent culture of dependence on the State.  
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  Malta  has  not  been  unduly  affected  by  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the 
subsequent recession, and the latest forecasts suggest that it is recovering, albeit modestly. 
This is encouraging and suggests that the reforms implemented in recent years have made 
the economy more resilient to external shocks.  
There  is,  however,  no  room  for  complacency,  particularly  at  this  time  of  renewed  financial 
market turmoil. It is clear that further difficult policy choices remain to be made. The lessons 
from  the  ongoing  sovereign  debt  crisis  should  serve  as  a  stark  reminder  that  the  benign 
neglect of accumulating imbalances, especially in the context of a monetary union, will have 
serious  economic  and  social  repercussions,  sooner  rather  than  later.  Allowing  short-term 
considerations to delay the timing of reforms, therefore, only serves to make the inevitable 
corrections more painful. 
This challenge should be faced with pragmatism. Rigorous fiscal consolidation and structural 
reforms may well cause some pain and even keep growth subdued, but this is a temporary 
phenomenon  as  the  ensuing  gains  in  efficiency  and  competitiveness  should  improve  the 
economy’s  ability  to  take  fuller  advantage  of  new  export  opportunities.  On  their  part, 
businesses  need  to  respond  flexibly  to  changes  in  global  demand,  especially  in  a  likely 
scenario  in  which  foreign  markets  will  be  characterized  by  more  efficient  competitors  and 
more  cost  conscious  consumers.  In  these  circumstances,  innovation  and  the  quality  of 
human capital will be of paramount importance. Malta’s ability to compete internationally will 
depend  increasingly  on  a  more  cost-effective  use  of  human  and  physical  resources  and 
sustained efficiency gains in both the public and the private sectors.  
Finally,  at  an  EU  level,  the  efforts  of  individual  countries  to  correct  macroeconomic 
imbalances – and Malta is not alone in facing such a challenge – would be greatly facilitated 
by an early completion of the Single Market project, particularly in the area of services, and 
by a strengthening of the economic component of EMU, including the Stability and Growth 
Pact.  In  this  regard,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  economic  rationale  of  a  monetary 
union foresees an important role for surplus countries as well in redressing imbalances within 
the Union. 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 5
