Glenn Stevens: Recent financial developments 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  ACI2010 
49th World Congress, Sydney, 26 March 2010. 
 Welcome back to Sydney. 
The last time that this body met here was in 1992. At that time the Australian economy was 
in  the  early  phase  of  a  recovery  from  a  deep  recession.  Pessimism  about  the  future  was 
deeply  rooted.  The  financial  system  was  under  considerable  strain.  Unemployment  was  in 
double  digits  and  still  rising.  Inflation  had  fallen  significantly,  but  many  people  thought  this 
was a temporary impact of the downturn. They thought that if we did get a recovery – and 
some  despaired  of  that  –  we  would  return  to  our  old  bad  habits  of  high  inflation.  People 
worried a lot about Australia’s substantial current account deficit. There were relatively few 
optimists. You might notice some of that sort of thinking today, in some other countries.  
I  imagine  that  among  the  participants  of  that  1992  meeting  one  could  have  gotten  some 
pretty long odds against Australia having a long upswing, with inflation averaging “two point 
something”, surviving the financial crisis and ensuing global downturn with one of the mildest 
domestic downturns we have seen, and facing the future with a fair degree of confidence. 
This shows how hard it is to forecast, of course. But perhaps it also demonstrates that with 
time, effort, discipline, good policies and a bit of luck, economies can be returned to health 
and their citizens to prosperity.  
Financial market recovery 
To that end, it is helpful that the global financial system is gradually recovering its poise, after 
a near-death experience eighteen months ago. Perhaps like a patient that has suffered an 
acute  cardiac  event,  there  has  been  some  lasting  tissue  damage,  but  quick  intervention 
avoided something much worse. A period of emergency life-support has been followed by a 
period  of  recuperation,  with  some  ongoing  medication,  during  which  the  patient  has  been 
able gradually to resume normal activities.  
Certainly the functioning of money markets has improved substantially. Extreme counterparty 
risk aversion has abated and spreads of LIBOR rates to equivalent maturity OIS rates have 
come  down  to  about  the  lowest  levels  since  mid  2007.  The  dramatic  expansion  in  the 
balance sheets of central banks in major economies has largely ended, though policy interest 
rates remain at 50-year lows.  
Australia’s situation is more advanced in this regard. The expansion in the RBA’s balance 
sheet was unwound nearly a year ago and the policy rate has been increased somewhat, 
reflecting the very different circumstances facing the Australian economy. But we are not the 
only country seeking to manage the “return to normality”. An increasing number of countries 
outside those most directly affected by the crisis have begun this process – though the speed 
of adjustment naturally depends on national conditions.  
Capital  markets  have  also  improved,  with  spreads  to  sovereign  bond  yields  for  private 
borrowers  across  most  of  the  risk  spectrum  back  to  “pre-Lehman”  levels,  and  for  the  best 
rated borrowers back almost to mid-2007 levels. They are not quite back to pre-crisis levels, 
but then, they probably should not have been at such low levels anyway. Similarly, spreads 
for  emerging  market  sovereigns  are  well  down  from  their  peaks.  In  fact  overall  borrowing 
costs for quality corporates and emerging market sovereigns are similar to or slightly below 
what they were in 2006. This finer pricing is being accompanied by a gradual pick-up in debt 
issuance.  
BIS Review 38/2010 
 1
Appetite  for  risk  has  increased  significantly  since  the  end  of  2008,  albeit  with  some 
occasional  setbacks.  Of  course  we  should  expect  that  it  would  have  increased,  since 
September and October 2008 were characterised by sheer panic – there is no other word – 
and a flight from virtually any risk at all. Once the global financial system did not actually go 
over  the  precipice,  there  was  going  to  be  some  re-appraisal.  Hence,  even  as  evidence 
continued to emerge in the first half of 2009 of the dramatic fall in demand for goods and 
services, share prices and spot commodity prices began to recover. Share prices are now 
about  60  per  cent  higher  than  the  “priced  for  disaster”  low  point,  while  commodity  price 
indexes have increased by a third.  Some individual commodity prices have risen by much 
more.  
Similarly,  we  have  seen  a  preparedness  to  take  foreign  currency  risk,  and  flows  into 
emerging markets involving both foreign currency and credit risk have increased. Again, risk 
appetite has not returned to the heady days of the mid 2000s, but nor should it. Even the 
flows  we  have  seen  have  begun  to  raise  concerns  among  policy  makers  in  some  of  the 
emerging countries about potential risks of asset market excesses and eventual capital flow 
reversal.  
The banking sector 
For  major  financial  institutions,  the  picture  has  also  improved.  The  general  decline  in  risk 
aversion has eased funding problems, and some countries have been able to terminate or 
scale back their government guarantee programs as banks are increasingly able to access 
term funding markets under their own names. Share prices for those financial institutions that 
are  still  privately  owned  have  generally  increased  by  more  than  the  broader  market.  A 
number of large American and European banks that accepted public-sector capital injections 
during the crisis have moved to repay them.  
The  challenges  that  remain  ahead  for  the  banking  system  in  major  countries  nonetheless 
remain considerable. The outlook for some of the remaining government ownership stakes 
remains  unclear.  While  losses  coming  from  write-downs  of  securities  slowed  some  time 
back,  losses  are  still  occurring  in  lending  books  as  a  result  of  the  normal  effects  of  big 
recessions,  not  least  in  the  area  of  commercial  property.  This  will  continue  for  a  while.  In 
addition, banks, particularly large internationally active banks with big trading operations, will 
require additional capital over time under proposed changes to global prudential standards.  
There is a considerable contrast between that picture and the one for banks in most other 
countries. It is important to note that the majority of countries have not had a banking crisis 
as such. Everyone was affected by the seizing up of markets in late 2008, but most were not 
afflicted with the sorts of asset quality and capital issues that so bedevilled large US, UK and 
continental European banks. This in turn meant that once the panic had subsided, the banks 
in  most  countries  were  able  to  continue  to  carry  out  their  functions  –  albeit  under  more 
difficult circumstances and facing much more  subdued demand for credit, particularly from 
corporations.  
Australia is a good example of this, though not the only one. The lowest rate of return on 
equity earned among the major banks here over the past two years was about 10 per cent in 
underlying  terms;  among  smaller  banks  the  lowest  was  3  per  cent.  When  markets  for 
securitisation closed the major banks stepped into the gap by increasing their rate of housing 
lending, albeit at higher prices. These banks were able to support some business customers – 
again  at  a  price  –  that  in  previous  cycles  they  might  have  chosen  to  cut.  The  rate  of 
provisioning for bad loans has stopped rising for several banks, and non-performing loans 
are likely to peak at a considerably lower share of loans than earlier expected. This general 
picture, even if not the exact numbers, would, I suspect, be replicated across much of Asia.  
These  differences  in  experience  are  an  important  backdrop  for  the  international  work  on 
regulatory reforms. There is no question that there must be some significant reform. To use 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2010
the medical analogy again, the recovering patient is usually advised to consider some dietary 
and lifestyle changes, and perhaps to submit to some ongoing monitoring, in order to avoid 
further emergency procedures. These changes involve:  
 
 
 
 
removing the scope for taking on excessive leverage via regulatory arbitrage; 
making sure that adequate capital is held against risk that is being incurred;  
ensuring better management of funding liquidity;  
countering, to the extent possible, the inherent tendencies in both human nature and 
regulation to form assessments of risk in a pro-cyclical way;  
and improving resolution processes to ensure orderly and rapid crisis management 
and to help manage the issue of “too-big-to-fail” institutions.  
 These are all very important goals. The Australian authorities support them. But as we have 
said before, the really serious problems were generated in a relatively small number of very 
large,  internationally  active  banks.  They  did  not  stem  from  the  thousands  of  other  banks 
around  the  world  which  have  not  needed  to  be  “bailed  out”  and  whose  capital  resources 
have,  in  most  cases,  proved  adequate  to  cover  normal  losses  in  a  cyclical  downswing. 
Hence it is important not to shackle unnecessarily the latter group in our efforts to constrain 
the relatively small number which caused much of the problem.  
Challenges from sovereign debt 
Turning  from  banks  to  markets  more  generally,  a  recent  development  has  been  the 
increasing focus on sovereign debt and creditworthiness. The initial manifestation of this was 
late  last  year  when  Dubai  World  requested  a  six-month  standstill  agreement  on  its  debt 
repayments.  
More  recently,  the  focus  has  been  on  Greece,  after  it  was  revealed  that  the  Greek 
Government’s  current  borrowing  requirement  was  much  larger  than  had  been  previously 
disclosed. Greece is a small country – accounting for only half of one per cent of the world’s 
GDP. The significance of Greece is that it is a euro area country, which means two things. 
First, its adjustment to its predicament cannot involve currency depreciation (unless it were to 
leave  the  single  currency).  The  only  way  it  can  grow  out  of  the  problem  is  by  gaining 
competitiveness against other European economies via domestic deflation, which will be a 
difficult and lengthy process. A very large fiscal consolidation is an unavoidable part of this 
path. Second, the euro area has an interest in this effort succeeding, which is why there has 
been  intense  discussion  about  whether,  and  in  what  form,  European  assistance  might  be 
forthcoming.  Any  assistance  would  of  course  have  to  pass  the  test  of  credibility  more 
generally in Europe, and would need to be applicable under similar terms to other euro area 
countries  if  needed.  This  is  obviously  a  difficult  problem,  on  which  the  policymakers 
concerned are continuing to work.  
Perhaps the broader significance is that the difficulties facing Greece, while unusually stark, 
are a reminder of the challenges facing many governments in Europe, and for that matter the 
United  States  and  Britain,  over  the  long  haul.  Ratios  of  debt  to  GDP  are  rising  quite 
significantly in all these cases. There are several reasons.  
The first is the size of the recessions being experienced, which obviously reduces revenues 
and adds to some categories of spending – the so-called “automatic stabilisers”. This effect 
is relatively larger in some European countries but it occurs everywhere to some extent.  
The second factor is the discretionary budgetary decisions aimed at stimulating demand and 
injecting capital into banks. In the circumstances, the former was understandable; the latter 
was unavoidable.  
BIS Review 38/2010 
 3
The “automatic stabilisers” will presumably “automatically” move budget positions in the right 
direction  as  economies  recover.  The  costs  of  stimulus  and  bank  rescue  measures,  while 
one-off in nature, do leave debt permanently higher. But without such measures, economies 
might have suffered much deeper downturns and so the extent of budget deterioration could 
have been much greater, itself leaving an even bigger debt legacy.  
If that was the end of the story, we would not want to get too worked-up over debt ratios. 
Unfortunately, though, there is more to the story.  
For several important countries there was a trend increase in debt-to-GDP ratios going on 
before the crisis occurred. For the domestic audience, let me be clear that Australia has 
been a conspicuous exception. Particularly in mainland Europe, the pattern has tended to 
be  for  debt  ratios  to  rise  quickly  in  periods  of  recession,  then  to  stabilise  for  some  years, 
before  rising  again  in  the  next  recession.  No  doubt  multiple  factors  are  at  work  but  the 
interaction of changing demographics and generous welfare, health and retirement systems 
is  prominent.  The  same  factors  also  work,  other  things  equal,  to  lessen  future  potential 
economic growth.  
It  is  certainly  not  unprecedented  for  countries  to  have  debt  stocks  much  larger  than  their 
annual  GDPs.  This  has  usually  been  seen  when  they  faced  the  requirements  of  fighting 
wars. Those ratios subsequently came down over time. But the situation now is different. The 
decline in debt ratios seen after the Second World War, for example, driven by rapid growth 
in output as population expanded and productivity surged, will not easily be repeated in many 
of the major countries.  
It is these more deep-seated trends, which were in place before the crisis, that are really the 
greater  cause  for  concern;  the  crisis  has  brought  them  more  sharply  into  focus.  The 
demographic  drivers  will  continue  for  the  foreseeable  future,  while  the  unwillingness  or 
inability to tackle the structural trends in earlier “good times” has significantly reduced future 
flexibility.  
So  a  number  of  advanced  industrial  countries  face  some  difficult  fiscal  decisions  over  the 
years ahead. At some  point, significant discretionary tightening will be required. Of course 
policymakers  need  to  get  recoveries  well  entrenched,  which  is  why  many  observers  warn 
against  attempting  an  early  fiscal  consolidation.  But  unless  a  credible  path  to  fiscal 
sustainability can also be set out, growth could easily be stunted by rising risk premia built 
into interest rates as markets worry about long-run solvency. This is not happening as yet; 
long-term rates in many of the major advanced countries remain quite low. That provides a 
window  within  which  to  plan  the  eventual  consolidation.  Since  markets  can  be  fickle  and 
things can change, governments will surely want to use the window.  
Economic recovery 
In the mean time differences persist in the pace of economic recovery across regions. In the 
United States growth spurred by a swing in the inventory cycle is thought to have marked the 
turning point in the second half of 2009, but most observers still expect only moderate growth 
this year. In Europe, the momentum of the recovery has been less certain. In both cases the 
old forecasting cliché about uncertainty applies in spades.  
In contrast, it is apparent that the letter “v” is a reasonable description of the trajectory, to 
date, of important emerging countries like China, India, Brazil and a number of smaller east 
Asian  countries.  We  should  expect  to  see  some  moderation  in  the  pace  of  growth  of 
production  in  some  of  these  cases  this  year.  This  is  usually  the  case  in  “v-shaped” 
recoveries,  since  the  initial  pace  of  expansion  is  considerably  higher  than  the  long  run 
sustainable growth rate.  
The question of what happens to demand in these countries is of course distinct from that of 
what happens to production. Full employment in parts of the emerging world will probably be 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2010
reached before full employment in North America or Europe. Productive capacity therefore 
would  remain  to  meet  further  demand  from  the  emerging  world,  via  imports  of  goods  and 
services from the “old world”. That is, emerging Asia and some other parts of the world could 
see their living standards rise a bit faster than the increase in their own productivity, for a 
time,  if  they  were  prepared  to  meet  some  demand  through  imports.  Facilitating  this  most 
efficiently would of course involve, among other things, allowing exchange rates to change.  
The alternative approach would be to seek to slow growth in demand in the emerging world 
as production there approaches full capacity, so as to maintain internal balance at a given 
set of exchange rates. But that would leave unused capacity in the industrial countries and 
emerging world living standards lower than they could be. These are polar cases – it would 
of course be open to policymakers to steer some path in between.  
Among Asian policy makers many factors go into thinking about exchange rates and trade 
and  capital  flows.  They  have  a  degree  of  suspicion  of  rapid  capital  flows  and  large 
movements  in  exchange  rates,  which  is  understandable  after  the  experiences  of  the  late 
1990s. It is also understandable that the smaller economies, some of which are extremely 
open,  with  trade  shares  of  more  than  100  per  cent  of  GDP,  do  not  wish  to  see  volatile 
exchange rates because it is disruptive for their economies. Moreover, the issue goes well 
beyond just exchange rates per se; it involves saving and investment patterns, and national 
policy approaches to growth, the speed with which these can be adjusted and so on. The 
point, nonetheless, is that the current and prospective differences in economic circumstances 
between  significant  parts  of  the  world  are  likely  to  put  strains  on  the  relative  settings  of 
macroeconomic  policies  and  exchange  rate  arrangements.  This  will  need  careful 
management, by all concerned, over the next few years.  
Conclusion 
The stabilisation of financial markets and banking systems over the past year or more is a 
welcome  development  for  all  of  us.  There  are  still  difficulties  to  overcome  for  financial 
institutions in some key countries as a result of the depth of recessions, and these will be the 
subject  of  attention  over  the  coming  year.  Looking  ahead,  the  differences  in  the  speed  of 
economic recovery are starting to present challenges of their own, showing up as they do in 
capital flows, asset valuations and exchange rates. When we add to all that the looming long-
term requirement for fiscal consolidation in a number of major countries, there is plenty for 
markets and policy makers alike to think about.  
I’m  sure  your  conference  will  take  up  these  issues  with  great  energy.  I  wish  you  every 
success in doing so.  
BIS Review 38/2010 
 5
