Yves Mersch: The framework for short-term provision of international 
reserve currencies to sovereign states and their central banks 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the 5th High-
level Seminar of Central Banks in the East Asia-Pacific Region and the Euro Area, Sydney, 
10 February 2010. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen! 
Today,  I  would  like  to discuss  “the framework  for short-term provision of international 
reserve  currencies  to  sovereign  states  and  their  central  banks”.  Let  me  begin  by 
reviewing  the  recent  evolution  of  global  liquidity.  Then,  I  will  discuss  different  concepts  of 
supplying  foreign  reserves  and  consider  their  recent  developments.  In  the  third  part  of  my 
speech, the pros and cons of these concepts will be explored. Finally, I will point out certain 
trade-offs with other economic objectives and draw conclusions on the evolution of the global 
framework. 
Let me start by highlighting current developments in global liquidity. For this purpose, I define 
global liquidity as the sum of monetary aggregates of the major advanced economies. 
Global  excess  liquidity  may  be  understood  as  monetary  liquidity  that  is  not  needed  by 
economic agents to finance real economic transactions. In theory, excess liquidity  may be 
measured  by  comparing  long-run  developments  in  money  supply  and  GDP.  Assuming  the 
trend  of  velocity  of  money  remains  stable  over  time,  nominal  GDP  is  a  proxy  for  the 
transactions  demand  for  money.  In  practice,  recent  disruptions  in  the  money  market 
substantially complicate the assessment of excess liquidity in the short to medium term. In 
this context, the ECB monetary policy strategy proved appropriate in taking a broad based 
perspective focussing on threats to price stability in the long term. This makes it possible to 
cross-check the results of the monetary analysis with the results of the economic analysis 
focussed on short to medium term developments in inflation and growth. 
In recent past, the injection of liquidity by central banks was higher than at any time in the 
last 15 years. Its stocks remain large and continue to build up. Of course, the fast pace of 
excess  liquidity  creation  reflects  not  only  growth  in  money  aggregates  but  also  shrinking 
nominal GDP. 
Before the crisis, global excess liquidity was often ascribed to global imbalances reflecting on 
one hand large current account deficits in countries like the US and the UK and on the other 
hand  substantially  increased  savings  and  sizeable  current  account  surpluses  in  some 
advanced,  emerging  and  oil-producing  economies,  which  accelerated  the  accumulation  of 
their foreign exchange reserves. Another source of global liquidity consisted of large interest 
rate differentials between major economies, which encouraged investors to engage in carry 
trade transactions in foreign exchange. 
Short-term risks to consumer price stability are currently dampened by a drop below potential 
in most economies and rising unemployment. However, the situation can change abruptly. 
One  should  not  underestimate  the  risk  of  prolonged  excess  liquidity  on  unwelcomed 
developments  in  specific  asset  classes.  Global  excess  liquidity  also  reduces  investors’ 
willingness  to  hold  liquidity  at  the  current  low  level  of  returns  and  might  fuel  their  risk 
appetite. This could provide a renewed chase for performance. 
Recent  experience  indicates  that  even  in  a  situation  of  abundant  global  liquidity,  local 
markets in foreign currencies can seize up and currency shortages swiftly propagate across 
currencies, international markets and time zones. This highlights the importance of the global 
liquidity provisioning concepts to counter illiquidity of particular markets. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 1
the  pooling  mechanism  and 
In  a  liquidity  crisis,  monetary  authorities  can  engage  in  foreign  currency  liquidity-providing 
operations which can be classified into the following four major concepts: national foreign 
exchange reserves, pooling of reserves, inter-central bank swap lines or repos and monetary 
units or loan facilities by supra-national monetary authorities. 
Central  banks  maintain  foreign reserves mainly in key currencies  but  also  in  high-value 
liquid assets like gold. They may redirect the investments of such foreign reserves towards 
bank deposits, in an endeavor to offset the withdrawal of bank deposits in foreign currency 
by investors. 
At the outset of the crisis, global foreign exchange reserves had reached an unprecedented 
Euro 3.5 trillion (USD 5 trillion) compared to only Euro 2.3 trillion (USD 2 trillion) in 2001. The 
share  of  Asian  countries  more  than  tripled  during  that  period  and  China  alone  now  holds 
reserves worth about Euro 1.7 trillion (USD 2.4 trillion). 
Another possible strategy to ward off potential future currency crises (proper exchange rate 
regimes  and  exchange  rate  management  notwithstanding)  consists  of  schemes  that  pool 
foreign  reserves  of  several  central  banks.  This  concept  generally  requires  a  binding 
arrangement  between  sovereign  states  specifying 
its 
management. 
In  May  2009  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  of  the  ASEAN+3  group  agreed  to  transform  its 
network  of  bilateral  currency  swap  agreements  into  a  multilateral  facility  that  would  pool 
together  Euro  85  billion  (USD  120  billion)  of  reserves.  So  far,  these  arrangements  have 
never been called upon. 
An additional source of reserve currency can be inter-central bank swap lines and repos. 
These involve two transactions. First, foreign currency is delivered against collateral in form 
of assets or domestic currency. Second, on a specified date in the future, accrued interests 
are  paid  and  transactions  are  unwound,  which  implies  that  currency  positions  or  repoed 
assets are retransferred. 
Since December 2007 certain central banks around the globe have been participating in a 
temporary network of inter-central bank swap lines and repo agreements. In particular, this 
included  the  US  Fed  supplying  unlimited  liquidity  in  US  dollars  to  the  ECB,  the  Bank  of 
Japan, the Bank of England and the Swiss National Bank. Other swap lines have also been 
put  in  place,  for  example  the  ECB  provides  Euros  to  the  Fed.  At  the  peak  of  the  crisis  in 
December 2008, the US Fed provided globally Euro 432 billion (USD 583 billion). Since then, 
demand has receded continuously and the swap lines have been discontinued. 
Lastly, monetary units or loan facilities created by supra-national monetary authorities 
can  grant  liquidity  to  their  member  states.  In  response  to  the  crisis,  IMF  member  states 
agreed  a  Euro  175  billion  (USD  250  billion)  general  allocation  of  Special  Drawing  Rights 
(SDR). In times of need, members can exchange SDRs for key currencies through voluntary 
trading arrangements with other IMF member countries; otherwise SDRs count as part of 
the official international reserves. The discussion whether SDRs could play a greater role as 
an international reserve currency has been re-opened during the crisis. 
In addition, the “New Arrangements to Borrow” boosted IMF facilities by Euro 345 billion 
(USD  500  billion).  The  IMF  redesigned  its  lending  framework  with  the  introduction  of  a 
“Flexible  Credit  Line”  for  countries  with  a  sustainable  strong  economy  and  enhanced 
“Stand-by Arrangements” that are more widely accessible. 
Let  me  now  suggest  some  criteria  to  evaluate  the  alternatives  that  I  have  just  mentioned. 
These criteria include effectiveness, costs, efficiency and moral hazard. 
First,  effectiveness  in  alleviating  liquidity  shortages  in  foreign  currency  depends  on  the 
speed and size with which foreign reserves can be mobilized. 
The discretionary nature of national reserves in foreign currency means that in principle they 
are  available  at  short  notice.  In  turn,  this  might  have  a  reassuring  effect  on  market 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2010
confidence.  The  same  also  applies  to  other  sources,  such  as  standing  swap  lines,  pooled 
reserves or IMF facilities that can be accessed unconditionally. 
In  addition,  foreign  exchange  reserves  should  be  available  in  a  size  sufficient  to  match 
outstanding demand. This can require very large volumes in a systemic crisis. While national 
foreign exchange reserves might alleviate temporary shortages in an individual institution or 
economy, their limited quantity might reduce their effectiveness during large systemic events. 
This suggests a need for additional sources involving cross-border cooperation. 
However, measures that are provided at the discretion of monetary authorities are based 
on  a  case-by-case  assessment  and  a  decision  by  the  respective  lender.  These  will  reflect 
several  factors,  including  the  objectives  of  the  creditor,  whether  the  crisis  is  systemic, 
country-specific  or  institution-specific  and  also  the  form  of  the  measure:  For  instance  the 
lending authorities might favor a secured repo agreement, although this removes collateral 
from  the  borrowing  central  bank.  Compared  to  repo  agreements,  lending  in  the  form  of  a 
currency swap preserves the potential to add new liquidity. 
Second, the effectiveness of liquidity provision in foreign currency has to be judged against 
its economic costs. Every time a country receives foreign currency support from an external 
creditor, the costs depend on the respective agreement. Foreign exchange reserves, on the 
other  hand,  bear  an  opportunity  cost  representing  foregone  alternative  investments.  An 
efficient  international  currency  system  based  on  pooling  or  similar  concepts  will  require  a 
lower overall amount of reserves. Of course, such an international system requires political 
agreement and additional administrative costs associated with managing the reserve pool. 
A further cost is associated with risk. Credit risk arises whenever a national central bank 
provides  liquidity  to  domestic  counterparties.  However,  it  will  also  arise  when  one  central 
bank  furnishes  liquidity  to  another  central  bank,  or  when  the  IMF  provides  liquidity  to  a 
national government. Besides, foreign currency reserves fluctuate in value and are therefore 
also  subject  to  foreign  exchange  risk.  A  priori  exchange  rate  volatility  increases  the 
required volume of reserves as well as its opportunity costs. 
A third criterion to judge liquidity provisioning in foreign currency is linked to moral hazard. 
This  arises  whenever  individuals,  institutions  or  countries  expect  that  they  will  not  have  to 
bear the consequences of their actions. This will incite them to act less prudently than they 
would otherwise, leaving third parties to bear some of the consequences of their behaviour. 
For  financial  institutions,  the  prospect  of  emergency  provision  of  foreign  currency  liquidity 
may  encourage  excessive  risk-taking  in  carry  trades  or  in  foreign  currency  lending.  This 
potentially increases the likelihood of a systemic crisis. For national authorities, the prospect 
of  emergency  liquidity  provision  from  abroad  might  reduce  the  incentive  to  conduct  sound 
economic policies and accumulate adequate reserves. This leads to the paradoxical situation 
that  unconventional  measures  applied  in  a  crisis  might  lower  the  incentive  to  maintain 
preventive  measures  during  normal  times.  In  turn  this  increases  the  likelihood  that 
unconventional measures will be needed again in the future, i.e. crisis resolution might trade-
off with crisis prevention. 
These  moral  hazard  considerations  are  a  well-known  problem  whenever  insurance  is 
provided in a context of asymmetric information. Their negative effects can be mitigated to a 
certain  extent.  For  instance,  appropriate  pricing  of  foreign  currency  liquidity  provision  can 
limit its function to that of an emergency backstop facility which is costly for banks to use. 
Additionally, the framework has to be in line with global economic objectives, such as price 
stability, balanced growth and efficient international allocation of resources. 
• 
Policies that preserve price stability in the long term should also ensure stability of 
the financial system. However, in short term these two objectives might appear to 
conflict. Even when liquidity in domestic currency is provided to another country, it 
might  find  its  way  back  to  the  domestic  economy  and  contribute  to  inflationary 
pressure, if not sterilised. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 3
   A  buildup  of  national  reserves  might  itself  contribute  to  systemic  instability.  A 
reserve  framework  requires  stability  of  the  reserve  currency  in  order  to  act  as  a 
global store of value and an anchor for price stability. However, the Triffin-dilemma 
notes that the accumulation of reserves implies persistent current account deficits of 
the  reserve-issuing  country.  This  potentially  creates  instability  and  fuels  global 
imbalances.  Moreover,  such  a  reserve  system  aggravates 
interdependence 
between  the  reserve  accumulating  countries  and  the  reserve-issuing  country.  For 
instance, the US Treasury market relies largely on demand from emerging market 
central banks. This dependence is likely to increase as the Federal Reserve phases 
out its asset purchase program, reducing US demand. 
This  is  connected  to  potential  negative  side  effects  of  reserve  accumulation  or 
intervention in foreign exchange markets. In consequence, it can distort exchange 
rates  and  prices  of  other  assets  and  might  be  difficult  if  not  impossible  to 
disentangle from its benefits. 
Finally,  an  acceptable  solution  from  the  country  perspective  might  not  appear 
desirable  from  the  global  perspective.  For  instance,  excessive  accumulation  of 
foreign exchange reserves might distort international capital allocation. 
This leads me to the general conclusion that there are many practical obstacles to a first-best 
solution for foreign exchange reserve provisioning. 
Ultimately,  I  will  conclude  with  some  considerations  on  the  challenges  facing  the  global 
framework for short term international reserve provisioning. 
• 
In  general,  the  discussion  requires  a  common  understanding  of  international 
liquidity and its economic interlinkages with credit markets and the real economy. 
The  immediate  challenges  we  are  facing  include  the  implementation  of  exit 
strategies  from  exceptional  measures  of  support.  In  terms  of  evolution  of  new 
concepts, it has been discussed whether it would be desirable to develop a network 
of  standing inter-central  bank  swap  lines. It  was  also proposed  that  central  banks 
should  consider  extending  their  collateral  requirements  to  accept  foreign  currency 
denominated assets or obligations booked abroad during emergency operations. 
Constitutive elements of an international crisis prevention setup have to be defined 
and the different objectives of involved parties taken into account. Thus an element 
of  political  coordination  will  be  inevitable  to  set  the  trade-offs  and  accommodate 
different national interests. More automatic mechanisms can help reduce the need 
for repeated negotiations to obtain political consensus. 
Moreover,  crisis  resolution  requires  a  provisioning  framework  with  sufficient 
flexibility  to  respond  adequately  rapidly  to  a  variety  of  possible  shocks.  This 
suggests relying on different sources, while preferring market solutions and turning 
to national foreign exchange reserves as the first line of defence. 
   Thank you very much for your attention! 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2010
