Nout Wellink: Working on the future of the financial sector 
Speech by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Dutch Embassy, London, 19 February 2010. 
 I will first briefly share with you my view of the recent developments in the financial sector 
and on the crisis. Second, I will discuss what the future role of supervision will be in order to 
minimize future crises. I will speak about some of the initiatives of the Basel Committee, and 
why these alone will not be enough. And finally, I will speak about the role of the financial 
sector itself.  
Let me first of all start by saying that although the financial sector has been hit severely, and 
probably  none  of  us  has  ever  experienced  something  like  this  before,  it  is  not  a  unique 
situation  from  a  historical  perspective.  In  The  Netherlands  and  the  United  Kingdom  there 
have  been  a  significant  number  of  large  financial  and  economic  crises  throughout  history. 
One  famous  example  of  this  is  the  Dutch  tulip  mania  in  the  early  17th  century,  when  the 
prices of tulips fell dramatically after an excessive speculative bubble period. Or, the collapse 
of  Overend  &  Gurney  bank  in  1866  London,  which  triggered  a  series  of  bankruptcies  of 
several  smaller,  but  otherwise  solvent  British  banks.  We  struggled,  but  came  out  stronger 
after each.  
Just as what must have been said after each of those events, let me assure you that this 
crisis  will  also  not  be  the  last.  All  of  our  measures  and  good  intentions  aside,  we  are  of 
course  always  perfectly  prepared  for  the  most  recent  crisis.  The  next  crisis  is  a  different 
story.  What  we  can  do  is  learn  from  each  crisis  and  try  to  prevent  and  mitigate  a  similar 
crisis, and to do our best to diminish the likelihood and impact of any future crisis.  
Our recent crisis is, in my opinion, the result of many problems. Let me mention some. One 
is  undoubtedly  the  search  for  yield  that  has  often  led  to  excessive  risk  taking.  Or  the 
compensation schemes and bonuses in the financial sector that by leading to a strong public 
outcry, have laid the foundations for a lack of trust in the financial sector.  
Supervision and the regulatory system must take responsibility for the crisis too. Despite the 
continuous improvement of regulatory practices throughout the years, certain risks were built 
up due to regulatory arbitrage opportunities.  
But  this  crisis  also  showed  a  fundamental  lack  of  transparency.  Customers  (private  and 
institutional  alike)  did  not  know  anymore  just  what  exactly  they  were  buying;  supervisors 
found it increasingly difficult to assess which risks financial institutions where subject to, and 
institutions had more difficulty with valuing their products. Transparency was gone, which not 
only contributed to the lack of trust between financial institutions, but also between client and 
institution.  
You will therefore understand that we, as supervisors, had to act quickly and act decisively. 
As  chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee,  let  me  mention  some  of  the  measures  that  the 
committee proposes. And I would also like to use this opportunity to convince you that these 
measures are really necessary. Despite being a significant improvement over the previous 
accord, Basel II has shown to still contain some significant weaknesses and shortcomings. 
Of  many  of  these  we  were  aware,  but  we  were  not  able  to  adequately  address  them. 
However, now, under the pressure from the crisis, many of these issues are open for debate 
again.  
Let me talk about some of these measures in more detail. First, we are going to improve the 
level  and  quality  of  capital.  We  have  seen  during  the  crisis  that  the  current  levels  are  not 
adequate and that in the end it is only the capital of the highest quality that counts in adverse 
conditions.  An  extension  of  this  measure  is  that  we  will  make  capital  requirements  less 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 1
cyclical, by means of additional capital buffers that are built up during economic upswings. 
This might imply that less profit can be used to pay out dividends or bonuses, as it is instead 
used for increasing the firm’s capital buffers. Second, we want to make sure that we really 
cover  all  risks  and  allocate  adequate  capital  to  each.  A  key  aspect  of  this  is  to  prevent 
regulatory  arbitrage  opportunities,  particularly  with  securitizations  and  between  banking 
activities  and  trading  activities.  Third,  we  will  work  on  an  international  accord  on  liquidity 
buffers and supervision, instead of the current fragmented, national rules.  
Furthermore, the Basel Committee proposes to supplement these risk-based measures with 
a non risk-based measure that acts as a backstop in order to prevent an excessive build-up 
of  leverage  during  favourable  economic  periods.  The  design  of  the  leverage  ratio  as  a 
simple,  transparent,  and  supplementary  measure  of  capital  that  is  based  on  gross 
exposures,  will  therefore  serve  as  a  safeguard  against  attempts  to  game  the  risk-based 
requirements and address model risk and measurement error. By the end of 2010 we hope 
to  have  fully  calibrated  these  measures  such  that  they  can  be  phased  in  as  economic 
conditions improve, with the aim of implementing them by end-2012.  
I would like to stress that these measures are really necessary. Not only to prevent further 
harm, but also to restore trust in the financial sector. Trust is an extremely important aspect 
of any services sector, and the financial sector is a services sector pur sang. If a feeling of 
uneasiness remains among clients and investors, or financial institutions cannot trust each 
other as they should, then financial (and consequently economic) development grinds to a 
halt. So restoring trust in the financial sector is an absolute priority and we have to go great 
lengths to achieve this.  
At  the  same  time  it  seems  as  if  the  sense  of  urgency  for  change  among  bankers  and 
politicians  has  somewhat  diminished  lately,  now  that  we  see  the  first  signs  of  recovery. 
Opposition against the proposals from the Basel Committee is growing, through lobbies from 
the financial sector. For this reason, we, as supervisors, have to do our utmost best to uphold 
these proposals, because otherwise countries may be forced to implement measures on their 
own. The result of this will be a distortion of the international level playing field, which in the 
end will not benefit the financial sector.  
It is for this reason that we will organise a comprehensive quantitative impact study in the 
first  half  of  this  year.  With  this  impact  study  we  can  see  what  the  impact  of  all  individual 
proposals will be, as well as the aggregate impact of all proposed measures combined, so 
that we can implement  measures with care, in a responsible and well-considered manner. 
And all of these measures will be considered in the light of the economic recovery, making 
sure that they will not harm the recovery process. I am aware of the current debates about 
reducing  the  size  of  the  sector,  adding  taxes,  cutting  bonuses,  and  the  like.  It  is  true  that 
there are indeed excesses which are not acceptable anymore, and these have to be dealt 
with. At the same time, we should refrain from overreacting and take care to not implement 
measures which we have not fully thought through.  
Beside all these new regulatory measures we have realised that there is also an urgent need 
for  closer  international  supervisory  cooperation.  The  rapid  development  in  cross  border 
banking  has  shown  us  supervisors  that  our  current  organisational  structure  is  no  longer 
adequate and limits our ability to rapidly respond to developing situations. A shift towards a 
more unified regulatory framework has therefore slowly been set into motion, for instance in 
Europe  with  the  new  structures  for  CEBS  or  CEIOPS,  or  through  the  intensified  use  of 
supervisory  colleges.  Crucial,  though,  in  this  process,  is  full  and  mutual  openness  and 
willingness to share information. 
But there are limits to what supervision can do. We cannot supervise everything, even if we 
want  to.  Do  we  have  to  double  our  number  of  supervisors,  or  triple  them?  Will  that  be 
enough? And we have to realise that more supervision and rules also creates a moral hazard 
problem,  because  we  take  away  the  incentive  for  institutions  and  clients  to  take  their  own 
responsibility and use common sense when engaging in financial products. A good example 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2010
of this is the deposit guarantee scheme. If one would keep on increasing the guarantee level, 
clients  eventually  become  less  alert  and  institutions  might  lower  liquidity  buffers.  Both 
dangerous developments.  
It  is  therefore  that  I  would  like  to  stress  today  the  fact  that  market  participants  have  to 
recognize  their  own  responsibilities  too,  and  act  more  according  to  them.  This  applies  to 
institutional managers, traders, fund managers, accountants, and even customers. More than 
ever  before  should  all  market  participants  consider  the  consequences  of  their  actions  and 
continuously ask oneself questions about everything one does. In answering such questions 
I  think  that  a  prudent  attitude  must  be  taken  and  greater  awareness  of  one’s  social 
responsibility, and ask one every time whether the right thing has been done and whether the 
actions are not harmful to vulnerable parties.  
I  think  that  an  important  step  in  the  awareness  of  one’s  own  responsibility  is  aiming  for 
greater openness. Transparency is really something that should be improved. Because only 
when  customers  really  understand  financial  products;  or  when  the  public  understands 
compensation  decisions,  or  bank  managers  and  supervisors  really  know  which  risks  an 
institution is subject to, will trust in the sector be restored. In the end, we may not forget that 
the  financial  sector  is  above  all  a  services  sector  and  this  requires  a  great  deal  of 
responsibility and care from the side of all. I would therefore very much invite you to help in 
bringing greater openness and social responsibility to the financial sector.  
I  hope  that  I  have  been  able  to  convince  you  that  there  is  truly  a  need  for  change  in  the 
financial  sector.  Not  only  in  terms  of  regulatory  practices  but  also  in  terms  of  attitude  and 
culture. I therefore welcome every initiative from the sector in order to achieve this and I look 
very much forward to a fruitful debate. 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 3
