Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 18 May 2010. 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. The statement is based on Norges Bank’s 
Annual Report for 2009, Monetary Policy Report 1/10 and the Executive Board’s assessments in the period to the 
monetary policy meeting on 5 May.  
 I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee and also thank the Committee for this 
opportunity  to  report  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  connection  with  the  Storting’s 
deliberations  on  the  Government’s  Financial  Market  Report  (previously  the  Credit  Report). 
My  statement  is  based  on  the  Bank’s  Annual  Report,  but  is  also  updated  based  on  the 
Executive Board’s assessments for the period to the previous monetary policy meeting and 
new information received to date. I also refer to this year’s report from Norges Bank Watch, a 
group of experts that evaluates Norges Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
1. 
New imbalances 
The most acute phase of the financial market crisis has for a period appeared to be over. In 
most  parts  of  the  world,  output  growth  has  resumed.  The  recovery  has  been  strongest  in 
emerging Asia. The upturn in OECD countries has been more moderate. The economies of 
many countries will continue to be marked by high levels of spare production capacity.  
 BIS Review 69/2010 
 1
But the situation is fragile. The crisis has given rise to new imbalances. Fiscal deficits have 
risen substantially in many countries and a number of countries are in the midst of a fiscal 
crisis. Government debt in the major advanced economies is as high measured as a share of 
GDP as it was immediately after the Second World War when the surge in military spending 
had been financed by borrowing. 
 Even with substantial tax cuts, strong growth in public spending and very low interest rates, 
unemployment  has  risen  considerably  in  both  the  US  and  Europe.  In  many  countries, 
unemployment  has  reached  double  digits.  There  is  a  risk  that  unemployment  will  become 
entrenched, particularly perhaps in Europe.  
 2 
 BIS Review 69/2010
2. 
Financial crisis 
 After a long upturn, the financial crisis started to unfold in summer 2007.  
In  autumn  2008,  a  full-blown  systemic  crisis  erupted  in  the  financial  system.  After  the 
collapse  of  the  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers,  activity  in  money  and  credit  markets 
almost came to a halt. Risk premiums in money markets and in corporate bond markets rose 
to  a  very  high  level.  Governments  took  action  to  stabilise  economic  developments  by 
supporting banks, cutting taxes and increasing spending. During this phase, the effects on 
government borrowing rates were limited. Interest rates in Greece and Ireland rose markedly. 
The fall in financial markets came to a halt at the beginning of March 2009. On 9 March 2009 
the Federal Reserve published the results of a comprehensive stress testing of US banks. In 
retrospect,  it  appears  that  a  better  overview  reduced  uncertainty  in  financial  markets. 
International equity markets then rebounded for a period and premiums were reduced.  
Up  to  last  autumn,  there  was  little  concern  in  the  markets  as  to  governments’  ability  to 
finance fiscal deficits and service debt. 
In late autumn last year, the crisis entered its latest phase so far, and the situation in Greece 
was a subject of growing concern. The fiscal deficit was considerably larger than previously 
reported and announced. Reports also indicated errors in government debt figures. Ireland 
had already implemented tightening measures and was therefore in a better position.  
Recently,  uncertainty  concerning  the  economic  situation  in  Greece  has  spread  to  other 
southern European countries. European money, bond and foreign exchange markets have 
also been affected. Equity markets have fallen sharply. On 2 May, Greece, the IMF and the 
euro area countries reached an agreement to provide a total of EUR 110 billion in loans to 
Greece.  Greece  has  presented  an  economic  programme  to  stabilise  and  then  reduce 
government debt and to boost growth potential. However, the loan was not sufficient to quell 
market unrest. On the contrary, premiums rose. The governments of several other countries 
were in danger of not being able to pay their bills.  
BIS Review 69/2010 
 3
At a crisis meeting on 8–9 May, EU finance ministers therefore agreed on a EUR 500 billion 
European  Financial  Stabilisation  mechanism  to  support  countries  unable  to  borrow  in  the 
market. The largest portion will be provided through loans guaranteed by individual euro area 
countries.  The  IMF  will  provide  support  in  the  form  of  loans  upon  application  from  an 
individual  country,  perhaps  up  to  a  total  of  EUR  250  billion.  Several  countries  announced 
sharper spending cuts. The ECB will buy government and other bonds and offer extra loans 
to banks to promote the smooth functioning of markets. Moreover, the Federal Reserve has 
entered  into  agreements  with  other  central  banks  to  re-establish  temporary  dollar  swap 
facilities to avoid failure in dollar funding markets. 
 Norwegian economy 
3. 
To mitigate the effects of the financial crisis, central bank key rates were cut sharply in 2008 
and are still close to zero in a number of countries.  
The  key  policy  rate  in  Norway  was  also  reduced  from  autumn  2008.  Norges  Bank  also 
implemented  a  number  of  extraordinary  measures  to  improve  credit  flows.  Banks  were 
provided  with  longer-term  liquidity  and  direct  access  to  US  dollar  liquidity,  and  collateral 
requirements for loans from Norges Bank were relaxed. On the advice of Norges Bank and a 
proposal from the Ministry of Finance, the Storting decided that banks would be entitled to 
exchange covered bonds for government securities. The Norwegian State Finance Fund and 
the Norwegian State Bond Fund were established to bolster the supply of bank equity capital 
and  loans  to  enterprises.  In  addition,  the  Storting  allocated  funds  to  central  and  local 
government authorities for maintenance and investment in order to support activity.  
4 
 BIS Review 69/2010
 Economic growth in Norway came to a halt in autumn 2008, and output fell in both the fourth 
quarter  and  the  first  quarter  of  2009.  Growth  resumed  from  the  second  quarter.  The 
substantial  decrease  in  the  key  policy  rate,  combined  with  increased  public  spending  and 
high oil investment has contributed to supporting activity. Capacity utilisation is nonetheless 
still lower than normal, although the downturn appears to have been mild so far. 
Without low key rates, inflation would have fallen too far.  
Unemployment rose less than we projected last year. Firms retained employees despite the 
fall in activity and many young people exited the labour force in favour of education. The mild 
downturn  in  Norway  is  also  reflected  in  the  wage  settlements,  which  have  provided  for 
appreciably higher pay increases than among our trading partners.  
BIS Review 69/2010 
  5
In  late  spring  last  year,  liquidity  premiums  in  money  and  bond  markets  started  to  fall  in 
Norway. As these markets began to normalise, the extraordinary measures could be phased 
out.  Long-term  loans  were  no  longer  provided  after  February  2009.  After  May,  foreign 
exchange swap agreements were no longer provided. Spring 2009 saw the first signs that 
the covered bond market was beginning to function. In June, it was announced that the swap 
arrangement  would  be  phased  out  by  gradually  adjusting  the  minimum  price  to  the  bond 
rates prevailing in this market at that time. And finally, in October, Norges Bank tightened the 
collateral requirements for loans.  
 Our interest rate forecasts were revised up and indicated that the key policy rate would be 
raised when the impact of the financial crisis began to wane. Since October 2009, the key 
policy rate has been increased by a total of 0.75 percentage point to 2 per cent. Our March 
forecast  indicates  that  the  key  policy  rate  should  be  increased  gradually  towards  a  more 
normal level, but at a slower pace than expected last autumn. The events in Europe and in 
financial markets in recent weeks have increased the uncertainty surrounding the outlook for 
the European and the Norwegian economy and for the interest rate. 
Some lessons from the financial crisis 
4. 
Norges Bank’s implementation of monetary policy shall be oriented towards low and stable 
inflation. The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual consumer price inflation of 
approximately  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  In  addition,  interest  rate  changes  can  contribute  to 
smoothing swings in output and employment. In assessing the outlook for prices and output, 
we  also  take  account  of  house  prices,  overall  credit  and  the  krone  exchange  rate.  These 
variables are thereby also given weight in interest rate setting. 
6 
 BIS Review 69/2010
 Inflation  targeting  has  served  the  Norwegian  economy  well  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  and 
later.  Inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored.  This  is  partly  because  inflation  has  on 
average over time been close to, but somewhat lower than, the target of 2.5 per cent, and 
because annual variations have not been pronounced. Inflation measured by the CPI is now 
3.3 per cent, but 2 per cent if the temporary increase in electricity prices is excluded. Inflation 
will fall later in the year. In the period of expansion in the Norwegian economy up to summer 
2008, the increase in the interest rate contributed to keeping inflation low. During the crisis, 
we  were  able  to  reduce  the  interest  rate  markedly  without  an  upward  shift  in  inflation 
expectations.  The  real  interest  rate  turned  negative.  The  interest  rate  reduction  rapidly 
stopped the fall in consumption and property prices. 
BIS Review 69/2010 
  7
The  krone  exchange  rate  has  also  by  and  large  contributed  to  stabilising  inflation  and 
employment.  In  the  short  term,  the  krone  exchange  rate  can  fluctuate  widely,  and  it 
depreciated  in  autumn  2008  because  capital  sought  safe  havens.  This  helped  Norwegian 
manufacturing  in  the  first  phase  of  the  downturn.  Since  then,  the  krone  has  appreciated 
considerably. This has dampened inflation prospects.  
Experience  from  the  crisis  in  other  countries  indicates  that  monetary  policy  alone  cannot 
ensure stable economic developments. Monetary policy has only one instrument by which to 
achieve the objective of low and stable inflation, and the interest rate is a crude instrument. 
Hence, other objectives must be achieved by means of, for example, financial regulation and 
the tax system.  
 In Norway, a number of arrangements functioned during the financial crisis. Banks’ capital 
adequacy ratios were at the outset fairly high, with high quality Tier 1 capital, and Norway 
had  a  bank  guarantee  fund  financed,  albeit  only  just,  by  capital  paid  in  by  banks.  Norges 
Bank also holds ample foreign exchange reserves and was able to supply foreign exchange 
to banks. 
Norwegian banks felt the impact of the global financial crisis primarily as a result of reduced 
access to funding. Over time, banks have increasingly relied on fairly short-term funding in 
global  markets  to  finance  their  lending.  This  is  the  main  reason  why  Norwegian  banks 
encountered problems when funding from foreign sources dried up in 2008. For Norwegian 
banks, the financial crisis essentially proved to be a funding and liquidity crisis.  
New and increased equity capital and liquidity requirements for banks can promote stability 
in the financial system. The requirements should probably be more stringent in Norway than 
the  minimum  requirement  that  is  likely  to  be  agreed  internationally.  It  is  also  important  to 
cooperate with the other Nordic countries to avoid a situation where more lightly regulated 
banks aggressively market loans in Norway. 
8 
 BIS Review 69/2010
 The  global  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  credit  cycles  and  property  market  bubbles  that 
burst represent one of the greatest challenges to economic policy. The experience of many 
countries  over  several  decades  has  shown  that  house  prices  and  residential  mortgage 
lending usually rise prior to the outbreak of a banking crisis.1  
In Norway, interest rate expenses can be deducted from taxable income, while capital gains 
on dwellings and the benefit of home ownership are not taxed. Housing is taxed as an asset, 
but not at its market value. High tax subsidisation of home ownership and a large proportion 
of  floating-rate  loans  contribute  to  considerable  fluctuations  in  house  prices  in  Norway. 
Furthermore, the rise in house prices over the past two decades has been high compared 
with countries where house price bubbles have now burst. High house prices and substantial 
household debt add to the economy’s vulnerability.  
In March, Finanstilsynet (Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway) issued new guidelines 
for prudent residential mortgage lending. The guidelines may have a somewhat dampening 
impact on the rise in debt and house prices.  
The global financial crisis has revealed weaknesses in the financial system. 
Regulation of financial institutions should seek to limit risk not only in individual banks, but 
also in the financial system as a whole. Risk is amplified by the interaction between financial 
institutions.  
Today, we can see that the crisis was amplified by the very surprise over the extent to which 
financial  markets  are  interwoven.  Losses  on  subprime  mortgages  in  the  US  shattered 
confidence  in  the  entire  financial  system.  Financial  institutions  started  to  doubt  their 
counterparties and interbank lending came to a halt.  
Experience shows the need for tighter regulation of systemically important banks. This can 
for  example  be  achieved  by  introducing  higher  bank  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  for 
such banks. The capital requirement for mortgage lending should to a larger extent reflect 
the overall risk of such loans.  
                                                 
1   See Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009): “This Time Is Different. Eight Centuries of Financial 
Folly”, Princeton University Press. 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 9
 Justified  criticism  has  been  levelled  at  international  banks.  The  focus  is  now  shifting  to 
government  fiscal  management  in  many  countries.  Fiscal  slippage  seems  to  have  been 
considerable  in  some  European  countries  in  particular.  EU  budget  policy  guidelines  have 
been  diluted  and  have  not  been  adhered  to.  Countries  have  experimented  with  budget 
frameworks  and  have  debt-financed  public  investments,  which  require  operating  and 
maintenance costs but yield little income. With already large deficits, the crisis has destroyed 
state finances in many countries. Economic developments over the next 5–10 years will be 
marked by the tightening measures that will now have to be implemented in these countries.  
However,  there  are  exceptions.  State  finances  in  Nordic  countries  are  in  order,  which 
provides a better starting point.  
With  ample  state  coffers,  the  Norwegian  economy  was  to  a  considerable  extent  insulated 
from  the  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2008  and  2009.  Norway  has  had  room  for 
manoeuvre because solid state finances secure credibility and because inflation expectations 
are firmly anchored. Even though oil prices fell from close to USD 150 per barrel in summer 
2008 to almost USD 30 at the end of the year, Norway’s state finances were not called into 
question. In addition, oil prices increased markedly as early as spring last year. The oil fund 
mechanism curbs the effects of oil price fluctuations on demand and output – as well as on 
inflation and the krone exchange rate.  
The  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  is  also  an  important  source  of  funding  for  public 
spending  in  the  next  decades.  Reductions  in  government  welfare  spending,  which  will 
probably be a matter of necessity with an increasingly ageing population, will be smaller than 
would have been the case without the fund.  
10 
 BIS Review 69/2010
5. 
Challenges to the Norwegian economy  
 In the period 1992–2008 the Norwegian economy experienced a long upturn. In the 2000s, 
the  cost  level  started  to  rise,  partly  reflecting  a  sharp  improvement  in  our  terms  of  trade. 
Prices  for  Norwegian  goods,  such as  oil,  gas, metals,  minerals  and  fish  increased  sharply 
while import prices fell.  
Looking ahead, the impact of these driving forces cannot be expected to be as favourable. It 
is  hardly  likely  that  export  prices  will  show  a  renewed  surge.  Moreover,  our  economy  has 
become vulnerable. Norwegian labour has never been as costly as today. Measured against 
Norway’s trading partners, the cost level is almost 20 per cent higher than the average for 
Norway’s oil age. Norwegian enterprises will often lose contracts abroad with the current high 
level of spare capacity in other countries.  
During  the  upturn,  Norwegian  enterprises  fared  well  in  spite  of  high  costs  because  they 
increased efficiency and because sales were strong and prices high. Norwegian labour has 
been  very  costly,  but  nevertheless  fully  employed.  Market  conditions  will  become  more 
demanding  ahead.  Even  with  a  floating  exchange  rate,  we  cannot  expect  any  substantial 
decline  in  Norway’s  relatively  high  cost  level  as  economic  conditions  are  even  weaker  in 
other countries in our region.  
The  industry  structure  in  Norway  is  different  from  that  of  other  advanced  economies.  We 
benefit  from  growth  in  Asian  countries  because  of  our  sizeable  commodity  exports  and 
freight industry. We are vulnerable to a slowdown in growth in Asia, which could lead to a fall 
in commodity prices and deterioration in our terms of trade. Norway’s high cost level may at 
the same time make it difficult for the business sector to shift to new markets.  
The economic geography of Norway will change over the next 10–15 years. The domestic 
cost level and low growth in Europe will bring pressure to bear on jobs and businesses in 
manufacturing  communities.  Job  losses  will  have  the  most  pronounced  effects  in  areas 
where  manufacturing  has  the  highest  concentration.  Entire  manufacturing  sectors  may  be 
lost. 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 11
Conclusion 
6. 
Let me conclude.  
The key policy rate was reduced substantially in order to mitigate the effects of the financial 
crisis on the Norwegian economy. This contributed to a pickup in economic growth. There 
are prospects that inflation over some time will remain fairly close to the inflation target. The 
downturn in Norway proved to be mild and unemployment has not moved up to a high level. 
Developments in Europe are also amplifying the uncertainty concerning the outlook for the 
Norwegian economy.  
Thank you for your attention. 
12 
 BIS Review 69/2010
