Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: European Union funded cooperation 
programme between the European Central Bank and the Central Bank of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Introductory  remarks  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of 
the European Central Bank, to the press conference on the announcement of the European 
Union funded cooperation programme between the European Central Bank and the Central 
Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sarajevo, 15 March 2010. 
 Dear Governor Kozarić,  
Dear Ambassador Kourkoulas, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be back in Sarajevo. My last visit was in 2007, when I attended a 
conference hosted by Governor Kozarić in celebration of the tenth anniversary of the Central 
Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina.  Today  we  have  the  pleasure  to  announce  the  start  on 
1 April  of  our  second  technical  cooperation  programme,  through  which  we  will  further  the 
European  integration  project  in  the  area  of  central  banking.  We  are  very  pleased  to  be 
working in close cooperation with the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina and welcome 
the opportunity to further intensify this cooperation. 
If we look back over the last couple of years, the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
was  the  first  central  bank  of  the  current  candidate  and  potential  candidate  countries  for 
joining  the  European  Union  to  work  closely  with  the  ECB  and  partner  central  banks  on  a 
needs-analysis  project.  This  work  was  carried  out  in  2007  and  resulted  in  a  list  of 
recommendations on how to bring the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina into line with 
EU central banking standards. Today, the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina is again 
taking the lead: it is the first central bank to announce a programme of technical cooperation 
following an earlier needs analysis. 
I would like to express my gratitude to the Delegation of the European Union to Bosnia and 
Herzegovina for supporting this programme, during which the European Central Bank (ECB) 
and seven central banks of the euro area will be working closely with our colleagues at the 
Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am sure we will, as usual, enjoy a very fruitful 
working relationship with our colleagues at the Delegation. 
We at the ECB, along with our partners, have a keen interest in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in 
the Western Balkans and in the EU’s neighbouring countries more generally. Our economies 
are closely linked, as are our cultures and history. The financial crisis has been a clear sign 
that  we  live  in  an  integrated  international  economy,  where  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions operate across borders and where the markets for financial instruments are truly 
global. Many of the banks that operate here in Bosnia and Herzegovina are owned by banks 
from the European Union. 
Links  between  financial  institutions  and  in  particular  ownership  links  have  for  years  been 
considered  to  be  a  stabilising  factor.  The  new  phenomenon  of  banks  from  the  old  EU 
Member States taking over or setting up banks in the new Member States or in the Western 
Balkans  was  considered  good  for  the  transfer  of  know-how.  The  solid  capital  base  of  the 
parent  institution  and  its  ability  to  support  the  subsidiary  in  case  of  difficulties  in  the  local 
market were highlighted as other advantages of such ownership. The current financial crisis 
has shown, however, that these links can create spillovers and that these spillovers between 
entities in a group can go both ways. 
In  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  we  have  seen  a  rather  stable  development  with,  so  far,  no 
apparent  destabilising  effects  resulting  from  such  ownerships.  I  believe  that  there  are  a 
BIS Review 30/2010 
 1
number of reasons for the success in maintaining stability. First, I think we have to recognise 
that the authorities in the countries hosting subsidiaries of banks from the European Union 
have applied and ensured compliance with adequate prudential rules that did not allow local 
banks  to  be  highly  leveraged.  Second,  the  so-called  “Vienna  Initiative”  or  European  Bank 
Coordination Initiative under the leadership of the IMF, [in which the ECB participates as an 
observer,] has been an important instrument for continuing the support of subsidiaries, and 
maintaining  the  functioning  of  local  markets.  Third,  I  believe  that  the  good  relationship 
between central banks and supervisory authorities has been instrumental in maintaining an 
open dialogue and in identifying solutions where such solutions were needed. Overall, let me 
emphasize that we have to remain vigilant and attentive to financial stability. We must work 
together  to  find  the  best  solutions.  These  have  to  be  global  and  regional;  they  certainly 
cannot be national in an integrated market. 
Let me now say a few words about the programme of technical cooperation with Governor 
Kozarić  and  his  team  that  we  are  announcing  today.  We  are  very  pleased  that  you, 
Mr Governor, on behalf of your board and staff, have invited the Eurosystem to work with you 
again on this technical cooperation programme. The aspirations of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
to join the European Union and its status as a potential EU candidate country imply the need 
to  adapt  to  EU  rules  and  standards.  Once  the  overall  conditions  are  met  and  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina joins the European Union, the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina will join 
the European System of Central Banks, and it is therefore also important to continue working 
towards compliance with the standards and rules relating to central banks. 
We have seen a lot of progress on many of the recommendations made by us in 2007. One 
example  is  the  publication  of  a  financial  stability  report,  which  you  have  today  on  your 
website.  The  areas  for  this  upcoming  technical  assistance  were  identified  by  you.  Your 
management and staff have been working closely with the ECB’s project management team 
– present here today – to define your specific goals and the working methods you will use. I 
think that the programme that will start on 1 April is very ambitious and I am confident that, 
together, we can achieve what we are setting out to do. 
During the next 18 months you will be working closely with experts from the ECB as well as 
with experts from national central banks of the Eurosystem. I am very pleased that we have 
found leading experts who will be able to support you in the areas of your choice. 
What will we be working on? First, there are three areas that were covered during the needs 
analysis programme: statistics; economic analysis and research; and financial stability. Then 
there  are  the  new  areas:  these  relate  to  legal  harmonisation,  improvements  in  your  IT 
resources, and coordination of your integration with the EU. 
There will be a need to coordinate efforts in the six different areas and for expert support in 
some areas on a day-to-day basis. This will be the main task of Ms Mara Vyborny, a central 
bank  expert  with  experience  from  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  and  the  European 
Central Bank, who will be our Resident Programme Coordinator here in Sarajevo. Mara is 
here today, and I would like to wish her every success in this undertaking. 
The analysis of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s current status in relation to 
reaching the targets of the programme and the ensuing guidance on how to do so will be 
carried  out  and  provided  by  the  ECB,  together  with  colleagues  from  the  national  central 
banks of Germany, Greece, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria and Slovenia. I would like 
to  warmly  greet  the  representatives  from  several  of  these  participating  central  banks  who 
have accompanied me here today. 
As  was  the  case  when  we  worked  together  in  2007,  I  am  sure  that  we  will  find  you, 
Mr Governor, and your staff to be highly motivated partners. From our side, rest assured that 
you will be able to rely upon our commitment and enthusiasm, both on the part of the ECB 
and of the partner central banks and their respective experts. 
I would like to wish all parties involved the very best of luck. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2010
