Heng Swee Keat: International reform agenda – Singapore’s challenges 
Opening  keynote  address  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary 
Authority of Singapore (MAS), at the Asian Banker Summit, Singapore, 19 April 2010. 
 Good morning. It gives me great pleasure to join you today at this 11th Asian Banker 
Introduction 
1. 
Summit. 
The inaugural Asian Banker Summit was held in Singapore about 10 years ago. At 
2. 
that time, Asia was staging a strong recovery from the financial crisis which shook the region 
in 1997. Today, we find ourselves at a similar inflection point. 
Emerging from the crisis 
3. 
The  worst  of  the  global  financial  crisis  appears  to  be  over.  Global  financial 
conditions  have  since  improved  markedly  and  prospects  for  the  world  economy  have 
brightened. Asia ex-Japan is leading the recovery, with its GDP already surpassing the pre-
crisis level by nearly 8%. For the whole of 2010, the region is expected to grow by 8% over 
the previous year. The Singapore economy has rebounded strongly and is expected to grow 
by 7–9% this year. 
4. 
While the immediate outlook is positive, we need to remain vigilant. The structural 
headwinds  to  growth  in  advanced  economies  remain.  The  transition  from  government-led 
stimulus to sustained private-sector driven growth may be more difficult in those economies 
which  face  rising  sovereign  debt  levels.  As  global  liquidity  conditions  are  normalised  
–  following  the  unprecedented  easing  of  interest  rates  by  major  central  banks  –  financial 
markets could experience bouts of volatility as a range of asset classes are repriced and this 
could impact negatively on various interest-sensitive industries.  
5. 
In  addition,  the  reform  of  the  global  financial  system  has  to  be  carefully  thought 
through,  calibrated  and  sequenced.  It  is  important  that  regulatory  reforms  do  not  become 
politicised,  with  a  rush  to  adopt  simple  rules  that  seem  to  solve  the  problems.  Specific 
measures,  each  of  which  is  sensible,  may  collectively  create  unintended  outcomes  and 
stymie  the  nascent  economic  recovery.  In  this  regard,  the  Basel  Committee’s  Quantitative 
Impact  Studies  will  provide  an  important  basis  for  us  to  take  a  more  holistic  view  of  the 
required changes. 
6. 
So far, most of the discussions have been framed around the theme of “how do we 
prevent a similar crisis from happening again.” Clearly, we must look back and learn from the 
crisis. But we must not fight the last war. We must also look forward. In the years ahead, 
significant  restructuring  of  the  global  economy  is  necessary.  Hence,  I  believe  a  more 
fundamental  question  to  frame  the  discussion  is:  “Given  the  economic  changes  and 
challenges  ahead,  how  do  we  make  the  global  financial  system  more  resilient  and  at  the 
same time supports economic restructuring and sustainable global growth?” 
It  is  therefore  critical  to  get  the  nexus  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real 
7. 
economy  right.  In  this  regard,  Asia’s  needs  are  likely  to  be  different  from  those  in  the 
advanced  economies.  Economies  in  rapid  transition  need  responsive  banking  and  capital 
markets.  Bankers  need  to  appreciate  the  changing  needs  of  the  economy,  build  new 
capabilities  and  develop  new  products  and  services,  to  support  the  needs  of  companies, 
large and small, in both mature and new industries. The financial industry needs to build up 
capabilities to understand the requirements of new industries in the technology and services 
arena,  and  to  efficiently  fund  long  term  infrastructure  needs.  To  sustain  Asia’s  growth 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 1
trajectory,  we  need  to  further  develop  and  deepen  national  financial  systems  and  regional 
financial integration. MAS is studying several ideas in these areas, and we look forward to 
working with our counterparts in the region and with the industry to advance this. 
8. 
Let  me  now  share  the measures  that  MAS  is  taking  to  respond  to  the  challenges 
from  the  international  reform  agenda  and  the  evolving  new  financial  landscape.  Our 
measures are based on three key pillars. 
Sensible rules 
9. 
The first pillar is establishing sensible rules. MAS seeks to establish sound rules of a 
high standard that allows well-managed risk taking and innovation, and which emphasises 
the stable and sustainable development of the financial services sector. The effectiveness of 
a regulatory framework is not determined by whether it is stringent enough to prevent any 
kind  of  shortcoming  or  failure  of  any  firm.  Neither  is  it  determined  by  how  dynamic  and 
innovative  the  financial  services  sector  is.  A  regulatory  framework  focused  on  stringency 
alone  would  impose  undue  costs  and  constrain  innovation  without  the  assurance  that  it 
would  be  effective.  A  regulatory  framework  focused  on  dynamism  alone  may  not  offer 
sufficient  protection  to  investors,  depositors  and  customers,  and  may  experience  more 
disruptive consequences in a crisis.  
10. 
MAS’ approach to rule-making is outcome-focused. This recognises that the design 
of regulation should take into account market realities so that unnecessary disruption to well-
functioning  markets  is  minimised.  For  example,  in  current  proposals  for  a  new  liquidity 
framework  for  banks,  having  too  narrow  a  definition  of  acceptable  liquid  assets  is  likely  to 
adversely  affect  the  operations  of  banks  in  countries  without  an  active  sovereign  debt 
issuance programme. We believe that there is a good case for high quality, widely circulated 
non-sovereign  debt  to  be  included  as  acceptable  liquid  assets,  without  undermining  the 
prudential  intent  of  the  new  liquidity  rules.  In  this  regard,  the  results  of  the  Quantitative 
Impact Study conducted by the Basel Committee will have to be studied carefully in finalising 
the list of eligible liquid assets. 
11. 
Having outcome-focused rule-making also means that where appropriate, MAS may 
seek to reign in potential risk-spots through more prescriptive rules, even if such rules are not 
commonly  accepted  international  best  practices.  A  good  example  would  be  the  macro-
prudential rules in some Asian countries, including Singapore, to cap loan-to-value ratios for 
mortgages,  which  are  not  common  in  the  US  and  Europe.  In  Singapore,  we  have  also 
disallowed  innovative  financing  schemes  for  mortgages.  Drawing  such  “bright  lines”  in 
regulation  –  simple,  clear  “out-of-bound”  markers  –  has  been  very  useful  in  targeting 
excessive build-up of risks in certain situations. 
Our  approach  to  rule-making  has  to  strike  the  right  balance  of  having  a  financial 
12. 
system that is both sound and progressive, so that it can fulfill its function as a conduit of 
capital and a facilitator of trade and economic activity. MAS will shortly publish a monograph 
on our approach to effective regulation. 
Effective supervision 
13. 
The second pillar is effective supervision. Globally, there has been much discussion 
on  having  better  rules,  but  not  enough  on  strengthening  day-to-day  micro  prudential 
supervision. 
14. 
An eminent ex-central banker once likened this financial crisis to a massive accident 
on the highway. To prevent future accidents, if we assess that all drivers are irresponsible, 
we would have to drastically reduce the overall speed limit. But if we assess that we could 
also  do  a  better  job  to  take  errant  drivers  to  task  early,  we  would  have  to  also  focus  on 
strengthening  the  effectiveness  of  enforcement.  We  can  then  afford  to  be  more  measured 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2010
and  targeted  in  our  rule-making.  I  believe  reinforcing  sensible  rules  with  good  supervisory 
judgements achieves a better outcome than acting on just one or the other. 
15. 
However, effective supervision is not easy. The spectrum of supervisory issues will 
continue to expand and evolve. The economic and financial landscapes are changing rapidly, 
and interactions remain complex even as we seek to simplify the system. 
Globally, financial supervisors are responding to this challenge in two ways. 
16. 
17. 
First, many  countries are now considering changes to the institutional structure of 
their supervisory authorities in the aftermath of the crisis. In this regard, MAS is rather unique 
in  combining  financial  sector  regulation  and  supervision,  central  banking  and  development 
responsibilities under one agency. This structure has served us well. Building on this, MAS 
recently implemented a revised organisation structure. Aimed at broadening and deepening 
our  management  bench,  this  structure  would  also  serve  to  enhance  our  ability  to  respond 
more effectively to supervisory challenges ahead, and to derive greater synergies from the 
combined structure. 
Second, many financial supervisors are stepping up their investment in building up 
18. 
and enhancing their supervisory resources and capabilities. The crisis has underscored the 
need  for  financial  supervisory  authorities  to  have  adequate and  well-trained  staff,  so  as  to 
cope  with  the  demands  of  supervising  financial  institutions  in  a  fast-moving,  complex  and 
challenging operating environment. To maintain a high degree of confidence in the quality of 
supervision, we recently set up the MAS Academy and devote considerable resources into 
training and developing our central banking and supervisory staff. 
Working in partnership with industry: shared outcomes and responsibility 
19. 
However, sensible rules and effective supervision are not enough. We need a third 
pillar  of  partnership,  where  authorities  and  financial  institutions  each  take  on  specific 
responsibilities to develop a shared ownership of supervisory outcomes. Indeed, the design 
of regulation and the supervisory approach taken should allow for financial institutions to take 
on  responsibility  in  contributing  towards  desired  supervisory  outcomes  where  appropriate. 
Let  me  highlight  two  of  these  areas,  namely  the  industry’s  role  in  improving  corporate 
governance and in capability building. 
Corporate governance 
One lesson from the recent crisis is that good corporate governance matters. The 
20. 
failure  by  Boards 
to  exercise  effective  risk  management  oversight  had  damaging 
consequences for many institutions. Boards play a vital role in safeguarding the safety and 
soundness of their institutions by setting the risk appetite, remuneration policies and strategic 
direction, amongst others. For directors to discharge their responsibilities, they have to have 
the requisite knowledge, skills and experience. 
21. 
MAS  will  place  increasing  emphasis  on  the  quality  of  the  board  of  directors  of 
financial 
institutions.  Among 
to  enhance  our  Corporate  Governance 
Framework for locally incorporated banks and significant life insurers is the requirement for 
financial institutions to assess the current skills of their Boards on an ongoing basis, and to 
establish  a  continuing  development  programme  for  all  their  directors.  Given  the  important 
role that the banking industry plays in our economy, MAS is also considering developing a 
mandatory training programme for bank directors. 
22. 
But let me add that rules, and mechanical compliance with rules, can only go so far 
in encouraging good corporate governance in organisations. What matters most is for Board 
and  management  members  to  embrace  not  just  the  letter  of  the  rules  but  the  spirit  of  the 
rules,  to  take  ownership  of  outcomes,  and  to  internalise  the  essence  of  these  rules  in  the 
ethos  and  practices  of  the  organisation.  Corporate  governance  in  our  financial  institutions 
the  proposals 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 3
have  improved  over  the  years.  We  must  continue  this  partnership  between  the  authorities 
and the corporate sector to seek continual improvements in corporate governance which will 
underpin Singapore’s reputation as a trusted financial and business hub. 
Capability building 
23. 
The  other  area  for  collaborative  partnership  is  in  building  up  the  capabilities  of 
financial industry professionals. Asia’s financial services industry is likely to grow rapidly. If 
this is not underpinned by an equally rapid growth of capabilities, whether it is in the front 
office  or  the  mid-back  office,  we  risk  a  major  disruption  ahead.  It  is  essential  that  we  act 
premptively to address this. 
24. 
MAS has been working closely with the industry and with organisations such as the 
Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  (IBF)  and  the  Workforce  Development  Agency  (WDA)  to 
increase the supply of skilled talent and to build professional capacity. It is heartening to see 
that the industry-led initiative in developing the Financial Industry Competency Standards or 
FICS for short is gaining traction, and despite the financial crisis, investment in training has 
not become an easy target for cost-cutting measures. 
25. 
Such  efforts  should  continue  apace.  Now  that  financial  conditions  have  improved 
and firms are hiring again, financial institutions must invest in recruiting and developing their 
own  staff.  Taking  the  easy  option  of  poaching  staff  from  competitors  to  meet  business 
expansion will undermine the collective strength of the industry in the long term, with adverse 
consequences on growth prospects for the industry as a whole. 
26. 
To  complement  industry  efforts  in  capability  building,  MAS  would  be  prepared  to 
consider  regulatory  initiatives  to  bring  about  a better-trained  and  more  competent  financial 
sector workforce. In the area of consumer banking, for example, some industry players have 
suggested  the  idea  of  a  national  examination  to  test  the  competencies  of  relationship 
managers serving customers in this segment. This could include topics such as ethics and 
conduct, so as to further promote fair dealing outcomes between industry players and end-
consumers.  MAS  is  now  studying  the  idea  and  will  work  with  the  industry  to  develop  this 
further. 
Conclusion 
27. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  Asia’s  financial  systems  and  institutions  are  facing 
considerably  less  pressure  for  financial  restructuring  and  regulatory  reform  in  the  current 
crisis. While Asia has not emerged unscathed, significant structural changes made after the 
Asian  Financial  Crisis  have  enabled  the  region’s  financial  systems  to  weather  this  crisis 
relatively well. 
28. 
But there is no room for complacency. Even as we recognise the need to continue 
development of our financial markets, considerable risks and policy challenges still remain 
for  the  region.  MAS  will  continue  with  our  three  pillar  approach  of  sensible  rule-making, 
effective supervision and partnership to achieve the desired outcome. 
29.  We  should  take  advantage  of  the  global  reform  agenda  to  strengthen  our  regulatory 
and supervisory regimes, consistent with international standards and best practices, but at 
the same time, doing it in a manner that is sensitive to our regional environment and needs. I 
am confident that with financial supervisors and the industry working together in partnership, 
we can further enhance the resilience of our financial system to better serve the economic 
aspirations of Asians going forward. I wish you a fruitful conference. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2010
