Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The Euro Exhibition at the Banque centrale 
du Luxembourg 
Address by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, on the occasion of the opening ceremony of the Euro Exhibition at the Banque 
centrale du Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 19 April 2010. 
 Dear Governor Mersch, 
Your excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  at  the  numismatic  centre  of  the  Banque  centrale  du 
Luxembourg  for  the  opening  of  the  Euro  Exhibition,  which  is  dedicated  to  a  young  and 
important currency: the euro.  
The majority of the euro area citizens have now been enjoying their new currency – the euro – 
for eight years. Back in 2001, prior to the euro cash changeover, a great deal of effort was 
made  to  familiarise  the  public  with  the  denominations,  designs  and  security  features  of  the 
euro banknotes and coins. The euro has since become the most tangible symbol of European 
integration  and  has  brought  many  advantages.  For  example,  in  Luxembourg  and  its 
neighbouring countries, where cross-border commuting is a daily phenomenon, it has made 
life a lot easier as there is no longer a need to change money. Moreover, when shopping in 
Luxembourg you can pay for clothes using euro banknotes withdrawn from a cash machine in 
Belgium, or when buying a drink in France you can use euro coins that you received during a 
trip  to  Germany.  A  further  advantage  is  that  the  euro  has  supported  the  completion  of  the 
Single  Market  and  has  removed  the  risk  of  fluctuation  between  the  currencies  of  those  EU 
Member States that now belong to the euro area. 
This year the European Central Bank (ECB), in collaboration with the national central banks 
of  Belgium,  France,  Germany  and  Luxembourg,  successfully  launched  a  cross-border 
educational initiative for schoolchildren aged nine to 12. These children belong to the “euro 
generation”: they have, most probably, never used their old national currencies and now take 
the advantages of the euro for granted. The central banks gave presentations in a number of 
schools and their pupils were encouraged to participate in the “Euro run” competition on the 
ECB’s website. The classes of the winning players from each country were then invited to 
attend the final of the competition, which was held here this afternoon. I hear that it was a 
very lively event and I am happy that the players and their supporters enjoyed it so much.  
The  main  objective  of  the  Euro  Exhibition,  now  on  display  in  its  sixth  location,  is  to  give 
citizens  of  all  ages  the  opportunity  to  learn  about  the  euro.  The  exhibition  provides 
information  on  the  designs  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins.  The  seven  different 
denominations  of  the  euro  banknotes  represent  our  common  heritage,  showing  different 
European architectural styles from different ages. The banknotes also depict bridges, which 
symbolise  the  connection  between  the  people  of  Europe.  The  exhibition  also  explains  the 
history of money, as well as the technologically advanced security features, which make the 
banknotes difficult to forge, but counterfeits easy to recognise. Genuine and fake banknotes 
are on display, and the exhibition also comprises interactive elements and films. In addition, 
there is a kids’ corner, which features some more fun ways of learning about the euro, but is 
by no means only for children!  
Dear Governor Mersch, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, I sincerely hope that you 
will enjoy your visit to the Euro Exhibition. It is a pleasure for me to declare the exhibition 
open. 
BIS Review 52/2010 
 1
