Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Policy challenges facing the euro area 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Distinguished  Speaker  Seminar,  European  Economic  and  Financial 
Centre, London, 23 July 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  have  been  invited  to  speak  here  today  by  the  European 
Economic and Financial Centre.  
My topic today will be the policy challenges facing the euro area, which is a rich topic: in fact, 
there is no shortage of challenges for us. What started as financial turmoil in August 2007 
turned  into  a  global  financial  crisis  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September 
2008.  More  recently  we  have  witnessed  an  exacerbation  of  sovereign  debt  concerns.  The 
economic outlook is still surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty. However, a path out of 
the worst financial crisis of our generation seems to be in sight, and there are signs that a 
recovery  is  under  way.  Yet,  the  return  to  normality  could  be  gradual.  It  requires  support. 
Therefore, we need to assess all developments carefully.  
As  Albert  Einstein  once  said,  we  have  to  “Learn  from  yesterday,  live  for  today,  hope  for 
tomorrow. The important thing is not to stop questioning”. In fact, we have learnt a lot from 
the past few years. Facing the current challenges and addressing them now and in the future 
will  be  key  to  more  sustainable  growth,  more  stable  financial  markets  and  an  even  more 
successful euro.  
I will start with the achievements of the euro and the single monetary policy, particularly in 
recent years. I will then set out some of the main challenges ahead, along with the remedies 
and policy priorities.  
The ECB’s actions during the crisis 
I.  
The euro area has been the focus of a great deal of attention in the last few weeks. But let 
me be frank: the euro itself is not the issue. Quite the contrary, the euro is an achievement 
that has met with great success.  
The introduction of the euro has resulted in deeper financial and economic integration with 
great benefits for the economy of the euro area as a whole and beyond. Intra-euro area trade 
in  goods  and  services  has  increased  notably.  The  “home  bias”  in  financial  markets  has 
declined  steadily.  And,  since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  an  increasing  share  of  foreign  direct 
investments are taking place between euro area countries. 
Perhaps the most important benefit of the euro has been the success of the monetary policy 
framework for the 16 – soon to be 17 – countries participating in the common currency. The 
framework  has  secured  price  stability  for  the  euro  area  and  inflationary  expectations  have 
remained well anchored, even during the crisis.  
Moreover, from the start of the financial turmoil in August 2007 the ECB and the Eurosystem 
have  proven  to  be  very  effective  in  implementing  the  policies  needed  –  both  conventional 
and unconventional policies. In fact, the outcomes could have been far worse – both globally 
and across the euro area – without the prompt actions of the ECB and the Eurosystem. I will 
briefly  discuss  what  the  ECB  has  done  in  response  to  the  challenges  faced,  thereby, 
contributing to setting the stage for a sound recovery in Europe.  
BIS Review 101/2010 
 1
launched 
First, nearly three years ago, amid the initial strong signs of problems in the money markets 
around the world on 9 August 2007, the ECB acted quickly to address the severe tensions in 
the interbank market.  
Second,  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  on  15  September  2008  the  ECB  acted 
decisively.  In  terms  of  conventional  monetary  policy  actions,  we  reduced  our  key  interest 
rates  to  unprecedented  low  levels.  In  addition,  we  introduced  a  series  of  non-standard 
measures to support credit provision by banks to the euro area economy. These measures, 
which we call “enhanced credit support”, essentially comprised five elements: we lengthened 
the maximum maturity of refinancing operations, we extended the list of eligible collateral, we 
provided  liquidity  in  foreign  currencies,  we  initiated  a  covered  bond  purchase  programme 
and, first and foremost, we provided unlimited liquidity in all refinancing operations at a fixed 
rate.  
Third,  in  early  May  this  year  renewed  market  tensions  emerged  in  some  segments  of  the 
euro  area  debt  securities  markets.  As  these  tensions  hampered  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism,  we 
the  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP), 
intervening  in  the  debt  securities  markets  to  support  the  proper  transmission  of  monetary 
policy impulses to the wider economy and, ultimately, to the general price level.  
These  measures  have  proven  to  be  extremely  important  for  the  euro  area  economy, 
shielding it from far worse outcomes. Let me give you some illustrations of the effectiveness 
and the success of our actions.  
First,  following  the  reduction  in  key  ECB  interest  rates  and  backed  by  our  extraordinary 
liquidity support to euro area banks, money market rates decreased considerably from their 
peak levels recorded in 2008. Spreads between secured and unsecured money market rates 
declined significantly: for example, the spread between the three-month EURIBOR and the 
three-month overnight index swap rate decreased by 170 basis points from its peak recorded 
in October 2008, falling to about 30 basis points one year later and remaining close to this 
level thereafter. 
Second,  the  enhanced  credit  support  measures,  including  the  covered  bond  purchase 
programme, contributed decisively to improving the funding situation of euro area banks. For 
instance, issuance and secondary market activity for covered bonds began to revive in mid-
2009, and bank bond spreads for unsecured funding have fallen considerably.  
Moreover,  the  improved  funding  of  banks  appears  to  have  contributed  to  a  smooth  pass-
through of our policy rate decreases to bank lending rates. In parallel to the 325 basis point 
reduction  in  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  since  October  2008,  average  short-term  rates  on 
loans  to  households  for  house  purchase  and  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  have 
declined  by  around  310  basis  points  and  340  basis  points  respectively.  In  addition, 
improvements in the liquidity situation of banks and their access to market funding have led 
to  a  loosening  of  credit  standards  for  loans  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations 
since the start of 2009, although credit standards for non-financial corporations have picked 
up somewhat recently.  
And,  third,  the  inception  of  our  Securities  Markets  Programme  in  early  May  has  helped  to 
ease  considerably  the  tensions  in  euro  area  government  debt  markets.  Sovereign  bond 
spreads and credit default swap (CDS) premia have fallen significantly from the peak levels 
that they reached in the first week of May. The dispersion across euro area government bond 
yields remains elevated, but it is somewhat below the peak levels recorded in the first week 
of May. Together with the commitments made by many euro area governments with respect 
to their public finances, the ECB’s purchases should contribute to further improvements in 
these markets.  
Overall, I believe that the bold and decisive measures that we have taken since autumn 2007 
have  been  instrumental  in  preventing  dramatic  disruptions  in  the  functioning  of  specific 
financial market segments. We have avoided severe impairments in the provision of credit to 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2010
firms and households, and have prepared the ground for a gradual recovery of the euro area 
economy from the worst cyclical downturn experienced since the Great Depression. Indeed, 
after a period of sharp decline, the outlook for growth is improving. Business and consumer 
confidence indicators have trended upwards over the last few quarters and the Eurosystem 
staff macroeconomic projections, as well as those of other organisations, foresee a further 
rebound in GDP growth in 2010 and 2011.  
The outlook for growth is also supported by the improvements that we see in the financial 
market.  The  banking  sector  appears  to  be  well  on  the  road  to  recovery.  Capital  positions 
have strengthened, the profit situation has improved, with loan losses peaking last year, and, 
notwithstanding  the  recent  renewed  tensions,  market-based  indicators  have  improved 
broadly. Moreover, the redemption of the €440 billion 12-month liquidity operation has only 
led to additional demand in the ECB’s shorter-term operations of less than half that amount. 
The resulting withdrawal of €240 billion of central bank liquidity went very smoothly overall, 
without any renewed tensions in the interbank money market.  
The euro area’s main challenges  
III.  
This positive outlook and the many achievements over the last decade notwithstanding, the 
crisis  has  exposed  various  challenges  facing  the  euro  area.  In  my  view,  there  are  three 
challenges that deserve particular attention.  
1.  The  first  challenge  pertains  to  cross-country  differences  in  real  economic 
performance.  Over  the  past  few  years  we  have  seen  moderate  growth  and  productivity 
developments  in  some  euro  area  countries  and  diverging  competitiveness  developments 
across the euro area. Euro area countries still have to implement further structural reforms – 
albeit to varying extents. Such reforms will lead to higher growth and employment and can 
contribute to less divergence in developments across countries.  
In fact, we have long known that structural reforms pay off. For instance, measures which 
increase  competition  in  consumer  markets  can  curtail  monopoly  rents  and  lead  to  higher 
employment  and  output.  The  introduction  of  the  Single  Market  has  decreased  monopoly 
rents by a quarter.1 Studies have found that this may also have led to an increase in potential 
output in the range of 5%–10%.2 Labour market reforms also have an impact. For instance, 
adjusting  the  unemployment  benefit  replacement  ratio  by  5  percentage  points  has  been 
estimated to give rise to an increase of 1.5% in output and 1.7% in employment over a period 
of five years.  
2. The second challenge is posed by public finances in euro area countries. Since the 
launch of the euro we have witnessed cross-country differences in the enforcement of fiscal 
discipline. While fiscal developments since the launch of the euro have been much better, 
overall, than developments in the period prior to the start of economic and monetary union 
(EMU), there has only been a limited reduction in the overall level of indebtedness across the 
euro area [Euro area aggregate in % of GDP: government budget balance: 1995: –5.0, 2007: 
–0.6,  2009:  –6.3,  2011:  –6.1;  government  gross  debt:  1995:  72.5,  2007:  66.0,  2009:  78.7, 
2011:  88.5].  Moreover,  some  countries  did  not  comply  with  their  commitments  under  the 
Stability and Growth Pact even in good times.  
                                                 
1   H. Badinger, 2007, “Has the EU’s Single Market Programme fostered competition? Testing for a decrease in 
mark-up ratios in EU industries”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 69(4), pp. 497–519. 
2   See W. Roeger, J. Varga and J. in’t Veld, 2008, “Structural reforms in the EU: a simulation-based analysis 
using  the  QUEST  model  with  endogenous  growth”,  European  Commission  Economic  Papers,  No  351;  and 
T. Bayoumi,  D.  Laxton,  P.  Pesenti,  2004,  “Benefits  and  spillovers  of  greater  competition  in  Europe:  a 
macroeconomic assessment”, European Central Bank Working Paper No 341. 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 3
3. The third challenge is posed by the lack of transparency and regulation in financial 
markets. In many respects, the recent crisis can be seen as the direct result of vulnerabilities 
and imbalances in the financial system. The risks stemming from financial innovations were 
compounded by insufficient risk management and adverse incentives. We have all seen the 
negative effects on economies around the globe. A key lesson is that systemic risks were 
largely misunderstood and thus underestimated.  
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  concrete  efforts  will  be  needed  to  address  all  three 
challenges and to sustain the recovery, rendering it solid, sustainable and long lasting. I will 
now turn to the remedies and policy actions needed to address these challenges.  
Addressing the challenges  
IV.  
For  the  first  challenge,  improving  real  economic  performance,  there  are  at  least  three 
policy priorities.  
 
First, policies are needed which enhance competition and innovation to speed up 
restructuring  and  investment,  thus  creating  new  business  opportunities.  Increased 
labour  market  flexibility,  as  well  as  investment  in  education  and  research,  are 
required 
to  create  employment  opportunities  and  enhance  competitiveness. 
Restructuring  of  the  banking  sector  to  establish  solid  business  models,  better  risk 
management and increased transparency will be essential.  
Second,  there  is  a  need  to  safeguard  and  strengthen  the  Single  Market  in 
Europe.  While  the  Single  Market  is  at  an  advanced  stage,  there  is  still  room  for 
further  progress.  A  clear  example  is  the  energy  market,  where  greater  integration 
would help to minimise costs and prices, improve energy security and support the 
wider use of renewable energy sources.3 Another example is the Single Market for 
services.  Implementing  the  internal  European  services  market  would  undoubtedly 
bring  great  benefits  in  terms  of  productivity  and  employment  gains.  One  specific 
example in this respect is the completion of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA), 
with  harmonised  retail  payment  instruments  and  standards  which  can  bring 
tremendous cost savings to companies and consumers.  
Third,  we  need  to  invest  in  education  and  technologies.  The  global  economic 
slowdown has had a severe impact on labour markets. Since early 2008 the number 
of unemployed people in the euro area has risen by over 4½ million. Policies aimed 
at improving labour market flexibility need to be combined with measures to raise 
the  level  of  participation  and  the  skill  level  of  the  labour  force.  While  some  of  the 
policy measures designed to maintain employment through the crisis have proven 
effective,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  these  temporary  support  measures  do  not 
become permanent.  
  For  the  second  challenge,  securing  sound  national  public  finances,  fiscal  discipline  is 
essential. It is true that the fiscal stimulus measures have made a contribution equivalent to 
roughly  2%  of  GDP  in  the  euro  area  (not  counting  off-balance-sheet  measures  and  the 
economic  support  provided  by  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers)  and,  therefore,  has  helped  to 
                                                 
3   On 7 June 2010 the ECB released the 2010 Structural Issues Report on energy markets and the euro area 
macroeconomy. It notes “Price levels vary  across energy  markets owing to taxes, energy  policies  and cost 
structures. Differences in competition and market concentration as well as the degree of vertical integration 
also  exert  an  influence.  Although  European  energy  markets  have  been  liberalised  and  competition  has 
increased, de facto competition still remains lower than de jure competition. Pre-tax price dispersion remains 
sizeable in electricity and gas markets. Nonetheless, evidence can be found that past market liberalisation has 
supported price reduction in these sectors. Further reforms towards a more competitive environment creating 
a level playing field across the euro area would diminish price dispersion and benefit consumers and firms”. 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2010
soften the economic impact of the crisis. But with the economic outlook improving, it is now 
time to phase out these special measures and to start fiscal consolidation, in line with the 
recommendations made in the country-specific excessive deficit procedures. For a number of 
countries, this process should start in 2010 and for the remainder it should start in 2011 at 
the latest.  
Hence,  we  welcome  the  fact  that  a  number  of  euro  area  governments  have  now  adopted 
fiscal consolidation measures and set out ambitious fiscal targets. On 7 June the euro area 
finance  ministers  agreed  on  the  spring  2010  orientations  for  fiscal  policies  in  euro  area 
countries.  These  decisive  actions  by  euro  area  governments  have  reassured  markets,  as 
reflected  in  the  fact  that  all  new  issuances  of  government  debt  have  been  successfully 
concluded and have met with adequate demand.  
In this context, coordinated action at the European level is essential. Each country must fulfil 
its  responsibilities  and  European  governments  must  work  together.  This  is  in  line  with  the 
conclusions of the latest G20 meeting in Toronto, where the G20 economies committed to 
fiscal plans that will at least halve deficits by 2013 and stabilise or reduce government debt-
to-GDP ratios by 2016. This should support a sound and sustainable economic recovery on a 
global level. 
Budgetary surveillance in Europe also needs to be improved. It is essential that governance 
and  enforcement  structures  in  the  economic  policy  framework  of  the  euro  area  be 
strengthened. Reinforcing surveillance of national budgetary policies and ensuring rigorous 
compliance with the fiscal rules will be key. Furthermore, it is extremely important that close 
oversight of relative competitiveness developments be implemented and that a surveillance 
mechanism be established to address imbalances in the euro area countries.  
For the third challenge, undertaking a comprehensive reform of the financial sector and 
of  financial  regulation  with  the  aim  of  securing  financial  stability,  the  responsible 
authorities  need  to  build  a  safer  financial  system  by  enhancing  their  financial  sector 
surveillance, both at a micro-prudential and macro-prudential level. Financial institutions also 
play  a  decisive  role,  as  they  have  to  improve  their  risk  management  practices.  A  key 
challenge for policy-makers will be to design appropriate measures to enhance the stability of 
the financial system without imposing restrictions that would unnecessarily hamper financial 
innovation and reduce the efficiency of the system.  
At the micro-prudential level, several initiatives are now under way to create more effective 
supervisory regulation, taking into account the lessons learnt from the crisis. The proposals 
of  the  Basel  Committee  –  which  are  known  as  “Basel  III”  –  aim  to  enhance  capital  and 
liquidity regulation to improve loss absorption capacity, mitigate pro-cyclicality and increase 
resilience  to  shocks.  These  measures  –  when  phased  in  gradually  as  the  economy 
recovers – will contribute to long-term economic growth, not least by helping to prevent the 
high costs of a crisis such as we are currently experiencing.  
An  effective  macro-prudential  framework  aims  to  deliver  a  thorough  analysis  of  systemic 
risks, formulate appropriate policies to address such risks, identify, in a timely fashion, the 
emergence and build-up of vulnerabilities, and decide on effective (pre-emptive) intervention. 
In this respect, as you are all well aware, the individual results of the stress test exercise for 
banks in the EU carried out by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) in 
cooperation  with  the  ECB  are  expected  to  be  published  later  today.  As  previously 
announced, appropriate action will have to be taken where needed. On the one hand, sound 
balance sheets, effective risk management and transparent, robust business models are key 
to  strengthening  banks’  resilience  to  shocks  and  to  ensuring  adequate  access  to  finance, 
thereby laying the foundations for sustainable growth, job creation and financial stability. On 
the  other  hand,  stress  tests  contribute  to  the  effectiveness  of  financial  intermediation  by 
providing  more  information  about  the  condition  of  financial  institutions  and  of  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole.  By  combining  transparency  regarding  the  results  of  stress  tests  with 
appropriate  measures  to  deal  with  potential  weaknesses,  European  authorities  will  send  a 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 5
clear message to market participants about the resilience of the financial system. Of course, I 
cannot say more about the details of the results until they are published later today.  
Concluding remarks 
To  conclude,  looking  back,  the  ECB  has  been  credible  in  delivering  price  stability  even 
throughout  the  recent  crisis  and  in  the  current  challenging  period.  The  policy  measures 
implemented  by  the  ECB  were  indispensable  to  support the  functioning  of  the  euro  area’s 
banking sector. They have supported credit flows to the economy and thus dampened the 
effects of the crisis to the extent possible. Even worse outcomes were prevented.  
Looking ahead, we now need to learn lessons and focus on what is needed to ensure that 
the recovery is sound and sustainable. Price stability is the central contribution that monetary 
policy can make to economic growth, job creation, and financial stability.  
Several challenges remain. While we have long understood the national costs of failure to 
reform, now we know that knock-on effects can occur of neglecting fiscal sustainability and 
there  are  financial  stability  implications  if  reforms  are  deferred  for  too  long.  Moreover,  the 
need to undertake product and labour market reforms to spur economic growth has grown 
tremendously.  
More  generally,  financial  stability  issues  will  be  a  major  focus  for  policy-makers.  Various 
central banks have been given new tasks and responsibilities in this domain. For example, 
the  ECB  will  contribute  to  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  which  will  conduct 
macro-prudential oversight at the European level. 
Ultimately,  central  banks  cannot  act  alone,  particularly  in  a  monetary  union.  Actions  are 
required to address all issues and challenges, and to spur long-term economic growth. We 
all have to work together. National governments, regulators and supervisors, as well as the 
private sector and the financial industry have to proceed with the difficult, but vital, measures 
required to ensure sustainable and sound economic growth and the stability of our financial 
system.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 101/2010
