Lucas Papademos: Financial integration, development and stability – 
lessons from the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference  “Financial  integration  and  stability:  the  legacy  of  the  crisis”  sponsored  and 
organised by the European Central Bank and the European Commission, Frankfurt am Main, 
12 April 2010. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Welcome to the European Central Bank! And welcome to this event which has been jointly 
organised by the European Commission and the ECB. The topic that we have chosen for this 
conference  is  the  relationship  between  financial  integration  and  financial  stability.  The 
integration of financial markets is an important policy objective of the EU because it fosters 
economic efficiency and growth. The Commission and the ECB have a common and keen 
interest in pursuing this objective. The Commission pursues the goal of financial integration 
in  Europe,  as  part  of  its  Single  Market  programme.  The  ECB  promotes  the  integration  of 
financial  markets  in  order  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  European  economy  but  also 
because  it  facilitates  the  smooth  and  balanced  transmission  of  the  single  monetary  policy 
and  increases  its  effectiveness.  Cooperation  between  European  institutions  is  not  always 
properly recognised or even known. Hence, organising this event jointly has a double aim: 
first,  to  advance  the  European  financial  integration  process  by  assessing  the  progress 
achieved  and  the  policies  pursued;  and,  second,  to  highlight  the  extent  of  cooperation 
between our two institutions in achieving common objectives. 
In my remarks, I would like to address two issues: First, I will highlight the interacting links 
between financial stability, on the one hand, and financial integration and development, on 
the other. And I will provide an overview of the effects of the crisis on financial integration 
and development, as well as of the role of the latter in the emergence of systemic risks. I will 
consider the processes of financial development and integration together, because, although 
conceptually they are distinct, they are related in practice and they have interacting links to 
financial stability. Second, I will focus on a more specific, but important and topical, issue: the 
impact  of  the  still  unfolding  crisis  on  the  integration  and  functioning  of  the  sovereign  and 
corporate bond markets in the euro area.  
The links between financial stability, integration and development 
II.  
The crisis has revealed a rather complex set of interdependencies between financial stability, 
integration  and  development.  In  general,  an  environment  of  financial  stability  and  the 
processes of financial integration and development are mutually reinforcing. The stability of 
the financial system does contribute to its development and integration. This is evident from 
the experience of the first eight years of EMU that were characterised by financial stability 
which  facilitated  a  steady  and  significant  progress  towards  more  financial  integration  and 
development.  
At the same time, and in the opposite direction, a more integrated and innovative financial 
sector  typically  enhances  competition,  facilitates  portfolio  diversification  and  access  to 
funding, improves risk-sharing opportunities and increases market liquidity. As a result, the 
shock-absorbing  capacity  of  the  financial  system  is  improved,  thereby  enhancing  financial 
stability.  
However,  the  crisis  demonstrated  that  a  highly  integrated  and  developed  financial  system 
does  not  always  and  necessarily  strengthen  financial  stability.  Under  certain  conditions, 
financial integration and certain forms of financial innovation can contribute to the build-up of 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 1
vulnerabilities and the emergence of systemic risks. In the years preceding the crisis, as the 
global  financial  system  evolved  at  a  rapid  pace,  the  proliferation  of  complex  and  opaque 
financial products, the development of innovative securitisation techniques, the emergence of 
inappropriate  incentive  structures,  the  increased  interconnectedness  of  markets  and 
institutions,  in  an  environment  of  enhanced  competitive  pressures  and  excessive  credit 
growth,  encouraged  risk-creation  and  risk-taking;  and  increased  the  scope  for  contagion 
across institutions, markets and borders. 
The  emergence  of  systemic  risks  and  the  eventual  eruption  of  the  crisis  were  also  the 
consequence of the fact that corporate governance, risk management, market infrastructures 
for  derivative  products  as  well  as  supervisory  practices  and  regulatory  frameworks  did  not 
keep up with the rapid transformation of the financial systems. 
What has been the impact of the crisis on financial integration and development? The crisis 
caused  severe  dysfunctionalities  in  several  financial  markets  and  had  adverse  effects  on 
development  and  integration  in  certain  market  segments.  The  issuance  and  trading  in  the 
most complex variants of asset-backed securities – like the CDOs – came virtually to a halt 
after  the  crisis  broke  out  and  the  markets  for  such  products  have  yet  to  revive.  Even  the 
interbank money market – the most highly integrated one in the euro area – showed signs of 
segmentation  after  August  2007,  which  intensified  in  September  2008.  The  ECB  Report 
assesses  in  detail  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  financial  integration  and  development  and  it 
examines, in particular, the extent to which cross-border integration has improved in various 
markets as they are returning to more normal conditions.  
Let me conclude by making two points regarding the policy implications of the crisis for the 
advancement  of  financial  integration  and  development.  The  crisis  has  provided  a  stressful 
but valuable test for financial innovation and cross-border integration, indicating what needs 
to be changed so as to reap the benefits of integration and development for efficiency and 
growth,  while  safeguarding  financial  stability,  by  addressing  potential  systemic  risks  that 
might  stem  from  these  processes.  The  recent  experience,  the  ongoing  policy  debate  and 
economic research converge on the need for greater transparency, reduced financial product 
complexity, improved corporate governance and more effective risk management. Moreover, 
the  crisis  revealed  the  need  for  a  strengthened  regulatory  framework,  enhanced  macro-
prudential  oversight,  intensified  micro-prudential  supervision  and  better  cross-border  crisis 
management and resolution regimes. The list is long, but it is vital that progress continues to 
be made on all relevant fronts. A lot has been achieved so far, but much more remains to be 
done. 
In particular, the global regulatory reform underway and the new EU supervisory framework 
will  greatly  contribute  to  both  financial  stability  and  increased  financial  integration.  The 
European System of Financial Supervisors will support financial integration by promoting a 
single set of micro-prudential rules and the equal treatment of market participants. In parallel, 
the European Systemic Risk Board will foster financial integration by safeguarding financial 
stability that allows market participants to better exploit cross-border opportunities. 
The impact of the crisis on the sovereign bond markets in the euro area 
III.  
Let me now turn to the second issue, namely the impact of the crisis on the sovereign bond 
markets in the euro area. This has been significant but heterogeneous, as demonstrated by 
diverging yield spreads. Moreover, it has varied over time reflecting the effects of different 
factors. 
The major phases in the movements in intra-euro area government bond yield differentials 
since the outbreak of the crisis are broadly familiar. (SLIDE 1) Therefore, I will abstain from a 
chronological  description  of  developments  and  will  focus  on  three  key  factors  that  shaped 
euro  area  sovereign  bond  spreads  at  different  stages:  First,  the  risk  transfer  from  the 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2010
financial system to the government sector; second, the importance of market liquidity premia; 
and third, the emergence of more country-specific sovereign credit risks.  
Risk transfer from the financial system to the government sector  
III.1  
In March 2008, euro area government bond spreads showed the first discernible increases 
since the beginning of the crisis in summer 2007. Thereafter, spreads abated somewhat but 
did  not  return  to  pre-crisis  levels.  Intra-euro  area  sovereign  bond  spreads  picked  up 
appreciably  after  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman,  reflecting  “flight  to  quality”,  but  they  widened 
substantially  in  October  2008,  when  EU  governments  announced  large  fiscal  stimulus 
packages  and  comprehensive  measures  to  support  financial  institutions.  These  measures 
led to higher government bond yields as market participants perceived that they induced a 
risk  transfer  from  the  banking  system  to  the  public  sector.  These  perceptions  were  also 
reflected in credit default swap (CDS) premia during this period. 
There were marked increases in CDS for government securities, while those on contracts for 
banks  decreased.  (SLIDE  2)  Moreover,  as  the  fiscal  burden  associated  with  the  financial 
system  support  measures  was  perceived  to  differ  across  countries,  sovereign  credit  risk 
premia increased to different degrees, leading to a widening of intra euro area government 
bond yield spreads.  
The bank rescue support packages also had a dynamic effect on sovereign credit spreads. 
As  analysed  in  a  recent  ECB  study1,  the  financial  system  support  measures  apparently 
brought  about  a  stronger 
to  shocks,  and 
correspondingly,  a  more  muted  reaction  of  bank  credit  spreads  to  the  same  disturbances. 
Hence,  after  October  2008,  the  general  intensification  of  financial  market  pressures  had 
stronger effects on sovereign credit spreads, while the “crisis sensitivity” of banks’ credit risk 
premia decreased. 
reaction  of  sovereign  credit  spreads 
The relevance of market liquidity premia  
III.2  
Besides credit risk premia, market liquidity premia have constituted an additional important 
determinant of the pricing of sovereign debt securities. Investors have been willing to accept 
a lower yield for those debt securities, which are readily convertible into cash. While the co-
movement  between  CDS  premia  and  sovereign  bond  yield  spreads  suggests  that  a  large 
part of the fluctuations in the latter during the crisis was due to changes in the relative pricing 
of  credit  risk,  other  factors  also  influenced  the pricing  of  government  securities.  (SLIDE  3) 
There  is  evidence  that  market  liquidity  conditions  played  a  vital  role  in  the  widening  of 
sovereign bond spreads during the crisis.  
This becomes apparent by taking a closer look at the French and German sovereign bond 
yield  spreads.  (SLIDE  4)  In  March  2009  the  difference  between  the  ten-year  bond  yields 
reached more than 50 basis points. Did this sizeable gap reflect different perceptions of the 
credit risk of these two AAA-rated sovereign issuers or did it reflect the effects of differences 
in market liquidity conditions? 
An answer is provided in the ECB Financial Integration Report by examining the difference in 
agency  bond  yield  spreads  in  these  two  countries.  Debt  securities  issued  by  the  French 
CADES and the German KfW would be expected to have the same risk characteristics as 
French and German government debt, respectively, since the debt securities issued by these 
two  agencies  are  fully  guaranteed  by  the  respective  governments.  It  turns  out  that,  in 
contrast to the government bond yield spreads, agency yield spreads remained remarkably 
stable. This suggests that there were no significant changes in the perceived relative credit 
                                                 
1   See J. Ejsing and W. Lemke (2009), “The Janus-Headed Salvation: Sovereign and Bank Credit Risk Premia 
during 2008–00”, ECB Working Paper No 1127. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 3
quality of the sovereign issuers, but market liquidity factors influenced favourably the German 
government bond yields.  
The role of individual sovereign issuers’ credit risk 
III.3  
Let me turn to the third factor that has shaped developments in the euro area government 
bond markets, namely country-specific sovereign credit risk. After reaching new peaks at the 
beginning of 2009, sovereign bond yield spreads have followed a downward trend, but with a 
few exceptions. (SLIDE 5) For some euro area Member States, notably Greece, they have 
widened again since mid-November 2009. 
The large and persistent increase in the spreads in the case of Greece has been driven by 
concerns regarding its long-term fiscal sustainability as well as worries about the country’s 
ability to refinance its maturing government debt this year. Following the announcement of 
additional fiscal consolidation measures by the Greek authorities in March and the statement 
by  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  of  the  Euro  Area  later  in  that  month,  Greek  bond 
spreads narrowed somewhat. But re-ignited market concerns on the macroeconomic outlook 
and the government’s refinancing requirements drove spreads substantially higher over the 
past few days. Contagion effects to other countries via the government bond markets have 
been limited so far. The statement on the support to Greece by Euro Area Member States 
issued yesterday had a significant favourable impact on the Greek sovereign spreads today. 
Overall,  government  bond  yield  spreads  in  some  countries  remain  at  relatively  elevated 
levels compared to their pre-crisis levels.  
The relation between corporate and sovereign credit risk premia 
III.4  
Before  concluding,  I  want  to  briefly  focus  on  the  relationship  between  sovereign  and 
corporate  credit  risk  premia.  Should  we  expect  adverse  spill-overs  from  developments  in 
sovereign  credit  spreads  to  the  relative  costs  of  corporate  financing  across  euro  area 
countries?  In  particular,  in  the  European  monetary  union  is  it  still  the  case  that  sovereign 
credit risk premia provide a lower bound for credit risk premia of corporations residing in the 
respective country? 
As  there  are  no  intra-euro  area  exchange  rate  risks  and  the  cross-country  money  market 
volatility  is  very  small,  these  sources  of  cross-country  differentials  in  risk  premia  are  not 
relevant. But there may be other channels of adverse spill-overs from the sovereign to the 
corporate bond markets: A country with significantly higher sovereign financing costs would 
need to reduce its fiscal deficit, and would be expected to take fiscal consolidation measures, 
including increases in corporate taxes. This would potentially dent into firms’ profits, worsen 
their credit risk assessment and drive up their credit risk premia.  
So  what  is  the  empirical  evidence  so  far?  During  several  phases  of  the  crisis,  bond  yield 
spreads  for  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  showed  distinct  co-movement  with  the 
respective sovereign bond yield spreads. This may be explained by common factors which 
affected  both  a  country’s  fiscal  position  and  its  firms’  profitability,  or  by  changes  in  risk 
perceptions that affected both types of credit spreads. 
However,  we  have  also  observed  episodes  of  decoupling  between  developments  in 
sovereign  and  corporate  credit  risk  premia.  Lately,  it  turned  out  that  sovereign  credit  risk 
premia (in terms of CDS spreads) did not always provide a floor for all corporations operating 
in  the  respective  country.  A  case  in  point  is  that  CDS  premia  of  several  euro  area 
telecommunication companies ranged above the respective sovereign CDS spreads in 2008 
and  early  2009,  but  this  relation  has  been  reversed  during  various  periods  thereafter. 
(SLIDE 6)  
The crisis has also shown that there are several channels through which deteriorating public 
finances and worsening sovereign credit risks can spread to the financial sector and affect 
the  credit  risk  of  financial  institutions.  Spreads  on  CDS  contracts  for  larger  banks  and  the 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2010
sovereign CDS for government securities of the countries where these banks are domiciled 
have moved together over the past six months. (SLIDE 7) Two snap-shots are shown on this 
chart,  one  on  30  September  2009  and  the  other  on  26  March  2010.  Between  these  two 
dates,  as  sovereign  CDS  spreads  rose,  so  did  bank  CDS  spreads,  and  in  some  cases 
substantially so. This important pass-through of sovereign credit risk to bank funding costs is 
in the opposite direction from the feedback observed in the fall of 2008, when bank credit 
risks  resulted  in  an  increase  of  sovereign  funding  costs,  when  governments  committed  to 
support their banking sectors. In assessing this evidence, we should keep in mind that the 
limited  market  liquidity  characterising  some  CDS  markets  suggests  particular  caution  in 
interpreting cross-country developments in CDS premia on government bonds. 
These  relationships  clearly  deserve  further  analysis  and  they  underscore  the  important 
interactions between the government and corporate sectors across the euro area countries 
despite the high degree of financial integration in the euro area.  
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  stress  three  points.  First,  developments  in  sovereign  yield 
spreads and CDS premia on government bonds should be interpreted with great caution with 
regard  to  their  implications  for  market  integration.  The  degree  of  integration  of  sovereign 
bond  markets  is  difficult  to  measure  and  assess.  Most  importantly,  in  a  monetary  union, 
sizeable  bond  yield  spreads  may  not  indicate  lack  of  market  integration  but  market 
participants’  judgement  on  relative  sovereign  credit  risks.  It  is  a  salient  feature  of  an 
integrated  bond  market  that  investors  can  easily  change  their  positions  among  different 
sovereign  securities  whenever  the  credit  risk  outlook  changes.  Hence,  a  widening  of 
sovereign  bond  yield  spreads,  reflecting  changes  in  perceived  credit  risks,  does  not 
necessarily  signal  a  reduced  degree  of  market  integration.  However,  at  the  same  time  it 
cannot be excluded that some fragmentation may indeed have taken place during the crisis, 
reflecting different market liquidity conditions, as I previously explained.  
Second,  looking  ahead,  the  cross-country  dispersion  of  price-based  indicators  of  financial 
integration in various markets is likely to reflect a different appreciation of risks across the EU 
compared with that prevailing before the crisis.  
Finally, it is important to recognise that despite the adverse temporary effects of the crisis on 
the integration of financial markets, the high degree of financial integration achieved in the 
euro area before the eruption of the crisis helped contain its impact on the financial system 
and the broader economy. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 5
SLIDE 1 
SLIDE 2 
  BIS Review 47/2010
  6 
 SLIDE 3 
SLIDE 4 
  BIS Review 47/2010 
   7
SLIDE 5 
SLIDE 6 
  BIS Review 47/2010
  8 
 SLIDE 7 
 9
BIS Review 47/2010 
 