 Philip Lowe: The development of Asia – risk and returns for Australia 
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, NatStats 
2010 Conference, Sydney, 16 September 2010.  
 I would like to thank Adam Cagliarini for his assistance in preparing this talk. 
It is a pleasure for me to be able to support the work of the Australian Bureau of Statistics 
(ABS) by participating in this year’s NatStats Conference. The conference itself is evidence 
of  the  ABS’s  commitment  to  high-quality  statistics.  It  is  also  evidence  of  the  Bureau’s 
commitment to making sure that its statistics remain relevant as the economy evolves over 
the years ahead.  
Today, I would like to talk about that expected evolution and some of the issues that it raises.  
My  central  thesis  has  two  elements.  The  first  is  that  the  medium-term  prospects  for  the 
Australian economy look to be more positive than they did some years back. This is partly 
the  result  of  policy  choices  that  have  been  made  within  Australia,  but  it  also  reflects  the 
development of the economies in Asia. The second element is that as Australia’s medium-
term prospects have improved, the risks facing the economy have also changed and these 
risks need to be managed. In my time today, I would like to explore both these elements.  
The medium term and the development of Asia 
As is now well understood, Australia has come through the global downturn in good shape. 
Not only has the business cycle here been relatively muted compared with elsewhere, but 
our  medium-term  prospects  look  to  be  brighter  than  those  of  most  other  advanced 
economies. They also look brighter than they did a decade ago.  
For  many  years  it  seemed  that  Australia  was  inexorably  slipping  down  the  global  league 
tables. The prices of our exports were gradually falling relative to the prices of our imports, 
and  there  was  little  optimism  that  this  would  change.  And  it  was  only  a  decade  ago  that 
Australia was viewed by some as an old-fashioned, low-tech economy, relying on its natural 
resources instead of developing new technologies.  
Today, things look quite different. While there are continuing uncertainties about the near-
term outlook, there is more optimism about medium-term prospects than there has been for 
some  time.  The  prices  of  commodities  have  risen  substantially.  Investment  in  Australia  is 
high and Australian assets are again viewed as attractive by international investors.  
I  have  talked  on  previous  occasions  about  the  factors  that  helped  Australia  through  the 
global downturn and I don’t plan to revisit those today. Rather, I want to focus on why this 
change in perceptions about medium-term prospects has occurred and, in particular, the role 
that the development of Asia has played.  
At a general level, the importance of Asia to Australia is now well understood. Despite this, it 
remains the case that the financial news from the United States and Europe dominates our 
newspapers and our airwaves. With this constant flow of information about the North Atlantic, 
it  is  sometimes  easy  to  forget  just  how  profound  –  and  important  to  Australia  –  are  the 
structural changes taking place in Asia.  
Two  of  these  changes  are  particularly  important.  These  are  the  twin  processes  of 
urbanisation and industrialisation. As the countries of Asia have urbanised and industrialised, 
the demand for infrastructure has grown very strongly. When people move to the cities, new 
dwellings need to be built, and as living standards rise, so too does the quality of dwellings 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 1
 constructed. The growth of urban centres also requires the building of communication and 
transport networks, with the demand for roads, bridges, railways etc rising.  
All  this  development  requires  raw  materials.  In  particular,  it  requires  steel  to  build  the 
apartments in which the new city dwellers live and to build the infrastructure that supports 
those  cities.  For  example,  a  typical  90m2  apartment  in  China  requires  about  six tonnes  of 
steel, and 10km of metropolitan subway requires around 75,000 tonnes. On average, every 
tonne of steel that is produced requires around 1.7 tonnes of iron ore and over half a tonne of 
coking coal, and Australia is in the fortunate position of having ample low-cost, high-quality 
supplies of both. And with higher energy consumption also a feature of industrialisation, we 
are in the fortunate position of having large reserves of natural gas.  
Not  surprisingly,  the  strong  growth  in  demand  for  raw  materials  in  Asia  has  led  to  a  large 
increase in the price of raw materials over the past decade. As a result, Australia’s terms of 
trade have increased very significantly and are now at their highest level since the spike in 
the early 1950s when wool prices soared due to the Korean War (Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
 These higher prices have raised the return to capital in the Australian resources sector, and 
the result has been a very large increase in investment. Indeed, Australia has become one of 
the  high-investment  countries  of  the  developed  world,  with  the  stock  of  physical  capital 
estimated to have increased at an average rate of around 5 per cent over recent years. By 
way of contrast, in many other advanced economies, including the United States, the level of 
investment has been only a little above that needed to offset the depreciation of the existing 
capital stock (Graph 2).  
2 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 Graph 2 
 When  discussing  the  impact  of  Asia  on  Australia  over  recent  years,  the  focus  has  rightly 
been on China. The transformation that has been occurring there is truly remarkable and it is 
reshaping the global economy. Over the past three decades, the proportion of the Chinese 
population living in urban centres has more than doubled to almost 45 per cent (Graph 3). 
While  there  have  been  a  couple  of  historical  examples  of  other  countries  urbanising  as 
quickly, the sheer number of people migrating to urban centres is unprecedented in human 
history  –  over  the  past  30 years,  nearly  400 million  Chinese  citizens  (almost  20  times  the 
population of Australia) have moved to cities. As a result, there are now around 170 Chinese 
cities with more than a million residents, compared with only around 35 in Europe. And the 
urbanisation process still has quite a long way to run, with another 300 to 400 million people 
expected to move from the country to the city over the next 20 years.  
Graph 3 
These  developments  in  China  are  being  closely  observed  in  Australia,  including  at  the 
Reserve  Bank.  A  decade  or  so  ago,  we  spent  a  lot  of  time  puzzling  over  why  quarterly 
 BIS Review 117/2010 
 3
 movements  in  Australian  GDP  were  so  highly  correlated  with  quarterly  movements  in  US 
GDP. We don’t puzzle over this anymore – not because we solved the puzzle, but because 
the  correlation  has  fallen  (Graph  4).  At  the  same  time,  the  correlation  between  quarterly 
movements in Australian and Chinese GDP has steadily increased. Clearly what happens in 
the Australian economy is now more dependent upon what happens in China than has been 
the case at any time in our past.  
Graph 4 
 But as we think about the future, the story is broader than China. Over the years ahead, the 
Indian economy, which also contains more than 20 per cent of the world’s population within 
its  borders,  is  likely  to  become  increasingly  important  to  Australia.  After  India  grew  at  a 
disappointing  pace  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  growth  has  picked  up  over  recent  decades, 
averaging 7 per cent per year over the 2000s (Graph 5). The economy has gradually opened 
up  to  foreign  trade  and  capital,  and  government  influence  over  investment  decisions  has 
been  scaled  back.  While  India  will inevitably  follow  a  different  development  path  to  that  of 
China, the prospects for sustained solid growth look to be better than they have for many 
years.  
Graph 5 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2010
  Like China, India too is urbanising. The process though is more gradual, with the number of 
people moving to urban areas over the past 30 years less than half that in China (Graph 3). 
Despite  India’s  population  currently  being  only  marginally  lower  than  China’s,  it  has  about 
40 cities with a population of over 1 million, compared with China’s 170 or so. This lower rate 
of urbanisation partly reflects the fact that India has not industrialised as quickly as China.  
As I mentioned a few moments ago, as people move to cities the demand for steel tends to 
rise. Not surprisingly, in China consumption of steel has more than quadrupled since 1997, 
with  just  over  half  of  current  steel  consumption  accounted  for  by  the  construction  sector 
(Graph 6).1 Indian steel consumption has also grown, but not nearly as quickly. However, the 
experience  of  China  and  that  of  other  countries  that  have  urbanised  hints  at  the  potential 
growth in India. While at the moment, the bulk of the Indian population live in rural areas and 
investment in infrastructure has been relatively low, there is the potential for this to change 
over the years ahead, just as it has in China over the past 30 years. If this does indeed occur 
then the demand for raw materials – and steel, in particular – is likely to be very strong over 
coming decades.  
Graph 6 
 The impact of Chinese and Indian development is not just confined to the resources sector 
though. As countries develop and living standards rise not only does the demand for steel 
increase,  but  so  does  the  demand  for  higher-quality  food,  and  consumption  of  protein 
increases. Again, the comparison of China and India is instructive (Graph 7). As income per 
head  in  China  has  grown  over  the  past  30 years,  protein  consumption  per  head  has  also 
risen strongly, almost doubling over this period. Protein consumption has also risen in India, 
although the increases have been much smaller due to slower growth in income per head 
and differences in dietary preferences.  
                                                 
1   China’s share of world steel consumption has increased from 15 per cent in 1997 to 44 per cent in 2009. 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 5
 Graph 7 
 Again, over the years ahead it is quite likely that global demand for protein will grow strongly, 
particularly if India and China continue on their current paths. With Australia’s strong history 
of agricultural production, this is another area where we have an advantage.  
The overall impact of this growth and urbanisation of Asia can be clearly seen in Australia’s 
international  trade  statistics.  The  four  largest  markets  for  our  exports  in  2009  were  China, 
Japan, India and South Korea (Graph 8). Over the first half of 2010, around 22 per cent of 
Australia’s exports receipts have come from China and a further 8 per cent from India. These 
shares  have  been  trending  higher  for  some  time  and  this  is  likely  to  continue  over  the 
medium term. There has also been a large increase in the share of resources in Australia’s 
total exports. A decade ago, iron ore and coal together accounted for around 10 per cent of 
Australia’s total exports (Graph 9). In contrast, over the past six months, this share has been 
around one third, with total resource exports accounting for 55 per cent of aggregate export 
revenue, up from around 35 per cent in the 1990s.  
Graph 8 
 6 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 Graph 9 
 These changes in the country and product composition of our exports are very large. They 
are also likely to be persistent given that Asian development still has some years to run. This 
development means that, in aggregate, the Australian economy has the potential to do very 
well  over  the  years  ahead.  Conditions  are,  however  likely  to  differ  substantially  across 
sectors of the economy. If past experience is any guide, the growth of the resources sector 
will have positive spin-off effects for some industries, and rising real incomes will increase 
demand for a wide range of goods and services. Other industries though will find conditions 
more difficult due to the level of the exchange rate and the competition for labour and capital. 
While these differences across sectors will create some challenges, the overall medium-term 
outlook for the economy is a positive one.  
The changing risks and risk management 
I would now like to turn to the second element of my thesis – that just as the medium-term 
outlook has changed, so too have the risks, and these risks need to be managed.  
One obvious way that the risks have changed is that the economy is more dependent than it 
has  been  in  the  past  upon  the  performance  of  the  Chinese  economy  and  the  resources 
sector, and I suspect that we will be saying the same thing about the Indian economy some 
years down the track. While, this is generally a good news story, both China and India face 
significant challenges over the years ahead. In China, the authorities face the difficult task of 
rebalancing  growth  away  from  exports  and  investment  to  domestic  consumption.  And  in 
India, the burden of red-tape remains a major issue and ways need to be found to improve 
the country’s infrastructure if the economy’s potential is to be unlocked.  
It  would  be  unrealistic  to  assume  that  the  growth  paths  in  these  countries  will  be  without 
bumps, perhaps large ones. And these bumps will have an impact upon Australia. Nor can 
we assume that commodity prices will remain at their current elevated levels. New sources of 
supply  are  being  discovered  and  developed,  and  there  is  always  the  possibility  of  new 
technologies reducing the demand for Australia’s main resource exports.  
There is very little we can do about these external risks. But what we can do is to have the 
right  policy  framework  in  place  so  that  we  can  respond  when  things  inevitably  turn  out 
differently to what we expect.  
There  are  four  aspects  of  risk  management  that  I  would  like  to  talk  about.  The  first  is 
ensuring that productivity growth is strong. The second is ensuring that the economy retains 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 7
 its flexibility. The third is the way investment is financed. And the fourth is the rate at which 
national consumption increases in response to the improved medium-term outlook.  
First,  the  importance  of  productivity  growth.  Regardless  of  how  things  develop  in  the 
countries  to  our  north,  increasing  productivity  in  Australia  remains  the  key  to  sustained 
increases in our living standards. Ensuring that we continue to make progress here provides 
insurance against the possibility that developments in Asia do not turn out as positively as we 
expect.  
If we look back over recent years, we see that productivity growth has slowed. Since 2001, 
output per hour worked has increased at just over 1 per cent per year compared with over 
2 per  cent  per  year  in  the  1990s  (Graph  10).  This  slowdown  has  occurred  despite  a 
significant  rise  in  the  economy’s  overall  capital-labour  ratio,  which  would  typically  be 
expected to boost average output per hour worked.  
Normally, slower rates of productivity growth would lead to slower increases in average living 
standards. But this has not occurred. Indeed, over the past decade, growth in gross national 
income per hour worked has been unusually strong, averaging almost 2¾ per cent per year. 
The reason for this is that the prices of Australia’s exports have risen relative to the prices of 
our imports, lifting the purchasing power of Australia’s national income. With the proceeds of 
a tonne of iron ore we now can buy more LCD TVs and domestic services than we could a 
decade ago. This has allowed our living standards to increase at a faster pace than if we had 
to rely on productivity growth alone.  
Graph 10 
 Looking  forward,  this  situation  cannot  continue  indefinitely.  Over  the  next  few  years, 
commodity prices are likely to decline somewhat from their current very high levels and this 
will  put  the  focus  back  onto  productivity  growth  and  economic  reform  as  the  drivers  of 
increasing living standards.  
The second issue is the importance of ensuring that the economy remains flexible, and can 
respond  to  unexpected  developments.  My  colleagues  at  the  Reserve  Bank  and  I  have 
spoken  at  length  on  previous  occasions  about  the  key  elements  here.  Having  a  flexible 
exchange rate has been one of the great stabilising forces in the Australian economy over 
the past 30 years. Labour market flexibility is also important. So too is retaining the flexibility 
of both monetary and fiscal policy to respond quickly to unexpected developments. To this 
list, I would add the importance of having a highly trained and educated workforce. Not only 
does  education  help  lift  productivity,  but  it  also  makes  the economy  more  flexible and  this 
helps lower risk.  
8 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 The third element that affects the nature of the risks is the way that investment is financed. 
Historically,  much  of  the  external  funding  for  business  investment  has  come  from  banks. 
While  bank  financing  is  likely  to  remain  important  for  many  firms,  a  greater  share  of 
investment is likely to be financed from other sources than has been the case in the recent 
past. This may not be welcome news for the banks, but having investment financed from a 
variety of different sources helps reduce aggregate risk. Over the years ahead, foreign direct 
investment and capital market raisings by firms in the resources sector are both likely to play 
a more important role than they have over the past decade. This means that some of the 
risks – and, of course, some of the expected returns – from the rapid increase in Australia’s 
capital stock will be shared with foreign investors.  
The  fourth  element  of  risk  management  is  the  response  of  domestic  consumption  to  the 
improved outlook.  
The textbook says that if future income prospects improve, the level of national consumption 
– either private or public – should increase now. But the textbook also says that the lower our 
appetite for risk, or the greater the uncertainty about the future, the smaller should be any 
immediate adjustment in consumption. It also says that the more uncomfortable we are about 
the possibility of a future decline in consumption if things do not work out well, the smaller 
should be adjustment now.  
If we look back at our own economic history, the early 1980s provides a good example of 
what can happen if the adjustment is too quick. In the first couple of years of that decade, 
there was much optimism about the future of the resources sector, largely reflecting the rise 
in oil prices as a result of OPEC II. This optimism was translated quickly into higher wages 
and  increased  spending,  and  the  economy  grew  strongly  for  a  while.  But,  the  optimism 
turned  out  to  be  short  lived  and  the  result  was  a  significant  hangover,  which  required  a 
substantial adjustment in spending and real wages over the following years.  
By  way  of  contrast,  the  current  experience  looks  quite  different.  Despite  the  considerable 
optimism about the future, household spending has been relatively restrained over the past 
couple  of  years  and  the  appetite  for  debt  has  declined.  Partly  as  a  result,  the  pace  of 
household borrowing  has  slowed  significantly  (Graph  11).  One  interpretation  of  this  is  that 
the household sector, after having increased its debt levels for many years and witnessed 
the problems elsewhere in the world, has a better appreciation of the risks.  
Graph 11 
 BIS Review 117/2010 
 9
 If  this  interpretation  is  correct  it  is  likely  to  be  a  good  thing  from  a  risk-management 
perspective. I say this for two reasons. First, restraint now provides some insurance against 
the possibility that things do not work out as well as expected. In doing so, it can help lower 
the probability that costly adjustments will be required at some point in the future. Second, 
given that there is currently a relatively limited amount of spare capacity in the economy, the 
risk of upwards pressure on inflation would be increased if investment and consumption were 
both to increase very strongly over the next few years.  
In  summary  then,  while  we  can  do  little  to  control  the  external  environment  that  Australia 
faces,  the  choices  that  we  make  on  productivity,  flexibility,  financing  and  national 
consumption  will  influence  the  overall  risk-profile  of  the  Australian  economy.  So  while  we 
look forward with considerable optimism about our medium-term prospects, we also need to 
be alert to the risks and how we might best manage them.  
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  close  with  just  a  couple  of  observations  on  what  all  this  means  for  the 
collection of statistics.  
First,  we  need  high-quality  and  comprehensive  statistics  if  we  are  to  understand  the 
structural  changes  that  are  taking  place  in  the  economy.  One  obvious  area  where  the 
demand for statistics is increasing is the resources sector. We need to understand where the 
investment is going, and how both production volumes and prices are changing. But we also 
need to understand how these developments are affecting other parts of the economy – what 
are the linkages and how are they changing.  
Second,  the  ABS’s  work  is  also  important  in  helping  us  understand  some  of  the  risk-
management  issues  I  spoke  about.  We  need  to  continue  making  progress  on  the 
measurement  of  productivity  and  improving  our  understanding  of  what  drives  increases  in 
output  per  head.  And  on  the  financial  side,  we  need  to  understand  how  the  increase  in 
Australia’s capital stock is being financed and how changes in the pattern of financing are 
altering the economy’s overall risk profile. I know these are the areas that the ABS is working 
on and I look forward to seeing the outcome of that work.  
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS Review 117/2010
