Jean-Claude Trichet: The crisis and beyond 
Ceremonial address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
“100 Years of Confindustria”, Parma, 10 April 2010. 
 Signor Presidente del Consiglio dei Ministri, 
Signor Presidente della Regione Emilia-Romagna, 
Signora Marcegaglia, 
Autorità, 
Signore e Signori, 
Ho  dinanzi  a  me  “l’Italia  che  lavora  e  che  produce”,  come  ebbe  a  scrivere  Luigi  Einaudi, 
salutando il primo embrione di Confindustria. [TRANSLATION: I have in front of me “all of 
Italy  who  work  and  produce”,  as  Luigi  Einaudi  wrote  to  greet  the  first  embryo  of 
Confindustria. This refers to an article written by L. Einaudi (one of the fathers of the public 
finance literature, later governor of the Bank of Italy, and first President of the Italian Republic 
between 1948 and 1955), published by Corriere della Sera on 5 May 1910.] 
I cannot deny that I go back to those early days of the past century with some pride. As you 
know, a Frenchman, Louis Bonnefon, christened your centenary Association in 1910, as he 
became its first Chairman.  
He  had  descended  the  Alps  from  Lyon  to  neighbouring  Piémont  –  not  a  long  journey, 
geographically or culturally. He had become a respected entrepreneur in the textile industry. 
In  that  region,  he  had  encountered  a  brewing  milieu  of  industrialists,  ready  to  go  from 
craftsmanship  to  a  new,  modern,  model  of  industrial  organisation.  He  found  that  this  new 
generation of industrialists was inspired by a deep sense of pragmatism. They had a strong 
talent for a scientific organisation of labour and capital, an acute taste for innovation. They 
were  highly  appreciative  of  technical  education  –  in  a  country  in  which  “la  formazione 
umanistica”  was  considered  the  most  dignified  level  of  knowledge.  They  found  personal 
fulfilment in collective progress.  
These people were the first affiliates of Confindustria, when Confindustria was founded in the 
wake  of  the  global  financial  panic  of  1907.  At  the  time  –  with  a  sharp  contraction  in  the 
volume of bank credit – it was necessary for the nascent industrial milieu in northern Italy to 
establish a common strategy. Italy, where equity capital traditionally had been scarce, was 
highly dependent on bank loans for investment. But banks had been hit by the international 
crisis and were retrenching. So, in 1910 Confindustria was designed to inspire and promote 
an  “alleanza  tra  i  produttori”  which  could  strengthen  existing  enterprises  and  multiply  their 
number. Indeed this strategy reinforced the industrial sector and prepared the ground for its 
incredible success. From an agrarian society, with large pockets of poverty, Italy raised to the 
position of a leading industrial power. 
The 2008 financial panic was no less dramatic than the 1907 crash. As we enter the second 
quarter of 2010, the global economy has just begun to emerge from a prolonged period of 
economic turmoil. In the euro area, we expect a moderate recovery in the current year.  
But  the  recent  decline  in  international  trade  has  been  sharp,  rapid  and  exceptionally 
synchronised. This means that the recovery in Europe – a trade superpower – is likely to be 
surrounded by uncertainty. Also, given the diverse pattern of country specialisations within 
the European Union, the recovery will probably be uneven across regions and sectors, and 
over time.  
Like in the few years that followed the 1907 crisis – today Italy has been hit hard. As a prime 
exporter of equipment and machinery, this country has particularly suffered from the lopsided 
composition of the shortfalls in international trade.  
BIS Review 48/2010 
 1
But, many times – in the 100 years spanned by Confindustria – after a profound crisis, Italy 
has gradually moved back to the forefront of innovation and economic excellence. I am sure 
Confindustria will be part of this come-back.  
This  morning  I  should  share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the  nature  of  the  crisis  and  on  the 
strategy  that  I  see  as  an  effective  tool  for  a  new  start,  both  in  Italy  and  in  Europe  more 
broadly. I will conclude that being able to rely on a solid real economy is an exceptionally 
valuable  asset.  The  euro  and  the  European  Central  Bank  will  accompany  and  help  this 
process. You, entrepreneurs, will be decisive actors.  
Financial excesses 
Let  me  start  with  a  short  overview  of  the  nature  of  the  crisis.  Here,  it  is  critical  to  draw  a 
distinction between economic risk and financial risk. 
You know what economic risk is: the risk that your companies face when they introduce new 
products and new processes. Investment consumes resources in the present, and its future 
payoffs are uncertain in time and magnitude. This is economic risk.  
Historically, the financial industry has been at the forefront of economic progress, because of 
its ability to offer funding to those who take on economic risk.  
But  in  the  recent  past  the  focus  of  finance  has  gradually  shifted.  From  helping  the  real 
economy hedge economic risk, the focus of finance has quietly moved toward the creation of 
financial risk. Financial risk is different from economic risk. It is deliberate exposure to asset 
price changes.  
Building an exposure to a change in the value of an asset is not bad per se. But we have to 
distinguish  between  arbitrage  and  directional  positioning.  Arbitrage  is  an  essential  market 
force.  Indirectly,  it  helps  production  and  trade.  Directional  positioning,  instead,  can  amplify 
and even creates gaps in asset prices. It does so by acting on expectations of future price 
changes.  Unlike  in  the  case  of  arbitrage,  these  price  gaps  are  notional  –  indeed, 
“speculative”. They are often large only because they are not suitably discounted for risk.  
When perceived market risk is moderate, failing to discount for risk is not a severe omission. 
Indeed,  in  the  ten  years  that  led  up  to  the  crisis,  financial  risk  was  thought  to  be  low  and 
declining.  
But, the notion that risk was low and declining was largely an illusion. Individually, diversified 
financial  strategies  looked  all  as  rational  attempts  to  unload  risk  to  those  parties  in  the 
system  which  were  more  willing  to  bear  it.  In  the  aggregate,  however,  diversification  was 
subject to a sort of fallacy of composition.  
Individual  strategies  were  diversified.  But  the  aggregation  of  a  complex  web  of  identical 
strategies  –  all  designed  to  shed  risk  individually  –  generated  a  lack  of  diversity  for  the 
financial system as a whole. In the end, it turned out that the system could not diversify risk 
away.  Furthermore,  the  complexity  of  the  financial  web  made  this  fact  more  difficult  to 
identify. 
A  C.E.O.  of  an  important  bank  had  a  terrible  image  to  describe  the  euphoric  state  of  the 
markets, only few weeks before the crisis started. He said that: “When the music stops, in 
terms of liquidity, things will be complicated. But as long as the music is playing, you’ve got 
to get up and dance. We’re still dancing”. The “dancing” in the metaphor was an irresponsible 
credit  boom,  where  banks  scrambled  for  borrowers,  and  the  borrowers  could  dictate  the 
conditions for credit.  
Confronted  with  a  similar  landscape  of  market  euphoria  and  industrial  hardships  in  the 
1920s, Churchill said: “I would rather see finance less proud and industry more content”. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2010
Between, say, 2005 and much of 2007 the system was quietly sliding into a state of meta-
stability. A system is meta-stable when any external shock – even a trivial disturbance – can 
tip the balance of stability and trigger an avalanche. When, on 15 September 2008, Lehman 
Brothers  filed  for  bankruptcy,  the  turmoil  that  had  started  a  year  earlier  turned  into  an 
avalanche. The system moved into a chaotic state, mathematically and metaphorically. 
The crash 
In  times  of  financial  panic,  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  have  an  instinct  to 
change the composition of their assets. They shed risky and illiquid investments and rush to 
liquidity.  In  the  process,  banks’  intermediation  is  reduced,  and  loans  to  companies  are 
curtailed. If the process is let unfold in a disorderly manner, it can create severe damage for 
borrowers and for the broader economy.  
After  the  demise  of  Lehman,  liquidity  hoarding  was  so  intense  that  we  feared  bank 
intermediation would suffer a complete and lasting collapse. 
The ECB was the first central bank in the world – a whole year before the Lehman crisis – to 
recognise the severity of the situation. As the failure of Lehman precipitated the crisis, the 
ECB took several measures to protect against a disorderly correction in credit and liquidity 
conditions. 
The  ECB  provided  liquidity  in  unlimited  volumes  and  with  longer  maturities.  We  insured 
banks against present and future liquidity shortfalls.  
You know that the flow of credit is primarily channelled through banks in the euro area. A 
complete  breakdown  in  the  funding  relationships  that  constitute  the  inter-bank  market  for 
liquidity  would  have  derailed  the  bank  lending  channel  altogether.  The  interruption  of  the 
bank lending channel would have turned the financial crisis into a profound depression. By 
granting unlimited access to central bank liquidity we put banks in a position to maintain their 
crucial role in the financing of the real economy. By reducing the interest rate at which banks 
can  borrow  liquidity  from  us  we  facilitated  the  transmission  of  our  credit  support  to  the 
economy.  
As I speak, the funding ability of banks appears no longer to be a restraining factor for bank 
lending.  Since  the  second  half  of  last  year,  easy  funding  conditions  have  been  supporting 
banks’ core business: making loans. We still see – in our Bank Lending Survey – a residual 
slight  prevalence  of  banks  declaring  a  tightening  in  their  credit  standards  for  loans  to 
enterprises. But this is now entirely due to macroeconomic uncertainty. A number of banks 
are still hesitant because the conditions of their borrowers are still fragile. But in several euro 
area  countries,  and  Italy  is  one  of  them,  overall  credit  standards  for  corporate  loans  have 
already started to ease.  
Three ways forward 
The crisis, no doubt, has changed our world. I see three ways forward.  
Macroeconomic policies 
Macroeconomic  policies  should  concentrate  on  medium-term  objectives.  This  is  the 
perspective  entrepreneurs  take  when  deciding  on  the  scale  of  activities,  on  investment  in 
plant  capacity,  on  hiring  and  downsizing  labour.  Entrepreneurs  do  not  think  of  today  or 
tomorrow.  Entrepreneurs  think  over  the  medium  to  long  term.  This  is  the  perspective  that 
should guide macroeconomic authorities.  
Let  me  mention  that  a  similar  medium-term  perspective  has  guided  fiscal  policy  in  Italy 
throughout the crisis. The fiscal authority has resisted pressures to introduce fiscal stimulus 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 3
over and above the loosening of the fiscal stance coming from the operation of the automatic 
stabilisers  that  are  built  into  the  fiscal  code.  This  is  an  appropriate  strategy,  given  Italy’s 
public debt burden and the prospects for its evolution in the long run.  
For what the ECB is concerned, a medium term perspective is what motivates the gradual 
phasing-out of our extraordinary credit support measures.  
The  logic  which  guides  our  policy  is  simple.  We  have  granted  banks  privileged  access  to 
credit, when a tightening of their funding conditions would have meant a break-down in the 
entire chain of intermediation. Now, we have to guard against the possibility that an excess 
of credit support might become a subsidy to unproductive activities.  
If  excess  credit  allows  banks  to  reap  excessive  returns  from  directional  positioning,  they 
might  loose  an  incentive  to  expand  their  lending  to  the  economy.  In  the  end,  they  might 
become  too  dependent  on  central  bank  credit.  It  is  possible  that  credit  flows  might  be 
diverted  away  from  the  funding  of  productive  activities  –  your  businesses  –  and  toward 
financial  arbitrage.  You  see:  underwriting  and  servicing  a  loan  to  a  company  is  resource 
intensive  for  a  bank.  Maintaining  an  active  trading  book  is  less  so,  particularly  if  risks  are 
incorrectly priced.  
We have decided that we will gradually return to normal procedures for granting liquidity to 
banks. This will cure opportunistic bidding behaviour and discourage unproductive arbitrage 
across assets. 
Financial reform 
The second way forward is financial reform. This needs to be global in scope and surgical in 
its focus. No segment of the market or category of players has been immune to the crisis. 
We  need  to  immunise  the  financial  system  against  its  intrinsic  tendency  to  complacency. 
Three intrinsic weaknesses need correction.  
 
First, the transparency of the financial structures needs to be enhanced. Financial 
innovation cannot be built upon – and exploit – gaps in investor information and lack 
of  financial  literacy.  All  institutions,  instruments  and  markets  of  any  relevance  for 
systemic stability need to enhance risk disclosure. 
Second, short-termism in the design of financial contracts. Market participants were 
given strong economic incentives to focus on short-term profits. “Due diligence” was 
not a concern in the pre-crisis world. Collectively, this has resulted in excessive risk 
taking.  
Third, and perhaps foremost, the pro-cyclicality of the financial system needs to be 
mitigated. The quality and quantity of bank capital and their liquidity buffers have to 
be improved in good times to provide a sufficient buffer for bank equity to withstand 
the inevitable increase in credit risk when the cycle turns. The cyclicality of market 
economies is inevitable. But the financial system should not be allowed to amplify 
swings. 
  These three points – and others – are now in the mission of the G-20, the new prime forum 
of  international  cooperation.  The  G20  has  entrusted  many  of  these  tasks  to  the  Financial 
Stability Board – headed by Mario Draghi.  
The business activities that you represent here should benefit from financial reform. Lenders 
will  be  made  more  attentive  to  the  real  economic  prospects  of  their  borrowers.  Long-term 
value creation will – once again – be the criterion for granting credit to the economy.  
Structural change 
Entrepreneurs will be important actors of structural change, my third way forward.  
4 
 BIS Review 48/2010
Here we can build on assets that have made our real economies in the Continent successful: 
our  openness  to  trade;  our  balanced  and  dynamic  business  structures;  our  talented  and 
well-trained workforces.  
None  of  these  factors  is  single-faced.  I  mentioned  already  that  the  openness  of  our 
economies  has  been  seen  as  a  major  challenge.  Greater  openness  has  meant  that  our 
economies have been more exposed to the international crisis. But the past trend to global 
trade  integration  has  already  called  for  a  major  adjustment  in  the  euro  area  production 
patterns.  Many  countries  in  the  European  Union  have  adjusted  their  export  portfolios 
according to the technological advantages of advanced economies. In Italy, about half of the 
firms  with  20  or  more  employees  are  engaged  in  restructuring.  Many  of  them  are 
consolidating  their  technological  edge  and  diversifying  their  markets.  They  have  moved 
towards  products  that  are  more  skill-intensive  and  more  capital-intensive.  This  upgrade  of 
our  production  structure  will  make  European  –  and  Italian  –  firms  better  prepared  for 
international markets. 
We  already  see  signs  of  improvements.  Extra-euro  area  export  volumes  have  rebounded 
markedly  over  the  last  few  months.  This  rebound  has  been  broad-based,  but  particularly 
pronounced for capital goods and intermediate goods, where Europe and Italy are important 
suppliers. The geographical composition of foreign demand will also be a supporting factor. It 
is  relatively  strong  for  Eastern  European  countries  which  do  not  belong  to  the  Union,  for 
OPEC  members,  as  well  as  for  Latin  America  and  Africa.  All  these  regions  account  for 
almost a quarter of euro area exports.  
At  the  same  time,  a  self-sustaining  recovery  cannot  abstract  from  intra-Union  trade  and 
domestic investment in plant capacity, technologies and human capital.  
Here,  many  members  of  the  European  Union  –  and  this  country  in  particular  –  need  to 
advance farther. The lack of investment in capital and skills erodes competitiveness. Lack of 
long-term economic competitiveness, in turn, can sap confidence and undermine the Union’s 
internal cohesion.  
Economies, such as Italy, that in the aggregate have observed a decrease in their market 
shares  need  to  launch  a  new  long-term  competitiveness  strategy  to  harness  domestic 
manpower, skills and capital to the best of their potential. 
Structural reforms are critical to this process. And I would like to refer here to the constant 
messages of Banca d’Italia on reforms in the markets of goods and services, in the labour 
market and in the domain of pensions. I would also mention three points: an upgrade of high-
level  education  is  the  top  one;  regulatory  simplification  and  the  reduction  of  bureaucratic 
costs for business activity – in particular for business start-ups; and the dismantling of rent-
seeking  positions  –  which  tax  disposable  incomes  and  the  economic  potential.  In  Italy,  in 
particular,  the  pricing  chain  –  notably  in  the  service  sector  –  would  benefit  from  be 
streamlined to increase the flexibility of goods prices.  
None  of  these  avenues  will  be  possible  without  a  critical  commitment  on  the  side  of  the 
public authority.  
But in the end, as I said, you entrepreneurs are very important actors of structural change.  
Concluding remarks  
You have a sound platform on which you can build your future.  
First, healthy private finance. Italy never indulged in the financial excesses of the recent past. 
It remains a manufacturing economy, where finance is first and foremost a support to real 
economic production. Strong saving propensities and prudent banking represent a platform 
of security from which the economy can restart.  
BIS Review 48/2010 
 5
Second,  the  euro  has  shielded  your  economy  from  the  worst  consequences  of  a  financial 
fright of historical proportions. You know that the people of Europe can count on us, the ECB 
and the Eurosystem, to continue to be a solid anchor of stability and confidence.  
Third,  and  no  less  important,  you  have  a  strong  tradition.  Remember  that  Italy’s 
manufacturing sector withstood many challenges in recent history.  
As  in  the  past,  the  real  economy  of  production  and  innovation  which  you  represent  here 
today will return back to the front line where it has belonged since the end of the War. For all 
of us in Europe, the force to boot-strap ourselves out of the present hardships will come from 
inside. And we know that technological progress will continue unabated in Europe.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 48/2010
