Louis Kasekende: Overview of the Ugandan economy 
Remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the closing of 
the  Ugandan  Business  Journalists  Training  Workshop  by  Thomson  Reuters  Foundation, 
Kampala, 5 March 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good afternoon 
It  is  my  singular  honor  and  great  pleasure  to  deliver  closing  remarks  at  the  Journalists’ 
training. 
I  would  like  to  congratulate  all  of  you  for  having  completed  this  training  program.  Your 
participation  is  an  indication  that  you  are  ready  to  enhance  your  skills  through  such 
professional training programs. 
At the Bank, we consider financial reporting as a key ingredient in the process of financial 
markets development. 
In  the  globalised  world,  efficiency  in  the  financial  markets  is  mainly  driven  by  free  flow  of 
information,  which  investors  can  rely  on  for  making  their  investment  decisions.  There  is, 
therefore,  a  growing  need  for  the  emerging  economies  to  continuously  improve  on  the 
efficiency  of  information  flow  in  order  to  compete  internationally  and  attract  foreign  capital 
flows. This can only happen when the players get the right information. 
I  wish  to  emphasize  the  important  role  played  by  professional  business  journalists  in  the 
development of financial markets. Irresponsible and inaccurate reporting can cause instability 
in the market place and ruin investment prospects. I am sure with this training, focusing on 
ethical and responsible reporting in financial markets is a step in the right direction. 
As  Uganda’s  financial  sector  appears  on  the  radar  screen  of  global  investors,  industry 
players and professionals rely on what they read, hear or see and this is largely posted by 
journalist in different forms of media. 
I  would  argue  that  responsible  reporting  in  the  current  world  where  “Sentiment”  is  key  in 
driving financial markets is imperative to national economic development as well as to the 
stability  of 
financial  markets 
competitiveness and attractiveness not only to the foreign players but also to the domestic 
investors. 
The Global meltdown in financial markets has reminded us all of the importance of financial 
and  business  journalism.  Arising  out  of  these  a  number  of  profound  questions  as  to  the 
quality of that form of reporting have come up. The most common question that has been 
posed is – Did the financial reporters fail to put the financial system under proper scrutiny? 
As you improve your skills please draw lessons from this past experience. 
It goes without saying that financial markets thrive on information, it is, therefore, critical that 
information is disseminated accurately, in a timely manner and in a well structured format. It 
should be relevant and more importantly, well balanced to enable market participants make 
well informed investment decisions. The end goal for carrying out such training workshops 
and subsequent ones especially by quality trainers like the Thomson Reuters Foundation is 
to build a pool of professional business journalists in Uganda who will promote efficiency and 
development of financial markets in Uganda. 
At this stage let me congratulate USE; the organizers of this workshop for bringing together a 
group  of  the  most  distinguished  and  experienced  practitioners  in  the  field  of  journalism  to 
pass  on  their  experience  and  skills  as  well  as  sharing  best  practices  and  initiatives  in 
is  a  key  component  of 
financial  markets.  This 
the 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 1
business  journalism  with  their  Ugandan  counterparts.  I  wish  to  encourage  Ugandan 
journalists to always strive for excellence and professionalism in their reporting. 
Let me also thank the Thomson Reuters Foundation; a global leader in financial reporting, for 
playing its part and for partnering with Ugandan Institutions in having successfully produced 
at least 15 certified Journalists from this training. The onus now remains with the Ugandan 
journalists who have acquired the skills to put them to best use as they play their part in the 
development of financial markets in Uganda. 
I  wish  to  pledge  BOU’s  continued  support  through  the  5-year  FMDP  project  to  uplift  skills 
levels in our financial markets as we strive to improve efficiency and disclosure for the benefit 
of the investors. 
It is my belief that skills that you have acquired will improve on your business reporting and 
demystify financial markets operations for the good of ordinary Ugandans. 
With  those  remarks,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  declare  this  training  workshop 
officially closed. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2010
