William C Dudley: The longer-term challenges ahead 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Council of Society Business Economists Annual Dinner, 
London, 11 March 2010. 
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak here today. As always, my remarks reflect 
my  own  views  and  are  not  necessarily  reflective  of  the  views  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  or  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  As  we  emerge  from  a  deep  and 
protracted global recession and terrifying financial crisis, we should count our blessings – the 
outcome could have been far worse.  
Extraordinary  interventions  helped  to  keep  the  financial  system  from  collapsing  and  large 
doses  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  stimulus  helped  to  put  a  floor  under  global  demand, 
thereby preventing a full-blown depression. 
However, now that we are on a bit of firmer ground, it is even more important that we take 
stock and evaluate the challenges that still face us. How we respond will determine whether 
the path forward will be relatively smooth or instead will be more tortuous. 
I want to discuss three of these challenges today. The first challenge relates directly to the 
recent crisis: What needs to happen at the national and international levels to strengthen the 
financial system so that a crisis of this magnitude does not occur again. 
The second challenge relates to the set of fiscal exit strategies that would put fiscal policies 
around  the  world  on  a  sustainable  path.  In  many  countries,  including  the  United  States, 
budget deficits have widened sharply and the level of public debt is growing faster than gross 
domestic product (GDP). This trend is unsustainable.  
The  third  challenge  is  how  to  rebalance  global  consumption  and  investment  to  support 
continued strong growth in the emerging world and a sustainable recovery elsewhere. In my 
view,  sustainable  global  growth  requires  a  shift  toward  a  higher  consumption  share  in  the 
emerging world matched by a shift away from consumption in the United States. 
These three challenges are interlinked. Without regulatory reform, we will not have the robust 
and resilient financial system that we need to match savers and borrowers around the world. 
Without  fiscal  consolidation,  financial  market  participants  will  balk  at  providing  the  funds 
needed  to  close  the  gap  between  government  revenue  and  spending.  In  addition,  without 
rebalancing  the  composition  of  global  demand,  long-run  economic  growth  will  likely  be 
weaker. Weaker long-run growth will lead to excessive unemployment and less government 
revenue,  which,  in  turn,  will  make  it  more  difficult  to  put  fiscal  policies  on  a  sustainable 
course. 
Turning  to  the  first challenge  of  regulatory  reform,  the  key  issue  is  how  to  ensure that  we 
take  the  right  steps  so that  the  type  of  financial  crisis  that  occurred  never  happens  again. 
From my perspective, I have several concerns about where the regulatory reform process is 
heading. First, the international consensus to harmonize standards globally appears fragile. If 
each country acts to strengthen its financial system in an uncoordinated way, we will be left 
with a balkanized system, riddled with gaps that encourage regulatory arbitrage. Second, I 
am  concerned  that  the  focus  will  be  too  bank-centric.  Although  it  is  clearly  appropriate  to 
strengthen  the  liquidity  and  capital  standards  for  banks,  regulatory  reform  needs  to  be 
comprehensive.  Third,  I  worry  that  the  Federal  Reserve’s  role  with  respect  to  bank 
supervision will be unduly constrained. Let me discuss each of these concerns in more detail. 
Turning  first  to  the  issue  of  harmonization,  I  think  it  is  underappreciated  how  important 
harmonization  is  to  ensure  success  of  the  global  regulatory  reform  effort.  Without 
harmonized  standards,  financial  intermediation  would  inevitably  move  toward  geographies 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 1
and activities where the standards are more lax. This, in turn, would provoke complaints from 
those who cannot make such adjustments as easily. The political process, in turn, would be 
sensitive  to  such  complaints,  creating  pressure  for  liberalization,  which  would  cause  the 
tougher standards to unravel over time. In the discussion between countries, the emphasis 
would  subtly  shift  from  how  to  structure  the  regulatory  regime  to  ensure  financial  stability 
toward negotiating a regulatory regime that works best for the institutions headquartered in 
each particular country.  
The  harmonization  process  has  some  momentum  due  to  the  sponsorship  of  the  G-20 
leadership  and  the  efforts  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  other  international 
standard setters. However, the process is fragile because there are pressures to shape the 
standards  in  a  way  that  puts  the  least  burden  on  the  domestic  banks  and  financial 
infrastructures  in  one  country  relative  to  the  institutions  in  other  countries.  There  is 
understandable and genuine concern that the impact of moving to global standards will fall 
disproportionately on some types of firms. In my view, the way to mitigate these issues is to 
have a long phase-in period in the transition to the new standards rather than to soften or 
alter the standards to shelter those firms that happen – perhaps by historical accident – to be 
starting in a less advantageous position. The focus should be more on the side of all ending 
up in a similar place, rather than on the relative degree of difficulty in getting there. 
The process is also fragile because some countries seem intent on strengthening their own 
set  of  standards  before  the  international  process  has  had  a  chance  to  reach  consensus. 
Although it is understandable that countries would want to move quickly to strengthen their 
regulatory regimes, such actions should not be undertaken in a way that is immutable and 
unresponsive to the emerging international consensus.1 
At the end of the day, to achieve harmonized standards, each sovereign nation is going to 
have  to  bend  a  little  bit  from  what  it  believes  is  best  for  its  financial  system  viewed  in 
isolation. This is necessary, of course, because a series of regulatory regimes that appear 
best for each individual country would likely be distinctly second-best or even worse when 
considered  collectively.  The  recent  crisis  underscores  the  fact  that  the  regulatory  regime 
needs to be harmonized and global in nature. 
My second concern on the regulatory reform front is that reform may be too focused on the 
traditional  banking  sector  and  not  enough  on  other  financial  intermediation  activities.  Of 
course,  it  is  clear  that  we  need  to  make  the  traditional  banking  system  more  resilient  and 
robust.2  But  make  no  mistake,  we  also  need  to  ensure  that  regulatory  reform  fully 
encompasses the full range of financial intermediation activity, including capital markets and 
insurance,  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
trading  of  securities  and  derivatives,  wholesale 
collateralized funding markets, and payments and settlements.  
This  is  necessary  for  two  reasons.  First,  too  much  focus  on  raising  the  requirements  on 
banks runs the risk of just forcing activity into the non-banking sector. Second, many of the 
problems  of  the  financial  crisis  originated  outside  of  the  banking  sector.  To  a  significant 
degree,  the  crisis  was  about  regulatory  gaps  –  be  it  gaps  in  terms  of  loosely  regulated 
mortgage  underwriting  practices  in  the  United  States,  the  activities  of  bank-sponsored 
structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  and  conduits,  the  providers  of  insurance  guarantees 
against structured finance products such as AIG Financial Products Group, or the structured 
                                                 
1  
In this regard,  I am considerably more  worried about countries that implement standards that are more lax 
than the norm, rather than more tough than the norm. However, if many countries individually were to opt for 
tougher standards, this could raise questions about whether the international norm is too lax. 
2   Work  underway  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  others  all  are  designed  to  make  the 
traditional banking sector more robust. This includes requiring more and higher quality capital, better capturing 
of risk in the application of capital standards, imposing a capital leverage limit on banks, raising liquidity buffer 
requirements, and requiring compensation regimes to be consistent with financial stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2010
finance models of the rating agencies and others that turned out to be defective. Thus, the 
experience  of  the  recent  crisis  strongly  suggests  that  confining  regulatory  reform  to 
strengthening  the  banking  sector  would  be  insufficient  to  make  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole resilient and robust. 
A crucial case in point is the too-big-to-fail problem. Having some firms that are too big to fail 
creates  moral  hazard, which  distorts  incentives.  These  firms  are  able  to  obtain  funding  on 
more attractive terms because debt holders expect that the government will intervene rather 
than allow failure. This creates an incentive to get large to achieve such status, not because 
it facilitates greater efficiency, but instead because the implicit government backstop enables 
the too-big-to-fail firm to achieve lower funding costs. 
Although the United States has an effective resolution mechanism for commercial banks, we 
do not yet have a good resolution scheme for large non-banking institutions or bank holding 
companies  with  large  international  operations.  To  address  the  too-big-to-fail  problem,  we 
need to develop a truly robust and credible resolution mechanism that allows for the orderly 
wind-down  of  any  institution  –  regardless  of  its  size  –  and  that  limits  the  contagion  to  the 
broader financial system. This will require not  only domestic legislation, but also extensive 
work  internationally  to  address  a  range  of  legal  issues  involved  in  winding  down  a  major 
global firm. 
I want to emphasize how important it is that the incentives we embed within the regulatory 
apparatus  for  financial  intermediaries  encourage  the  type  of  behavior  we  seek  –  behavior 
consistent  with  safety  and  soundness  and  financial  stability.  For  example,  consider  the 
efforts  underway  to  standardize  OTC  derivatives  and  move  the  clearing  of  such  trades  to 
central counterparties (CCPs). These are good and worthwhile efforts. However,  I suspect 
that  these  efforts  will  not  fully  succeed  without  measures  to  develop  marketplaces  and 
infrastructures  that  promote  greater  transparency  for  all  OTC  derivatives  activity,  including 
more and higher-quality information on prices and transaction volumes.  
OTC derivatives dealers have natural incentives to favor opaque, decentralized markets that 
preserve their information advantage relative to other participants. The greater profit margins 
that  derive  from  this  advantage  create  incentives  to  favor  more  bespoke  OTC  derivatives 
over  more  standardized  OTC  instruments.  Making  more  and  better  pricing  information 
available  to  a  wider  range  of  market  participants  will  increase  competition  and  lessen  the 
profit  incentives  that  stem  primarily  from  the  opacity  of  these  instruments  and  markets. 
Improving  transparency  should  make  the  benefits  that  stem  from  standardization  such  as 
increased liquidity, reduced transaction costs, and lower counterparty risks more dominant, 
helping  push  the  evolution  of  the  OTC  derivatives  market  in  the  direction  of  greater 
standardization and homogeneity. 
This doesn’t mean that bespoke products will vanish. They will continue to exist. But they will 
exist  primarily  because  they  better  serve  the  needs  of  the  OTC  derivatives  customer,  not 
because they create an informational asymmetry that allows rents to accrue to the securities 
dealer.  
Greater  transparency  would  also  have  other  benefits.  If  regulators  had  ready  access  to 
current  OTC  derivatives  transaction  information  in  trade  repositories,  I  suspect  that  this 
would serve as a brake on the use of OTC derivatives that are used for more questionable 
purposes.  For  example,  this  includes  trades  undertaken  to  evade  accounting  rules  or  to 
circumvent investment charter limitations. Such transparency would also allow regulators to 
monitor  and  identify  concentrations  and  trading  patterns  that  might  be  related  to  market 
manipulation.  
In addition, if the public had more detailed information about the OTC derivatives positions of 
market  participants,  market  discipline  would  be  enhanced  by  providing  market  participants 
with information that would help assess risks during times of stress. Uncertainty about the 
valuations  of  complex  derivatives  due  to  the  lack  of  price  transparency  was  a  factor  that 
exacerbated  the  financial  crisis.  Large  financial  institutions  became  less  willing  to  engage 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 3
with one another because of an inability to assess the size of the exposures or to value the 
opaque positions held by their counterparties. 
My third regulatory reform concern is that the Federal Reserve’s role in regulatory oversight 
will be excessively constrained going forward. This threatens to throw the baby out with the 
bathwater.  
The Federal Reserve made mistakes, as did others, in the run-up to the crisis. We are fully 
cognizant of that, which is why we are revamping how we oversee the financial system and 
supervise  large,  systemically  important  institutions.  To  cut  back  our  bank  supervisory  role 
significantly  would  be  a  mistake  because  macroprudential  supervision  is  important;  the 
Federal Reserve is particularly well suited to this role; and because bank supervision helps 
inform the Fed in its lender-of-last-resort role and in the conduct of monetary policy.  
Macroprudential  supervision,  which  I  characterize  as  the  top-down  assessment  of  risks 
throughout the financial system, is essential because it addresses the problem of gaps in the 
regulatory  regime  and  the  regulatory  arbitrage  that  such  gaps  can  encourage.  In  addition, 
macroprudential  supervision  is  needed  because  the  financial  system  is  interconnected.  As 
amply demonstrated during the crisis, siloed regulatory oversight is problematic. Supervisory 
practices must be revamped so that supervision is also horizontal – looking broadly across 
banks, nonbanks, capital markets, payment and settlement systems and geographies. 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve is well suited to play a major role in such oversight 
because it alone has the expertise in three major aspects of the financial system – banking, 
capital  markets,  and  payments  and  settlement  systems.  It  also  currently  has  oversight 
responsibility for most of the firms that one would view as systemically important. 
In  evaluating  what  the  Federal  Reserve  should  do,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the 
Federal Reserve’s three primary roles – monetary policy, the lender of last resort function, 
and  supervision  –  are  closely  interlinked.  Each  one  of  these  activities  helps  the  Federal 
Reserve  perform  the  others.  For  example,  the  information  we  collect  as  part  of  the 
supervisory process gives us a frontline, real-time view of the state of the financial industry 
and  broader  economy.  Monetary  policy  is  more  informed  as  a  result.  Only  with  this 
knowledge  can  a  central  bank  understand  how  the  monetary  policy  impulse  will  be 
propagated through the financial system and affect the real economy. 
Similarly, involvement in the supervisory process gives us critical information in fulfilling our 
lender-of-last-resort responsibilities. Information sharing with other agencies is simply not as 
good  as  the  intimate  knowledge  and  understanding  of  markets  and  institutions  that  is 
gathered  on  a  first-hand  basis.  Indeed,  many  institutions  at  the  center  of  the  crisis  and 
arguably  the  most  troubled  –  Bear  Stearns,  Lehman  Brothers,  Merrill  Lynch,  AIG  and  the 
government-sponsored  enterprises  –  were  not  supervised  by  the  Federal  Reserve. 
Consequently, when those institutions came under stress, the Federal Reserve had poorer 
quality  and  far  less  timely  information  about  the  condition  of  these  institutions  than  would 
have been the case if we had had the benefit of direct supervisory oversight. 
Let me now shift gears and turn to the two macroeconomic policy issues: fiscal sustainability 
and balanced global economic activity. The deep downturn in economic activity has led to a 
sharp  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  condition  of  many  countries  –  the  United  States  is  no 
exception. The problem is not so much that the economic downturn has caused large budget 
deficits  to  open  up  –  this  always  happens  when  a  decline  in  economic  activity  leads  to  a 
sharp drop in revenue and increased spending on the safety net – but instead is more due to 
the fact that these deficits generally have a very large structural component. By structural, I 
mean that the deficits are projected to be persistent – absent changes in tax and spending 
policies – even after the individual economies have recovered and the unemployment rates 
in these countries have fallen as low as is possible, consistent with price stability.  
Fiscal stimulus measures undertaken to support demand have been responsible for much of 
the recent deterioration in the structural budget deficits. For example, in the United States, 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2010
the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the structural federal budget deficit rose by 
nearly  $1  trillion  between  fiscal  2007  and  fiscal  2009,  to  $1.1  trillion  or  7.3  percent  of 
potential GDP. 
Obviously, different people have different views as to how much stimulus was needed and 
the form of that stimulus. But to me it is clear that an accommodative fiscal stance was the 
appropriate  policy  response  given  the  circumstances.  In  the  case  of  the  United  States, 
without  substantial  fiscal  stimulus,  the  economy  would  have  been  even  weaker  and  the 
unemployment rate considerably higher. Given the fact that the federal funds rate could not 
be pushed any lower, fiscal stimulus was indeed important in stabilizing the economy. 
Going  forward,  however,  market  participants  are  worried  that  many  countries  are  now  on 
unsustainable  fiscal  paths.  By  unsustainable,  I  mean  a  scenario  in  which  persistently  high 
deficits cause the amount of outstanding debt to rise relative to GDP indefinitely, even if the 
economy  performs  well  in  the  future.  The  concern  is  that  at  some  point,  investors  worried 
about the potential for default would balk, and this would lead to sharply higher interest rates 
and a fiscal crisis.  
Just  as  there  needs  to  be  a  credible  exit  strategy  for  monetary  policy  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations,  there  also  needs  to  be  a  credible  exit  strategy  from  fiscal  policy  stimulus  to 
anchor expectations about the risks of sovereign debt default. This is not going to be easy for 
several  reasons.  Even  abstracting  from  considerations  involving  political  will  –  it  is  never 
easy to vote for higher taxes or lower spending – there is also the important issue of timing. 
The  economic  recovery  is  still  very  fragile.  This  means  that  premature  fiscal  retrenchment 
could  jeopardize  the  recovery  and  push  a  convalescent  economy  into  a  double-dip 
recession. 
Given  this  risk,  why  not  just  wait  and  see  how  things  go?  After  all,  in  the  United  States, 
market participants appear to be quite tolerant of the current large fiscal imbalance. In fact, 
long-dated  Treasury  yields  have  stayed  low  despite  signs  that  the  economy  is  indeed 
recovering. 
I think this is a risky strategy because it fully exposes the economy to the vagaries of market 
sentiment and because shifts in such sentiment can have important consequences for both 
the deficit path and the economy. Furthermore, the dynamics provoked by a sentiment shift 
can be self-reinforcing. Risk premia rise, driving up interest rates and debt service costs. In 
addition,  the  rise  in  longer-term  rates  constrains  economic  activity  –  making  it  even  more 
difficult to sustain an economic recovery.  
Moreover, once confidence begins to erode, it can do so very quickly. Even if a country were 
willing to pay higher interest rates, this path is not viewed as credible given the implications 
such  rates  have  for  future  debt  service  costs  and  deficits.  Put  simply,  to  wait  and  see 
ultimately is likely to necessitate an even bigger fiscal adjustment. 
In  addition,  waiting  for  the  market  to  say  “no  more”  may  mean  losing  discretion  as  to  the 
timing  and  magnitude  of  fiscal  tightening.  It  is  very  unlikely  that  the  time  when  market 
sentiment turns most adverse would also be the most attractive time to have to tighten fiscal 
policy.  Thus,  there  is  a  balancing  act  between  solving  the  longer-term  problem  of  needed 
fiscal consolidation and, at the same time, not tightening fiscal policy too soon or too abruptly 
so as to derail the nascent expansion. 
So  what  should  be  done?  I  believe  that  moving  ahead  earlier  with  a  credible  plan  is 
preferable to waiting. I am not going to enter a political debate about whether the restraint 
should be more in the form of higher taxes or lower spending. However, I do believe, like 
most  other  economists,  that  fiscal  consolidation  that  has  the  least  negative  impact  on 
investment  in  physical  and  human  capital  is  bound  to  be  most  effective.  That  is  because 
fiscal capacity depends on economic capacity. The bigger the economy grows over time, the 
more fiscal resources can be made available. Thus, taking steps that do not hurt long-term 
productivity  growth  would  seem  preferable  to  steps  that  reduce  the  amount  of  invested 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 5
capital – both physical and human – and/or its quality. I also would be inclined to measures 
that  indicate  a  credible  commitment  to  long-term  budget  consolidation,  but  with  a 
contractionary impulse that phases in only slowly and builds over time. 
The  last  challenge  I  wish  to  discuss  is  how  to  move  from  a  cyclical  recovery  to  a  more 
balanced and sustainable pattern of growth globally.  
Just as there are substantial fiscal imbalances in several countries that threaten to become 
unsustainable  in  the  absence  of  consolidation,  so  there  are  large-scale  imbalances  in  the 
world economy as a whole that raise issues of long-term sustainability. In particular, there 
continues to be a need to reduce consumption and increase saving relative to investment in 
the United States, and a parallel need to increase consumption relative to investment in parts 
of  the  emerging  world.  The  recent  crisis  has  reduced  but  not  eliminated  current  account 
imbalances worldwide. In many cases, the imbalances remain sizable, and they could begin 
to grow again and ultimately become destabilizing.  
The case for global rebalancing is compelling when we consider the structural backdrop. If 
we in the United States and other deficit countries are to move to a more healthy balance of 
private and public spending in relation to income, other countries cannot be as reliant on us 
as in the past to be their growth engine. The recent configuration of global demand, after all, 
has  involved  persistent  trade  surpluses  in  many  emerging  markets  and  this  represents 
foregone  consumption  and  investment  that  has  mostly  been  recycled  into  large  scale 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves.  
To be sure, the crisis demonstrated the value of an ample reserve cushion to protect against 
sharp shifts in capital flows. However, a number of countries have surely reached a point at 
which  further  reserve  accumulation  comes  with  more  costs  than  benefits.  The  expected 
return on foreign exchange reserves is likely to be quite low in relation to potential domestic 
uses. In fact, there is the prospect that reserves could earn a significantly negative return in 
local currency terms, especially when the acquisition of such reserves is undertaken to resist 
local currency appreciation that must eventually occur anyway. Finally, delay in adjustment of 
demand patterns and currencies raises the risk that these adjustments will ultimately occur in 
a  more  compressed  and  wrenching  manner.  How  many  times  have  we  seen  bottled-up 
pressures ultimately give way to disruptive overshooting? 
Moreover, lack of progress on rebalancing demand would put at risk the open trading regime 
that has been so important to global prosperity and growth. To date, protectionist pressures 
have  been  largely  contained.  But  if  surplus  countries  are  perceived  as  resisting  global 
adjustment, the political consensus in favor of an open global trading regime could begin to 
erode.  Protectionism  is  a  lose-lose  proposition  –  for  surplus  and  deficit  countries  alike  – 
which would ultimately prove very harmful to global growth. 
Sustainably rebalancing global growth won’t be an easy task – and it will take time. A larger 
share  of  consumer  spending  (and  lower  saving)  in  the  emerging  economies  requires  the 
development  of  a  stronger  and  more  comprehensive  safety  net  for  households.  Only  with 
institutional  support  for  health  care  and  retirement  are  families  likely  to  become  more 
comfortable saving less of their income. It also requires the further development of financial 
systems so that households can more easily obtain credit and shift expenditures forward in 
time – for example, to finance spending on education or to purchase housing. The fact that 
progress will be gradual simply bolsters the case for getting started as soon as possible. 
Action on rebalancing would also bring short-term benefits. As I’ve noted, the positive fiscal 
impulse that has supported global growth over the past 18 months is set to unwind. Indeed, 
in some countries, the stance of fiscal policy will soon turn contractionary. This means that 
such fiscal consolidation could conceivably put the global recovery at risk. This suggests that 
moves  to  rebalance  growth  toward  domestic  demand  in  trade  surplus  countries  would 
provide a useful offset. Such actions would generate stronger external demand for countries 
undergoing fiscal consolidation. Even if stronger exports were to provide only a partial offset 
to the restraint from fiscal consolidation, the increase in demand generated by rebalancing 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2010
would  reduce  the  risk  that  the  nascent  recoveries  might  falter.  This,  in  turn,  would  also 
reduce the risk of a protectionist backlash.  
To  conclude,  the  structural  case  for  rebalancing  is  compelling.  The  current  cyclical 
circumstances reinforce this case. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 7
