European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
2 September 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference.  We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting,  which  was  also 
attended by Commissioner Rehn. 
Based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council continues to 
view the current key ECB interest rates as appropriate. It therefore decided to leave them 
unchanged. Considering all the new information and analyses which have become available 
since our meeting on 5 August 2010, we continue to expect price developments to remain 
moderate over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, benefiting from low domestic price 
pressures. Recent economic data for the euro area have been stronger than expected, partly 
owing  to  temporary  factors.  Looking  ahead,  the  recovery  should  proceed  at  a  moderate 
pace,  with  uncertainty  still  prevailing.  Our  monetary  analysis  confirms  that  inflationary 
pressures over the medium term remain contained, as suggested by weak money and credit 
growth.  Overall,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  Inflation  expectations  remain 
firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations remains of the essence.  
The Governing Council has today also decided to continue to conduct its main refinancing 
operations  (MROs)  and  its  special-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  one 
maintenance  period  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment  for  as  long  as 
necessary, and at least until the end of this year’s twelfth maintenance period on 18 January 
2011.  The  fixed  rate  in  these  special-term  refinancing  operations  will  be  the  same  as  the 
MRO rate prevailing at the time. Furthermore, it has decided to conduct the 3-month longer-
term refinancing operations (LTROs), to be carried out in October, November and December 
2010,  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment.  The  rates  in  these  3-month 
operations will be fixed at the average rate of the MROs over the life of the respective LTRO. 
The Governing Council has also decided to carry out three additional fine-tuning operations 
on 30 September, 11 November and 23 December when 6-month and 12-month refinancing 
operations mature. 
Overall, the current monetary policy stance remains accommodative. Monetary policy will do 
all that is needed to maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium term. This is the 
necessary  and  central  contribution  that  monetary  policy  makes  to  fostering  sustainable 
economic  growth,  job  creation  and  financial  stability.  All  the  non-standard  measures  taken 
during the period of acute financial market tensions, referred to as “enhanced credit support” 
and  the  Securities  Markets  Programme,  are  fully  consistent  with  our  mandate  and,  by 
construction, temporary in nature. We remain firmly committed to maintaining price stability 
over the medium to longer term. The monetary policy stance, the overall provision of liquidity 
and the allotment modes will be adjusted as appropriate. Accordingly, the Governing Council 
will continue to monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
After a period of sharp decline, euro area economic activity has been expanding since mid-
2009.  Euro  area  real  GDP  grew  strongly  on  a  quarterly  basis,  increasing  by  1.0%  in  the 
second  quarter  of  2010,  supported  by  ongoing  growth  at  the  global  level  but  also  in  part 
reflecting  temporary  domestic  factors.  Recent  data  and  survey  evidence  generally  confirm 
the expectation of a moderation in the second half of this year, both at the global level and in 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 1
the  euro  area.  Nevertheless,  while  uncertainty  still  prevails,  they  continue  to  indicate  a 
positive underlying momentum of the recovery in the euro area. Ongoing growth at the global 
level and its impact on the demand for euro area exports, together with the accommodative 
monetary policy stance and the measures adopted to restore the functioning of the financial 
system, should continue to support the euro area economy. However, the recovery in activity 
is expected to be dampened by the process of balance sheet adjustment in various sectors 
and labour market prospects.  
This  assessment  is  also  reflected  in  the  September  2010  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, according to which annual real GDP growth will range between 
1.4% and 1.8% in 2010 and between 0.5% and 2.3% in 2011. Compared with the June 2010 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the range for real GDP growth this year has 
been revised upwards, owing to the stronger than expected rebound in economic growth in 
the second quarter as well as better than expected developments over the summer months. 
For 2011 the range has also been revised upwards, reflecting mainly carry-over effects from 
the projected stronger growth towards the end of 2010.  
In  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment,  the  risks  to  this  improved  economic  outlook  are 
slightly tilted to the downside, with uncertainty still prevailing. On the one hand, global trade 
may continue to perform more strongly than expected, thereby supporting euro area exports. 
On  the  other  hand,  concerns  remain  relating  to  the  emergence  of  renewed  tensions  in 
financial  markets  and  to  some  uncertainty  about  growth  prospects  in  other  advanced 
economies and at the global level. In addition, downside risks relate to renewed increases in 
oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  and  protectionist  pressures,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  a 
disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  1.6%  in  August, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  compared  with  1.7%  in  July.  The  small  decline  in 
inflation  is  likely  to  reflect  base  effects  in  the  energy  component.  Later  in  the  year  annual 
HICP inflation rates are expected to increase slightly while displaying some volatility. Looking 
further  ahead,  in  2011  inflation  rates  should  remain  moderate  overall,  benefiting  from  low 
domestic price pressures. Inflation expectations over the medium to longer term continue to 
be firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, 
but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
This  assessment  is  also  reflected  in  the  September  2010  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation in a range between 1.5% 
and 1.7% for 2010 and between 1.2% and 2.2% for 2011. Compared with the Eurosystem 
staff  macroeconomic  projections  of  June  2010,  the  ranges  have  been  revised  slightly 
upwards, largely on account of higher commodity prices.  
Risks to the outlook for price developments are slightly tilted to the upside. They relate, in 
particular, to the evolution of energy and non-oil commodity prices. Furthermore, increases in 
indirect taxation and administered prices may be greater than currently expected, owing to 
the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  coming  years.  At  the  same  time,  risks  to  domestic 
price and cost developments are contained.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 stood at 0.2% in July 2010, 
unchanged from June. The annual growth rate of loans to the private sector, which has been 
gradually  increasing,  rose  further  to  0.9%,  but  still  remains  relatively  weak.  The  subdued 
developments  in  money  and  loan  growth  continue  to  support  the  assessment  that  the 
underlying pace of monetary expansion is moderate and that inflationary pressures over the 
medium term are contained. 
The downward impact of the steep yield curve on monetary growth, which is reflected in the 
allocation of funds into longer-term deposits and securities outside M3, is gradually waning. 
Moreover,  the  impact  of  the  narrow  spreads  between  different  short-term  interest  rates  on 
the growth of the components of M3 is continuing to diminish. As a result, the annual growth 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2010
rate of M1 has continued to moderate from high levels, and stood at 8.1% in July 2010, while 
the annual growth rate of other short-term deposits has become less negative.  
The still weak annual growth rate of bank loans to the non-financial private sector continues 
to conceal positive growth in loans to households and diminishing negative annual growth in 
loans  to  non-financial  corporations.  These  developments  are  consistent  with  a  normal, 
lagged response of loan developments to economic activity over the business cycle.  
Given the subdued developments in banks’ overall balance sheets, the challenge remains for 
banks to expand the availability of credit to the non-financial sector when demand picks up. 
Where necessary, to address this challenge, banks should retain earnings, turn to the market 
to  strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  or  take  full  advantage  of  government  support 
measures for recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Considering all the new 
information and analyses which have become available since our meeting on 5 August 2010, 
we  continue  to  expect  price  developments  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant 
medium-term horizon, benefiting from low domestic price pressures. Recent economic data 
for  the  euro  area  have  been  stronger  than  expected,  partly  owing  to  temporary  factors. 
Looking  ahead,  the  recovery  should  proceed  at  a  moderate  pace,  with  uncertainty  still 
prevailing. A cross-check of the outcome of our economic analysis with that of the monetary 
analysis  confirms  that  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term  remain  contained,  as 
suggested  by  weak  money  and  credit  growth.  Overall,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be 
maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area 
households.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation 
expectations remains of the essence.  
Turning to fiscal policies, current developments at the euro area aggregate level appear to 
be  broadly  in  line  with  previous  expectations.  At  the  country  level,  any  positive  fiscal 
developments that may emerge, reflecting factors such as a more favourable than expected 
macroeconomic  environment,  should  be  exploited  to  make  faster  progress  with  fiscal 
consolidation.  At  the  same  time,  in  countries  where  there  is  still  a  need  to  take  additional 
specific measures to achieve consolidation targets, such measures should be adopted swiftly 
to ensure that consolidation commitments are fulfilled. This is a prerequisite for maintaining 
confidence in the credibility of governments’ fiscal targets. Positive effects on confidence can 
compensate  for  the  reduction  in  demand  stemming  from  fiscal  consolidation,  when  fiscal 
adjustment strategies are perceived as credible, ambitious and focused on the expenditure 
side.  The  conditions  for  such  positive  effects  are  particularly  favourable  in  the  current 
environment of macroeconomic uncertainty. 
In order to support the process of fiscal consolidation, to underpin the proper functioning of 
the euro area and to strengthen the prospects for higher sustainable growth, the pursuit of 
far-reaching structural reforms is essential. Major reforms are particularly needed in those 
countries that have experienced competitiveness losses in the past or that are suffering from 
high  fiscal  and  external  deficits.  Measures  should  ensure  a  wage  bargaining  process  that 
allows wages to adjust flexibly and appropriately to the unemployment situation and losses in 
competitiveness.  Reforms  to  strengthen  productivity  growth  would  further  support  the 
adjustment process of these economies.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 3
