Benny Popoitai: Prospects for development and economic growth in the 
new decade 
Address by Mr Benny Popoitai, Deputy Governor (Regulations) of the Bank of Papua New 
Guinea,  to  the  Papua  New  Guinea–Australian  Business  Council  Forum,  Townsville, 
Queensland, Australia, 16–18 May 2010. 
 Papua New Guinea (PNG) Minister for foreign affairs, Honourable Sam Abal, MP, Australian 
High Commissioner to PNG, His Excellency High Commissioner Mr. Ian Kemish, PNG’s High 
Commissioner to Australia, His Excellency High Commissioner Mr. Charles Lepani, the two 
presidents  of  the  Australia-PNG  Business  Council,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. I wish to thank the organizers for having invited the Bank of PNG, particularly the 
Governor, to make a presentation at this forum. I pass the Governor’s apology for not being 
able to make it to the forum due to other commitments. I am standing in for him.  
In the Bank of PNG’s Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) of 31st March 2010, the Governor 
outlined the monetary policy stance the Bank will pursue in the first half of this year and the 
medium term. Two points were stressed: that the Bank, in its application of monetary policy, 
will carefully assess and evaluate the trade-off between higher economic growth and inflation 
so as not to discourage domestic economic activity and ensure inflation does not spiral out of 
control;  and  that  only  prudent  fiscal  management  of  the  windfall  revenue  from  the  LNG 
project  and  close  cooperation  and  coordination  between  the  Central  Bank  and  the 
Government  will  make  it  possible  for  monetary  policy  to  address  inflationary  concerns  in 
2010 and the medium term when the private sector will be driving economic growth. These 
will  ensure  that  macroeconomic  stability  is  maintained,  which  in  turn  will  provide  the 
foundation  for  Papua  New  Guinea  to  fully  utilize  and  Papua  New  Guineans  to  use  all  the 
opportunities the development of the Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) project is offering.  
Today, my presentation will be on: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The lessons we can learn from our history on economic management;  
Current State of the Economy;  
What  are  the  development  prospects  of  the  construction  and  operation  of  a  LNG 
project?; and  
What should be done to ensure that this time around we achieve our development 
objectives?  
4. 
The lessons we can learn from our history on economic management  
1. 
As we all know, history can be a good teacher if we are willing to learn from it.  
The  Government’s  expansionary  fiscal  policy  and  its  reliance  on  monetary  policy  for  debt 
management, during the period between the outbreak of the Bougainville conflict in 1989 and 
1999  resulted  in  what  can  be  best  defined  as  the  “Lost  Decade”.  Instead  of  taking  full 
advantage of the very substantial income flows from the mineral developments and investing 
them in improving the social areas of health, education, physical infrastructure maintenance 
and construction of roads, airstrips, sea and river ports to open up the rural areas to markets, 
and  law  and  order  the  resources  were  squandered  and  wasted.  In  the  early  90’s  the 
misguided  policies  of  the  Government  of  the  day  by  reducing  taxes  and  increasing  the 
recurrent expenditure, at a time when the country was in a major, very costly armed conflict, 
resulted in the loss of public confidence, a run on the Kina and a state of insolvency after 
loosing all its foreign exchange reserves.  
BIS Review 85/2010 
 1
responsible  macroeconomic  management.  Fiscal 
In  June  1995  the  Organic  Law  on  Provincial  and  Local  Level  Governments  was  passed, 
shifting the fiscal operations of the Government from a centralized to a decentralized model. 
While well-intended, the change placed a further demand on the very strained resources of 
the  National  Government.  The  transfers  of  funds  from  the  National  Government  to  the 
Provincial and Local Level Governments was aimed at funding the transferred functions, in 
health,  education,  law  and  order  and  infrastructure.  While  the  funds  were  transferred  the 
functions stayed with the National Government and left unfunded. Not surprising the result 
was that the social indicators worsened and the infrastructure of the country deteriorated. In 
some parts of the country they have become unusable.  
Looking at the numbers in the “lost decade” after the very strong growth in the 1991 to 1993 
period, the rest of the period to 1999 has had an annual decline in growth of negative 1.1% 
on per annum. The result was that for the whole period from 1989 to 1999, a period when 
some  of  Papua  New  Guinea’s  very  large  mineral  developments  took  place,  the  per  capita 
growth in GDP was negative 1.6%.  
The  period  from  2000  to  2006  can  be  defined  as  a  period  of  consolidation  after  the 
restoration  of 
responsibility  was 
reestablished. The understanding that any increase in public debt places an unsustainable 
burden on the National Purse was accepted by all policy makers. Even more so, the need for 
close cooperation and coordination between the fiscal operations of the Government at all 
levels and monetary policy management, the sole responsibility of an independent Central 
Bank with a clearly stated prime objective of Price Stability, are the necessary conditions for 
a long term broad based economic development and growth. The annual growth in GDP was 
2.62% and with an annual population growth rate of 2.83%, the per capita growth in GDP 
was negative 0.0021% per annum. It is within the range of the statistical error, and therefore 
it is zero. This is still a poor performance but it is an improvement from the 1990s.  
It is only in the last three years, 2007 to 2009, that we have had an overall growth in GDP of 
21.5% or a per annum growth of 6.6% and a per capita growth rate of 3.77% per annum.  
The conclusions are very clear. In the thirty four years of our independence, we have failed in 
the overall objective to increase the standard of living and well-being of the great majority of 
our people. The statistical information we have shows that for the whole period the per capita 
income declined by around 4% and social indicators indicate a dismal performance, this with 
two periods of very strong GDP growth, the first at the mineral boom in 1991 to 1993 driven 
by the construction and increase in the volume of exports from Misima, Porgera and Kutubu 
and the second from 2006 to 2009 driven by unprecedented price increases of oil, copper 
and gold.  
Current state of the economy  
2. 
Papua New Guinea has, over the last 7 years, with a blip in 2009, benefited significantly from 
the  export  commodity  price  boom  as  it  resulted  in  fiscal  surpluses,  record  international 
reserve levels, reduced total public debt and sustained real GDP growth. The financial sector 
reform, which commenced in 2000, contributed to a sound and prudently managed financial 
system and aided economic growth.  
The  sound  and  prudent  management  of  our  financial  institutions  is  reflected  by  the  high 
capital  adequacy  ratios,  a  liquid  banking  system,  low  level  of  non-performing  loans,  and 
funding  of  loans  by  the  banking  system  from  deposits  rather  than  from  borrowings  from 
overseas. The Central Bank authorized financial institutions also remained highly profitable. 
A  further  testament  of  the  sound  financial  system  was  when  the  economy  withstood  the 
global financial crisis. Through good management our financial institutions had less exposure 
to the troubled markets and institutions abroad.  
Prudent monetary and fiscal policies between 2003 and 2009, with the exception of 2008, 
and a co-ordinated approach in their management also contributed to stable exchange rates 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2010
and price stability (low inflation in the single digits) and improved confidence in the domestic 
economy. Together with the low interest rate environment, this led to a significant increase in 
lending to the private sector, with a growth of between 30–40 percent during the period. The 
removal of foreign exchange controls, particularly on lending to non resident companies also 
supported the strong growth.  
We are still in the second boom with a blip in 2008, as a result of the Global Financial Crisis 
followed  by  a  depression  in  the  developed  countries  that,  led  to  economic  problems  all 
around the world. Price stability was achieved and maintained from 2004 to 2009, with the 
exception of 2008 and first half of 2009, due to high international food and fuel prices, which 
were  beyond  PNG’s  control.  There  was  also  prudent  fiscal  management  in  this  period, 
except for 2008.  
While it is too early to judge the outcome, we can point toward some improvements mainly in 
the formal structures. The Government has a Medium Term Development Strategy document 
2005–2010,  which  has  yet  to  be  updated,  a  Medium  Term  Fiscal  Strategy  Document  
2008–2012,  enacted  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  Act  2006,  and  formulated  the  Development 
Strategic Plan 2010–2030, and the Papua New Guinea Vision 2050. These can serve as the 
framework  for  a  clearly  defined  objective,  which  can  be  assumed  to  be,  a  Broad  Based 
Economic  Growth  as  measured  by  GDP,  underpinned  by  a  greater  participation  of  and 
benefit for the rural people.  
3. 
What are the development prospects of the construction and operation of a 
LNG Project?  
The  development  prospects  of  the  LNG  project  should  be  looked  upon  in  two  stages  – 
construction and operation (production).  
The construction stage  
A. 
The construction stage will last three to four years, to the end of 2013 or even 2014. The size 
of this project at a total expenditure of US$ 15 to US$ 16 billion is huge by all standards. Just 
to give some general measures, the expenditure is 1.8 times the estimated nominal GDP of 
Papua  New  Guinea.  It  is  far  beyond  what  the  country  experienced  in  the  past  mineral 
developments and a magnitude that at least I don’t know if there is a precedent of it in any 
other country. If we assume that construction will last for four years, every year the developer 
will spend the equivalent of 45% of the 2009 nominal GDP.  
A large portion of the expenditure will be on imported goods and services, paid from funds 
held off shore while, some of the goods and services will be purchased on shore, with funds 
to be brought in from off shore. The size of the project coupled with the very strong impact it 
will  have  on  domestic  economic  activity  will  facilitate  activity  in  the  other  sectors  of  the 
economy  such  as  food  production  in  agriculture,  manufacturing,  building  and  construction, 
and  transportation.  Those  who  will  act  for  the  LNG  project  will  be  paid  by  the  developer 
converting foreign exchange into Kina, which will have the effect of an appreciated kina. The 
increase in imports to accommodate increase in economic activity in other sectors will have 
the  effect  of  a  depreciated  kina.  These  opposite  effects  could  balance  each  other  out  and 
result in a stable kina exchange rate. But this will depend on the magnitude of flows from 
each side. Even if the reserves might decline as a result of the imports by other sectors that 
are not for the project development, it will be marginal. The Bank of Papua New Guinea has 
sufficient reserves to ensure that it has minimal impact on the exchange rate and through it 
on inflation.  
While  it  is  expected  that  there  will  be  very  strong  growth  in  economic  activity  during  the 
construction phase, high demand for goods and service will have some inflationary effect. To 
ensure that there is economic growth while inflation is not too high, the Government has to 
follow some clearly designed policies.  
BIS Review 85/2010 
 3
The developer is constructing a huge infrastructure corridor from the Southern Highlands to 
Port Moresby. They will construct roads, a pipeline, bring in electricity, telecommunication, 
and  meet  social-community  commitments  in  the  villages  where  the  corridor  is  passing 
through.  The  country’s  production  capacity  will  be  used  far  beyond  its  availability.  The 
Government  is  therefore  advised  not  to  undertake  any  major  infrastructure  development 
project during the construction years of the project and not increase its general expenditure. 
It  should  instead  concentrate  its  efforts  on  maintaining  and  improving  the  existing 
infrastructure that deteriorated in some areas to an unusable state.  
The added advantage will be that all the resources of the Government can be concentrated 
on the priority areas of education, health, conservation of the environment and law and order.  
In  these  three  to  four  years  the  Government  should  undertake  a  full  detailed  review  of  its 
development agenda. All sacred cows should be slaughtered.  
1. 
It should re visit the decentralization of Government responsibilities and review the 
Organic Law on Provincial and Local Level Governments to streamline channels of 
funding mechanism for rural areas;  
It should clearly define what Government should and should not do. What should be 
fully  privatized,  what  should  be  done  by  Public,  Private  Partnership,  and  what 
functions and roles should be abolished for enhancement and efficiency in service 
delivery;  
It should set out clearly defined targets for social indicators in health, education, law 
and order and conservation of the environment; and  
It  should  prioritize  the  infrastructure  projects  it  will  implement  after  the  resources 
used  by  the  developer  become  available  when  the  construction  phase  ends.  The 
Government  should  work  out  detailed  plans  for  the  highly  skilled  local  contractors 
working  on  the  LNG  infrastructure,  so  that  following  the  completion  of  the 
construction stage, it will use the resources elsewhere. This will ensure that there is 
no  crowding  out  of  the  private  sector  and  the  benefit  of  using  highly  qualified 
contractors  and  workforce,  to  implement  a  long  term  infrastructure  development 
framework can become a reality.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
We  at  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  also  have  to  work  on  several  matters  during  the 
construction phase of the project. These are:  
1. 
The development and implementation of a national payments systems that will be 
geared  toward  dealing  with  instruments  of  a  fully  developed  country  with  all  the 
payment mechanisms used in today’s world;  
Ensure  that  financial  services  are  available  to  the  people  “unbanked  population” 
wherever  they  are,  through  developing  the  Microfinance  industry  and  the  rural 
banking facilities by all the banks and financial institutions operating in the country, 
telephone, including mobile phone and internet banking;  
Enhancing competition in the banking and finance industry through licensing of new 
foreign exchange dealers such as FIFL, licensing of more micro banks such as the 
two new ones recently and licensing of Post PNG to do international remittances;  
Expanding the banking services and products on offer by the banks in the domestic 
and foreign exchange markets; and  
Creating  a  competitive  environment  to  ensure  that  the  people  enjoy  the  best  and 
lowest cost services, that a stable and prudently managed banking system can offer.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
I will move now to the last part of my address. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2010
4. 
What should be done to ensure that this time around we achieve our 
development objectives?  
The production and operations stage of the LNG project 
B. 
As I already said the three years 2006 to 2009 Papua New Guinea enjoyed a second mineral 
boom  driven  by  high  gold,  copper  and  oil  prices.  The  Government  learned  some  of  the 
lessons  of  the  failure  of  the  first  boom  in  the  1990’s  and  took  measures  not  to  repeat  the 
same  mistakes.  It  decided  to  use  some  of  the  excess  revenue  to  repay  domestic  and  off 
shore debt. This is equivalent to a Future Generation Fund. Reducing debt today reduces the 
burden on future generations when the debt becomes due.  
It  also  decided  to  place  some  of  the  excess  revenue  in  trust  accounts  to  be  used  as  a 
stabilization  fund.  This  decision  has  had  some  flaws,  the  first  is  that  the  use  of  the  funds 
were not tightly controlled and regulated by law. The second is that the funds were deposited 
with the commercial banks at a very low interest rate, and the Bank of Papua New Guinea 
has had to defuse them to ensure that the excess liquidity will not result in very high inflation, 
by using Central Bank Bills (CBB’s), at a much higher interest rate cost to the benefit of the 
commercial  banks.  Just  to  give  some  indication  of  the  magnitude  of  the  cost  to  the 
Government and the people, the interest rate paid on the trust accounts by the commercial 
banks were bellow 1%, while the CBB’s were placed at 5% and higher, and only this year it 
has come down to 4%. The amounts were very large, at the peak the trust accounts reached 
close  to  K4.6  billion  and  the  CBB’s  issued  were  K4  billion.  Every  one  of  us  can  see  how 
costly this was to the Government and the people of Papua New Guinea.  
The  third  problem  was  that  most  of  the  trust  accounts  were  aimed  to  be  spent  on 
development  projects  and  there  was  and  still  is  very  limited  implementation  capacity,  that 
result in non-efficient use of the funds and in some cases some of the funds were misused.  
The  fourth  and  last  issue  I  want  to  point  out  is  the  trust  accounts  offered  a  stabilization 
potential. They could be drawn down when the revenues decline. When it came to the test in 
the sharp decline of the commodity prices in 2008, it did not work. The Government incurred 
a relatively large deficit of K 479 million, which as expected has had an inflationary impact 
that resulted in a two digit level inflation of 11.2%.  
The generally accepted paradigm by the Government and the Bank of Papua New Guinea is 
that, a very responsible fiscal management, which aims at a balanced budget, or at the worst 
case  at  a  very  low  deficit,  and  a  complementary  monetary  management  with  the  main 
objective of price stability, defined as low inflation levels, which is a necessary condition for a 
long term, sustainable economic growth. If properly done, this can benefit the great majority 
of the population, living in the rural areas. For the Bank’s part, we realize that with the first 
LNG project and the likelihood of more LNG projects, the economy will enter a new era of 
economic  growth.  In  its  formulation  and  conduct  of  monetary  policy  the  Bank  will  carefully 
assess and evaluate the trade-off between higher economic growth and inflation so as not to 
discourage domestic economic activity and ensure inflation does not spiral out of control. 
It  is  very  encouraging  that  the  National  Executive  Council  (NEC)  decided  to  set  up  a  joint 
working group of very senior staff from the Department Treasury and the Bank of Papua New 
Guinea  to  asses  and  evaluate  the  applicability  of  the  Sovereign  Wealth  Fund  model,  to 
prepare the country toward the times that the LNG project will move into the operation stage 
of production and export.  
All  the  expectations  are  that  when  the  LNG  project  will  move  to  the  operation  stage,  the 
country will benefit from very large taxation, dividend, and royalty incomes. It is of outmost 
importance that the mistakes of the late 1980’s and 1990’s are not repeated. The Working 
Group  is  consulting  with  all  the  stake  holders  and  get  the  best  available  advice,  from 
domestic and international experts, to come up with the best structures known at the present 
to deal with large foreign exchange inflows.  
BIS Review 85/2010 
 5
The  last  thing  we  should  do  is  not  to  preempt  the  Working  Group’s  deliberations  and 
recommendations.  The whole  Nation  has  a  very  strong  interest  and  a  lot  at  stake  and  we 
want to ensure that they come up with the best possible solutions to the two subjects they 
deal  with;  the  stabilization  of  the  fiscal  operations  of  the  Government  and  the  Savings  for 
Future Generations, from a project of immense size and importance to the future wellbeing of 
all our nation.  
The  Government  in  close  cooperation  and  consultation  with  all  economic  sectors  and  civil 
society,  has  the  time  to  carefully  formulate,  and  design  the  implementation  tools  and 
mechanisms of its development strategies and plans, to ensure that we commence an era of 
high economic activity and growth for the nation’s future generations.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 85/2010
