Timothy Lane: Canada's housing sector in recession and recovery – 
beyond bricks and mortar 
Remarks by Mr David Wolf, Adviser at the Bank of Canada, on behalf of Mr Timothy Lane, 
Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Edmonton  Chartered  Financial  Analyst 
(CFA) Society, Edmonton, 11 January 2010. 
 Good afternoon, thank you for inviting me to speak with you today. The beginning of a new 
year  is  a  good  time  for  reflection  –  a  chance  to  look  back  over  the  past  12  months  and 
consider  what  may  lie  ahead.  Certainly,  2009  saw  remarkable  economic  and  financial 
upheaval  around  the  world,  which  plunged  Canada  into  a  severe  recession.  A  global 
recovery has begun, however, and as we look ahead, we can be confident that this recovery 
will become more deeply entrenched as the year progresses. 
Today,  I  will  discuss  some  trends  in  the  Canadian  economy,  focusing  on  a  particularly 
important sector: housing. The strengthening of the housing market – especially in the resale 
market – over the past few months has been striking.  
Housing is of considerable interest to the Bank of Canada, from two perspectives. First, it is 
important  to  consider  the  housing  market  when  formulating  monetary  policy.  The  housing 
sector is a crucial part of the Canadian economy, and it typically plays a disproportionate role 
in  economic  cycles.  Housing  wealth  provides  collateral  for  household  borrowing  and 
spending.  Increases  in  the  cost  of  housing  are  an  important  element  in  consumer  price 
inflation, and demand for housing is a gauge of household confidence. The housing market is 
also  very  sensitive  to  changes  in  interest  rates,  so  it  can  provide  an  important  channel 
through which monetary policy may influence the economy.  
Second, experience shows that increases and collapses in house prices have been driving 
forces  behind  bouts  of  financial  instability  in  many  countries.  Because  the  purchase  of  a 
home  is  the  most  significant  reason  for  household  borrowing,  housing  looms  large  on  the 
balance sheets of both homeowners and financial institutions. This nexus between financial 
system stability and the housing sector has been vividly illustrated by the developments in 
the U.S. housing market over the past two years. The painful correction in the U.S. housing 
sector was at the root of that country's financial system turmoil that started in August 2007 
and then spread around the world, triggering the global recession. 
Canada has been spared such drama, both in this recession and in recent history, and this 
has  drawn  much  international  interest.  Therefore,  it's  important  to  understand  the  policies 
affecting  the  housing  market,  and  then  to  work  to  strengthen  and  preserve  the  stabilizing 
aspects of our system.  
In my remarks today, I intend to review the implications of housing for both monetary policy 
and financial stability. I will begin by providing some context through a brief overview of the 
economic  outlook  for  the  world  and  for  Canada.  Then,  I  will  review  in  more  detail  how 
Canada's  housing  market  has  managed  so  well  through  the  global  crisis  and  some  of  the 
challenges it faces in the recovery. I will also explain how we at the Bank of Canada factor 
developments in the housing market into our policy decisions.  
The Canadian economy – looking back and looking forward  
The world economy was on a roller-coaster ride in 2009. It began the year in near free fall, 
plunging into a deep and synchronous global recession triggered by the worldwide financial 
crisis.  While  Canada  fared  better  than  many  countries  through  the  crisis,  we  did  feel  the 
effects through trade, confidence, and financial channels. 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
Aggressive,  coordinated  policy  actions  were  taken  in  many  countries  to  combat  the  crisis. 
These included significant measures to support financial systems, substantial fiscal stimulus, 
and monetary policy easing that took interest rates in all of the major advanced economies to 
historically low levels.  
Canada played an active role in this global policy response. While we did not need to bail out 
our financial institutions, fiscal and monetary policies were applied vigorously. Guided by the 
2  per  cent  target  for  inflation,  the  Bank  of  Canada  pushed  its  overnight  interest  rate 
essentially to the floor – that is, to the effective lower bound of 25 basis points. We also set 
out a framework for unconventional policies that could be used to provide further stimulus if 
needed. We implemented one element of this framework – our commitment to hold rates at 
the  effective  lower  bound  until  the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  2010,  conditional  on  the 
outlook  for  inflation  –  while  stressing  that  other  unconventional  policies  were  available  if 
needed.  
The worldwide effort provided the impetus for the global recovery that began to take hold in 
the middle of 2009. The Bank of Canada's October Monetary Policy Report pointed to the 
start  of  the  recovery,  and  the  global  outlook  has  improved  modestly  since  then.  However, 
significant  fragilities  remain,  since  the  recovery  is  still  heavily  dependent  on  government 
support, and sustained growth driven by the private sector has yet to materialize. 
Canada's economic recovery started in the third quarter of 2009, although it was weaker than 
had  been  anticipated  in  the  October  Monetary  Policy  Report.  This  recovery  has  been 
supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus, increased household wealth, improving financial 
conditions, stronger business and consumer confidence, the beginning of the recovery in the 
global economy, and a strengthening in the terms of trade. At the same time, the weakness 
of the recovery in the U.S. economy and the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar have 
exerted  a  drag  on  Canada's  growth.  The  balance  of  these  factors  has  tended  to  shift  the 
composition of aggregate demand towards growth in Canada's domestic demand and away 
from net exports. 
Overall, we continue to believe that Canada's recovery is likely to be more gradual than in 
previous cycles. While inflation is now below the 2 per cent target, the Bank expects that it 
will return to that target as the economy returns to potential.  
Canada's housing market – recent developments 
From  the  outlook  for  the  overall  Canadian  economy,  let  me  now  narrow  my  focus  to  the 
housing sector. First, a bit of recent history. As you know, Canadian housing activity dropped 
off sharply during 2008 and early 2009 as a result of the global recession. Turnover in resale 
markets  dropped  by  about  40  per  cent  from  their  peaks,  while  housing  starts  declined  to 
118,500, well below the estimated sustainable long-run average of about 175,000. However, 
the housing correction here was not nearly as destructive as the collapse of the U.S. housing 
market. This reflects, in part, the fact that the rise in housing prices prior to the crisis was not 
as  sharp  in  Canada  as  it  was  in  the  United  States.  Between  2000  and  2006,  U.S.  house 
prices appreciated by nearly twice as much as Canadian house prices. That said, Canadian 
house prices continued to appreciate for a longer period1. 
Moreover, Canada has not had the over-investment in housing that has created the need for 
painful  adjustments  in  the  United  States  and  some  other  countries.  The  steady  growth  in 
housing investment (that is, the construction of new housing units) in Canada over much of 
the  past  decade  was  due  largely  to  strong  employment  and  sustained  income  growth 
                                                 
1  Data from December 2009 Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland economic commentary: “Why Didn't Canada's 
Housing  Market  Go  Bust?”  J.  MacGee.  Sources  cited:  United  States,  S&P/Case-Shiller  (20-city  composite 
index); Canada, Teranet 6-city composite index). 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
supported  by  rising  commodity  prices.  There  was  also  a  degree  of  catch-up  from  under-
investment during the 1990s. The favourable financing environment, marked by relatively low 
interest  rates  plus  accommodative  mortgage  terms  and  conditions  in  that  period  played  a 
further, important role. Reflecting all these factors, Canada entered the global financial crisis 
with a smaller housing inventory than other countries.  
Behind  this  national  picture,  different  regions  of  Canada  have  experienced  different 
conditions. Housing markets in Western Canada were particularly robust during most of the 
past decade, as an inflow of new residents, rising income levels associated with the strength 
of energy prices, and a tight supply of housing combined to put upward pressure on house 
prices.  In  Alberta,  this  led  to  a  strong  supply  response,  with  house-building  activity  rising 
sharply.  
But  with  the  recession  and  tumbling  commodity  prices,  a  housing  market  correction  was 
inevitable. For Canada as a whole, prices for resale housing dropped by about 9 per cent2 
and for new homes, by about 3.5 per cent3 compared with their 2008 peaks. The correction 
was much steeper, though, for regions that had previously experienced the largest increases. 
Here in Alberta, as you know, the drop in prices has been larger. There was also a fall-off in 
activity – both resale and construction. 
Despite  that  correction,  many  are  asking  why  Canada's  housing  market  in  general  has 
tended to be less turbulent than housing markets in other countries. An important factor is 
Canada's  housing  finance  and  regulatory  system.  Canada's  mortgage  market  is  national, 
with similar lending conditions and mortgage products across most regions. It is dominated 
by domestic players, especially the six major banks, although a number of new competitors 
have entered the Canadian market in recent years.  
Canada's mortgage credit culture has tended to be quite conservative. Mortgage insurance is 
compulsory for federally regulated financial institutions when the loan-to-value ratio is over 
80 per cent. Further, mortgage insurance providers tend to set the lending standards for the 
industry as a whole. Only about 30 per cent of mortgages in Canada are securitized, so most 
lenders  have  ongoing  exposures  to  the  mortgages  they  originate,  and  that  gives  them  an 
incentive  to  be  more  prudent  in  their  lending  practices.  Borrowers  in  Canada  also  have 
reasons  for  prudence:  mortgage  interest  on  primary  residences  is  not  tax  deductible  in 
Canada  and  (in  most  provinces)  lenders  have  full  recourse  to  borrowers  in  the  event  of 
default. Thus, a combination of factors contributes to a more stable mortgage market. 
With  Canada's  economic  recovery,  the  housing  sector  has  been  experiencing  a  strong 
rebound. Sales of existing homes have reached a new high, and prices are now almost back 
to  2008  peak  levels.  Housing  starts  have  also  revived,  although  they  remain  below  their 
long-run levels. The rebound has been strong in most regions: in Alberta, resales were up 
more than 50 per cent in November compared with a year earlier, and housing starts have 
been increasing at rates of over 20 per cent for the past two quarters.  
The revival of housing activity is a reflection of the historically high level of affordability that is 
associated with the current record-low interest rates. Another important factor has been the 
rebound  in  consumer  confidence,  as  many  Canadians  see  their  economic  prospects 
brightening.  But  the  housing  rebound  is  also  partly  a  matter  of  timing,  rather  than  a 
permanent  increase  in  housing  demand.  Some  pent-up  demand  has  been  unleashed  as 
many families that a year ago, were too concerned about the future to commit to so large a 
purchase as a new home, are now willing to take that plunge. There is also an element of 
pull-forward  of  demand,  as  buyers  see  this  as  a  particularly  attractive  time  to  purchase  a 
home. 
                                                 
2  Resale housing prices for 2009 measured by Teranet from August 2008 to March 2009. 
3  New Housing Price Index from September 2008 to June 2009. 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 3
At the Bank of Canada, we follow these developments closely, both at a national level and 
through the work of our regional offices. We know that what happens in the housing market 
can have important effects through the macroeconomy, and these implications need to be 
taken  into  account  as  we  set  monetary  policy  to  achieve  our  inflation  target.  At  the  same 
time, as I have said, the housing market and related financing have important implications for 
financial stability. Let me elaborate on both of these aspects of policy. 
Policy implications 
As  Canada's  economic  growth  moves  towards  its  potential,  it  is  expected  that  a  robust 
housing  market,  supported  by  exceptionally  low  interest  rates,  will  continue  to  work  as  an 
important engine pulling the Canadian economy out of recession. This has implications for 
monetary policy, which, as I've said, aims to achieve the Bank's inflation target of 2 per cent 
over the medium term. It's important to remember that this target is symmetrical; that is, we 
are equally concerned about whether inflation is above target or below target – as we expect 
it  to  be  until  2011.  The  revival  of  the  housing  market  is  one  factor  that  is  helping  us  to 
achieve  our  inflation  target,  and  it  is  a  powerful  means  through  which  monetary  stimulus 
affects the economy. Of course, we need to keep a close eye on the housing market, along 
with  all  other  sectors  of  the  Canadian  economy,  to  ensure  that  we  are  providing  the  right 
amount of monetary stimulus. In setting monetary policy, we view housing – or the exchange 
rate,  the  energy  sector,  the  auto  industry,  or  any  other  factor  –  through  the  prism  of  our 
inflation target.  
Developments  in  the  housing  market  are  also  an  important  element  in  the  Bank's 
assessment of financial stability. The current rebound in the housing sector is taking place in 
tandem with a very rapid rise in household indebtedness: the household debt-to-income ratio 
reached a new high of 142 per cent in the second quarter of 2009. Household debt-service 
ratios remain moderate, but that is because interest rates are currently extraordinarily low. 
These high debt levels make households vulnerable to increases in borrowing costs, which 
will inevitably occur.  
To  illustrate  the  vulnerability  of  households,  both  to  increases  in  borrowing  costs  and  to 
further  growth  in  indebtedness,  the  Bank  conducted  a  series  of  stress  tests,  which  we 
published  in  the  December  issue  of  our  semi-annual  Financial  System  Review.  Using  the 
current  path  of  household  indebtedness,  and  alternative  assumptions  about  how  quickly 
interest  rates  may  increase,  the  simulation  generates  a  scenario  indicating  that,  by  the 
middle of 2012, almost one in ten Canadian households would have a debt-service ratio that 
makes them vulnerable to economic shocks. 
These projections are not forecasts of what will happen, of course, but they provide an early 
warning of what could happen, to help us all better understand the downside risks that could 
generate stress in the Canadian financial system. Consumer difficulties with rising mortgage 
payments can also lead to wider problems with other consumer loans, such as credit card 
debt. Consumers may also have to curtail other spending to cope with their debt burdens, 
creating adverse spillovers to the real economy. This is an illustration of how problems in one 
area, such as housing, can quickly spread throughout the economy and through the financial 
system.  
In addition, some observers have pointed to the risk of a housing bubble – a situation where 
the level of house prices is based primarily on extrapolative expectations that house prices 
can only rise further. Housing bubbles are usually fuelled by credit expansion, as borrowers 
and lenders take false comfort from exaggerated house prices. Generally, when there is a 
rapid rise in asset prices, including house prices, one should always ask whether they have 
increased too far, too fast.  
In  the  Bank  of  Canada's  view,  it  is  premature  to  talk  about  a  bubble  in  Canadian  housing 
markets. Recent house price increases do not appear to be out of line with the underlying 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2010
supply/demand  fundamentals.  Moreover,  with  housing  starts  below  long-term  demographic 
requirements, inventories are still declining. It is likely, though, that a significant part of the 
surge in housing sector activity is associated with temporary factors – notably the historically 
low borrowing costs, as well as pent-up and pulled-forward demand – which cannot continue 
to drive increases in house prices and activity. Thus, we see the housing market as requiring 
vigilance, but not alarm.  
This  discussion  leads  to  the  following  question:  if  the  Bank  did  see  the  housing  market 
posing a possible threat to financial stability, what should we or other authorities do about it? 
Some  observers  –  those  who  see  a  housing  bubble  forming  –  have  said  that  since  low 
interest  rates  have  stimulated  housing  market  activity,  the  Bank  should  now  raise  interest 
rates to dampen that activity. 
But that poses a problem. As I've stressed, we have a mandate to use our key interest rate to 
achieve  our  inflation  target  –  and  the  housing  market  is  only  one  of  several  factors  that 
influence inflation. If the Bank were to raise interest rates to cool the housing market now – 
when inflation is expected to remain below target for the next year and a half – we would, in 
essence, be dousing the entire Canadian economy with cold water, just as it emerges from 
recession. As a result, it would take longer for economic growth to return to potential and for 
inflation to get back to target. This is why we say monetary policy is a blunt instrument for 
achieving financial stability. 
So what other instruments are available? An array of supervisory and regulatory instruments 
can be used by the government to restrain a build-up of systemic risks. These include capital 
requirements  for  institutions,  leverage  ratios,  loan-to-value  ratios,  terms  and  conditions  for 
mortgage insurance, and a variety of other measures. These instruments can be targeted to 
risks to the entire financial system that stem from particular markets or institutions.  
Using  these  instruments  to  safeguard  the  whole  financial  system  –  not  just  individual 
institutions – is the essence of the macroprudential approach. Macroprudential supervision is 
one of several concepts in a current global initiative to strengthen supervision and regulation 
in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  In  Canada,  a  system-wide,  or  macroprudential, 
approach  is  the  shared  responsibility  of  the  Department  of  Finance  and  all  of  the  federal 
financial  regulatory  authorities,  including  of  course  the  Bank  of  Canada,  the  Office  of  the 
Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  and  the  Canada  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation. 
Ultimately, it is the Minister of Finance who is responsible for the sound stewardship of the 
financial system.  
Conclusion 
Prudent, conservative policies have provided significant support to Canada's housing market, 
through  both  good  times  and  bad.  This  point  has  been  amply  demonstrated,  during  the 
recent recession – where many countries saw imbalances roil their housing markets – and in 
the  ongoing  recovery  here  in  Canada.  The  current  revival  in  our  housing  sector  was  a 
desirable, and intended, part of Canada's economic recovery, but like all good things, it must 
be carefully monitored to ensure that it doesn't go to an extreme.  
You  can  be  sure  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  be  closely  watching  developments  in  the 
housing  sector  and  taking  them  into  account  in  our  decisions  on  monetary  policy  and  in 
assessing financial stability. In setting interest rates to achieve the inflation target, housing 
developments  need  to  be  weighed  along  with  all  the  other  factors  influencing  economic 
activity  and  inflation.  In  assessing  financial  stability,  we  focus  on  the  potential  risks  to  the 
whole financial system. In carrying out these responsibilities, we are committed to promoting 
the economic and financial welfare of Canada, by fostering confidence in the value of money, 
and in the safety and efficiency of our financial system. 
With that, I wish you a happy and prosperous 2010.  
BIS Review 4/2010 
 5
