Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India – 
issues and perspectives 
Article by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, published 
in Financial Stability Review, Bank of France, July 2010.  
(Reproduced with permission from the Bank of France) 
 The  present  article  tries  to  put  in  perspective  the  boundary  conditions,  imposed  by  the 
macroeconomic  constraints,  which  have  guided  the  evolution  of  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
markets in India and underlines the point that the process of transiting from a predominantly 
OTC based model to an exchange-traded model needs to follow a calibrated path. Through 
this transition period, the overall regulatory approach towards OTC derivative markets is as 
important as addressing the transactional aspects. 
In  India,  unlike  the  developed  financial  markets  where  OTC  derivative  markets  epitomised 
complex,  unregulated  financial  innovations  that  grew  exponentially  over  the  last  two 
decades,  the  OTC  derivative  markets  have  evolved  within  a  regulated  space.  The  major 
elements  of  this  regulatory  framework  include  a  broad  specification  of  products  to  be 
permitted,  nature  of  participants  in  the  markets,  distinct  responsibilities  for  market  makers 
and  users  for  all  OTC  derivatives,  effective  reporting  systems  for  capturing  systemic 
information  and  focus  on  developing  market  infrastructure  for  post-trade  clearing  and 
settlement. 
Given the above context, the OTC space in India for interest rate and forex derivatives will 
continue to operate within a regulated manner with increased transparency. New instruments 
for  exchanges  will  be  introduced  in  a  gradual  manner,  as  hitherto.  Further  areas  for 
strengthening  the  functioning  of  OTC  markets  will  include  greater  standardisation  of  OTC 
derivatives and extending central clearing arrangements for such contracts where feasible. 
Work  has  already  been  initiated  for  designing  a  centralised  trade  reporting  system  for  all 
OTC derivatives for better systemic oversight and market transparency. 
The  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivative  markets,  in  particular  credit  derivatives,  are  now 
perceived  as  the  weak  link  in  the  financial  system  that  increased  the  systemic  risk  of 
contagion and exacerbated the financial crisis globally. Their complex and non-transparent 
nature  coupled  with  a  light-touch  regulatory  approach  towards  them  resulted  in  excessive 
counterparty  exposures  and  risk  concentrations  building  up  through  the  system.  Naturally 
there has been a concerted effort globally to reform the OTC derivative markets, with much 
of  the  debate  focusing  on  measures  to  address  the  issues  of  counterparty  credit  risk  and 
non-transparency. The revised template for reforming these markets, as is being pursued in 
major jurisdictions, therefore broadly envisions greater standardisation of contracts to make 
them  eligible  for  central  clearing,  tighter  counterparty  risk  management  norms  and  higher 
capital  charges  for  all  clearing-ineligible  contracts  and  making  these  markets  more 
transparent. 
The  OTC  derivatives  are  generally  considered  superior  to  exchange-traded  derivatives  in 
their amenability to customisation to cater to specific risk management needs of clients. OTC 
markets are also best suited to test innovative products, let them stabilise and get refined, 
before these are considered suitable for wider offering through standardisation. However, the 
explosion in the OTC derivative volumes over the past decade globally has largely been a 
result of these markets moving out of the regulatory perimeter as part of a conscious policy 
stand.  The  regulation  of  financial  markets  in  key  developed  markets  was  reinterpreted  as 
being limited to regulation of the conduct of business aspect on exchange-traded markets, 
under  the  presumption  that  the  risks  in  OTC  derivative  markets  would  best  be  addressed 
through entity regulation. As is now evident, this approach was found to be inadequate since 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 1
the  entity  regulation  itself  relied  heavily  on  banks’  own  risk  management  frameworks  and 
more importantly, risks building up in the OTC space at the systemic level were lost sight of. 
In contrast to the above, the predicament for countries such as India is qualitatively different 
from  the  developed  countries  in  terms  of  the  nature  and  evolution  of  the  OTC  derivative 
markets as well as the regulatory approach towards these markets. 
Contextual considerations 
1. 
Exchange  traded  derivative  markets,  to  be  efficient  and  complete,  require  a  certain  set  of 
policy framework for the underlying markets. Essentially what the exchange traded markets 
demand  are  friction-free  underlying  markets  with  no  restrictions  on  taking  long  or  short 
positions  and  a  seamless  integration  between  different  segments  enforced  through  free 
participation by all agents. In simple words, efficient exchange traded derivative markets and 
controls in the underlying market do not go together. 
This  is  a  fundamental  challenge  faced  by  the  policy  makers  in  economies  where 
macroeconomic  and  structural  constraints  as  well  as  financial  stability  considerations 
necessitate certain restrictions on the underlying markets. In the case of India, for instance, 
there  are  policy-imposed  limitations  on  participation  by  various  economic  agents.  There  is 
still  a  requirement  of  an  underlying  exposure  for  undertaking  forex  derivative  transactions. 
Most  importantly,  the  real  sector  tolerance  for  high  volatility  in  exchange  rates  as  well  as 
interest rates is limited and this makes policy interventions in the cash markets an additional 
variable to contend with. 
While  exchange  traded  derivative  markets  do  not  fit  into  this  framework,  whatever  their 
operational  benefits,  OTC  markets  make  it  feasible  to  pursue  market  development  in  a 
gradual framework within the given constraints. This is precisely what has happened in India 
where OTC derivative markets have evolved to significant volumes. 
It would be imperative to recognise the above considerations while chalking out the reform 
path  for  OTC  derivative  markets  in  India.  The  nuanced  terms  of  the  reform  proposals  will 
need to focus more on strengthening the OTC market framework instead of being embroiled 
with binary consideration of OTC vis-à-vis exchanges. 
Evolution of OTC derivatives 
2. 
The financial derivative markets in India have evolved through a reform process over the last 
two decades, witnessed in its growth in terms of size, product profile, nature of participants 
and  the  development  of  market  infrastructure.  At  present,  the  following  categories  of 
derivatives are permitted: 
 OTC 
Exchange-traded 
Rupee interest rate 
derivatives 
Foreign currency 
derivatives 
Equity derivatives 
Interest rate futures 
Forward rate 
agreements, 
interest rate 
swaps 
Forwards, 
swaps, options Currency futures 
  
Index futures, index 
options, stock futures, 
stock options 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2010
The  OTC  derivative  markets  in  India,  unlike  the  developed  financial  markets  where  these 
markets  epitomised  complex,  unregulated  financial  innovations,  have  evolved  within  a 
regulated space. The process of evolution needs to be seen in perspective of the boundary 
conditions  imposed  by  the  broader  macroeconomic  framework  for  the  development  of  the 
financial sector. 
The process of financial market reforms in India is less than two decades old. It was in March 
1993 that a system of market-determined exchange rates was adopted by India as part of a 
broad  set  of  structural  reform  measures.  Gradually,  financing  the  fiscal  deficit  transitioned 
from  automatic  monetisation  to  market-based  borrowings  resulting  in  a  regular  supply  of 
marketable securities. With regard to exchange rate, it was in August 1994 that the rupee 
was made fully convertible on current account. These reforms allowed increased integration 
between domestic and international markets and created a need to manage interest rate and 
currency risks. 
It  was  in  the  above  backdrop  that  a  menu  of  OTC  products  was  introduced  to  enable  the 
economic  agents  to  manage  their  risks  in  an  effective  manner.  Being  a  bank  dominated 
system, it was natural that these products were offered through the OTC market with banks 
acting as intermediaries. On the forex side, apart from forwards, which were in existence for 
long, cross currency options not involving rupee, foreign currency-rupee options and swaps 
were  permitted  for  customers  who  have  foreign  currency  exposures.  The  fundamental 
requirement  of  existence  of  an  underlying  commercial  transaction  for  entering  into  a 
derivative,  both  on  current  or  capital  account,  has  remained  through  the  years.  The 
determination  of  underlying  exposure  is  largely  based  on  current  exposure  and  past 
performance  for  trade  related  transactions.  However,  as  an  exception,  borrowers  having 
long-term Indian rupee (INR) borrowing were permitted to use foreign currency-INR swaps to 
transform these into a foreign exchange liability. 
On the interest rate side, banks and primary dealers were allowed in 1999 to offer forward 
rate agreement (FRA) and rupee interest rate swaps (IRS) to corporates for hedging interest 
rate risk as also to deal in them for their own balance sheet hedging and trading purposes. 
The size of the OTC interest rate and forex derivative markets in India is given in the Annex. 
In case of securitisation, a regulatory framework was put in place after a sizeable market had 
developed. The attempt was to standardise the differing practices being followed by banks 
and address certain concerns on accounting, valuation and capital treatment. One of the key 
provisions,  among  others,  was  to  disallow  upfront  booking  of  profit/premium  arising  on 
account of sale and requiring it to be amortised over the life of the securities issued by the 
SPV. These measures went a long way in disincentivising some of the innovative structures 
that  created  problems  elsewhere.  Furthermore,  in  view  of  the  pass-through  nature  of  the 
securities linked to cash flows from the underlying assets, the risk of maturity mismatches is 
reduced. 
Credit  default  swaps  (CDSs)  are  currently  not  permitted  and  are  in  the  process  of  being 
introduced to provide the participants an instrument to manage their credit risk. This is also 
expected to aid the development of the corporate bond market. The aftermath of the crisis 
provides an opportunity for countries such as India, which are starting on a clean slate, to 
address some of the negative features associated with the product through an appropriate 
framework design. It is proposed to start with plain vanilla single name CDSs on corporate 
bonds  in  the  OTC  market.  The  guidelines,  to  be  placed  in  public  domain  would  broadly 
emphasise  on  appropriate  risk  management  framework,  greater  transparency  in  CDS 
transactions and eventually providing a clearing framework.1 
                                                 
1  Gopinath  (S)  (2010):  “Pursuit  of  complete  markets  –  The  missing  perspectives”,  RBI  Speeches, 
http://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=480. 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 3
From a systemic perspective, a key issue would be of induced volatility in the credit markets 
as a result of CDS markets. It is in this context that the issue of insurable interest becomes 
relevant.  Permitting  naked  CDS  may  increase  buildup  of  speculative  positions  across  the 
system.  It  may  also  accentuate  adverse  incentives  by  encouraging  leveraged  credit 
exposures  and  impeding  effective  resolution  process.  However,  prohibiting  naked  CDS 
would  constrain  market  making  in  the  product.  The  challenge  would  be  to  design  a  limit 
structure  within  which  market  making  could  be  facilitated  by  regulated  entities.  Stipulating 
risk limits such as “risky duration”/“risky PV01”2 of CDS portfolio may need to be considered. 
In the exchange traded derivative space, a more liberal approach has been adopted and in 
the  recent  past.  While  currency  futures  and  interest  rate  futures  have  already  been 
introduced  on  exchanges,  currency  options  on  USD/INR  are  in  the  process  of  being 
introduced. While it is expected that these markets fulfil the genuine hedging requirements of 
the participants, it is not possible to replicate the discipline of ensuring underlying commercial 
transactions which is possible in the OTC market. Accordingly, the interest rate and currency 
futures markets operate in parallel with the OTC markets with different set of stipulations. 
Regulatory framework for OTC derivatives 
3. 
Explicit  regulation  of  OTC  derivatives  in  India  has  been  a  key  element  of  the  policy 
framework  which  has  helped  in  preserving  systemic  stability.  The  responsibility  for  the 
regulation of all interest rate, forex and credit derivatives, including OTC derivatives, vests 
with  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI).  Legally,  the  RBI  derives  these  powers  from  various 
statutes including the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 
the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. 
The RBI Amendment Act, 2006, was a key milestone in explicitly laying down the regulatory 
framework  for  OTC  interest  rate,  forex  and  credit  derivatives.  The  box  gives  a  brief 
background and provisions of this amendment. 
Substantively  also,  regulation  of  these  markets  being  with  the  RBI  makes  eminent  sense. 
The underlying variables in these markets viz. interest rates and exchange rates have critical 
bearing  on  the  macroeconomic  management  by  the  RBI  and  it  is  imperative  that  the 
regulation of these derivatives are aligned with the larger policy objectives of monetary and 
financial stability. Further, in all these markets banks are the dominant participants and the 
overarching role of the entity regulator for banks i.e. the RBI provides the requisite synergy. 
The  major  elements  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  OTC  derivatives  include  a  broad 
specification  of  products  to  be  permitted,  nature  of  participants  in  the  markets,  distinct 
responsibilities  for  market  makers  and  users  for  all  OTC  derivatives,  effective  reporting 
systems  for  capturing  systemic  information,  governance  and  oversight  and  focus  on 
developing  market  infrastructure  for  post-trade  clearing  and  settlement.  The  underlying 
rationale for key stipulations is explained below. 
(i) 
There  is  a  requirement  that  for  an  OTC  derivative  transaction  to  be  legally 
valid,  one  of  the  parties  to  the  transaction  has  to  be  a  RBI  regulated  entity. 
This  is  to  ensure  that  the  entire  OTC  derivative  market  is  within  the  regulatory 
perimeter. Prudential prescriptions for each class of participants may be decided by 
the  respective  regulator  within  the  broad  policy  framework  but  it  makes  systemic 
monitoring possible. 
                                                 
2  Risky  PV01  represents  the  value  change  (Present  Value  Impact)  of  the  CDS  when  the  spread  moves  by 
1 basis point. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2010
(ii) 
There is a clear distinction between the roles of market makers and users for 
all OTC derivatives. It is the market makers which function as risk transferors in the 
system. It is extremely important that these entities function in a totally transparent 
and regulated manner. Only banks and primary dealers in case of certain interest 
rate derivatives are permitted to act as market makers since extending this facility to 
all agents can result in risks building up on the balance sheets of such entities. 
Box 1 
RBI Amendment Act, 2006 
traded on a recognised stock exchange;  
settled on the clearing house of the recognised stock exchange,  
in accordance with the rules and bye-laws of such stock exchange.” 
In  1999,  by  the  Securities  Laws  (Amendment)  Act,  1999,  section  18A  was  inserted  in  Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (SCRA) which reads as under: 
“18A. Contracts in derivative – Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, contracts in derivative shall be legal and valid if such contracts are 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
In view of the said section 18A of SCRA, a doubt was raised about the legality of OTC derivatives such 
as  forward  rate  agreements  and  interest  rate  swaps  permitted  under  RBI  guidelines  issued  in  July 
1999. It was felt that these OTC derivatives could be deemed as wagering contracts and as such, void 
under section 30 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and not legally valid under section 18A of SCRA. 
Recognising  that  OTC  derivatives  play  a  crucial  role  in  reallocating  and  mitigating  the  risks  of 
corporates, banks and financial institutions and that the ambiguity regarding the legal validity of OTC 
derivatives  inhibits  the  growth  and  stability  of  the  market  for  such  derivatives,  suitable  amendments, 
effective January 9, 2007, were carried out to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (RBI Act). 
Section 45V of RBI Act, 1934 (inserted by Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2006) lays down 
that  notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  SCRA  or  any  other  law  for  the  time  being  in  force, 
transactions in such derivatives, as may be specified by RBI from time to time, shall be valid, if at least 
one of the parties to the transaction is RBI, a scheduled bank, or such other agency falling under the 
regulatory purview of RBI under the RBI Act, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999, or any other Act or instrument having the force of law, as may be specified by 
RBI from time to time. It also provides that transactions in such derivatives, as had been specified by 
RBI from time to time, shall be deemed always to have been valid. 
The  Act  further  gives  powers  to  the  Reserve  Bank  under  Section  45W  to  “...determine  the  policy 
relating to interest rates or interest rate products and give directions in that behalf to all agencies or any 
of  them,  dealing  in  securities,  money  market  instruments,  foreign  exchange,  derivatives,  or  other 
instruments of like nature as the Bank may specify from time to time.” However, the directions shall not 
relate  to  “the  procedure  for  execution  or  settlement  of  the  trades”  in  respect  of  transactions  on 
exchanges. 
 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The users, including financial entities, are permitted to transact in derivatives 
essentially to hedge an exposure to risk or a homogeneous group of assets 
and  liabilities  or  transform  an  existing  risk  exposure.  This  stipulation  is 
essentially  to  restrict  speculative  trading  in  derivatives  by  the  real  sector,  whose 
primary economic interest in undertaking derivative transactions should be to hedge 
their exposures. 
Derivative  structured  products  (i.e.  combination  of  cash  and  generic 
derivative instruments) are permitted as long as they are a combination of two 
or more of the generic instruments permitted by RBI and do not contain any 
derivative as underlying. Structured products entail packaging of complex, exotic 
derivatives into structures that may lead to increased build-up of risks in the system. 
Some of these structures may simply be unsuitable for a large section of users given 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 5
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
The responsibility for assessment of customer suitability and appropriateness 
is squarely on the market maker. There are a detailed set of requirements that the 
market maker needs to fulfil in this regard while selling any product to a user. As the 
recent experience in many countries shows, inappropriate understanding of complex 
derivatives by the buyers of these can have serious repercussions. The argument of 
caveat emptor does not really work in practice, as many countries are realising on 
account  of  huge  derivative  losses.  It  is  ultimately  a  systemic  issue  and  it  is 
important, in the interest of sellers of the products as well, that sufficient suitability 
assessment is done before selling the product. 
All  OTC  forex  and  interest  rate  derivatives  attract  a  much  higher  credit 
conversion  factor  (CCF)  than  prescribed  under  the  Basel  framework  and  all 
exposures are reckoned on a gross basis for capital adequacy purpose. The 
applicable CCFs were increased in 2008 since it was felt that the conversion factors 
prescribed  under  the  Basel  framework  did  not  sufficiently  capture  the  market 
volatility of underlying variables in the Indian context. 
Exposures of banks to central counterparties (CCPs) attract a zero risk weight 
as  per  Basel  norms.  Additionally,  collaterals  kept  by  banks  with  the  CCPs 
attract  risk  weights  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  the  CCP  as  reflected  in  the 
ratings  under  the  Basel  II  Standardised  Approach.  The  latter  was  incorporated  by 
RBI as CCPs cannot be considered risk free entities. 
All  permitted  derivative  transactions,  including  roll  over,  restructuring  and 
novation  are  required  to  be  contracted  only  at  prevailing  market  rates.  This 
ensures  that  non-market  rates  are not  used  to  manipulate  cash  flows  current  and 
future. 
There  are  regulations  for  participation  by  non-residents 
in  derivative 
transactions. This basically flows from the capital account management framework 
which  places  certain  restrictions  for  participation  by  non-resident  investors  in  the 
forex and interest rate markets.3 
Clearing and settlement infrastructure for OTC derivatives 
4. 
In  India  as  early  as  in  2002,  the  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd  (CCIL)  commenced 
guaranteed  settlement  of  inter-bank  spot  forex  transactions  and  all  outright  and  repo 
transactions  in  government  securities,  whether  negotiated  or  under  order  driven  systems. 
CCIL has commenced non-guaranteed settlement of OTC trades in IRS/FRA in November 
2008, covering over 75 per cent of the market turnover. CCIL also offers certain post-trade 
processing  services  like  resetting  interest  rates  and  providing  settlement  values  to  the 
reporting members. Guaranteed settlement of these trades is expected soon. CCIL also acts 
as central counterparty for spot and forex forward trades. 
With the enactment of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2008, the Reserve Bank 
has the legislative authority to regulate and supervise payment and settlement systems in the 
country.  The  clearing  and  settlement  facilities  offered  by  CCIL  are  governed  by  the  risk 
                                                 
3  Foreign  investment  in  rupee  debt  securities,  both  sovereign  as  well  as  corporate,  is  permitted  only  within 
prescribed limits. This follows from the broader capital account management framework which has favoured 
freer foreign investment in equity markets and a limited access in the debt markets. Non-residents are also not 
permitted to freely transact in forward markets; a limited window has been allowed to non-resident investors to 
hedge their currency risk in respect of their investments in India. 
6 
 BIS Review 102/2010
management  processes  which  are  assessed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  through  its  offsite 
monitoring and onsite inspections. The margins with the CCIL are maintained in the form of 
cash  and  government  bonds  ensuring  the  quality  and  liquidity  of  the  settlement  guarantee 
fund. 
Transparency and reporting 
5. 
The aggregate trade data relating to all OTC derivatives is required to be reported by banks 
on  a  regular  basis.  On  the  forex  side,  while  banks  are  required  to  report  aggregate  daily 
sales/purchases  of  forex  forwards  and  swaps,  data  relating  to  options  is  collected  on  a 
weekly basis. Additionally, as part of regulatory reporting, banks report to the RBI product-
wise  notional  principals  of  their  outstanding  derivative  exposures  on  a  monthly  basis, 
indicating  the  bifurcation  between  trading  book  and  banking  book,  and  benchmark-wise 
details of interest rate swaps. They also report related credit risk exposure to their top ten 
counterparties each in the financial and non-financial sectors. 
In the recent past, important initiatives have been taken to enhance reporting disaggregated 
trade data for OTC derivative transactions. A start was made in 2007 when all banks started 
reporting the inter-bank interest rate swap (IRS) trade data on-line to CCIL. The collection of 
client level trade data from banks has also started on a weekly basis from October 2009. The 
traded price range and volume data on inter-bank trades is also being disseminated publicly 
for market transparency. 
Going  forward,  a  working  Group  is  looking  into  the  issue  of  a  single  point  centralised 
comprehensive  reporting  of  all  OTC  derivatives.  The  objective  is  two-fold:  to  make  the 
reporting more meaningful for regulatory assessment as well as market transparency and to 
have a single-point reporting platform for all market transactions. 
Issues going forward 
to  operate  within  a  regulated 
6. 
Given  the  above  context,  the  OTC  market  in  India  for  interest  rate,  forex  and  credit 
derivatives  will  continue 
increased 
transparency.  New  instruments  for  exchanges  will  be  introduced  in  a  gradual  manner,  as 
hitherto. Further areas for strengthening the functioning of OTC markets will include greater 
standardisation of OTC derivatives and suitably extending central clearing arrangements for 
such contracts where feasible. 
However, there are a few open issues which need to be addressed: 
(i) 
framework  with 
Contract  standardisation:  standardisation  is  one  of  the  prerequisites  of  moving 
contracts towards central clearing. There is merit in going by the argument put forth 
in  a  recent  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA)  paper  that  there  are  benefits  from 
pursuing greater standardisation in itself, irrespective of whether these products are 
then  cleared  or  traded  on  an  exchange.  Given  the  vanilla  nature  of  products 
permitted  in  the  Indian  context,  standardisation  for  existing  products  may  not  be 
difficult. 
Bilateral  collateralisation:  though  bilateral  collateralisation  is  considered  an 
efficient,  though  sub-optimal,  solution  to  central  clearing,  it  involves  significant 
trade-offs. 
 
Move  towards  increased  collateralisation  could  increase  cost  for  hedging  by 
the  real  sector  and  place  huge  premium  on  availability  of  good  quality 
collateral. In case of client trades, it may need to be recognised that a bank-
client  relationship  is  a  much  broader  one  and  could  include  a  credit 
relationship  as  well.  Provision  of  a  facility-wise  collateralisation  may  work 
(ii) 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 7
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
  Operationally,  collateralisation  is  effective  only  if  the  exposure  is  calculated 
frequently and there is a mechanism to exchange collateral dynamically. Who 
would ensure this? It will invariably again be the bank’s own model which will 
be used to arrive at both the exposures in favour or against the bank. 
From a systemic perspective, there is also the issue of procyclicality that gets 
hardwired  in  the  system  through  mark-to-market  based  collateralisation  and 
this would be equally applicable in the central clearing model. 
Push towards central clearing: while CCP model is accepted as an ideal solution 
form  a  counterparty  risk  perspective,  it  is  being  increasingly  recognised  that  a 
universal acceptance of CCP model would result in the concentration of risks at one 
point, which would potentially become the single point of failure for market stability. 
Certain issues become extremely critical in this regard: 
 
Clearability  of  contracts  would  be  a  key  issue.  The  essence  of  a  CCP 
arrangement is netting and margining, which are contingent on homogeneity 
of the underlying asset, availability of reliable prices and sound risk models to 
capture potential future exposures. The ability of models to capture tail risks is, 
however, put to question post crisis. 
It  would  become  imperative  for  the  CCPs  to  be  treated  as  “too-big-to-fail” 
systemic entities and be brought under the oversight of the systemic regulator 
within a globally harmonised set of standards. In this regard one important and 
as  yet  unresolved  question  is  whether  CCPs  should  have  access  to  central 
bank credit facilities and, if so, when. Given the incentives structures and the 
lack of competition in such market infrastructure entities, it may be worthwhile 
to consider CCPs as “public utility” and organise them as at-cost entities. 
 Higher  capital  requirements  for  non-cleared  trades:  the  Basel  requirements 
already  prescribe  a  capital  charge  for  credit  risk  exposure  of  banks  arising  out  of 
OTC  derivative  transactions.  In  as  much  as  these  exposures  are  reckoned  on  a 
gross basis, there is already a disincentive for bilaterally cleared OTC transactions 
as  against  centrally  cleared  transactions.  To  further  address  the  systemic  risks 
inherent  in  significant  inter-bank  OTC  transactions,  all  such  inter-bank  exposures 
may be subject to a higher capital charge. 
Role for bespoke products: this issue is more relevant for jurisdictions involving 
product regulation, as in India. The trade-off is between the requirements of the real 
sector  and  the  risk  assessment  of  the  product.  To  give  an  example  from  our 
experience,  certain  zero-cost  forex  option/swap  structures  were  permitted  in  the 
past to enable better design of hedging solutions for clients. These cost reduction 
structures, introduced in 1996 inherently involved a trade-off between reduction in 
the cost of hedging and retention of part of the downside risk. The concerns relating 
to  proper  valuation,  mis-selling  of  such  products  and  other  irregularities  that 
emerged in the recent past forced a re-evaluation of the propriety of allowing such 
products in India. 
However,  interestingly,  many  corporates  and  industry  associations  represented  that 
prohibiting  cost  reduction  structures  will  seriously 
forex  risk 
management operations of corporates and their competitiveness in the global markets. It has 
been  suggested  that  structures  may  be  allowed  with  additional  safeguards  to  address  the 
leverage and mis-selling issues. 
It  would  be  interesting  to  see  how  the  global  debate  in  regard  to  the  reform  of  the  OTC 
derivative  markets  finally  settles  in  various  jurisdictions.  In  some  senses,  the  approach 
the  dynamic 
impede 
8 
 BIS Review 102/2010
seems  an  extension  of  the  pre-crisis  regulatory  philosophy  in  these  markets,  with  a  non-
obtrusive  view  of  financial  markets  and  financial  products  per  se,  while  concentrating  on 
stronger entity regulation and conduct of business aspect of the financial markets. 
It would be important for the process to have any lasting impact that it is supplemented with a 
framework for regulating markets from a systemic risk perspective as well as ensuring sound 
prudential  framework  for  regulation  of  all  financial  intermediaries  engaged  in  derivatives, 
exchanges  and  CCPs.  The  reform  of  OTC  derivatives  cannot  be  disassociated  from  the 
larger perspective of the too-big-to-fail issue, at the heart of which is limiting the proprietary 
trading by banks. 
For  countries  such  as  India,  the  collective  experience  of  the  developed  markets  at  the 
epicentre of the crisis and their response in terms of changes to institutional and regulatory 
models is a great opportunity to tread a new path. Hopefully we will find effective ways to 
channelise the power of financial innovation in a more constructive manner. 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 9
Size of OTC derivative markets in India 
Annex: 
The BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity 
in 2007 estimated that the percentage share of the rupee in total foreign exchange market 
turnover covering all currencies increased from 0.3 percent in 2004 to 0.7 percent in 2007. 
As per geographical distribution of foreign exchange market turnover, the share of India at 
USD 34 billion per day increased from 0.4 in 2004 to 0.9 percent in 2007. 
The  activity  in  the  forex  derivative  markets  can  also  be  assessed  from  the  positions 
outstanding in the books of the banking system. As of December 2009, total forex contracts 
outstanding in the banks’ balance sheet amounted to INR 36,142 billion (USD 774.25 billion), 
of which over 86% were forwards and rest options (Table 1). 
 
Table 1  
S. 
No 
Outstanding derivatives of banks: notional principal account  
Item 
March 2007 
March 2008 
March 2009 
December 2009
INR 
billions 
USD 
billions
INR 
billions
USD 
billions
INR 
billions
USD 
billions 
INR 
billions 
USD 
billions
1  Foreign exchange 
contracts 
2  Forward forex 
contracts 
3  Currency options 
purchased 
4  Futures 
29,254  671.12
55,057 1,377.46 50,684
994.78  36,142  774.25
24,653  565.57
47,360 1,184.89 44,669
876.72  31,190  668.17
4,601  105.55
2,290 
52.53
7,697
2,743
192.57
68.63
6,015
3,511
118.06 
68.91 
4,952  106.08
3,447 
73.84
5 
Interest rate related 
contracts 
6  Of which : 
   single currency interest 
rate swaps 
41,958  962.56
 
 85,430 2,137.35 44,803
 
  879.35  46,434  994.73
 
  41,597  954.28
85,159 2,130.57 44,377
870.99  46,073  987.00
7  Total -contracts/ 
derivatives 
73,502 1,686.21 143,230 3,583.44 98,998 1,943.04  86,023 1,842.82
Source: RBI 
 
With  regards  to  interest  rate  derivatives,  the  inter-bank  rupee  swap  market  turnover,  as 
reported on the CCIL platform, has witnessed a decline in terms of notional sum in 2009 over 
2008 before some recovery in 2010, mostly on account of early termination of the contracts 
through  multilateral  netting  (Table  2).  The  outstanding  single  currency  interest  rate  swap 
contracts in banks’ balance sheet, as on December 31, 2009, amounted to INR 46,073 billion 
(USD 987 billion) in notional principal while the amount of cross currency interest rate swaps 
was relatively at a lower level. The overnight index swaps (OIS) based on overnight MIBOR 
has  been  the  most  widely  used  OTC  derivative  for  hedging  interest  rate  risk.  The  market 
participation,  however,  remains  much  skewed  with  the  foreign  banks  as  the  major  player. 
10 
 BIS Review 102/2010
The size of the Indian derivatives market is clearly evident from the above data, though by 
global standards it is still in its nascent stage 
 
Outstanding volume in IRS for various benchmarks  
Table 2  
 MIBOR1 
MIFOR2 
INBMK3 
Notional sum 
INR 
billions 
USD 
billions
No. of 
trades
Notional sum 
No. of 
trades
Notional sum 
No. of 
trades
INR 
billions
USD 
billions
INR 
billions 
USD 
billions 
36,556 
13,940 
17,488 
838.63  61,665 6,116  140.31 16,528
348.76  23,732 4,680  117.09 11,803
343.24  29,853 3,269 
64.16  8,201
End-march 2008 
End-march 2009 
End-march 2010 
1  MIBOR: Mumbai Inter-bank Offered Rate: the benchmark rate published by NSE/FIMMDA based on polled 
rates from a panel of representative banks. 
2  MIFOR: Mumbai Inter-bank Forward Offered Rate: implied forward rupee rate derived from USD LIBOR and 
the USD/INR forward premia. 
3  INBMK: Indian Benchmark Rate published by Reuters. This effectively presents a yield for government 
securities of a specific tenor. 
 
3.14 
4.68 
4.00 
137 
187 
204 
368 
461 
450 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 11
