Ignazio Visco: Financial education in the aftermath of the financial crisis 
Special  address  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  to  the 
OECD-Bank  of  Italy  Symposium  on  Financial  Literacy,  “Improving  financial  education 
efficiency”, Rome, 9 June 2010. 
 to 
take 
leverage 
to  raise 
Introduction 
large  and  poorly  understood  risks, 
1. 
The  financial  crisis  and  its  roots  have  been  widely  analysed.  The  crisis  arose  out  of  the 
interaction  of  financial  innovation,  information  asymmetries,  regulatory  failures  and  lax 
supervision with macroeconomic conditions characterised by low interest rates, asset-price 
misalignments,  and  large  saving-investment  imbalances.  These  factors  prompted  the 
financial  sector 
to 
disproportionate  levels,  and  to  rely  increasingly  on  wholesale  short-term  funding,  thus 
creating further sources of contagion. 
The crisis has shown us just how severe the unintended consequences of complexity can be. 
It has also revealed that many households and investors are unaware or only partially aware 
of  the  implications  of  many  of  the  financial  decisions  they  take.  The  credit  boom  that 
preceded the crisis, particularly in the United States, was fostered by overconfidence in ever-
increasing home values and asset prices and persistently low interest rates. Overconfidence 
is usually present in credit booms and asset price bubbles. This time, however, the scope 
and  depth  of  the  crisis  have  been  exceptional  because  the  financial  system’s  role  in  our 
economies has become so much larger than in the past. 
As  a  result  of  the  crisis,  the  financial  system’s  ability  to  channel  savings  to  the  most 
productive investments and to assist in the inter-temporal allocation of resources has been 
substantially  damaged.  At  the  same  time,  confidence  in  the  support  it  provides  to  risk 
diversification  and  portfolio  management  has  been  shattered.  Restoring  confidence  and 
ensuring the long-run sustainability of financial flows is now paramount.  
In response to the crisis, prudential regulation for banks through higher capital requirements 
is  being  tightened  and  new  standards  to  contain  liquidity  risk  are  being  introduced. 
Consultation and cooperation among national authorities are being reinforced and new forms 
of  international  coordination  are  being  envisaged  for  crisis  management  and  resolution. 
These measures are aimed at increasing the stability of the financial system as a whole.  
Attention is also being paid to the structure of incentives within financial firms and to the way 
business  is  conducted.  Risks  must  be  correctly  evaluated  and  presented.  A  regulatory 
framework  designed  to  ensure  consumer  protection  and  fair  relations  between  financial 
intermediaries  and  their  customers  is  necessary  to  limit  conflicts  of  interest  and  is  a 
prerequisite  for  customer  confidence.  However,  within  an  appropriate  system  of  incentives 
and  sanctions  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  intermediaries,  financial  responsibility  ultimately 
rests with individuals. This is why we must invest in financial education, to improve the way 
financial decisions are taken and to raise awareness of the risks inherent in financial assets 
and liabilities.  
In the past households had fewer financial decisions to take and the choice of investments 
and  debt  instruments  was  more  limited.  Pension  systems  were  mostly  publicly  funded, 
mortgage markets were less developed, consumption more tied to current income streams. 
As the financial system has grown more diversified and complex, households have enjoyed a 
broader  set  of  opportunities  while  potentially  facing  substantial  new  risks.  Furthermore, 
because of demographic changes and the tighter constraints on public finances, our welfare 
and  that  of  our  children  are  more  likely  to  depend  on  financial  decisions  at  the  individual 
level.  Education,  healthcare,  retirement  living  standards  will  depend  heavily  on  sound 
financial planning. 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 1
At  the  same  time,  financial  literacy  is  a  key  ingredient  of  competitive  financial  markets. 
Competition  in  the  financial  industry  requires  not  only  a  multiplicity  of  suppliers  to  choose 
among, but also that consumers be properly informed when making their choices. Obstacles 
and  difficulties  in  gathering  and  processing  information  increase  switching  costs.  Informed 
and  financially  literate  consumers  are  essential  to  the  effectiveness  of  price  and  quality 
competition.  
Financial education and customer protection 
2. 
Consumer protection is pursued with regulations on transparency and conduct of business. 
These  are  essential  in  a  relationship  between  customers  and  intermediaries  where 
unavoidable  information  asymmetries  make  it  impossible  for  the  investor  to  monitor 
independently the work of the intermediary. In addition, deregulation of financial markets and 
the  reduction  in  costs  brought  about  by  developments  in  information  technology  have 
resulted  in  a  proliferation  of  new  products;  the  pace  of  financial  innovation  is  so  fast  that 
investors are faced with products with too short a history to make reliable estimates of the 
probability of returns. They must be made aware of this. 
Customer  protection  promotes  confidence  in  the  enforceability  of  contracts,  an  essential 
ingredient  for  financial  intermediation.  Properly  enforced  consumer  protection  prevents 
intermediaries  from  adopting  reprehensible  practices  and  enhances  competition  based  on 
prices, quality of services and product innovation. Appropriate regulation on the conduct of 
business  makes  it  easier  for  customers  to  react  to  malpractices  earlier  and  regardless  of 
sanctions imposed by supervisory authorities.  
While rules on transparency and the conduct of business have typically a top-down design, 
financial education can be held to protect confidence, stability and competition in a bottom-up 
perspective. Indeed, supervisory authorities are tackling the financial education issue as an 
important element in the wider context of their responsibilities. As the OECD put it in its 2005 
report  on  Improving  Financial  Literacy,  “financial  education  provides  policymakers  with 
another tool for promoting economic growth, confidence, and stability”.  
Financial education helps investors to monitor intermediaries. Households better acquainted 
with the notions of risk and return, compound interest and inflation can better identify abuse 
and  fraud  as  well  as  understand  the  real  terms  of  what  they  are  being  offered.  There  are 
many recent examples where the placement of financial instruments has been largely based 
on poor understanding of the fact that unusual earnings can be offered only against unusual 
risks  and  in  ways  not  necessarily  consistent  with  the  risk  aversion,  financial  situation  and 
investment objectives of many investors.  
For reputational concerns to play a role in checking the behaviour of financial intermediaries, 
investors must be able to compare different financial products and assess the quality of the 
services provided by different institutions. Financial education can therefore complement the 
supervisory action of the authorities in fostering enhanced competition. 
Finally, financially literate households are less likely to believe that they have been cheated 
when  that  was  not  the  case.  Thus,  financial  education  helps  to  sustain  confidence  in  the 
financial  system  and  can  have  a  beneficial  effect  on  the  stability  of  intermediaries  by 
reducing  their  legal  and  reputational  risks.  Indeed,  the  financial  industry  is  likely  to  benefit 
from having more literate customers.  
For all its merits, however, financial education should not be regarded as a silver bullet by 
any of the interested parties (consumers, regulators, industry). First, knowledge takes time to 
build.  Second,  evidence  on  the  effectiveness  of  financial  education  in  improving  financial 
behaviour  is  mixed,  and  clearly  depends  on  the  kind  of  programmes  provided.  Third,  we 
should  not  expect  financially  literate  consumers  never  to  make  mistakes:  the  financial 
sophistication  of  the  people  fooled  by  Bernie  Madoff,  and  their  numbers,  are  a  sober 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2010
reminder that financial education does not provide foolproof protection against fraud. Indeed, 
it might even, to some extent, induce overconfidence.  
But, all said, investing in financial education still seems the safest bet if we want to improve 
individuals’ ability to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the financial system. 
Promoting financial education 
3. 
The  Italian  public  debt,  currently  running  at  around  115  per  cent  of  GDP,  is  high  by 
international  standards.  It  is  well  known  that  most  of  the  growth  in  public  debt  took  place 
during  the  1980s,  when  large  budgetary  deficits  piled  up  and  disinflation  was  slow  and 
incomplete; this eventually led to the financial crisis of 1992–1993. Afterwards, in the run-up 
to the economic and monetary union (EMU), substantial stability was restored as public debt 
was  progressively  reduced  from  a  peak  of  over  125  per  cent  of  GDP  in  1995  to  about 
105 per  cent  in  2007.  This  was  largely  the  result  of  two  factors:  the  reduction  in  interest 
payments and the rise in revenues from privatization programmes. The fall in interest rates 
reflected not only the taming of inflation but also the reduction in “sovereign risk”.  
It is also well known that Italian households used to have high saving rates, while it is less 
well known that their levels of debt, and in general those of the whole of the private sector, 
have always been relatively low by international standards. The high saving has meant that 
interest  earnings  have  been  an  important  component  of  households’  disposable  income. 
However,  when  interest  rates  were  reduced  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  the  income 
share of net interest flows fell from an average of about 12 per cent in 1992–1996 to 8 per 
cent in 1999–2001. The negative trend continued over the initial years of the EMU, reaching 
a low of around 6 per cent in 2005. 
Two main factors have been at work: the progressive reduction of government bond yields 
and  the  reallocation  of  households’  portfolios  from  relatively  “safe”  to  riskier  assets.  This 
process was particularly in evidence in the second half of the 1990s, as government bonds 
held by households contracted from about 21 per cent of total gross financial wealth in 1995 
to  12  per  cent  in  1999.  After  a  partial  recovery  at  the  beginning  of  the  new  decade  (in 
connection with the stock market crash of 2001), the share of government bonds over total 
financial assets fell below 10 per cent.  
According to the Bank of Italy’s Survey on Italian Households’ Income and Wealth (SHIW), 
the  portfolio  shift  out  of  government  bonds  was  widespread  across  different  groups  of 
investors.  The  proportion  of  households  with  low  education  (at  or  below  lower  secondary 
school level) holding government bonds fell from 49 per cent in 1995 to 23 per cent in 2000 
and 15 per cent in 2004; it increased slightly in the following years (up to 20 per cent in the 
2008  survey).  At  the  same  time,  the  share  of  low-education  households  investing  in  risky 
assets increased from 15 per cent in the mid-1990s to 32 per cent at the turn of the century, 
averaging  around  25  per  cent  since  then.  This  most  likely  reflected  the  attempt  to 
compensate for the fall in government bond yields caused by the reduction in inflation and in 
real rates without being fully aware of the higher risks involved; a stunning example of this 
was the massive investment in Argentinean bonds by Italian households. 
To the extent that education proxies financial literacy, these trends may raise concerns about 
households’  ability  to  manage  the  higher  risk  in  their  financial  portfolios,  especially  as 
financial  innovation  deepens  and  increasingly  complex  financial  tools  become  available. 
Indeed, in Italy, levels of financial literacy still appear to be low. As the SHIW has shown, 
about one third of the population is unable to read a bank statement, calculate changes in 
purchasing  power,  distinguish  between  different  types  of  mortgage  and  evaluate  the 
associated  interest  rate  risk.  More  than  half  of  Italian  households  do  not  understand  the 
importance of investment diversification, and two thirds do not know the difference between 
shares  and  bonds  in  terms  of  risk.  Less  than  one  household  out  of  three  knows  the  main 
features of supplementary pension schemes. 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 3
Although it may be difficult to make generalisations on financial literacy at the international 
level, findings like these seem to be common to several countries. They show that there is 
little  knowledge  of  basic  financial  concepts  and  low  computational  and  statistical  skills.  A 
couple of examples will suffice. 
According  to  surveys  conducted  in  the  United  Kingdom,  households’  ability  to  plan  ahead 
seems to be fairly poor. More than 80 per cent of the pre-retired think that a state pension will 
not provide them with the standard of living they hope for in retirement. Nevertheless, only 
slightly more than half of them have made some additional pension provision. Also, 70 per 
cent  of  the  population  have  made  no  personal  provision  to  cover  an  unexpected  drop  in 
income. Households also expend little effort in choosing products. For example, one out of 
two holders of saving accounts is unaware of the current interest rate. One out of ten holders 
of credit cards simply use them because they came with their bank account, and only half of 
credit card users choose their credit card on the basis of the interest rate charged on it. One 
out of three of those who have only general insurance bought their policy without comparing 
it with even one other product. 
The  latest  survey  conducted  in  high  schools  and  colleges  in  the  US  by  the  Jump$tart 
coalition  shows  that  more  than  50  per  cent  of  high  school  students  do  not  correctly 
understand  how  to  manage  their  credit  card  debts  or  choose  the  repayment  rates;  only 
17 per  cent  are  able  to  appreciate  the  different  returns  of  stocks,  savings  bonds,  savings 
accounts  and  checking  accounts;  60  per  cent  are  not  familiar  with  their  health  insurance 
coverage; 36 per cent are unaware of the impact of inflation on savings. 
Poor  knowledge  and  skills  may  have  serious  medium-to-long  term  consequences  for  the 
well-being of households. Financial literacy programmes might help. However, given that the 
competences  required  depend  on  people’s  needs  at  a  certain  moment  in  their  life,  a  one-
size-fits-all approach to improving the skills of the entire population, from students to retired 
people, is not feasible.  
This  means  that  priorities  need  to  be  clearly  set,  in  terms  of  targets  and  goals.  Financial 
education programmes could be targeted to leveraged households and to the very poor, who 
have the most to lose if they make bad decisions; to students, who will be the consumers of 
the  future.  The  OECD  has  identified  two  priorities.  First,  education  in  schools:  younger 
generations are likely to bear increasing financial risks; schools are regarded as an efficient 
and fair way of reaching an entire generation nationwide and putting all young people in the 
same age group on an equal footing. Retirement-saving literacy programmes addressed to 
the labour force are also a priority. In fact, several countries are shifting towards a more or 
less  compulsory  system  of  private  savings  accounts.  Thus,  as  pointed  out  in  a  2005  G10 
report  on  Ageing  and  Pension  System  Reform,  also  published  by  the  OECD,  one  of  the 
policy challenges for these countries is to develop financial education programmes that “can 
help  consumers  avoid  abuse  and  fraud,  improve  their  investment  choices,  and  raise  their 
contributions to private pension plans”. 
Once  the  target  has  been  determined,  it  is  necessary  to  identify  the  skills  that  should  be 
acquired with the programme. Especially important in this respect is the recognition that not 
only are levels of financial education generally low, but so is awareness of the need for it. 
Closer  investigation  of  the  causal  connections  between  different  programmes  of  financial 
education  and  investment  decisions  is  still  needed  and  more  effort  must  be  put  into 
identifying  those  forms  of  financial  education  that  more  effectively  improve  financial 
behaviour. As a further caveat, it should be remembered that the financial industry evolves 
quickly. It is therefore better to focus on general principles rather than on detailed information 
about specific products.  
The provision of information, however important, cannot always fully protect unsophisticated 
consumers. Even when, as regulators rightly require, the information disclosed to the public 
is  not  deceitful  or  manipulative,  an  information  overflow  might  generate  confusion  and 
ultimately  hamper  customers’  decision  making.  Indeed,  financial  education  programmes 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2010
developed as a mere delivery of information may fail to reach the expected goal. The limited 
available  evidence  seems  to  suggest  that  education  strategies  are  most  effective  if  those 
trained  are  actively  involved  and  experience  effective  gains  and  losses  from  simulated 
decisions. 
It  is  worth  emphasising  again  that  the  success  of  financial  education  programmes  largely 
depends on people’s awareness of their level of financial literacy and of the enormous impact 
this will have on their medium-to-long term well-being. People who are aware that their level 
of financial literacy is low may be more receptive to educational programmes and proactively 
strive to acquire the information and knowledge they need. Financial educators should use 
mass media and effective communication strategies to develop such awareness. 
Knowledge  of  the  costs  associated  with  short-sighted  financial  decisions  is  also  very 
important. Consumers are used to shopping around for relatively sophisticated goods or for 
important investments (such as in real estate). In fact, the cost of not doing so is evident to 
them.  Customers  need  to  be  encouraged  to  shop  around  even  for  banking  and  financial 
products and services. 
The Bank of Italy’s financial education initiatives 
4. 
In  Italy,  financial  education  has  only  recently  entered  the  limelight.  As  one  of  the  first 
institutions to point out the importance of this issue to the country, the Bank of Italy has, on 
several  occasions,  stressed  the  need  for  investors  to  acquire  appropriate  and  up-to-date 
financial  education  as  one  of  the  key  components  of  comprehensive  action  to  foster 
economic and business growth. Since then several initiatives have been launched. 
In  the  last  two  editions  of  the  Bank’s  SHIW  (for  2006  and  2008)  specific  questions  were 
included  to  measure  the  financial  literacy  of  the  Italian  population  (ability  to  read  a  bank 
statement, calculate variations in purchasing power, measure bond yields, calculate accrued 
interest,  understand  the  relations  between  the  various  securities  and  distinguish  between 
types of mortgage loan). As mentioned before, the findings were in line with those of other 
advanced countries and confirm the need for financial education programmes: about 50 per 
cent of Italian households do not possess the basic knowledge required to make informed 
decisions on the most common financial transactions.  
Since 2007, the Bank of Italy’s website contains a section dedicated to financial education. It 
attempts to provide easily understandable information on the main banking products as well 
as clear explanations of banking, economic and financial matters. In the near future it will be 
made more interactive and attractive to the public.  
Young  people,  students  in  particular,  are  a  priority  target  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  financial 
education  programmes.  Based  on  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  the  Ministry  of 
Education  signed  in  November  2007,  an  experimental  project  to  incorporate  financial 
education into school curricula was launched in 2008. This initiative, inspired by international 
principles and best practices, is the first project in Italy to be launched by public authorities in 
this field and specifically addressed to students. Experts from the Ministry of Education and 
the Bank of Italy jointly prepared lessons on money and payment instruments to be delivered 
in schools.  
The first wave of the programme took place in the 2008–2009 school year and involved a 
limited number of primary, lower secondary and secondary schools in northern, central and 
southern Italy. The effectiveness of the educational programme was measured by means of 
tests administered to students before and after lessons were delivered. Students who had 
not received any financial training were also given the tests to serve as a reference sample. 
The tests were developed in cooperation with INVALSI, the National Institute for Assessment 
of  the  Efficiency  of  the  Educational  System.  The  results  showed  that  the  educational 
programme  was  effective  in  improving  students’  familiarity  with  money  and  alternative 
payment systems (the percentage of correct answers rose from 81 to 89 per cent in primary 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 5
schools, from 70 to 76 in lower secondary schools and from 60 to 69 per cent in secondary 
schools). 
Those results led the Bank of Italy and the Ministry of Education to extend the project to the 
current school year and involve up to 250 schools and 8,500 students nationwide. The test 
results confirm, on a larger scale, the efficacy of the educational programme. 
Measuring  the  impact  of  financial  education  programmes  is  no  easy  task,  however.  There 
are technical challenges, as the adoption of a rigorous experimental protocol can be difficult 
in a school environment, where the standardization of treatment clashes with the discretion 
teachers  need  to  maintain,  risks  of  contamination  are  high  and  ethical  problems  can  be 
strong.  More  fundamentally,  the  impact  on  financial  behaviour,  which  is  the  ultimate  goal, 
cannot be measured straightforwardly, since students may still be years away from important 
financial decisions.  
To  address  some  of  these  difficulties,  a  new  programme  will  be  launched  next  year, 
specifically  designed  to  verify  whether  financial  education  improves  the  ability  to  take 
advantage of the opportunities offered by the financial system (borrowing, retirement saving, 
taking out an insurance policy, investing savings). The programme adopts an experimental 
protocol  “treating”  secondary  school  students:  they  will  be  given,  in  a  standardized  way, 
some  notions  on  the  role  of  the  financial  system,  on  sound  decision  making,  on  the 
identification,  impact  and  assessment  of  risks  and  returns.  Before  and  after  the  treatment, 
both  the  treated  students  and  a  control  sample  will  be  involved  in  simulated  problems, 
mimicking the main features of actual financial decisions. The objective is to gauge, through 
the changes in the quality of the decisions observed, the effectiveness of financial education. 
While providing financial education initiatives, policymakers could and should cooperate with 
other  parties,  in  particular  consumer  and  industry  associations.  The  Bank  of  Italy  is 
cooperating with the other supervisors and regulators, such as Consob, Isvap, Covip, AGCM, 
which  are  all  represented  here  today,  to  define  a  coordinated  national  strategy.  A  single 
financial education web portal will be developed to pool all the educational material and tools 
already present in the websites of the individual supervisory authorities. 
Conclusions 
5. 
It  is  unlikely  that  a  higher  degree  of  financial  literacy  worldwide  would  have  significantly 
helped to contain the financial crisis. And it is also unlikely that complex financial decisions 
could be made by each person becoming their own personal financial adviser. We must use 
regulation  and  supervision  to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient  to  shocks  and  to 
enhance efficiency in a more competitive and also a more stable environment. Substantial 
changes are needed, and they need to be introduced through a cooperative and coordinated 
international process. Most likely they will imply less risk-taking and possibly lower returns for 
the financial industry, but also for its customers. 
The  latter,  however,  is  already  a  significant  reason  why  investing  in  financial  education  is 
important. Some of the non-negligible effects of the crisis could in fact be a substantial loss 
of trust in the financial industry; a reluctance to take fundamental and conscious decisions 
related to saving for retirement; for some people, discouragement from exploiting even the 
safest, though not risk-free, investment opportunities, while for others a renewed search for 
high yields in a world of diminished returns without understanding the higher risks attached; 
for most, a wariness concerning the use of debt.  
Thus, while not a panacea, investing in financial education is an important means to perform 
our  institutional  duties:  protecting  savings,  ensuring  stability  and  promoting  competition.  In 
Italy, the fact that financial education programmes are just beginning to see the light can offer 
the opportunity to build sound future initiatives on the basis of international best practices. 
We have to identify the financial education needs of the population, develop the necessary 
framework, and share responsibilities among the various stakeholders. 
6 
 BIS Review 79/2010
Financial literacy requirements should be identified in a national perspective. Nonetheless, 
as  this  Symposium  shows,  developing  common  strategies  and  sharing  information  and 
experience at the international level is essential for satisfactory achievements. 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 7
