Ewart S Williams: Launch of the Economic Bulletin and the Summary of 
Economic Indicators 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the launch of the Economic Bulletin and the Summary of  Economic Indicators, 
Port-of-Spain, 3 August 2010. 
 The international economy 
1. 
More  evidence  that  the  US  economy  is  slowing  …  second  quarter  growth  was 
2.4 per cent compared with 3.7 per cent and 5.0 per cent in two previous quarters.  
In the Eurozone, the first quarter of the year has seen a slow tepid recovery with 
real GDP estimated to have increased by 0.2 per cent. The situation is similar in 
the UK with data showing growth of 0.3 per cent in the first quarter and 1.1 per cent 
in the second.  
Meanwhile growth in the emerging market economies continue apace … in China, 
growth is pushing ahead at a rate of 10.3 per cent: 8 per cent in India : 9 per cent in 
Brazil : 4 per cent in Mexico.  
For 2010 as a whole, the IMF projects that: 
The  advanced  economies  (US,  UK  etc)  will  grow  by  2.6  per  cent  while  the 
emerging market economies are projected to grow at a rate of 6.8 per cent. 
It’s worth noting that growth in the advanced economies continues to depend 
on  fiscal  stimulus,  as  private  demand  has  not  recovered,  even  in  the  face  of 
record-low  interest  rates.  This  has  resulted  in  a  sharp  rise  in  central  government 
indebtedness which now stands at 66 per cent of GDP in the US, 72 per cent of 
GDP in the UK and 122 per cent of GDP in Japan. 
Additionally, the continued sluggishness of private sector demand has delayed job 
creation  leaving  unemployment  rates  at  uncomfortable  highs.  In  the  US,  the 
unemployment rate has remained at 9.5 per cent in June (down from the high of 10 
per cent). In the Eurozone, unemployment remains stuck at 10 per cent (there has 
been some fall in Germany from a high of 8.3 per cent to 7.6 per cent).  
In the CARICOM region, there are tentative signs of a slow emergence from a deep 
recession: 
In Barbados, the economy contracted by 1.1 per cent in the first half of 2010, but 
this compared with a contraction of 9 per cent in the corresponding period of 2009. 
In Jamaica, the latest data show a decline of 1.1 per cent in the first quarter 2010 
compared with 2.2 per cent in the last quarter of 2009. 
In  the  OECS,  it  is  estimated  that  there  was  a  decline  of  4.1  per  cent  in  the  first 
quarter following upon a decline of 7.3 per cent in 2009. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
5. 
   On the domestic front 
Central  Bank  quarterly  indicators  suggest  real  GDP  growth  of  2.3  per  cent  in  the  first 
quarter of 2010 … this would sum to two quarters of GDP growth, following four consecutive 
quarters of decline. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 1
    As in the immediately preceding period, growth in the first quarter of 2010 came 
entirely from the energy sector (5.5 per cent), while the non-energy sector was 
flat, coming out of about –3.7 per cent in the last quarter of 2009. 
Oil production continues to decline but petrochemical output has been boosted by 
the commissioning of a new ammonia plant at MHTL Complex. 
In the non-energy sector, construction activity continues to languish (both public and 
private):  the  manufacturing  sector  is  operating  at  about  two-thirds  of  capacity  and 
sluggish consumer demand is having a negative impact on the distribution sector. 
The  last  available  employment  data  is  for  Quarter  IV  2009  which  showed  an 
unemployment  rate  of 5.1  per  cent.  However,  partial  indicators  including  recorded 
retrenchments submitted to the Industrial Court suggest that the unemployment rate 
may have increased in the first quarter of 2010. 
Wages 
Based on collective agreements registered with the Industrial Court, nominal wage increases 
are averaging 3.5 per cent per year in 2009–2010. 
Central government finances 
Available  data  through  May,  presented  on  a  cash  basis,  would  seem  to  suggest  that  the 
fiscal outturn could be significantly better than budgeted. 
Energy revenues are higher than expected because oil prices are higher than budget (oil is 
averaging  $76  per  barrel  as  against  the  budget  figure  of  US$55  per  barrel  while  gas  is 
averaging  about  US$2.37  per  mmbtu  (net  back),  compared  with  the  budget  estimate  of 
US$2.75 mmbtu). 
Admittedly, non-energy revenue is lagging somewhat below budget because of lower than 
expected  imports;  depressed  sales  (affecting  VAT)  and  slower  than  expected  economic 
growth. 
The data through May also show that capital expenditure has been lower than budgeted 
because many of the planned projects have not got off the ground. 
The data need to be interpreted with caution since there are reportedly large payments owed 
to contractors and suppliers. When these are factored in, the projected overall deficit for the 
year as a whole could be about $5.8 billion or about 4 per cent of GDP, compared with the 
budgeted deficit of 5.3 per cent of GDP. 
On this basis, public sector debt (excluding open market operations) would rise to about 
38 per cent of GDP. 
Inflation  has  returned  to  be  a  major  challenge.  Headline  inflation  gathered  considerable 
momentum since the start of 2010, rising from 1.3 per cent (year-on-year) in December 2009 
to  13.7  per  cent  by  June  2010.  The  increase  was  due  principally  to  initial  drought  and 
subsequent flooding which adversely affected supplies of locally grown produce, pushing the 
increase in the food index to 31 per cent (year-on-year). 
While the trend in food prices is not surprising, the question is whether there is something 
about the basket or about data collection that aggravates the trend in agricultural prices 
(both ways). 
Core inflation meanwhile was relatively stable in January–June 2010, with the main (year-
on-year) price increases related to earlier tax hikes on alcohol and tobacco and rises in the 
cost of rent and transport. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2010
The  rise  in  headline  inflation  to  double-digits  is  a  cause  for  concern  since  it  could  affect 
inflationary expectations and future price as well as wage setting behavior. 
Monetary policy 
The  Bank  has  kept  the  Repo  rate  at  5  per  cent  since  January  2010,  trying  to  balance 
concerns about rising inflation and a stagnant economy. 
Bank  credit  outstanding  to  the  private  sector  continues  to  decline  (by  4.5  per  cent  on  a  
year-on-year  basis):  banks  have  significant  excess  liquidity  and  with  weak  credit  demand 
(and  perhaps  some  tightening  of  loan  criteria),  there  is  increasing  competition  for  treasury 
bills and government securities. Three-month treasury bills rates are now under 1 per cent 
(0.97 per cent). 
The  few  government  securities  issues  that  have  come  to  market  have  been  all  over-
subscribed at a premium. 
While deposit rates are at rock-bottom levels, it is the Bank’s view that there is significant 
room for further reductions in bank lending rates. 
The stock market and mutual funds 
The  record  low  bank  deposit  rates  may  be  an  important  factor  behind  the  improved 
performance  of  the  stock  market.  After  declining  by  9.2  per  cent  in  2009,  the  Composite 
Index increased by 8.1 per cent in the six months to June 2010. 
Also  in  the  search  for  higher  yields,  there  has  been  a  resumption  in  the  growth  of  mutual 
funds  after  the  decline  in  QIV  2009,  due  to  uncertainties  about  changes  in  the  pricing 
mechanism. 
Balance of payments 
The balance of payments data for the first quarter show (relative to the previous quarter):  
 
 
 
A sharp increase in energy exports, largely due to prices 
A reduction in non-energy exports 
Significantly lower imports reflecting soft domestic demand (both consumption and 
investment) 
The  external  current  account  has  returned  into  surplus  and  there  has  been  an 
increase in official reserves of some US$459 million so far this year. As at June 2010, 
gross  official  reserves  stood  at  US$9.1  billion  (12.5  months  of  imports).  This 
excludes US$3.1 billion held in the Heritage and Stabilization Fund. 
 Outlook 
The  short-term  outlook  for  the  economy  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  uncertain  and  will  be 
dependent on the strength of the ongoing global recovery and the level of fiscal support that 
the Government will be able to provide. It is reasonable to expect that for the next several 
months,  the  level  of  external  demand  will  continue  to  facilitate  continued  expansion  of  the 
petrochemical sector at current price levels. 
On this basis, even if the non-energy sector remains flat, real GDP growth for the year as a 
whole  should  reach  1  to  1.5  per  cent.  The  continued  stagnation  in  the  non-energy  sector 
could,  however,  have  adverse  consequences  for  unemployment  which  could  easily  rise  to 
the 6 – 6.5 per cent range. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 3
Moving forward, a strong recovery of the non-energy sector will be the key to a faster rate of 
growth  of  output  and  employment  in  2011.  While  monetary  conditions  could  contribute 
through  a  much  sharper  reduction  in  bank  lending  rates,  the  original  impulse  will  need  to 
come from the public sector. In this context the FY 2011 budget will be challenged to secure 
the right balance between the need for maintaining an adequate level of capital expenditure 
and stimulating business activity, on the one hand, and the medium term objective of fiscal 
consolidation on the other. Urgent energy tax reform to encourage oil and gas exploration 
and the need to incorporate new initiatives, including for poverty alleviation programmes, will 
further complicate fiscal policy. 
As  noted  above,  the  sharp  rise  in  headline  inflation  will  present  additional  challenges  for 
economic policy. Continued increases in food prices will certainly affect wage demands and 
other  price  setting  behaviour  and  could  soon  be  reflected  in  core  inflation.  In  these 
circumstances, monetary policy would need to be more active in the fight against inflation. Of 
course,  higher  interest  rates  could  choke  off  a  recovery  that  is  not  well  entrenched…and 
therein lies our dilemma. 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2010
