Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The global Islamic financial market today – challenges 
and way forward 
Luncheon address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
annual “The Asset Triple A Awards for Islamic Finance”, Kuala Lumpur, 6 July 2010. 
 form  of 
resilience  as  a 
its  competitiveness  and 
It is my great pleasure to be here this afternoon on this occasion of the Annual “The Asset 
Triple A Awards for Islamic Finance” by the Asset Publishing and Research, to deliver some 
remarks  on  the  key  challenges  and  way  forward  for  Islamic  finance  in  the  international 
financial system. Islamic finance has experienced its most rapid pace of development in this 
decade  demonstrating 
financial 
intermediation. While the Islamic assets are now more than US$1 trillion, it is estimated that 
the global Islamic finance industry will reach the US$2 trillion mark in the next three to five 
years. 
The sukuk market has become the most significant and vibrant segment in the international 
Islamic financial system. Issuers are seeing the sukuk instrument as an attractive alternative 
means for raising capital, whilst investors are increasingly seeing it as a new asset class in 
their  investment  universe.  This  has  generated  significant  cross-border  flows  as  funds  are 
raised from beyond domestic financial markets and as investors diversify their portfolios into 
assets from other jurisdictions. The sukuk market currently stands at almost US$130 billion, 
with  a  growth  rate  of  about  40  percent  annually.  Despite  a  challenging  environment,  new 
issuance of sukuk in the global sukuk market rose by 43 percent to US$20 billion in 2009. 
However, developments in Europe resulted in a more cautious market and the global sukuk 
issuance declined by about 20 percent in the first half of this year. In the coming period, this 
trend is expected to improve as the Governments in Asia and the Middle East have already 
initiated  the  raising  of  funds  for  the  implementation  of  infrastructure  development  and 
investment projects. 
This  extensive  interest  in  Islamic  finance  from  different  parts  of  the  world  is  driving  the 
international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance.  This  has  contributed  to  the  strengthening  of 
financial  and  economic  linkages  between  the  more  established  financial  centres  of  the 
Western world and the newly emerging financial centres in Asia and the Middle East. This 
has thus contributed to the more efficient allocation of funds across borders from centres with 
surplus funds to regions with investment opportunities. It has also allowed for more inclusive 
participation regardless of size and stage of development. Islamic finance now provides the 
range  of  financial  products  and services  to  multinational corporations,  to  micro  enterprises 
and  to  households  while  at  the  same  time,  facilitates  financing  of  international  trade  and 
cross border investment activities. 
This  recent  decade  has  also  seen  significant  milestones  being  achieved  in  the  area  of 
international  financial  infrastructure  that  supports  the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  The 
Islamic Financial Services Board or IFSB, established in 2002 as an international prudential 
standard setting body for Islamic finance, now has a membership of 50 regulatory authorities. 
It  has  developed  prudential  standards  ranging  from  capital  adequacy  requirements  to 
standards for governance and risk management. There has also been the development of 
degree  programmes  and  professional  qualifications  in  Islamic  finance  that  are  now  being 
offered  by  major  institutions  of  higher  learning  and  training  organisations  from  around  the 
world. More recently, conscious efforts to initiate platforms for greater engagement among 
practitioners,  scholars  and  regulators  have  brought  about  greater  convergence  and 
standardisation  of  Shariah  interpretations  and  thus  enhancing  the  potential  for  product 
harmonisation  which  has  in  turn  supported  greater  cross  border  transactions  in  Islamic 
finance. 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 1
Challenges faced by the Islamic financial industry 
During  this  same  decade,  despite  enjoying  rapid  growth,  Islamic  finance  has  also 
experienced  its  most  challenging  period.  Today  we  face  an  environment  of  financial 
uncertainties and economic turmoil. The global economy and international financial system 
has  been  shaken  by  a  series  of  unprecedented  financial  meltdowns  in  the  international 
environment. Much has been said and documented about the financial mess that the crisis 
has  created.  Unprecedented  policy  responses  were  initiated  to  stabilise  conditions.  Now, 
significant steps are being taken by the international community to reform and strengthen the 
international financial system. The aim is to build the foundations for a stronger international 
financial system and global economy that is built on the premise of sustainable growth and a 
greater shared prosperity. This global resolve is in congruence with the role and relevance of 
Islamic finance on the global economic environment in this post-crisis era. 
While the amount of funds managed in the Islamic financial system is still only a fraction of 
the  total  assets  of  the  international  financial  system,  it  represents  that  portion  of  financial 
activities that is truly supported by underlying productive capacity that connects with the real 
economy.  Despite  the  unprecedented  disruptions  in  the  international  financial  system, 
studies  show  that  the  Islamic  financial  industry  has  weathered  the  global  financial  crisis 
relatively well. The financial crisis has thus brought about a greater appreciation amongst the 
international  financial  community  on  the  distinct  nature  and  in-built  strengths  of  Islamic 
finance.  Based  on  the  Shariah  requirement  that  Islamic  financial  transactions  needs  to  be 
supported  by  an  underlying  economic  activity,  its  expansion  contributes  to  income  and 
wealth  creation.  In  addition,  the  profit  sharing  and  risk  sharing  characteristics  in  Islamic 
finance  strengthen  the  incentives  for  the  financial  institutions  to  ensure  the  profits  are 
commensurate with the risks being assumed. It is this form of finance that we would want to 
encourage. 
With  this  underlying  foundations,  efforts  are  being  directed  to  build  the  domestic  financial 
infrastructure.  A  challenge  that  is  being  specifically  addressed  is  the  development  of  an 
active secondary global sukuk market. In this regard, there has been a lack of trading in the 
secondary market especially in the USD sukuk market as the investors tend to buy-and-hold 
the  instruments  until  maturity.  This  is  largely  due  to  the  scarcity  of  the  instruments  in  the 
market. In Malaysia, the growing ringgit sukuk market has resulted in an active secondary 
market. This is largely due to the regular and varied issuances throughout the year. This is 
supported  by  the  investment  in  research  and  development  and  in  talent  development  to 
ensure  the  availability  of  expertise  in  the  structuring  of  sukuk  instruments  and  in  sukuk 
documentation. Having the potential to innovate new instruments will depend on having the 
necessary  talent.  This  is  an  area  of  focus  in  Malaysia  to  develop  the  skills,  expertise  and 
capability.  The  Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysia  now  offers  a  wide  range  of  financial 
products and services that are competitive and able to meet the changing requirements of 
the domestic and global economy. 
Way forward for the global Islamic financial system 
As we advance forward, we need to recognise the forces of change and the transformation 
taking place in the international financial system and global economy. Relentless efforts have 
been initiated to reform the international financial system by the international community to 
address  the  weaknesses  that  have  contributed  to  the  recent  crisis.  In  this  environment, 
Islamic finance needs to continue to evolve to remain effective and competitive. 
The Islamic financial system does not exist in isolation and will continue to develop as an 
integral part of the global financial system. As part of efforts to ensure sustainability in this 
new  and  more  challenging  environment,  a  Task  Force  on  Islamic  Finance  and  Global 
Financial  Stability  was  formed  by  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  and  the  Islamic 
Financial Services Board (IFSB). The report, which was completed in April this year, sets out 
eight  areas that  need  to  be  further  strengthened  to  bring  the  Islamic  financial  system  to  a 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2010
higher  level  of  performance  in  this  new  economic  and  financial  order  that  is  emerging.  A 
recommendation  of  the  report  is  the  establishment  of  an  Islamic  Financial  Stability  Forum 
(IFSF) based at the IFSB as a strategic platform for productive dialogues to promote financial 
stability  in  Islamic  financial  system.  The  IFSF  would  also  be  a  platform  for  the  Islamic 
financial system to interface with the conventional system via the Financial Stability Board to 
facilitate the common objective of achieving global financial stability. 
To  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  Islamic  financial  institutions,  a  solution  is  currently  being 
developed  to  facilitate  liquidity  management  at  both  national  and  international  level.  A 
Liquidity Management Task Force was established by the IFSB and the IDB to develop this 
solution. This task force is expected to make key announcements later this year to facilitate 
cross border liquidity flows for efficient resource utilisation by Islamic financial institutions.  
Islamic  finance  has  come  a  long  way  and  is  set  to  continue  its  trajectory  upwards  and 
onwards.  An  important  aspect  of  the  recent  developments  to  strengthen  Islamic  financial 
services industry is that this is being undertaken during the stable and good times. This will 
position  Islamic  finance  to  deal  with  future  challenges.  A  clear  indication  of  that  is  the 
growing  relevance  and  importance  of  the  sukuk  market.  This  event  in  Kuala  Lumpur  is 
commemorating the talent, expertise and the successes of the Islamic financial community. 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 3
