Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB’s response to the recent tensions in 
financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
38th Economics Conference of the Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 31 May 2010. 
 Meine sehr verehrten Damen und Herren, 
ich  danke  den  Veranstaltern  dieser  Konferenz  recht  herzlich  für  die  Einladung  zur 
38. Volkswirtschaftlichen Tagung der Oesterreichischen Nationalbank.  
I would like to use the occasion of today’s conference to recall how the European Central 
Bank has reacted to the crisis and, in particular, put our most recent actions into this context.  
As I am sure you all appreciate, there is a single thread running through all of these actions, 
namely to ensure that we deliver on what we are expected to deliver: price stability across 
the euro area over the medium term.  
To those observers who have recently asked whether we have changed our orientation, I can 
only assure them that, on the contrary, it is the circumstances that have demanded special 
actions, and our orientation remains the same.  
As we all know, these are challenging times for Europe and for the ECB. We are confronted 
with tensions in financial markets, a difficult fiscal situation in some parts of the euro area 
and an associated adverse impact on the effective functioning of monetary policy.  
The  current  tensions  are  the  most recent  repercussions  of the  financial  crisis  of  2007  and 
2008, which culminated by the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. After that, we 
saw  a  sharp  fall  in  global  economic  activity,  hitting  the  euro  area  and  other  advanced 
economies  hard.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008  and  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  global  trade 
volumes fell by 18 percent, the GDP of the euro area fell by altogether almost 4.5 percent 
and unemployment rose by 1.4 percentage points in just six months.  
The ECB acted quickly and decisively in response to these circumstances. We reduced our 
key  interest  rates  to  unprecedented  low  levels  and  introduced  a  series  of  non-standard 
measures to support credit provision by banks to the euro area economy. This was essential 
at  a  time  when  the  financial  crisis  had  led  to  a  virtual  “free  fall”  in  economic  activity  and 
severe problems in the money market were hampering the transmission of lower key ECB 
interest rates to money market and bank lending rates.  
Our  non-standard  measures,  which  we  refer  to  as  “enhanced  credit  support”,  aimed  to 
sustain  financing  conditions  and  credit  flows  above  and  beyond  what  could  be  achieved 
through  reductions  in  key  ECB  interest  rates  alone.  They  included  lengthening  of  the 
maximum maturity of refinancing operations, extension of the eligible collateral list, provision 
of  liquidity  in  foreign  currencies,  covered  bond  purchases,  and,  above  all,  provision  of 
unlimited liquidity in all refinancing operations at a fixed rate.  
Enhanced credit support fostered a considerable improvement in market liquidity and helped 
to alleviate funding risks. The measures also protected us against any possible deflationary 
situation and helped focus on medium-term price stability. 
Earlier this month, at a time when we had already exited from some of our enhanced credit 
support measures, we were suddenly faced with renewed market tensions. This time, they 
erupted  in  a  number  of  segments  of  the  euro  area’s  debt  securities  markets.  After  very 
careful  consideration  of  all  implications  of  acting,  as  well  as  of  those  of  not  acting,  we 
decided  to  intervene  in  these  markets  starting  on  10  May  by  launching  our  Securities 
Markets Programme. Along with cuts in our interest rates back in 2008 and early 2009, and 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 1
measures of enhanced credit support, this programme constitutes the third element of our 
response to the financial crisis.  
In my remarks today, I would like to give you some further details about this third element: 
why we have introduced it, how it is designed to operate and why it is in line with the key 
principles of our monetary policy-making. And I would like to place our actions in the context 
of the broader challenges for economic policy-makers and private sector decision-makers, in 
our  collective  pursuit  of  return  to  financial  stability  and  ensuring  a  sustainable  economic 
recovery. 
The fundamental importance of a functioning transmission mechanism of monetary policy 
Like all other non-standard measures we have taken, the Securities Markets Programme is 
time-bound in nature. It aims to ensure the proper transmission of monetary policy impulses 
to the wider economy and, ultimately, to the general price level. To achieve our primary goal 
of ensuring price stability, monetary policy-making needs to be effective. In this respect, well-
functioning securities markets are indispensable. 
Let me briefly describe why this is the case. We implement monetary policy by setting our 
key  policy  rates.  Through  this,  we directly  influence  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  money 
market. Financial markets transmit this impulse along the maturity spectrum, since term rates 
reflect current and expected future short-term rates as well as risk premia.  
These rates, in turn, affect the costs of funding for households, for firms, and for governments. 
The resulting financing conditions affect economic activity and, in the end, prices.  
The  functioning  of  the  market  for  government  bonds  is  central  to  the  transmission  of  the 
ECB’s policy rates. This is because of several channels. 
Via  the  price  channel,  interest  rates  on  government  bonds  influence  financing  conditions 
within the economy. For example, they are often used as a reference rate when a bank prices 
a  loan  for  a  customer,  or  when  a  company  borrows  money  by  issuing  a  bond.  Sovereign 
financing conditions, under normally functioning bond markets, often provide a floor for the 
funding conditions of the private sector. 
Interest rates on government bonds always include add-ons to compensate for liquidity risk 
and  credit  risk.  But  these  risk  premia  should  not  become  so  large  that  they  dominate  the 
signal from the key policy rates to a point where it is no longer distinguishable and does not 
reach the real economy. This can happen when markets no longer function properly.  
Closely related is the liquidity channel, which comes into play at the start of the transmission 
mechanism, influencing short-term interest rates beyond the conditions set by policy rates. 
Government  bonds  are  often  used  as  collateral  for  banks’  refinancing  operations.  In  fact, 
government bonds are the primary collateral used in the secured interbank market.  
If  government  bond  markets  are  disrupted,  this  hampers  the  functioning  of  the  interbank 
market and reduces liquidity in this market. The consequences are increased money market 
rates due to premia for liquidity risk. As a result, the capacity of banks to issue loans and 
refinance the real economy suffers.  
A  third  channel,  the  balance  sheet  channel,  is  indirect:  lower  government  bond  prices, 
which  correspond  to  higher  bond  yields,  imply  valuation  losses  in  the  assets  held  by  the 
financial  and  non-financial  sectors.  For  banks,  the  lower  capital  base  may  mean  that  they 
can supply fewer loans to the economy. For borrowers, their creditworthiness is reduced, and 
this affects their capacity to borrow. 
Because of these channels, severe tensions in the bond market hamper the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. The relation between our key interest rates and the rates applicable 
in the real economy gets out of order, and our main tool for influencing refinancing conditions 
in the real economy does not work the way it should. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2010
This is the situation that threatened us at the beginning of this month, so we saw the need to 
act  quickly  to  re-establish  a  more  normal  functioning  of  our  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. The very rapid consolidation of that situation depends crucially on the effective 
implementation of the fiscal retrenchment programmes that have been decided in a number 
of countries.  
How the Securities Markets Programme works 
Let me now explain how the Securities Markets Programme works. The programme consists 
of  interventions  in  the  euro  area’s  public  and  private  debt  securities  markets.  In  order  to 
sterilise the impact of these interventions on the liquidity conditions in the banking system, 
we  re-absorb  the  liquidity  injected.  Thus,  these  measures  do  not  influence  our  monetary 
policy stance. 
More  specifically,  the  programme  focuses  on  these  securities  markets  that  have  been 
affected by severe disruptions recently.  
These tensions did not come out of the blue. The sky had darkened since the end of last 
year, when difficulties with public finances in some euro area countries came into the focus 
of  financial  market  participants.  Following  prolonged  discussions  about  the  possibility  of  a 
loan  support  facility  for  Greece,  tensions  rose  further  towards  the  end  of  April  and  the 
beginning of May.  
On  6  and  7  May,  on  Thursday  afternoon  and  throughout  Friday,  we  observed  a  further 
deterioration  in  financial  market  conditions,  both  in  Europe  and,  as  a  consequence,  at  the 
global  level.  On  Friday  7  May,  spreads  on  sovereign  bonds  in  Europe,  CDS  spreads  and 
indices of volatility and stress in the interbank market were signalling the spreading of severe 
tensions.  
Bond  spreads  for  several  euro  area  countries  widened  beyond  any  reasonable  level. 
Liquidity in government bond markets of some euro area countries almost dried up. And the 
tensions in the sovereign bond markets spilled over to other market segments, such as the 
foreign  exchange  market  and  equity  markets,  where  trading  volumes  and  liquidity  became 
erratic, and volatility spiked. 
In view of these exceptional circumstances  prevailing in the financial markets, we decided 
that exceptional intervention was necessary.  
The Securities Markets Programme and the principles of monetary policy-making 
As always, our actions have been guided by our principles. In this respect, let me focus on 
three aspects that are key for the credible conduct of monetary policy: price stability, central 
bank independence and the prohibition of monetary financing.  
First,  price  stability,  which  is  our  primary  objective.  The  latest  measures  address  a 
malfunctioning  of  certain  market  segments.  Without  such  measures,  the  market  problems 
could have created risks to the favourable outlook for price stability. However, we have not 
gone beyond the goal of re-establishing a more correct transmission of our monetary policy. 
We have not changed our monetary policy stance: we have maintained the present level of 
interest rates which is, in our view, appropriate; and we have not embarked on more ample 
liquidity conditions. 
Precisely  in  order  to  guarantee  that  the  stance  remains  unaffected,  we  sterilise  our 
interventions,  as  I  have  explained.  The  Securities  Markets  Programme  should  not  be 
confused with quantitative easing. In simple words: We are not printing money. This confirms 
and underpins our commitment to price stability.  
BIS Review 75/2010 
 3
Credibility is crucial for ensuring price stability. As long as inflation expectations remain well-
anchored in line with our definition of price stability, long-term interest rates do not need to 
reflect the risks stemming from an uncertain inflationary process. In an environment in which 
the  central  bank  fully  preserves  its  credibility,  economic  agents  do  not  need  to  try  to 
anticipate uncertain inflationary developments, thus potentially fuelling inflationary pressures.  
In  this  respect,  let  me  highlight  that  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  have  remained 
well-anchored in line with the Governing Council’s definition of price stability throughout the 
financial  crisis.  This  is  evidenced  by  a  range  of  indicators.  For  example,  in  the  Survey  of 
Professional Forecasters, inflation five years ahead is continuously expected to stand either 
at 1.9% or 2.0% since the beginning of 2002.  
A  second  key  principle  guiding  our  action  is  central  bank  independence.  We  were  fully 
independent in our decision to act as we have done. We have never hesitated to take the 
decisions needed to ensure price stability. And we will continue to act accordingly.  
Let  me  recall  that  in  December  2005,  we  increased  rates  against  the  publicly  expressed 
sentiment of the governments. In 2008 we did not hesitate to raise interest rates, even in a 
period of financial turbulence. We took this decision to prevent broadly based second-round 
effects at that time, with a view to counteracting increasing upside risks to price stability over 
the medium term. 
We always act fully in line with our own responsibilities. And that is the reason why we have 
been delivering price stability. 
Third, our actions are in full compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing and thus 
with our financial independence. The Treaty prohibits the direct purchase by the ECB of debt 
instruments from governments. We are buying bonds on the secondary market only, and we 
stick  to  the  principles  of  the  Treaty,  which  are  price  stability,  our  primary  mandate,  and 
central bank independence. Since our inception, we have always called upon governments 
to respect budgetary discipline. We had a lot of difficulty with several governments during the 
last  ten  years,  both  as  regards  their  own  national  responsibilities  and  as  regards  their 
collegial responsibilities of peer surveillance in the Eurogroup. This period is over. We expect 
from governments strict respect for the principle of budgetary discipline and effective mutual 
surveillance.  
The  purchases  made  on  the  secondary  market  cannot  be  used  to  circumvent  the 
fundamental  principle  of  budgetary  discipline.  The  Securities  Markets  Programme  strictly 
aims at correcting malfunctioning of markets. 
The prohibition of monetary financing underlines precisely the fact that budgetary discipline is 
of the utmost importance. We have taken note of the commitments of euro area governments 
to  take  all  measures  needed  to  meet  their  fiscal  targets.  We  have  also  taken  note  of  the 
precise additional commitments taken by some euro area governments to accelerate fiscal 
consolidation and to ensure the sustainability of their public finances.  
It  is  crucial  that  governments  implement  rigorously  the  measures  needed  to  ensure  fiscal 
sustainability. It is in the context of these commitments only that we have embarked on an 
intervention programme in the securities markets. 
The Securities Market Programme is an extraordinary action, which was undertaken in the 
situation  of  severe  tensions  in  financial  markets.  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  rigorous 
application  of  the  adjustment  programmes  by  governments  is  essential  to  guarantee  the 
progressive return to a more normal functioning of financial markets.  
4 
 BIS Review 75/2010
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
Recent experience, since 2007, has demonstrated how important it is for all decision-makers 
to analyse lucidly the unexpected situations that they are facing and to act in a timely manner 
when  needed.  As  soon  as  it  became  clear  that  the  intensity  of  recent  market  disruptions 
could have implied very serious consequences for price stability in the euro area, we took 
firm action. As I have said time and again: we are permanently alert and always prepared to 
act when necessary. 
Price stability is the central contribution, which monetary policy makes to economic growth, 
to job creation and to financial stability. Our successful track record since the inception of the 
euro  –  both  in  terms  of  low  inflation  rates  and  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  –  is 
remarkable. Since the inception of the euro, more than 11 years ago until April this year, the 
average annual inflation in the euro area was 1.98%. This is exactly in line with our definition 
of price stability and it is better than the achievement of any major central bank over a period 
of many decades, including the Bundesbank.  
But the ECB’s measures cannot substitute for the actions required to address more deep-
seated and fundamental problems. It remains for others – national governments, regulators 
and supervisors, and the private sector and financial industry – to proceed with the difficult, 
but  vital,  measures  required  to  re-establish  the  trust  on  which  a  well-functioning  market 
economy relies. 
Cohesive action at a European level is essential to alleviate the current tensions. Such action 
will also support a sound, longer-term economic recovery in the euro area and beyond. This 
will benefit all of us who live and work in Europe. 
I call on euro area governments to work together. Looking ahead, countries have to take up 
their responsibilities. Major improvements need to be made to prevent bad fiscal behaviour, 
ensure effective implementation of the recommendations made by partners and enforce real 
and  effective  sanctions  in  case  of  breaches.  It  is  equally  decisive  for  the  European 
Commission and the Eurogroup to engage in an effective control of the evolution of relative 
competitiveness inside the euro area, including of the evolution of unit labour costs. And the 
implementation of structural reforms, under the surveillance of the peers, is of the essence to 
elevate the growth potential in Europe.  
I call on euro area governments in particular to work actively together to reach agreement on 
a quantum leap of the effectiveness of their collegial surveillance.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 5
