Tarisa Watanagase: Current topics of the economy and monetary policy 
of the Kingdom 
Dinner  talk by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  to  the  Japanese 
Chamber of Commerce, Bangkok, 24 March 2010. 
 Good Evening,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
First  of  all,  I  would  like to  thank  the  Japanese Chamber  of  Commerce  for  the  invitation  to 
speak  again  at  this  annual  event.  It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  to  be  back  here  for  the 
institution that has, for a long time, been playing a key role in promoting a closer cooperation 
and  better  understanding  between  the  Thai  authorities  and  the  Japanese  business 
community in Thailand.  
Tonight,  I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  three  issues.  The  first  is  Thailand’s  current 
economic conditions and outlook. The second is the key challenges for policymakers going 
forward. And the third is the Kingdom’s policies to ensure a sustained growth recovery along 
with price and financial stability.  
Many of you may recall that my speech here last year took place during the most testing time 
for both the global economy and policymakers. In the western economies at the core of the 
crisis, the financial and real sectors have been severely impacted. And for Thailand, it was 
the first time in ten years that the Thai economy registered negative growth, as the collapse 
in global demand led to a sharp contraction in the Thai exports.  
Fortunately, the global economy has now turned the corner and recovery has continued to 
gain  stronger  momentum.  The  latest  figures  have  indicated  the  better-than-expected 
recovery  of  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets  due  to  the  large,  timely  and  broad-
based economic stimulus measures that have been implemented to combat the crisis.  
In  most  countries,  manufacturing  production  and  trade  have  improved,  while  rebounding 
consumer and business confidence has helped boost the private demand. As for the financial 
system, de-leveraging and the tightening of credit underwriting standards have moderated. 
Banks have gradually rebuilt their strength and become less dependent on the support from 
government facilities.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me turn to the case of Thailand. Our successful navigation of the Thai economy through 
the crisis can be credited to two key factors. The first is our strong economic fundamentals 
including the resilient financial system as a consequence of intensive and continuous reforms 
since the  1997  Asian crisis  and  the  second  is  the  timely  implementation  of  both monetary 
and fiscal stimulus measures.  
You may remember that, the Bank of Thailand has reacted decisively and preemptively by 
lowering the policy interest rate by 250 basis points to a historically low level of 1.25 percent, 
while the Thai government launched massive stimulus packages and other measures to help 
relieve households’ cost of living through the difficult time.  
As  a  result  of  these  policies  and  the  revival  of  the  global  economy,  our  GDP  data  for  the 
fourth quarter of 2009 shows solid growth and momentum, growing 5.8 percent year-on-year 
and 3.6 percent quarter-on-quarter, one of the highest in the region and the world. The latest 
data for January also shows continuation of a broad-based economic recovery in all sectors.  
BIS Review 41/2010 
 1
 Our manufacturing production index rose at 28.6 percent;  
Exports grew at 31.4 percent;  
Private consumption expanded at 4.7 percent;  
Number  of  inbound  tourists  are  now  exceeding  1.6  million  for  the  second 
consecutive months; and  
Farm income has improved noticeably from mid-2009.  
• 
All of these have been instrumental in reducing the unemployment rate of our economy from 
the peak of 2.4 percent during the crisis to a near historic low level of 0.9 percent, with some 
sectors  such  as  electronics  and  automobile  industries  now  starting  to  experience  labor 
shortages.  
These are exactly the picture of the economy that we are hoping and looking for: growth that 
is based on confidence of consumers and investors that feel secure enough about their jobs 
and  business  prospects.  So  much  so  that  it  leads  to  the  renewal  of  consumption  and 
investment  activities,  especially  the  consumption  of  durable  products  such  as  cars, 
refrigerators,  and  televisions  as  well  as  the  purchase  of  new  home  and  new  investment 
projects.  
Going  forward,  the  prospect  of  the  Thai  economy  remains  robust.  The  momentum  of  the 
recovery is expected to continue into both 2010 and 2011. Our latest economic projection as 
of  January  2010  suggests  an  economic  expansion  of  3.3–5.3  per  cent  in  2010  and  
2.8–4.4 per cent in 2011, with an increasing role of private investment replacing government 
expenditure, which will gradually subside since the need for continued fiscal stimulus wanes 
as the economic growth becomes self-sustaining.  
Here,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  this  projection  is  due  for  a  revision  in  April.  With  the 
stronger-than-expected performance in the last quarter of 2009, it is highly likely that these 
numbers will be revised upward.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Having pointed out a fairly positive outlook, I will now turn to the second topic of my talk: the 
key  challenges  going  forward  and  I  must  quickly  add  that  looking  ahead  there  are  both 
external  and  domestic  uncertainties.  Policymakers  therefore  will  have  to  be  watchful  and 
well-prepared to implement appropriate policy to ensure continued growth momentum amidst 
these challenges.  
First,  the  global  economic  recovery,  particularly  those  of  the  industrialized  economies, 
remains fragile and subject to downside risks. In spite of the higher-than-expected growth in 
the fourth quarter of 2009, the US economy is still beset by high unemployment, continued 
deleveraging,  and  weak  financial  institutions.  All  of  these  will  have  dampening  effects  on 
domestic  demand,  especially  consumer  spending  –  the  main  growth  driver  for  the  US 
economy.  At  the  same  time,  concerns  on  the  Eurozone’s  sizable  fiscal  deficits  especially 
those of the peripheral economies may trigger another round of confidence problems.  
Furthermore, the exit policy especially of the major economies could spill additional risks to 
the ongoing global recovery. Their timing and speed will be crucial. The action that is either 
too early when the economy is not sufficiently robust, or too late when inflationary pressure 
and/or  economic  imbalances  have  already  been  formed  will  have  important  implication  on 
recovery, price and financial stability.  
Second, emerging economies, Thailand included, face the challenge of sizeable and volatile 
flows of capital due to their better growth prospect and sooner policy normalization vis-à-vis 
G3  countries.  These  flows  could  lead  to  volatility  in  foreign  exchange  markets  and  might 
potentially create financial imbalances. From the data thus far, we have seen sizable inflow 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2010
of capital into some of the Asian countries such as Korea, Taiwan, India, and China since the 
second half of 2009. And in the last couple weeks, this money started to flow into Thailand.  
Third on domestic front, as you are well aware, Thailand also faces two major uncertainties: 
the problem of Map Ta Phut and the on-going political unrest.  
I  believe  the  “Map  Ta  Phut”  problem  is  of  the  most  interest  to  Japanese  investors,  and 
therefore I would like to say a few words. At present, the authorities have put all efforts to 
achieve  the  resolution  of  the  problem,  given  its  implications  on  the  country’s  future 
investment prospect, industrial practice, and economic recovery. So far, the processes of the 
EIA, HIA, and public hearing processes have been formalized and the government is now in 
the process of establishing independent agencies which will be responsible for evaluating all 
of the proposed investment projects. It will take some more time, but progresses are being 
steadily made.  
In my view, the “Map Ta Phut” problem is only a temporary hiccup in Thailand’s long record 
of investment-friendly climate and rapid industrial development. It can be seen as part of a 
growing pain that developing countries such as Thailand experienced as it becomes more 
developed. On the positive side, it should provide opportunity to forge a closer coordination 
among related parties and establish a clear process in achieving sustainability of industrial 
development.  
As for the second issue, I think, it is too early at this point to put out an exact estimate of its 
negative impact on the recovery process.  
Should  the  problem  takes  time  to  resolve  itself,  the  negative  impact  on  the  economy  will 
become  more  visible  especially  on  the  tourist  industry  and  private  consumption.  These, 
together with the severe drought that we have been experiencing thus far, may somewhat 
dampen the robust economic momentum that we carry forward from the fourth quarter of last 
year.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would like to turn to my last topic: Thailand’s economic policies going forward, starting with 
our monetary policy strategies in 2010.  
In the last few months, we have seen slight upward price movement with both headline and 
core inflation rates turning positive since the fourth quarter of last year. Currently, headline 
and core inflation for February 2010 are at 3.7 and 0.3 per cent respectively. The turnaround 
was  due  to  a  combination  of  the  base  effects  from  oil  prices  and  the  pick-up  in  domestic 
demand.  
Looking  ahead,  with  the  firming  economic  recovery,  inflationary  pressure  is  expected  to 
increase further, with core inflation forecasted to surpass the midpoint of our target range of 
0.5–3.0 percent by the end of the year.  
Thus, it is clear that in the near term, policymakers need to perform a delicate balancing act 
that  would  at  the  same  time  ensure  a  continued  growth  momentum,  the  anchoring  of 
inflationary expectations, and the containment of potential financial imbalances.  
In light of the solid fourth-quarter GDP figures and January’s economic indicators, the current 
extraordinary  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  will  be  of  less  need  for  the  Thai 
economy. Furthermore, an over-extended period of low interest rates can lead to heightened 
inflation expectations or financial imbalances such as asset price bubbles, as this crisis has 
vividly demonstrated in many countries.  
To this end, the timing of monetary policy normalization will be important so that it will not 
jeopardize economic recovery particularly as private investment has yet to pick up enough 
pace. Thus, I would like to assure you that, we will put our best effort in considering its timing 
carefully.  
BIS Review 41/2010 
 3
As  for  dealing  with  consequences  of  capital  inflows,  we  see  the  current  managed  float 
exchange rate regime as appropriate and beneficial to the Thai economy. We will continue to 
let the level of exchange rate be determined by market forces, but make sure that it is not too 
volatile to the extent that it will be too difficult for the private sector to adjust to.  
And to give the private sector greater flexibility to manage foreign exchange risks, last month 
we  further  relaxed  restrictions  on  Thai  direct  investment  abroad  and  on  the  unwinding  of 
foreign  exchange  hedges.  These  moves,  which  are  parts  of  our  ongoing  capital  account 
liberalization  plan,  will  also  make  our  capital  flows  situation  more  balanced,  by  facilitating 
two-way foreign exchange flows.  
On the fiscal front, you will agree that fiscal policy is one of the key instruments to support 
the  economy  during  the  difficult  times  when  private  sector  growth  engines  have  been 
impaired. However, the stimulus packages that the government announced last year, have 
been done on the assumption that Thailand will face the most severe global recession in the 
last 60 years. But as it turned out, the global crisis was not as severe as thought. Given that 
our  economy  is  on  the  robust  recovery  path,  the  need  for  stimulus  may  be  less.  And  the 
government should also find the way to normalize the fiscal policy stance at an appropriate 
time.  
Here, the latest development on sovereign debt crises in Europe underscores the importance 
of the restoration of our fiscal discipline. If there are no changes in our policy, the ratio of 
public  debt to  GDP  will  increase  to  over  60  percent  by  2012.  This  will  not  only  leave  little 
room  for  the  government  to  use  more  fiscal  stimulus  should  there  be  a  new  crisis  in  the 
region or in the global economy but it could also put Thailand in the spotlight of the foreign 
investors who have become much more sensitive to the issue of fiscal sustainability.  
This is why we have to rethink the stance of our fiscal policy once the short-term political and 
economic  uncertainties  fade  away.  Furthermore,  to  ensure  fiscal  sustainability  over  the 
medium to longer term, Thailand will need fiscal reforms that include:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Indeed,  the  government  realizes  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  and  reforms.  With  the 
better-than-expected tax revenues, thanks to the solid economic recovery, the budget deficit 
for  this  fiscal  year  and  the  extent  of  public  debt  will  probably  be  lower  than  originally 
expected. The government has also taken initiatives to work on some reform measures such 
as the introduction of property taxes. These are commendable initiatives that remain to be 
seen whether will be successfully implemented.  
Continued fiscal consolidation;  
Broadening of our tax bases;  
Reforms to increase the efficiency and equality of the tax system; and  
Greater allocation of public spending toward investment expenditures. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Looking  forward,  Thailand  has  no  other  choices  but  to  embrace  the  force  of  globalization. 
This means that we have to continue to integrate our economy to the global economy and 
world financial markets. And a closer cooperation with economies in the region would then 
be a vital factor that will help strengthen the overall recovery and enhance the potential of 
Thailand in the global stage.  
This  is  why  we  continue  to  engage  in  free  trade  agreements  both  on  a  bilateral  and 
multilateral  basis,  for  example,  the  ASEAN  Free  Trade  Agreement  (or  AFTA)  that  should 
facilitate intra-regional trade and technological development. And at the same time, we also 
need to prepare ourselves for the coming volatilities in the flow of capital. As of noon today, 
our Chiang Mai Initiative Multilaterization (CMIM) will be in effect to provide the swap lines 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2010
of foreign exchange liquidity for the ASEAN+3 countries during periods of liquidity or balance 
of payments distress.  
I  am  certain  that  these  closer  integration  and  cooperation  will  be  critical  for  our  success 
together as a region in new global economy after the crisis and Thailand is looking forward to 
working  with  the  Asian  communities  and  especially  with  Japan,  one  of  Thailand’s  closest 
friends and economic partners, in achieving our potential.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 41/2010 
 5
