Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: The global financial crisis and issues for a 
regulatory response 
Welcoming remarks by H E Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of 
the United Arab Emirates, at the high-level meeting on “Regulatory & Supervisory Policies in 
Light  of  the  Recent  Financial  Crisis”,  organised  by  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  &  Arab 
Monetary Fund, Abu Dhabi, 16 November 2009. 
 Good morning, 
Excellencies 
Ladies & gentlemen 
Y.E. Josef Tosovsky, 
Y.E. Dr. Jassim Al Mannai, 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the UAE, especially those who traveled a long 
way to be here with us at the outset of this important high level meeting, and I would mention 
in particular the honorable Thomas Hoeing, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, and the distinguished speakers. 
Excellencies 
Ladies & gentlemen 
In  this  short  speech,  I  will  describe  briefly  the  financial  package  the  UAE  had  to  make 
available to banks, to help the banking sector stand in the face of the global financial crisis 
last year and Issues being considered now for a regulatory response. 
The financial packages 
CD swap facility: 
An overdraft facility: 
Central Bank of the UAE’s package 
A) 
Central  Bank  made  available  to  banks  in  the  UAE  certain  facilities  to  help  them  with 
shortages of liquidity, its first such facility was made towards the end of September 2008, I 
will summarize as follows: 
1) 
An AED 50 billion O/D facility was made available to banks through their current accounts at 
the Central Bank. 
2) 
Banks were allowed to use 100% of their Central Bank CD holdings to borrow dirham and 
dollar funds from the Central Bank. 
3) 
Banks were allowed to borrow against their holdings of bonds and sukuks issued by Local 
Governments or Local Governments’ Companies, with a reasonable hair-cut. 
4) 
This facility was provided to all banks regardless of their dirham net position. 
5) 
Central  Bank  discounted,  in  March  2009,  US$  10  billion  of  bonds  issued  by  Dubai 
Government. 
Swap operations (dirham/US dollar): 
Discounting of government bonds: 
Support to local governments: 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 1
UAE Federal Government’s package 
Federal Government guarantee of bank deposits: 
B) 
1) 
In October 2008, the Cabinet announced that the Government will guarantee all deposits at 
banks licensed and operating in the UAE, for 3 years. A plan has been initiated to create a 
guarantee scheme. 
Liquidity facility: 
2) 
An AED 70 billion was injected by Ministry of Finance into National Banks in three stages. 
This  is  an  exercise  aimed  at  enhancing  the  capital  base  of  National  Banks,  to  strengthen 
banks against NPLs, should this arise. 
Formation of the Ministerial Follow up Committee: 
3) 
A committee was formed by the Cabinet, its members are the Minister of State for Finance, 
the Minister of Economy and the Governor of Central Bank, with a mandate to tackle global 
financial crisis adverse spill-overs on the UAE economy. 
We have noticed that these packages put by the Central Bank and the Federal Government 
improved the liquidity situation at banks, as early as April 2009. 
Excellencies, 
Ladies & gentlemen 
The issues that we are debating now, to formulate our regulatory response are, 
1) 
UAE banks would have had no problem, if they owned sufficient first class and liquid 
securities among their assets, and here I do not mean “AAA” rated papers. I mean, 
we have to look at the type of securities that would fit the category of liquid assets at 
times of crisis and what percentages of these securities would be suitable for our 
banks to hold. 
Inter-bank deposits plus MTNs, ECPs and similar instruments issued by UAE banks 
in international capital markets acted as a two edged sword during the crisis. 
We  have  to  look  here  at  the  liabilities  percentage  of  these  Instruments,  and  how 
they match with first class liquid securities held by our banks. 
Also, we have to examine what businesses or assets banks are acquiring or selling 
to their customers. The question that we need to consider; do they understand the 
risks, and have they explained the inherent risks sufficiently to their customers? 
Growth of loans and advances per economic sector, and what is the percentage of 
cross-border loans, as these rates proved to be very important indicators.  
Loans  per  economic  sector  should  be  examined  carefully  to  determine  higher 
liquidity  requirements  in  order  to  mitigate  the  extra  possible  risks  created  through 
higher growth rate in a sector or two versus the total economy. 
In  addition,  we  have  to  look  carefully  at  off-balance  sheet  items  that  are  likely  to 
become on-balance sheet in a financial crisis. 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
The aim of the regulatory response or reform would be to help banks to devise a better risk 
management framework, to protect our banking system from future financial crises. 
With this I come to the end of my short speech, but before I close, I would like to thank the 
AMF, the FSI of BIS and the IIF, for holding this important high level meeting here in Abu 
Dhabi. 
I wish you all a successful meeting. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 2
