Christian Noyer: Financial stability in Europe and in the world – a French 
perspective 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Open podium debate on “The 
euro in the financial crisis – lessons and perspectives”, Copenhagen, 22 March 2010. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here in Copenhagen at the gate of the euro area. This makes it all 
the  more  stimulating  to  discuss  here  with  you  issues  related  to  the  single  currency,  the 
financial  crisis  and  the  emerging  new  financial  order.  It  allows  for  sharing  experience  and 
perspectives, which in and of itself is valuable for policy-makers.  
I would like to focus my remarks more on the emerging new financial order. More specifically, 
in the few minutes I have, I would like to share with you some thoughts, in a candid way, on 
three important policy questions.  
How can we make our financial systems more resilient?  
How can we reduce the procyclicality of financial systems?  
How can we best address systemic risk?  
Resilience  
Central banks have a strong stake in the resilience of financial systems. An environment of 
financial stability reduces the risk that monetary policy instruments become less efficient due 
to frictions and volatility in financial markets.  
Strong prudential standards are a certainly a prerequisite. It is now apparent that the level 
and quality of pre crisis capital in the banking system has not been adequate for the types of 
losses  that  have  been  experienced  and  that  are  expected  to  materialize  from  the  broader 
economic downturn. Larger capital and liquidity buffers are necessary especially for trading 
activities.  
In  the  Basel  framework  we  have  recently  taken  decisions  which  will  lead  to  a  much  more 
robust  and  resilient  banking  system  in  the  future,  with  both  a  stronger  capital  and liquidity 
base. The challenge, now, is to calibrate and phase in the new framework in a way that does 
not impede the recovery and does not contradict our macroeconomic objectives. In the long 
run,  we  want  stronger  balance  sheets  in  the  banking  system.  In  the  immediate  future, 
disorderly deleveraging is one of the main downside risks to the recovery process. Striking 
the  right  balance,  in  our  actions  and  in  our  communication,  is  important,  but  difficult.  The 
top-down assessment underway in the context of the Basel committee and the FSB is trying 
to  reach  that  balance.  The  broader  point  here  is  that  the  proposed  reforms  can  have 
significant macroeconomic consequences and these should be factored in when designing 
and implementing them. While the crisis has clearly had global ramifications, its impact on 
financial  systems  was  not  uniform  across  the  world.  Differences  in  financial  structures  do 
matter. Banks remain central in our financial systems: this is especially true for continental 
Europe  where  they  are  responsible  for  more  than  80%  of  financial  intermediation.  These 
differences suggest that we should be careful in crafting the regulatory answer to the crisis. 
Our  experience  in  France  is  that  our  banks’  universal  model  has  weathered  the  storm 
relatively well. It would be a major paradox to put in place rules which would challenge such 
universal models. There needs to be scope for different countries to tailor solutions to their 
circumstances, while at the same time doing so within a globally agreed framework.  
BIS Review 35/2010 
 1
Many  banks  have  improved  significantly  their  capital  position  through  raising  high  quality 
capital. Yet, banks may not feel comfortable if their new capital position is barely above the 
new  minimum.  Indeed,  a  critical  issue  going  forward  relates  to  the  behavior  of  banks  with 
respect to capital buffers they retain on top of the existing minimum. If banks target buffers 
above the regulatory minimum, which is an endogenous market outcome, they may need to 
raise  even  larger  amount  of  equity  than  what  can  be  expected  just  looking  at  the  current 
package.  On  the  one  hand  we  know  from  empirical  studies  that  weaker  capitalized  banks 
typically exhibit weak loan growth compared to other better-capitalized banks. On the other, 
banks may find it less costly to adjust loan volumes and loan pricing than capital, as frictions 
in the market for bank capital make the latter option more expensive.  
Finally, any regulatory framework needs to manage avoidance and regulatory arbitrage, and 
keep up with innovation and other forms of structural change. For this, a necessary, but not 
sufficient condition is that standards are comprehensive in coverage and consistent across 
jurisdictions. I am not sure, for instance, that the leverage ratio, if it was to be implemented 
as a compulsory instrument, would meet this double test. At the current level of accounting 
divergences, consistency will be very difficult to achieve. Furthermore, there is a risk that it 
would encourage migration of credit activities towards other – less regulated – parts of the 
financial system.  
It is therefore important that consistency apply across standards and countries. Convergence 
between accounting standards is a precondition for a consistent implementation of some of 
the  prudential  reforms  discussed  by  the  Basel  Committee.  It  is  also  essential  that  new 
prudential standards for banks become truly universal.  
Procyclicality  
Strictly speaking, procyclicality is a tendency of financial systems to fluctuate around a trend 
with the economic cycle.  
By extension, procyclicality can encompass all “amplification mechanisms” through which an 
initial shock results in wider movements in asset prices, credit flows, market liquidity, and, 
possibly, the real economy.  
Our  accounting  and  prudential  regimes  have  increased  procyclicality  in  recent  years.  In  a 
mark to market environment, asset prices movements quickly translate into changes in the 
capital base of financial institutions. This, in turn, triggers additional demand for assets and a 
further  increase  in  their  prices.  This  kind  of  “inverted  demand  curve”;  where  demand 
increases  with  prices,  may  create  the  conditions  for  deep  and  lasting  financial  instability. 
Addressing procyclicality caused by the regulation itself is therefore a priority.  
The first line of defense against procyclicality should be the accounting framework. I strongly 
support the current focus on changing the accounting rules. More precisely, moving from an 
incurred loss model to a forward looking model is essential. We need a robust, auditable and 
straightforward provisioning system at the accounting level based on a forward looking model 
that  would  allow  provisioning  efforts  commensurate  with  credit  risks  through  time.  This 
framework should also be simple, bearing in mind the ultimate objective of creating synergies 
between prudential and accounting standards.  
The Basel Committee is working on a very comprehensive approach, which is casted in its 
“Principles for revision of IAS 39”. Accounting standard setters have also been working hard. 
I firmly believe that two steps are required going forward. One is that the IASB should follow 
the principles by the Basel Committee. Another is that the IASB and the FASB should adopt 
a common  methodology regarding  provisioning based on  expected credit losses. This is a 
precondition to ensure that the G20 countries have convergent accounting systems.  
Some of the procyclicality can also be trimmed through prudential regulation. Efforts to make 
solvency ratios potentially less procyclical are welcome and should be pursued. In particular 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2010
those  efforts  aimed  at  imposing  a  measure  of  risks  “through  the  cycle”  or  “downturn”  are 
useful.  Other  options  to  take  some  of  the  procyclicality  off  through  prudential  standards 
include  a  fixed  buffer,  which  would  act  as  a  capital  conservation  device.  I  see  some 
limitations to such an option. It is hard to see how this fixed buffer, supposed to be on top of 
the minimum requirement, would not be perceived as a new regulatory minimum. Also, it is 
very  hard  to  see  how  this  mechanism  may  not  have  adverse  impact  on  banks’  share 
ownership. Another avenue to address procyclicality through prudential rules is by putting in 
place  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  The  logic  is  simple  and,  in  principle,  appealing:  the 
mechanism,  indexed  on  a  macroeconomic  variable,  would  force  banks  to  build  capital 
reserves when they can do so and allow them to consume such reserves in a downturn. This 
would  be  expected 
in 
synchronization with the financial cycle. In practice, we still need to clarify the conditions and 
the set up for triggering the release of surplus capital accumulated through the mechanism. 
Such  a  mechanism  may  not  necessarily  be  cumulative  with  others  and  we  may  have  to 
choose.  
that  banks  accumulate  and  use  self-insurance 
to  ensure 
initiatives  are  currently  discussed, 
Systemic risk and moral hazard  
As techniques for managing and allocating risk became more sophisticated, the network of 
counterparties expanded in scale and in complexity. This was, truly, a systemic change that 
was properly understood but not fully captured by regulators at the time. Credit and market 
risk  was  supposedly  more  broadly  spread.  But  counterparty  risk  increased.  Overall,  the 
overall impact on financial stability may well have been negative.  
There might be a temptation to assess systemic risk through a crude “size” criterion. “Too big 
to  fail”  certainly  warrants  special  treatment.  But,  the  position  and  role  of  even  smaller  or 
medium  size  actors  may  also  put  them  in  a  situation  to  have  a  strong  influence  on  the 
system’s dynamics. There is a need to account for other dimensions of systemic importance 
such  as  interconnection,  complexity,  substitutability.  Furthermore,  the  “systemic”  character 
strongly  depends  on  circumstances,  the  environment  and  the  specific  features  of  the 
financial system. Drawing up an a priori list of systemically important institutions would give a 
false sense of certainty. It may also fuel the moral hazard associated with such firms being 
perceived by markets as – exactly that – systemic.  
Various 
including  stronger  cooperation  between 
supervisors  and,  more  controversially,  additional  capital  charges.  They  certainly  require 
further thorough analysis It is essential to avoid threshold effects and never forget that risks 
are continuous in nature, time-varying and state-contingent.  
The  debate  about  systemic  firms  echoes  also  concerns  about  the  activities  and  business 
models  of  some  institutions.  It  is  especially  so  in  countries  where  public  intervention  to 
rescue  the  financial  system  was  on a  massive  scale.  The  presumption  is  that smaller  and 
leaner financial institutions would pose less risk to financial and macroeconomic stability than 
larger  and  more  diversified  ones.  Yet,  facts  suggest  this  cannot  hold  as  a  general  lesson 
from the crisis. Indeed, those banks which suffered most from the crisis were precisely those 
which  were  more  specialized,  such  as  the  investment  banks.  By  contrast,  large  universal 
banks, reliant on a large deposit base, could withstand the shocks comparatively better.  
To  deal  with  systemic  risks,  there  is  a  lot  of  merit  in  investigating  more  what  I  would  call 
“market  options”.  Financial  innovation  can  bring  an  essential  contribution  to  growth  and 
prosperity.  It  can  also  create  significant  instability.  To  reap  the  benefits  of  innovation  and 
reduce its risks, we need robust and resilient financial systems and infrastructures.  
In  this  respect,  concentrating  systemic  risks  in  central  clearing  counterparties  for  the  most 
important markets (interbank, derivatives) may bring us a long way in reducing them. Even in 
CCPs, counterparty risk never disappears. Clearing houses concentrate the risks and remain 
vulnerable  to  a  default  by  a  major  participant.  They  should  operate  under  appropriate 
BIS Review 35/2010 
 3
oversight  in  order  to  ensure  that  they  are  properly  capitalized;  maintain  robust  risk 
management  practices;  and  meet  high  standards  of  governance.  They  must  also  not  be 
dependent on liquidity provision by other financial intermediaries, which means they should 
have access, at any time, to Central Bank liquidity.  
Credit Default Swaps (CDS) are a case in point. The market is very opaque and increasingly 
concentrated between a small numbers of institutions. Worldwide, five banks – one of which 
is based in Europe – account for half of the CDS market. Besides, leading CDS players trade 
primarily among themselves and the actual transfer of risk through CDS has become more 
limited. Concentration and interconnectedness have increased with financial crisis. They are 
sources of vulnerability, a risk for the liquidity of the market and a threat to efficient pricing.  
The transparency of the CDS market should also be enhanced. Data warehouses, because 
they hold the register of all positions, are key players in that respect: whatever their location, 
they  should  provide  supervisors  and  regulators  with  access  to  all  the  data  they  need  to 
conduct effective macro- and micro-surveillance. With both a stronger market infrastructure 
and greater transparency, we will be in a good position to ensure that CDS provide a safer 
contribution to the financing of the economy.  
Most  of  these  remarks  have  been  focused  on  the  major  and  vital  impetus  to  enhance 
financial regulation. I cannot conclude without mentioning that changes in financial regulation 
are  not  a  panacea  for strengthening  financial  systems  and  ensuring  that  the  new  financial 
order will be less prone to instability. What is also absolutely critical is that macroeconomic 
policies do not derail financial stability. As I mentioned in my introduction, there is no free 
lunch in being a member of a monetary union. The credibility of policies for financial stability 
is contingent upon the conduct of other policies. Disciplined fiscal policy is a precondition to 
achieve macroeconomic and financial stability.  
Looking into the future, a macro-prudential policy framework could provide further rooms for 
maneuver.  In  a  nutshell,  macroprudential  policy  could  alleviate  some  of  the  constraints 
associated  with  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  when  faced  with  asset  price  instability.  It 
might also alleviate the burden on fiscal policy by limiting systemic risks and thus lowering 
the  need  for  state  financial  rescue  packages.  That  said,  in  practice,  developing  a 
well-articulated macroprudential policy framework raises some challenges. I trust the benefits 
of addressing them are worth the impressive hard work currently underway.  
Thank you for you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2010
