Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The progress made on the introduction 
of Islamic banking in Uganda 
Speech  by  Prof  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  on  the 
occasion  of  Eid-El-Fitri  celebrations  at  Bank  of  Uganda  Western  Gardens,  Kampala, 
17 September 2010. 
 Your Eminence the Mufti of Uganda, 
The Rt. Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja, Third Deputy Prime Minister/Minister of Internal Affairs,  
Hon Ministers, 
Honorable Members of Parliament, 
His Worship the Mayor of Kampala, 
Chief Executives of Commercial Banks, 
Bank of Uganda Senior Management, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Asalaam Aleikum,  
Eid Mubarak, Eid Mubarak, Eid Mubarak!  
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this auspicious occasion when we mark the 
end of the Holy month of Ramadan and to celebrate Eid-El-Fitri.  
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate our Muslim brothers and sisters for having been 
steadfast in committing themselves to fulfilling one of the five pillars of Islam by fasting during 
the Holy Month of Ramadan; I pray that Allah accepts it. I urge all the Muslims who observed 
the  fasting  to  maintain  this  noble  act  of  worship.  The  virtues  of  fasting  should  be  upheld 
throughout your daily life both at work and elsewhere.  
At the Bank of Uganda, we believe that God plays a role in everything we do in executing the 
Bank’s mandate “to fostering price stability and a sound financial system”. That is why we 
adopted  the  culture  of  starting  all  our  meetings  with  a  prayer  led  by  staff  from  different 
religions and denominations to seek God’s guidance. We uphold the freedom of worship and 
no staff is constrained because of religious affiliation or creed and endeavor to accord equal 
opportunities to all. In this regard the Bank hosts the Christian Community to the Christmas 
thanksgiving we host the Muslims to the Eid celebrations. Let me once again assure you that 
the Bank is committed to hold this Eid-El-Fitri celebrations every year.  
Allow  me  to  appraise  you  on  the  progress  made  on  the  introduction  of  Islamic  banking  in 
Uganda which a number of local and foreign banks have expressed interest.  
Ladies and gentlemen, Islamic banking is a system of banking or banking activity which is 
consistent with the principles of Islamic law (Shari’ah). An Islamic financial institution (IFI) is 
therefore  one  whose  statute,  rules  and  procedures  expressly  state  its  commitment  to  the 
principles of Islamic Shari’ah and to the banning of the receipt and payment of interest in any 
of its operations. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  current  regulatory  regime  does  not  permit  financial  institutions  to 
engage in Islamic banking. To close this gap, Bank of Uganda has proposed amendments to 
the  Financial  Institutions  Act,  2004  to  permit  the  licensing  of  and  transacting  by  financial 
institutions  in  Islamic  banking  in  Uganda.  The  proposed  amendments  to  the  law  were 
submitted to the Finance Minister for consideration by Cabinet and subsequently Parliament 
for enactment. This amendment will bring Uganda in line with other EAC member countries 
that have licensed Islamic banking and finance. It will increase the depth, breadth and range 
of finance products bank customers can use to access banking services.  
BIS Review 119/2010 
 1
Let  me  conclude  by  wishing  you  once  again  happy  celebrations.  It  is  now  my  pleasure  to 
invite Hon Ali Kirunda Kivejinja to address the congregation.  
God Bless you all.  
Asalaam Aleikum,  
Eid Mubarak, Eid Mubarak, Eid Mubarak 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2010
