Prof Njuguna Ndung’u: Growing real estate through finance 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Forum on 
Growing  Real  Estate  through  Finance,  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies,  Nairobi, 
23 June 2010. 
 The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Housing, Mr. Tirop Kosgey 
The Counsellors of Real Estate 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  warmly  welcome  you  all  to  this  important  interactive  forum  on 
“Growing  Real  Estate  through  Finance”.  I  thank  all  present  for  accepting  our  invitation.  In 
particular, I wish to thank the Counsellors of Real Estate represented here for joining us to 
deliberate on growth and financing of such an important sector in the Kenyan economy. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  any  economy,  long-term  finance  is  one  of  the  key  drivers  of 
economic  growth.  Long-term  finance  allows  for  the  provision  of  affordable  and  adequate 
housing which is a major thrust of Kenya’s Vision 2030. Indeed, in line with the objective of 
this forum, one of the flagship projects under the “Housing and urbanization” as stipulated in 
the Vision 2030 is “Mortgage Financing Initiatives”. At an estimated annual demand of about 
150,000 housing unit, the supply is barely at 35,000 leaving a gap of 115,000. The sector 
thus  portends  enormous  opportunity  and  a  major  market;  appropriate  and  innovative 
financing mechanisms are therefore absolutely essential. 
This  forum  brings  together  bankers,  regulators,  practitioners,  researchers,  academics  and 
senior  government  policy  makers  to  discuss  this  vital  agenda  –  Real  Estate  Financing  in 
Kenya, but I do believe that one of the solutions is not only the source of long-term finance 
but  also  the  collateral  technology  and  its  process  must  be  improved  and  simplified.  The 
outcomes and policy conclusions of this interactive forum are, therefore, an important input 
into policy responses in addressing the binding constraints in this sector and the economy. 
The  Kenyan  financial  system  through  its  intermediation  role  remains  the  key  pillar  in 
providing mortgage financing. Although there is evidently enormous opportunity in the sector, 
lending  to  the  building  and  construction  and  real  estate  sector  stands  at  12.2% 
(Ksh 92.5 billion  as  at  end  of  2009)  of  the  total  credit  by  banks  and  mortgage  finance 
companies.  The  bulk  of  financing,  it  does  appear,  is  through  household  savings.  This  is  a 
clear  indication  that  financing  is  one  of  the  major  constraints.  While  most  deposits  are  of 
short  term  nature,  mortgage  finance  is  long-term.  The  traditional  mismatch  constraint 
therefore comes into play. This requires a well developed mortgage market to address long-
term funding requirements of the sector. 
Developing mechanisms for long-term finance is good for monetary policy transmission as 
well. The MPC has been trying to address the issue of long-term finance; we do hope this 
forum can provide some viable and feasible options. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Government’s commitment to growth of real estate sector is in 
our  blueprint  for  Vision  2030  and  is  also  well  articulated  in  the  Finance  Bill,  2010.  The 
Finance  Bill  outlines  a  number  of  measures  to  spur  growth  in  the  property  market.  In 
particular, in order to facilitate provision of adequate housing to Kenya’s growing population, 
The Finance Bill, 2010 contains proposals to amend the Banking Act: 
(i) 
(ii) 
To allow mortgage finance companies to operate current accounts; and 
To allow banks to advance up to 40% of their total deposit liabilities up from 25% for 
purchase, improvement or alterations of land. 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 1
These  measures  will  unlock  the  sector’s  potentials  by  availing  funding  required  to  finance 
growth  of  real  estate  in  Kenya.  The  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  work  with  the  sector  to 
improve the operating environment. 
It is equally important for the players in the real estate sector to design innovative ways of 
securing funds to exploit opportunities available. For instance, pension funds are needed for 
guaranteeing  members’  mortgages.  This  is  happening  in  Kenya,  but  still  at  a  low  scale. 
Leveraging  on  such  long-term  instruments  will  lower  costs  and  make  decent  and  low  cost 
housing available to potential borrowers. Also, other investment vehicles such as unit trusts 
have the potential of pooling funds required for specific projects. 
In  addition,  the  success  of  the  Kenya  Government  infrastructure  bond  as  well  as  other 
corporate bonds that have followed, demonstrates enormous potential of the bond market. In 
2009 alone the Government raised a total of Ksh 54.7 billion through bonds issues, and the 
infrastructure  bonds  were  oversubscribed  every  time.  This  is  a  clear  testimony  of  the 
market’s  ability  to  provide  cheaper  source  of  funding  for  long-term  projects  such  as 
mortgages. To further deepen the bond market, the Central Bank has implemented a number 
of measures, including introduction of benchmark bonds and re-opening of these benchmark 
bonds  to  create  liquidity  and  facilitate  trading.  We  can  then  use  this  infrastructure  bond 
platform to develop housing bonds. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  all  this,  a  vibrant  financial  sector  with  adequate  and  dynamic 
human capital is a vital component. The Kenya School of Monetary Studies as the capacity 
building institution of the Central Bank of Kenya and the region is well placed to develop and 
implement  a  curriculum  that  fits  21st  century  Real  Estate  Financing.  This  curriculum  is 
expected  to  be  broad  and  multi-disciplinary  cutting  across  various  fields  in  demand  for 
capacity  building.  Such  a  multi-faceted  capacity  building  program  will  provide  the  requisite 
skill sets to unlock potentials of the real estate sector in Kenya. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  these  remarks  on  the  future  of  this 
market, it is my pleasure to declare this interactive forum officially open. I wish you all fruitful 
deliberations. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2010
