Cleviston Haynes: Civility, creativity and performance – building and 
sustaining smart partnerships for improved productivity 
Speech by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
opening of the 2010 Week of Excellence, Bridgetown, 22 February 2010. 
 Dr The Hon. David Estwick, Minister of Economic Affairs & Empowerment, Innovation, Trade, 
Industry  and  Commerce;  Senator  Sir  Roy  Trotman,  President  of  the  Congress  of  Trade 
Unions and Staff Associations; Mr. Ben Arrindel, Chairman of the Barbados Private Sector 
Association; specially invited guests and facilitators; Dr. Tayo Fashoyin, Director, Industrial & 
Employment Relations Department ILO, other distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.  
The  Central  Bank  of  Barbados  is  again  pleased  to  participate  in  this  Week  of  Excellence 
organised by the Social Partners. It is appropriate that you should begin your week here in 
the Grande Salle of the Central Bank for the Bank’s own strategic vision is to be a centre of 
excellence  in  all  that  it  does.  At  the  Bank,  we  are  acutely  aware  of  the  sustained  effort, 
discipline, consistency and commitment required to attain this goal. We only have to look at 
our  cricket  icons  who  have  led  the  way  by  demonstrating  in  their  sphere  of  activity  that 
excellence is attainable at the international level for citizens of this small country. One can 
say  that  in  recent  times  we  have  also  seen  what  indiscipline,  inconsistency  and  lack  of 
commitment  can  produce.  We  therefore  commend  the  Social  Partners  on  their  on-going 
efforts to keep this objective at the forefront of national consciousness.  
This week takes place at a difficult period for the Barbadian economy. As you are aware, the 
past year was challenging as the global financial crisis had a significant negative effect on 
economic activity, particularly in the tourism and construction sectors and on government’s 
finances. Reduced tourism earnings and lower private sector capital inflows have contributed 
to an attendant loss of foreign exchange earnings. One unfortunate consequence of these 
developments has been increasing unemployment. However, it is fair to say that the Social 
Partners  have  responded  to  the  challenge  with  more  flexible  labour  arrangements  that 
helped to contain job losses in some sectors. 
In its review in early January of the Barbados economy for 2009 and prospects for 2010, the 
Bank was cautious in its forecast, noting that the outlook for 2010 is “clouded by uncertainty 
about the pace and robustness of the recovery in the North American and European markets 
on which the tourism and international business depend.”  
Since this sober forecast, the International Monetary Fund has revised upwards its projection 
for  global  economic  activity,  with  stronger  growth  expected  in  the  United  States,  United 
Kingdom and the Euro area than previously expected. However, the economic recovery is 
likely  to  be  uneven  and  output  in  some  countries,  including  in  some  of  our  major  trading 
partners, is not anticipated to reach pre-crisis levels until 2011. 
The uncertainty about the pace of the recovery requires us to be prudent in our economic 
management.  At  the  same  time,  we  must  position  ourselves  to  take  advantage  of  the 
recovery  when  it  comes.  My  remarks,  this  morning,  focus  on  the  issue  of  productivity 
enhancement as a mechanism of strengthening that recovery.  
We rely on our ability to sell our goods and services abroad for our economic success while 
other countries are at the same time aggressively seeking to sell to us or to set up operations 
locally.  This  requires  us  to  be  competitive  in  our  domestic  market  and  in  our  export 
production. 
Our efforts to enhance our competitiveness are closely linked with improved productivity. We 
know that factors such as size, the lack of domestic competition and access to finance can 
retard  the  pace  at  which  productivity  enhancing  measures  are  introduced.  However,  while 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 1
these  factors  may  seem  to  be  a  disincentive  to  change,  we  must  not  resile  from  our 
commitment to pursue productivity enhancements. Clearly there is a role for government in 
creating the enabling framework for productivity improvements, but productivity occurs at the 
firm  level.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  even  for  firms  operating  in  the 
domestic market, competition comes not only from other local firms but also from  external 
entities that are adopting new technologies and deriving the scale economies by exporting to 
economies that have not. 
How  we  achieve  gains  in  productivity  is  complex  since  the  factors  that  drive  long-term 
productivity  growth  are  complementary  to  each  other.  For  example,  new  investments  in 
capital  goods  and  enhancement  to  labour  skills  are  often  required  to  take  advantage  of 
productivity enhancing new technologies. 
I wish to suggest that productivity is as important in the public sector as it is in the private 
sector.  We  need  to  ask  ourselves  whether  we  can  we  produce  the  services  we  currently 
provide with no dimunition in quality at a lower cost? Conversely can we produce a higher 
quality of service without increased costs? 
As a services-based economy, some of our productivity gains can probably be achieved by 
simply being conscious of the need to maintain a customer focus so that we can understand 
the customer and provide him with what he wants. Our competitive position therefore will be 
driven not only by price considerations but also by the quality of service that we provide. 
This is why I think your theme of this week – Civility, Creativity and Performance: Building 
and  Sustaining  Smart  Partnerships  for  Improved  Productivity  –  is  so  apt  for  the 
circumstances.  
Those  of  my  generation  and  before  may  well  recall  the  age-old  bajan  parental  reminder 
“Mind  Your  Manners!”.  This  memory  evokes  the  word civility.  One  may  be  forgiven  for  at 
first thinking that this word seems out of place in a discourse on productivity. However, when 
one  stops  to  consider  the  concept of  Smart  Partnerships, based  as  I understand it  on  the 
universal  values  of  trust,  respect,  understanding,  good  faith  and  fair  play,  it  becomes 
abundantly clear that civility is indeed the most appropriate word within this context. In fact, it 
may be argued that to remove it would be to unravel the fabric that binds the relationships 
that govern the Smart Partnerships.  
If I may be  permitted to build on that platform,  the guiding principles of Smart Partnership 
recognize that often the interests of the partners differ and sometimes they even collide. At 
these  times,  civility  becomes  paramount  as  we  seek  to  resolve  our  differences  through 
dialogue and peaceful negotiations rather than through the use of power or the exertion of 
force and coercion. 
Civility  is  therefore  the  currency  we  must  use  in  a  partnership  that  brings  together 
Government  and  Business  and  Labour  in  a  single  forum  towards  solutions  in  the  national 
interests.  
The theme for this Week of Excellence suggests that the ultimate goal for establishing and 
maintaining Smart Partnership is to improve productivity. We therefore need to consider the 
environment in which productivity occurs – the workplace.  
Is there a place for civility in the workplace? And, can its practice or lack thereof promote or 
hinder productivity? I answer a resounding “YES”! 
In  the  workplace,  it  is  not  usually  the  technical  competence  that  provides  the  greatest 
challenge or consumes most of our creative energy; rather, it is often fractured relationships, 
hurt  emotions  and  dishonouring  behaviours  that  stifle  creativity  and  strong  performance. 
These impact negatively on productivity, and are all examples of lack of civility. 
Judy Clements Training & Development Programme, Civility in the Workplace, contends that, 
“Employees working side by side need to learn how to respect each other so that they can 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2010
work as a team. Unreturned email, unfulfilled promises, late arrivals at meetings, distracted 
listening all hurt workplace productivity and make work an awful place to be.” 
These may seem small things but they are easy to fix and can be beneficial to the workplace 
in the short term. Of course this must be supported by respect between management and 
employees at the firm level while more long-term initiatives are undertaken by firms and by 
government which creates the enabling framework.  
If  your  seminar  can  achieve  greater  awareness  of  the  importance  of  productivity  to  the 
national wellbeing, then the time spent here each year will be worthwhile. In closing therefore 
I continue to wish you much success and reiterate the Bank’s commitment to participating in 
this annual event. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 3
