K C Chakrabarty: Financial deepening by putting financial inclusion 
campaign into mission mode 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
23rd Skoch Summit, Mumbai, 17 June 2010. 
 1. 
Dr C Rangarajan, Hon’ble Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister, 
Mr Hari Sankaran, Managing Director and CEO, IL& FS, Shri S. S. Tarapore, Distinguished 
Fellow,  Skoch  Development  Foundation,  Shri  J  Sriram,  CEO  Mobile  Commerce  Venture, 
Bharti  Airtel  Ltd,  and  of  course  the  main  organiser  of  this  function  Mr  Sameer  Kochhar, 
distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  have  come  here  to  say  a  few  words  about 
financial  inclusion  which  is  closely  related  to  the  topic  of  this  Summit,  i.e.  Financial 
Deepening. One of the preconditions for deepening of any process is the existence of a large 
number  of  participants.  Hence,  financial  inclusion  is  a  necessary  condition  for  financial 
deepening. 
2.  
Let us consider how financial deepening can address concerns of growth with equity 
and ensure pro-poor growth. Financial sector development and deepening drives economic 
growth  by  mobilizing  savings  and  investing  in  the  growth  of  the  productive  sectors.  The 
institutional  infrastructure  of  the  financial  system  contributes  to  reducing  information, 
contracting and transaction costs, which in turn accelerates economic growth and promotes 
pro-poor growth. We firmly believe that increasing financial inclusion reduces the economic 
vulnerability of households, promotes economic growth, alleviates poverty and improves the 
quality of peoples’ lives. Thus, expansion of banking leads to increasing availability of finance 
to spur economic growth and helps alleviate poverty. 
for  poor  people 
financial  services 
to  access  appropriate 
Barriers to this process 
3.   Barriers 
include  
socio-economic  factors  e.g.,  lack  of  education-illiteracy,  gender  and  age,  low  and  irregular 
income,  and  geography,  regulatory  factors  e.g.  mandatory  requirements  of  identity 
documentation and product design factors. 
4.   A  major  barrier  cited  to  expand  appropriate  services  to  poor  by  financial  service 
providers is the cost of providing those services including administering small loans. While 
transaction costs do not vary in direct proportion to a transaction’s size and larger number of 
transactions bring down the costs, serving the poor with small value services is not viable 
using  conventional  retail  banking  or 
to  promote 
technological and institutional innovation as a means to expand financial system access and 
usage, including addressing infrastructure weaknesses. 
5.  
Innovation  in  delivery  and  design  of  financial  services  targeting  the  poor  and  the 
excluded, presents challenging policy and regulatory issues. Even the G-20 has set up the 
Financial  Inclusion  Experts  Group  to  address  these  issues  of  ensuring  Financial  Inclusion 
and  global  safety  nets.  Global  awareness  of  the  challenges  and  barriers  and  hands-on 
experience with policy, regulation and supervision is limited. Industry innovation has thus far 
frequently outpaced the capacity of policymakers to respond. When we talk of reaching to the 
people, we must understand what types of problems are faced by customers and what is the 
solution.  Any  policy  and  regulatory  responses  will  therefore  need  to  focus  on  articulating 
flexible approaches that can take account of multiple and competing objectives and that can 
accommodate further innovation. A key source of innovation is the capacity of technology to 
reduce costs and overcome other barriers to the provision of sustainable financial services to 
the excluded. 
insurance  approaches.  We  have 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 1
6.   Till  a  few  years  ago,  there  was  a  dearth  of  appropriate  technology.  But,  now  that 
technology has arrived, we have taken several initiatives to bring about financial inclusion. 
What we require is a business model and a delivery model. With this in view, RBI advised 
banks  to  formulate  a  board  approved  financial  inclusion  plan  for  the  next  three  years.  All 
banks  have  drawn  up  their  financial  inclusion  plans  and  we  are  engaged  in  active 
discussions with  banks on  their  plans.  Through  this  approach,  we  are  putting  the  financial 
inclusion  campaign  into  mission  mode.  Based  on  our  assessment  and  learning,  we  have 
advised them to review and revise their plans. Our broad  approach on achieving planned, 
sustained and structured financial inclusion is as under: 
Technology: seamless integration of front-end with back-end 
7.   First,  the  transformational  role  of  technology  needs  to  emphasised.  Financial 
deepening is taking banking to people. We are speaking of this for the last four decades post 
nationalization; we have failed if we see that the current coverage is of barely 32,000 rural 
commercial  bank  branches.  Scalable  financial  inclusion  cannot  happen  without  stable  and 
reliable Information and Communications Technology (ICT). Not only the bank branches but 
also the branches of Regional Rural Bank’s must also be on Core Banking Solution (CBS), 
without  which  it  would  not  be  possible  to  scale  up  the  financial  inclusion  efforts.  The 
transactions through the hand held front end-devices should be seamlessly integrated with 
banks’  main  server.  These  devices  must  be  capable  of  transacting  the  four  minimum 
products as mentioned in a subsequent paragraph. There should be a provision in the smart 
card for integration with the UID number under the Aadhaar Project. 
A Savings cum overdraft account 
A Pure Savings Product ideally a recurring or variable recurring deposit 
A Remittance Product for EBT and other remittances 
Entrepreneurial Credit such as GCC, KCC 
Banking services: need to increase the bouquets of products 
8.   Second, it is not enough to open a No Frills Accounts (NFA) and maintain that banking 
services  are  available.  De  minimus,  four  banking  products  need  to  be  provided  for  it  to 
qualify as availability of banking services. These are: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
The number of NFA opened present a very rosy picture, however, evaluation studies show 
that accounts once opened lie dormant as the poor do not have enough money to put in the 
deposit  accounts.  Hence,  the  need  to  transact  is  not  there.  If  the  banks  want  customer 
acquisition and that poor customers transact with them, they must permit overdrafts in the 
accounts.  To  begin  with,  very  small  amounts  such  as  Rs  200,  Rs  500  etc.  could  be 
sanctioned. The needs of the poor for consumption smoothing and for lifecycle events such 
as  medical  emergency,  weddings,  funerals,  etc.  are  pressing  and  need  immediate 
gratification.  They  need  to  be  made  aware  that  to  meet  their  emergency  credit  needs,  an 
overdraft facility exists and they can avail should they require. This would bring them to the 
banks to transact and enable the banks to sell other products apart from making the entire 
exercise viable. For those, who only wish to save, a pure savings product like a recurring or a 
variable recurring deposit product could be offered. A remittance product to facilitate EBT or 
other remittances should also be offered. For entrepreneurial credit, products such as GCC, 
KCC, etc. could be offered. This is the minimum set of products that needs to be offered. 
Beyond this, banks are free to provide any other products such as insurance, mutual funds, 
etc. as per their assessment and capability. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2010
Coverage: need for transparency 
9.   Third,  the  issue  of  coverage.  So  far,  even  when  a  customer  from  a  remote  village 
comes  and  opens  an  account  with  a  bank  branch  in  a  city,  that  city  branch  includes  that 
remote  village  as  covered  by  banking  services.  We  are  clarifying  that  for  a  village  to  be 
considered  covered  by  banking  services,  either  a  bank  branch  has  to  be  present  or  a 
Business Correspondent (BC) is visiting/present in that village. There must be a bifurcation 
between villages with more than 2000 population and those with less than 2000 population. 
The plan needs to cover in an integrated manner both categories of villages. The names of 
the BC/branch covering a particular village need to be indicated on the banks website. 
Financial inclusion plan: integrated with banks’ business plans  
10.   Fourth, financial inclusion plans must be integrated with the normal business plans of 
the banks. We believe that banking to the poor is a viable business opportunity but costs and 
benefit exercise needs to be attempted by the banks to make financial inclusion congruent 
with  their  business  models.  Banks  must  view  financial  inclusion  as  a  huge  business 
opportunity and perfect their delivery models. 
Operational issues: need for intermediate structure 
11.   Fifth, the banks need to examine the operational issues related to the BC model such 
as cash handling. They need to evaluate whether an intermediate brick and mortar structure 
is  required  between  the  base  bank  branch  and  BCs  for  more  effective  supervision  of  the 
BCs. This structure, which should be manned by banks’ own skeletal staff can have a safe 
where BCs can deposit cash, a CBS terminal and passbook printing facility. Over a period of 
time, this can morph into a full fledged satellite branch of the Bank 
Urban financial inclusion: not to be lost sight of  
12.   Sixth,  financial  inclusion  is  sometimes  erroneously  treated  as  synonymous  with  rural 
poverty.  Concerns  of  urban  poverty  also  need  to  be  factored  in  and  the  needs  of  various 
groups as rickshaw pullers, construction workers, migrant workers, etc. must be factored in 
and  products  and  services  crafted  as  per  their  needs  by  the  banking  system  to  address 
urban financial inclusion. 
Monitoring: need for a structured approach 
13.   Seventh, we would be closely monitoring the progress made by the banks as per their 
financial  inclusion  plans.  A  structured  reporting  format  has  been  made  available  for 
meaningful compilation and analysis of data. The banks need to do similar structured data 
compilation  exercise  at  the  state/district  level  which  will  facilitate  monitoring  at  the 
district/state/bank level. A structured approach will ensure that this time the outcome of our 
financial inclusion efforts will be different and will not meet the same fate as previous ones. 
Other issues 
14.   Let me reiterate that financial inclusion is not mere State Benefit Transfers. Loans must 
be extended and savings and borrowings habits need to be inculcated among the poor. Poor 
do not require cheap credit but prompt credit. It is an anomaly that while they are pressed to 
pay exorbitant rates of interest to the money lender, the mainstream financial institutions are 
still shy of lending to them. In the ultimate analysis, financial inclusion is a driver of economic 
growth and poverty alleviation. 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 3
Inclusive  financial  sector  development  makes  two  complementary  contributions  to 
15.  
poverty  alleviation:  financial  sector  development  is  a  driver  of  economic  growth  which 
indirectly reduces poverty and inequality; and appropriate, affordable, financial services for 
poor people. Critical to our efforts at securing sustained economic growth are the expansion 
of last mile access to finance. Thus financial inclusion is no longer a policy choice but is a 
policy compulsion. In a bank based model, customers have a direct contractual relationship 
with  a  bank  or  similar  prudentially  regulated  and  supervised  financial  institution  –  a  basic 
bank account, a savings account, a savings cum overdraft account, a transaction account, a 
loan, or some combination – even though the customer may deal exclusively with the staff of 
one or more retail agents hired to conduct transactions on the bank’s behalf. In the non-bank 
based  model  the  contractual  relationship  is  with  a  non-bank  service  provider  such  as  a 
mobile  network  operator  or  an  issuer  of  stored-value  payment  instruments.  Customers 
exchange  cash  at  a  retail  agent  in  return  for  an  electronic  record  of  value.  This  virtual 
account  is  stored  on  the  service  provider’s  server.  Nevertheless,  although  there  is  no 
contractual relationship directly between a bank and a customer, a bank is always involved, 
for example as a potentially safe and liquid place for the nonbank provider to hold the float 
.Our model in India as of now is a bank led model and in this way we are able to address 
consumer  protection  issues  which  are  of  paramount  concern  given  the  nature  of  the 
vulnerable clientele we are dealing with. Here, financial capability building through financial 
literacy and education also assume great importance. We have mandated the setting up of 
Financial Literacy and Credit Counselling Centres which are expected to go a long way in 
ameliorating the lot of the customer although it should be understood that first we have to 
provide financial access. 
16.   Finally, let me stress that currently we are marketing the paradigm of financial inclusion 
through the bank-led model. It is thus for the banks to rise up to the challenge and meet it in 
full measure. What we mean by no access to finance for the excluded is that no access from 
the  formal  financial  system;  so  a  word  of  necessary  caution  for  banks;  the  paradigm  of 
financial inclusion is ultimately one of the continued relevance for the banking sector as other 
actors are waiting anxiously in the wings waiting for a go ahead. 
17.  
India  has  good  IT  talent  as  also  financial  sector  talent  and  hence  this  experiment  to 
bring  ICT  based  financial  inclusion  is  not  only  relevant  to  India  but  to  the  entire  globe  as 
success  of  this  experiment  can  be  replicated  elsewhere.  Entire  world  is  looking  at  these 
developments with keen interest. We need to meet these expectations. 
18.   We have a broad based government-Central Bank commitment to financial inclusion to 
help  alleviate  poverty.  Our  aim  is  to  help  create  an  enabling  policy  and  regulatory 
environment for innovative financial inclusion. The present enabling environment will critically 
determine  the  speed  at  which  the  financial  services  access  gap  will  close  for  the  people 
currently excluded. 
19.   Thank you. I wish the 23rd Skoch Summit all the best and hope the deliberations here 
throw new light on various aspects of financial deepening. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2010
