José Manuel González-Páramo: Reform of the architecture of the 
financial system 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Universidad  del  País  Vasco,  Campus  de  Leioa,  Bilbao, 
21 June 2010. 
 I am very grateful to Frank Dierick for his contributions to this speech and to Inês Cabral and Balázs Zsamboki for 
inputs. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Introduction 
I.  
It is a pleasure to be in the city of Bilbao, which hosts one of the finest modern art museums 
in  Spain  and  Europe:  the  Guggenheim  museum.  With  its  very  distinct  architecture,  this 
museum  is  the  city’s  world-famous  hallmark.  Much  as  I  love  the  design  of  the  building, 
however,  I  will  talk  today  about  another  type  of  architecture,  namely  that  of  the  financial 
system. And just like the Guggenheim building, the current reforms of the financial system 
stir a lot of emotions. 
We are dealing here with a very broad topic but I will approach it like a tourist visiting the 
Guggenheim museum. I will start by giving you a broad overview, describing the landscape 
as it were. I will briefly review the causes of the financial crisis and will run through the main 
initiatives that are on the plate of policy makers to prevent a crisis of such magnitude and 
severity ever recurring again. 
Then I will turn to four eye-catching initiatives: 
 
first, the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board or ESRB, a new body 
that will for the first time become responsible for macro-prudential supervision in the 
EU;  
second, how policy makers are dealing with systemically important institutions;  
third, the issue of procyclicality or the dynamic interplay between the financial sector 
and the real economy;  
fourth  and  last  topic  to  which  I  will  pay  some  more  attention  is  the  mandate  of 
central banks in the area of financial stability. 
  Let us now embark on our architectural walk! 
Causes of the current crisis 
II.  
Much has been said about the root causes of the current crisis over the past three years. I 
will not expand on this topic but I will just mention specific factors – some of them of a macro- 
and  others  of  a  micro-economic  nature  –  which  in  my  view  were  key  in  the  run  up  to  the 
crisis. 
In the two or three years before the crisis erupted, a constellation of factors, including very 
favourable  macro-financial  conditions  combined  with  strong  growth,  low  inflation,  ample 
liquidity,  exceptionally  low  volatility  across  virtually  all  financial  markets  and  extraordinarily 
low risk premia, had the effect of covering up the building up of significant imbalances. 
Significant financial imbalances were in the making, at various levels of the global economy 
and  financial  system.  Among  these  were  exuberant  real  estate  prices,  and  a  flourishing 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 1
securitisation  business,  which  facilitated  excessive  credit  growth.  A  group  of  countries  
– including China, Japan, and oil-exporting economies – were saving too much, while others 
– such as the US – were heavily borrowing to finance consumption and investment. These 
developments  were  unsustainable  in  the  long-run.  At  the  same  time,  in  an  environment 
characterised by low interest rates, a global search for yield may have led investors to take 
on too much risk. 
On the micro side, it became apparent that market participants’ incentives were not aligned 
with the risks they were taking, and that some investors were not fully aware of the extent of 
their  exposures,  which  contributed  to  the  under-pricing  of  risk.  In  the  banking  sector  in 
particular, deficiencies in the design of the prudential framework for banks, in the supervisory 
review  of  banks’  risk  management  procedures  and  in  the  rules  for  compensation  and  pay 
were some of the microeconomic factors leading to important vulnerabilities. 
Regulatory and supervisory initiatives currently under discussion 
III.  
After witnessing the first global banking crisis since the Great Depression, it became clear 
that  it  was  absolutely  crucial  to  get  the  banking  sector  on  a  sound  footing  again.  Policy 
makers  responded  rather  quickly  and  forcefully  to  the  crisis,  which  resulted  in  a  wide-
encompassing reform agenda. 
This  reform  agenda  is very  ambitious  and  time-wise  rather  tight,  but  before  describing  the 
measures  under  discussion,  let  me  first  briefly  introduce  the  main  actors  in  this  area.  The 
G20 provides the political and strategic impetus for the reforms, with the Financial Stability 
Board  (FSB)  playing  an  important  role  in  the  policy  coordination.  Various  committees  and 
working  groups,  of  which  the  most  prominent  is  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, are charged with reviewing specific international standards. 
As regards the reform agenda, the most important issues are the following: 
 
 
 
the adoption of high-quality capital and liquidity standards for banks,  
measures to reduce the financial system’s procyclicality,  
the  introduction  of  a  regulatory  framework  for  systemically  important  financial 
institutions,  
the regulation of credit rating agencies and hedge funds, improving OTC derivatives 
markets, and  
finally, sound compensation practices that support financial stability. 
 
These issues are comprehensively addressed by the Basel Committee’s reform package that 
aims  to  strengthening  the  banking  sector’s  resilience  and  represents  a  cornerstone  of  the 
response  to  the  crisis.  The  package,  which  was  released  at  the  end  of  last  year  for 
consultation, aims at improving the quality and consistency of bank capital. It also considers 
the introduction of a non-risk-based leverage ratio as a supplementary capital measure. This 
leverage ratio is expected to curb excessive balance sheet growth and to set a floor for the 
Basel II capital requirements. In order to mitigate the inherent pro-cyclical nature of financial 
activities,  to  which  I  will  return  later,  the  Basel  Committee’s  proposals  also  contain  capital 
buffers  and  forward-looking  provisioning.  Finally,  the  proposals  include  global  minimum 
liquidity risk requirements enabling credit institutions to withstand a short-term liquidity stress 
and aiming to ensure longer-term stability in their funding requirements. 
The  objective  of  this  comprehensive  package  is  to  enable  financial  institutions  to  better 
withstand the adverse effects of economic shocks. In order to assess the cumulative impact 
of  the  proposals,  quantitative  impact  assessments  are  underway.  The  outcome  will  be 
available  in  the  coming  weeks,  and  will  assist  decision-makers  in  properly  calibrating  the 
measures. At this stage, therefore, it is premature for me to say anything about the desirable 
 2 
 BIS Review 87/2010
calibration of the measures. Nevertheless, I am of the view that the measures are warranted 
from  a  conceptual  point  of  view,  though  their  cumulative  impact  needs  to  be  carefully 
assessed. Indeed, it is important that the right balance is struck between enhancing banking 
stability and maintaining a stable provision of credit to the economy. 
What has been done? 
IV.  
The main strands of the reform agenda I come to paint are at various stages of development. 
It is therefore useful to briefly run through what has already been achieved, in particular in 
Europe. 
Starting  with  the  prudential  framework  for  banks,  most  FSB  members,  including  the  EU 
Member States, have fully implemented the more risk-sensitive Basel II framework. 
Amendments to the trading book are due to be implemented no later than the end of 2011 to 
address the problem of excessively low capital charges for trading activities in the pre-crisis 
period.  In  the  EU,  the  appropriate  measures  are  included  in  amendments  to  the  Capital 
Requirements Directive, the so-called CRD3 package. 
The FSB just finished its peer review on how its members implemented the agreed principles 
for  sound  compensation  practices.  In  the  EU,  the  CRD3  has  specifically  included  banks’ 
remuneration policies in the supervisory review. 
An EU regulation on credit rating agencies – which will come into effect at the end of 2010 – 
was  adopted  last  year.  The  European  Commission  has  recently  proposed  amendments  to 
the regulation which aim to introduce a centralised framework for supervision of the agencies 
at the EU level. Under the new supervisory framework, an European Securities and Markets 
Authority  with  oversight  and  supervisory  powers  over  credit  rating  agencies  will  be 
established. Efforts in this field aim to address some shortcomings of the credit rating sector 
revealed  by  the  crisis,  such  as  conflicts  of  interest,  poor  rating  quality  and  insufficient 
transparency  about  the  methods  used  for  their  evaluations  and  the  procedures  for  rating 
decisions. 
A legislative proposal that establishes regulatory and supervisory standards for hedge funds 
is also under consideration in the EU. 
Finally  the  two  major  accounting  standard  setters,  IASB  and  FASB,  are  continuing  their 
efforts to achieve convergence of accounting standards, though it might not be possible to 
keep to the initially agreed time table. 
I turn now to a very important response in Europe to the crisis, which is of particular interest 
for the ECB: the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board or ESRB. This new 
body  will  be  responsible  for  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  whole  EU.  In  contrast  to 
micro-prudential  supervision,  which  focuses  on  the  financial  soundness  of  individual 
institutions, macro-prudential supervision looks at the financial system as a whole. 
Up to the late 1990s, the predominant view of policy makers was that if individual institutions 
were financially sound, the financial system as a whole would also be fine. Unfortunately, this 
is  not  always  the  case.  Through  various  channels,  institutions  can  be  inter-linked  so  that 
problems  emerging  from  one  or  some  of  them  may  spill  over  to  the  rest  of  the  financial 
sector,  setting  in  motion  an  adverse  dynamic  that  affects  all  of  them.  A  macro-prudential 
perspective,  looking  beyond  the  conditions  of  each  institution  in  isolation,  should  help  to 
detect and prevent such system-wide potential problems. 
Of course, there were already in place mechanisms for the monitoring and assessment of 
financial  stability  well  before  the  financial  crisis  erupted,  as  evidenced  by  the  financial 
stability  reports  published  by  the  various  central  banks.  But  the  financial  crisis  also 
demonstrated fundamental weaknesses in practices: 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 3
  First,  while  various  central  banks  engaged  in  their  own  financial  stability  analysis 
there  was  not  really  a  comprehensive  analysis  covering  the  whole  EU  and  all 
elements of the financial system.  
Second, many of the analyses expressed serious concerns, such as the persistence 
of global imbalances and the investors’ hunt for higher yields, but these concerns 
were not sufficiently followed-up by concrete action. 
There  is  therefore  a  need  to  improve  the  interplay  between  micro-  and  macro-prudential 
supervision since many tools to correct for possible risks are in the micro-prudential realm. 
To  this  aim,  the  ESRB  will  be  able  to  issue  risk  warnings  and,  where  appropriate, 
recommendations and follow-up on their implementation. 
The  legislative  proposals  for  the  establishment  of  the  ESRB  that  are  currently  being 
discussed among the relevant European institutions foresee an important role for the ECB in 
the ESRB and we stand ready to take up this role. We will do this with the support of the 
other members of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB), the constellation of the 
national central banks of the European Union. The ECB will support the ESRB by providing 
analytical, logistical and administrative support to the ESRB as well as the ESRB Secretariat. 
Preparatory work at the ECB is underway so that the ESRB can take up its work right after its 
formal establishment, which is expected for early next year. 
The  ECB  is  also  in  the  process  of  enhancing  its  own  capabilities  for  monitoring  and 
assessing  financial  stability  risks,  not  least  to  provide  high-quality  analytical  input  to  the 
ESRB.  In  the  pursuit  of  this  objective,  we  also  try  to  draw  as  much  as  possible  from 
synergies with existing work and resources both within the ECB and the ESCB, as well as at 
the supervisory authorities. 
I  conclude  on  this  point  that  the  establishment  of  ESRB  will  be  a  watershed  event  in 
developing a macro-prudential framework for Europe. Having said that, I should also say that 
the  ESRB  does  not  have  an  easy  mission  and  it  certainly  faces  many  challenges.  Macro-
prudential supervision is relatively new, which implies that a well-established framework with 
a clear operational objective, as we know for monetary policy, must yet be set in place. The 
ESRB will therefore have to develop its own thinking and strategy, and will probably have to 
advance in a pragmatic way. 
The interplay with the micro-prudential function will be crucial, not only because the ESRB 
will have to rely to a large extent on micro-prudential supervisors for the information and the 
data,  but  also  because  a  number  of  the  tools  that  can  be  expected  to  address  potential 
weaknesses in the financial system are of a micro-prudential nature. In that respect, I should 
recall that the ESRB will not have any binding powers but will have to rely on moral suasion 
and peer pressure for the follow-up to its risk warnings and recommendations. And finally the 
ESRB will have to strive for effectiveness and efficiency in the pursuit of its tasks, given its 
relatively wide composition (over 60 members). 
A look into the future 
V. 
Taking a forward-looking perspective, I am sure that one of the important topics that will be 
on the ESRB’s agenda is that of the systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). 
These institutions are major contributors to what in the financial jargon is known as “systemic 
risk” and are, therefore, of great interest to macro-prudential supervisors. How to gauge the 
contribution of a financial institution to systemic risk, in other words how to identify a SIFI, is 
a very difficult task, not least because of data limitations. Nevertheless, there are a number 
of  factors  that  seem  to  be  particularly  relevant,  such  as  the  size  of  the  institution,  its 
interconnectedness with the rest of the financial system and the degree of substitutability in 
the event of a failure of the critical services they provide. It is clear that any such assessment 
cannot be exclusively based on a quantitative approach. Rather, the informed judgment of 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2010
the  relevant  authorities,  guided  by  internationally  agreed  principles,  will  play  an  important 
role. 
Indeed, the concept of systemic risk is fuzzy and still under debate, but, with a certain degree 
of simplification, it can be defined as the risk of an impairment in the financial system that 
has potentially serious negative consequences for the real economy. For example, the actual 
default of a major bank may seriously affect depositors’ savings (though reimbursement up to 
the insured level of retail deposits is to be provided by deposit insurance schemes) and the 
financing of otherwise profitable investment projects. 
But even in case of no actual default, SIFIs may pose serious challenges. Because of the 
potentially  high  damage  to  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy  in  case  of  default, 
there  is  the  expectation  that  governments  and  supervisors  would  not  let  a  SIFI  fail.  This 
implicit support may provide an incentive to the institution to engage in profitable but risky 
activities, giving rise to “moral hazard”. It also means that a SIFI can finance itself at a lower 
cost  compared  to  other  similar  institutions,  which  are  not  deemed  to  be  systemically 
important.  In  short,  incentives  are  misaligned  and  the  playing  field  is  distorted.  These 
problems have probably increased in the wake of the financial crisis following some of the 
voluntary,  and  less-voluntary,  marriages  among  institutions  that  have  created  even  bigger 
and more complex financial groups. 
Reflecting these concerns, at the G20 summit of April last year in London, it was decided that 
SIFIs should be subject to an appropriate degree of regulation and oversight. At the same 
time, the G20 entrusted the FSB with the task of overseeing concrete regulatory steps and 
monitoring  their  implementation.  The  FSB  is  now  considering  various  policy  options  to 
address the concerns I mentioned. 
In general terms, there are two ways to address ex ante the problems that SIFIs pose: you 
can restrict the scope of their activities or force them to internalise the costs they pose to the 
system. The clearest illustration of the first approach is the discussion on the “Volcker rule” in 
the  United  States.  Under  this  rule,  banks  that  receive  deposits  would  be  prevented  from 
engaging  in  proprietary  trading,  and  investing  in  or  sponsoring  hedge  funds  and  private 
equity  funds.  I  do  not  believe  this  is  the  most  fruitful  way  to  pursue  in  Europe,  given  the 
traditional strength of the universal banking model in a number of Member States. Also, there 
may  be  challenges  associated  with  defining  the  borderline  between  the  proprietary  trading 
and servicing clients. But more importantly, the activities that are seen as deserving special 
attention may move outside the intensively regulated and supervised banking business, but 
stay within the same group. 
One  could  argue  that  the  same  effect  of  controlling  for  risks  stemming  from  the  trading 
business  can  be  reached  by  imposing  higher  capital  requirements  on  banks’  trading  book 
activities,  and  this  seems  to  be  the  way  that  is  being  pursued  internationally.  The  Basel 
Committee  has  already  increased  the  capital  requirements  for  a  number  of  trading  book 
activities, and a fundamental review of the trading book is planned for next year. 
The Basel Committee is looking as well into how to get the SIFIs to internalise the potential 
costs  they  pose  to  the  financial  system.  This  can  include  a  variety  of  measures,  such  as 
higher capital and liquidity requirements, more intense supervision, concentration limits, etc. 
Work is still under way on defining such possible measures. The FSB is expected to provide 
recommendations to the G20 summit of November in Seoul. 
An  alternative  way  to  make  banks  internalise  the  externalities  they  pose  on  the  financial 
system  is  through  a  bank  levy.  A  levy  responds  more  directly  to  the  need  to  raise  a 
contribution from the financial sector in order to pay for the cost of past or future financial 
crises,  depending  on  whether  the  levy  is  imposed  ex-post  or  ex-ante.  For  instance,  the 
proceeds raised by a levy can be destined to finance a dedicated fund to be activated in the 
future  for  the  orderly  winding  down  of  distressed  banks.  The  EU  Commission  is  moving 
forward in this area, with the aim of establishing a common framework for a levy in the EU 
member states. The IMF is also finalising a report on this topic for the G20 summit later this 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 5
month in Toronto. In my view the discussion should be properly framed in the overall reform 
of  the  prudential  framework,  including  the  quantitative  impact  assessment  of  the  various 
initiatives  I  mentioned  earlier.  Such  a  careful  assessment  is  warranted,  inter  alia,  to  avoid 
imposing an undue burden on the banking sector and, ultimately, hamper the flow of credit to 
the real economy. 
Another  important  element  of  the  Basel  reform  package  is  the  introduction  of  a  range  of 
measures  designed  to  mitigate  the  inherent  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system.  In  this 
context, mechanisms that enhance prudent and forward-looking provisioning of banks as well 
as  the  building  up  of  sufficient capital  buffers  in  years  of  economic  expansion  that can  be 
drawn down at times of stress, are all under consideration. Overall, these measures aim at 
ensuring  that  the  financial  system  functions  as  an  absorber,  rather  than  an  amplifier  of 
shocks, thus smoothing the volatility of the financial and real economic cycles. 
In  setting  up  a  more  forward-looking  provisioning  framework,  the  Basel  Committee  works 
closely  together  with  the  accounting  standard  setters  with  a  view  to  developing  a  sound 
operational framework for expected loss provisioning. In this context, let me mention as very 
important the collaborative efforts under way between the Basel Committee and the IASB to 
develop a revised expected loss model that proves operational. 
Concerning  measures  on  capital  buffers,  the  Basel  Committee  set  forth  a  proposal  on  a 
capital conservation buffer that would establish certain restrictions for undercapitalised banks 
with  regard  to  the  distribution  of  earnings  in  the  form  of  dividends,  share  buy  backs  and 
bonuses.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  a  counter-cyclical  buffering  mechanism  is  also 
considered.  It  would  require  banks  to  build  up  additional  capital  buffers  when  excessive 
credit growth is identified in the economy. 
The  last  topic  I  want  to  pay  some  attention  to  is  the  role  of  central  banks  in  financial 
stability.  The  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  was  not  only  an  important  trigger  to  set  in 
motion  supervisory  and  regulatory  reform.  It  also  drew  attention  to  the  need  to  develop 
comprehensive  financial  stability  frameworks  in  which  identification  and  assessment  of 
system-wide risk are translated into macro-prudential policy action. Considerable efforts are 
being put in place at the European and global level in discussing such a framework and how 
to make it operational. 
Central  banks,  on  account  of  their  experience  in  financial  stability  should  be  important 
players in the macro-prudential analytical and policy fields, as reflected in the composition of 
the ESRB.  This should not interfere with the primary responsibility of central banks, which 
should  inflexibly  remain  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  To  the  contrary,  the  successful 
pursuit  of  the  primary  objectives  of  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  should 
reinforce each other. 
In particular, measures that enhance the resilience of the financial system or that  address 
rising financial imbalances are likely to contribute to increase the effectiveness of monetary 
policy  by  reducing  the  impact  of  financial  frictions  on  the  supply  of  credit.  Conversely,  as 
demonstrated in the run up to the crisis, price stability is not sufficient to safeguard financial 
stability,  but  it  is  certainly  a  necessary  condition  for  it.  Indeed,  it  reduces  the  system’s 
vulnerability to the build-up of financial imbalances and the scope for risk mispricing. 
The financial crisis has well illustrated how the monetary policy transmission channel can be 
seriously hampered in the absence of financial stability. This points to the many benefits from 
leaning  against  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  while  pursuing  the  price  stability 
objective.  To  some  extent,  successful  macro-prudential  policy  could  alleviate  the  need  for 
monetary policy to “lean against the wind” as regards unsustainable financial trends. The two 
policy areas should however operate with a clearly distinct set of tools. Effective governance 
arrangements  need  to  be  in  place,  so  as  to  maximise  credibility  and  preserve  institutional 
independence. 
6 
 BIS Review 87/2010
Conclusions 
IV.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  started  my  talk  with  a  reference  to  architecture  and,  as  we 
progressed, I reviewed the many building sites – at various stages of development – of the 
reforming  financial  system.  It  will  be  very  challenging  to  keep  momentum  in  the  reform 
agenda  and  to  keep  the  activities  of  the  many  building  sites  on  track  as  “battle  fatigue” 
inevitably settles in. But the crisis has also painfully demonstrated that sound foundations are 
indispensable to withstand the occasional blows that hit the financial system. Therefore, it is 
all the more important to continue vigorously pursuing the ambitious financial reform agenda. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 7
