Duvvuri Subbarao: The IMF and economic developments in the Indian 
subcontinent 
Statement  by  Mr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  to  the 
International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC), Washington DC, 24 April 2010.  
Statement  on  behalf  of  Mr  Pranab  Mukherjee,  Finance  Minister  of  India  and  Member  IMFC  representing  the 
Constituency consisting of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Sri Lanka. 
 Mr. Chairman: 
1. 
Confounding our worst fears, the turn around in the global economy has been much 
faster  than  we  had  anticipated  as  recently  as  only  a  few  months  ago  when  we  met  in 
Istanbul. The global economy has experienced three quarters of positive growth following the 
sharp declines in the first quarter of 2009 and in the preceding quarter. There is, however, 
considerable heterogeneity in the pace of the upturn in different countries with emerging and 
developing countries leading the way.  
is  growing  concern  about 
The global economy 
2. 
Although  the  global  outlook  is  more  reassuring  than  it  was  a  few  months  ago, 
uncertainty  about  the  shape  and  pace  of  global  recovery  persists.  While  macroeconomic 
risks  have  decreased,  vulnerabilities  remain.  There 
the 
deterioration  in  the  sovereign  risk  profile  and  dangers  posed  to  financial  stability  in  some 
countries.  It  is  often  said  that  every  financial  crisis  is  followed  by  a  sovereign  debt  crisis 
because  of  the  public  sector’s  support  to  affected  parts  of  the  economy.  Will  this  time  be 
different? Recent developments have shown the merits of a gradualist approach to allowing 
external financing of fiscal deficits. The crisis and the post-crisis experience should usher in 
some rethink on how and by how much debt markets be opened up for external financing. 
3. 
Volatile capital flows have been a central issue during the crisis, and continue to be 
so now as the crisis is ebbing. Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) saw a sudden stop and 
reversal of capital flows during the crisis as a consequence of global deleveraging. Now the 
trend has reversed once again, and many EMEs are seeing net inflows – a consequence of a 
global  system  awash  with  liquidity,  the  assurance  of  low  interest  rates  in  advanced 
economies over “an extended period” and the promise of growth in EMEs. Capital flows can 
also  potentially  impair  financial  stability.  The  familiar  question  of  how  EMEs  can  maximize 
the benefits and minimize the costs of volatile capital flows has returned to haunt the policy 
agenda.  
4. 
The  recent  crisis  has  clearly  been  a  turning  point  in  the  world  view  on  capital 
controls. The crisis saw, across emerging economies, a rough correlation between the extent 
of openness of the capital account and the adverse impact of the crisis. Surely, this should 
not be read as a denouncement of open capital account, but a powerful demonstration of the 
tenet that premature opening hurts more than it helps. Notably, the IMF published a policy 
note in February 2010 that reversed its long held orthodoxy. The note has referred to certain 
“circumstances  in  which  capital  controls  can  be  a  legitimate  component  of  the  policy 
response to surges in capital flows”. Now that there is wide agreement that controls can be 
“desirable  and  effective”  in  managing  capital  flows,  the  IMF  and  other  international  bodies 
must pursue research on studying what type of controls and under what circumstances so 
that emerging economies have useful guidelines to inform policy formulation.  
BIS Review 55/2010 
 1
The mandate of the Fund 
5. 
The Fund has done a remarkable job of managing the crisis response. Drawing on 
the lessons of the crisis, the Fund needs to adapt to the post-crisis scenario. We welcome 
the review of the mandate of the Fund which should help it effectively refocus on areas such 
as  macro-financial  stability  and  the  spillover  impact  of  policies  of  systemically  important 
countries.  Such  a  review  should  lead  to  significant  improvements  in  the  surveillance  and 
lending tool kits of the Fund.  
The  surveillance  and  lending  functions  of  the  Fund  are  distinct  and  need  to  be 
6. 
performed in a manner that best serves the interests of the global economy. A key lesson of 
the crisis is that systemic risks lie not only in less mature markets but in advanced countries 
as well. The clear lines of distinction between the surveillance and lending functions have to 
be  maintained  to  ensure  that  the  Fund’s  more  intense  surveillance  focuses  not  only  on 
borrowers and potential borrowers but also on the creditor members. 
Surveillance 
7. 
The  Fund’s  surveillance  has  a  preemptive  role  in  focusing  on  vulnerabilities  and 
detecting  the  onset  of  crises  in  contrast  to  the  Fund’s  financing  function  which  essentially 
plays  a  crisis  mitigation  role.  The  lessons  of  the  crisis  warrant  a  careful  scrutiny  of  the 
manner in which the Fund conducts its surveillance, both multilateral and bilateral.  
8. 
For surveillance to be effective and for it to inspire trust and confidence, it is vital 
that it is even-handed, candid and unbiased. How do we operationalize this? A mandate that 
is  derived  only  from  an  Executive  Board  decision  obtained  by  a  simple  majority  could  be 
open  to  differing  interpretations  subsequently,  thereby  sacrificing  clarity  for  expediency.  In 
our view, the best way to achieve this objective is by amending the Articles of Agreement to 
give  the  Fund  oversight  over  the  international  monetary  and  financial  system  and  over 
financial sector policies within the conduct of domestic policies by members. 
9. 
We believe that the Fund is strategically positioned to conduct effective multilateral 
surveillance  by  virtue  of  its  universal  membership  and  the  forum  for  peer  review  that  it 
provides. Accordingly, we can engage constructively and with an open mind towards building 
a  wider  consensus  on  improving  multilateral  surveillance  through  innovative  instruments 
such  as  spillover  reports;  multilateral  consultations;  and  enhanced 
interaction  with 
regional/country groups. For a reality check, there should be trial runs before taking a view 
on their usefulness.  
10. 
Bilateral  surveillance  is  at  the  core  of  the  Fund’s  mandate  and  the  proposals  for 
improving  multilateral  surveillance  should  not  compromise  the  pursuit  of  robust  and  even-
handed bilateral surveillance. There is need for ensuring synergy between IMF’s bilateral and 
multilateral  surveillance.  Improvement  in  timeliness  and  increased  communication  is 
desirable, but care needs to be exercised to eschew undue proliferation of reports whereby 
the quality of surveillance is compromised by spreading resources thinly and widely.  
The  issue  of  financial  sector  oversight  is  indeed  a  crucial  one.  We  find  merit  in 
11. 
assessing  the  efficacy  of  new  approaches.  Mapping  global  financial  networks,  deeper 
engagement with large complex financial intermediaries (LCFIs), asset managers and central 
counterparties  (CCPs);  and  closer  and  more  effective  cooperation  with  standard  setting 
bodies,  including  the  ongoing  engagement  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  on  the 
Early Warning Exercise (EWE) are some initiatives in this genre. The lessons of the crisis 
also  underscore  that  the  focus  on  important  financial  centres  and  systemically  important 
countries should be intensified.  
12. 
There  is  a  rationale  for  strengthened  financial  sector  surveillance  in  assessing 
macro-systemic  risks  in  view  of  the  lessons  of  the  crisis.  However,  the  modalities  of 
operation in this role would need deeper consideration to guard against mission creep and to 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2010
preserve  the  distinct  roles  of  the  IMF  on  the  one  hand  and  the  FSB  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) on the other. We have concerns about the need and utility of 
a mandatory Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) at this stage. It is better to 
preserve  the  voluntary  nature  of  FSAP  with  enhanced  efforts  to  secure  the  widest 
participation by making FSAP forward looking and  focused. Priority should be given to the 
first  round  of  FSAP  for  all  systemically  important  countries  before  repeating  FSAP  for 
countries which have already gone through a similar exercise. 
13. 
A  key  pre-requisite  for  effective  surveillance  is  governance  reforms  that  reflect 
changing global economic realities and ensure equity and balance. Effective implementation 
will also develop a broader consensus for further reforms.  
The financing role of the Fund 
14. 
The  crisis  affected  even  economies  with  sound  policies  and  those  far  from  its 
epicenter, highlighting the need to strengthen the global financial safety net as a matter of 
priority. The Fund should play a key role in putting together such a safety net. The global 
financial  safety  net  needs  to  be  “global”  and  encompass  multiple  partners  –  individual 
countries,  central  banks,  regional  arrangements,  International  Financial  Institutions  (IFIs) 
including  the  IMF  and  other  multilateral  institutions.  The  Fund  needs  to  catalyze  such  a 
global arrangement, while being careful not to over-extend itself.  
15. 
While flexible precautionary instruments would help crisis prevention, the crisis has 
also  taught  us  that  reserve  accumulation  by  countries  is  a  very  important  element  of  the 
financial safety net. This is particularly so in countries where reserves have been built up in 
the  context  of  current  account  deficits  to  deal  with  inherently  volatile  capital  flows.  Such 
countries should be treated as partners in the global safety net, with multilateral mechanisms 
acting as a complement and not a substitute for reserves accumulated at the national level.  
16. 
The  proposed  evolutionary  reform  of  the  Fund’s  lending  toolkit  should  receive 
careful  consideration  on  merits  and  on  the  basis  of  possible  utility  to  a  sufficiently  large 
segment of the Fund’s membership. The attempt should be to improve existing and recently 
created instruments and keep the net addition of new instruments to the minimum. Such an 
approach  would  enhance  the  signaling  impact  and  predictability  of  the  instruments  in  the 
eyes of both potential users and financial markets. 
17. 
The implications of the Multi-country Swap Line (MSL), which proposes a unilateral 
offer of Fund assistance in the interest of systemic stability, have to be considered carefully. 
The instrument holds the promise of mitigating stigma of borrowing from the Fund and the 
potential  interest  in  such  an  instrument  amongst  the  membership  should  be  assessed. 
Communication  issues  and  the  market  signals  generated  by  an  instrument  of  this  nature 
could leave the Fund with enormous power over its sovereign members, which would have to 
be appropriately tempered. It will be advisable to allow more time for debating the merits and 
demerits of this proposal before taking a final view. 
IMF resources 
18. 
The announcement of a trebling of the Fund’s resources in the London Summit in 
April 2009 had a salutary impact on reducing uncertainty when the crisis was still raging. As 
a follow up to that announcement, we welcome the expansion of the New Arrangements to 
Borrow to US $600 billion, and call on all members to ratify the increased level at the earliest. 
Countries which have not been traditional creditors, including India, have come forward with 
sizeable  contributions  to  the  expanded  NAB.  This  should  signal  the  need  for  further 
governance changes in the Fund. 
19. 
We have always affirmed the importance of maintaining the Fund as a quota based 
organization. This implies that the quota-based resources and borrowed resources should be 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 3
in an appropriate proportion. We supported the decision to substantially increase the NAB on 
the understanding that since the need for resources is urgent, and a quota increase is time 
taking, the NAB would be a temporary bridge to an eventual quota increase. We do not see 
the  need  for  the  Fund’s  lendable  resources  to  be  increased  any  further  at  this  stage.  We 
support  a  substantial  increase  in  the  quota  resources  so  that  the  NAB  can  be  rolled  back 
once an increase in quotas is effected. This will ensure that the Fund remains a quota-based 
organization as it should be. 
Governance reform 
20. 
Governance reform will be central to the legitimacy and effectiveness of the Fund’s 
mandate. We appreciate that the Managing Director has acknowledged this in his statement. 
If the clarification and refocusing of the mandate of the IMF is to have legitimacy, it should 
follow  and  not  precede  a  change  in  the  governance  structure,  including  quota  shares 
reflecting  the  present  and  emerging  global  economic  realities  measured  in  the  most 
appropriate manner rather than on the basis of an improved but still flawed formula.  
21. 
The size of the quota increase is closely linked to the crucial governance issue of 
realignment  of  quota  shares  in  the  Fund.  A  large  quota  increase  not  only  affords  the 
opportunity  for,  but  also  requires  an  ambitious  realignment  of  quotas,  to  meet  the 
expectations of the Emerging Markets and Developing Countries (EMDCs) who form a large 
section  of  the  membership.  Only  such  a  substantial  shift  of  quota  shares  from  advanced 
countries to EMDCs so as to better reflect current global economic realities would enhance 
the legitimacy of the Fund. 
22. 
We  reiterate  our  call  for  at  least  a  7  per  cent  shift  in  quota  shares  in  favour  of 
EMDCs  as  a  group.  The  initial  staff  proposals  fall  well  short  of  expectations.  We  are 
disappointed that the ambition displayed in proposals for expanding the mandate of the Fund 
and  its  resources  are  not  matched  by  the  ambition  in  the  proposals  for  realigning  quota 
shares.   
23. 
The  improved,  but  still  flawed  quota  formula  does  not  adequately  reflect  global 
economic  realities.  The  shortcomings  of  the  formula,  including  the  relative  weights  and 
definitions of the variables are well known, and in April 2008 the Board of Governors of the 
Fund decided that the issue requires to be revisited before the formula is used again. The 
approach  so  far  relies  too  much  on  the  existing  formula,  rather  than  “working  from  it”  and 
hence  cannot  be  seen  as  enhancing  the  legitimacy  of  the  Fund.  Ideally,  a  rework  of  the 
formula  is  called  for;  with  a  substantial  increase  in  weight  for  PPP-GDP  in  order  to  better 
reflect current economic realities.  
24. 
To preserve credibility, the deadline of January, 2011 has to be adhered to. We are 
open to taking up the formula revision task on a parallel track with a longer time frame. In the 
meantime,  the  quota  allocation  in  the  present  round  can  be  completed  on  the  basis  of  an 
alternative mechanism which operates on a uniform and transparent basis without complex 
and  opaque  adjustments.  This  approach  should  remedy  real  under-representation  and 
automatically identify dynamic EMDCs.  
25. 
We are committed to protecting the vote share of the poorest countries. This is best 
done through an allocation of quotas rather than through an increase in basic votes which 
would require further amendments to the Articles and could delay the whole process. 
26. 
The most crucial area of governance reform is a significant and meaningful quota 
and  voice  reform.  All  other  aspects  of  governance  reform should  follow  and  flow from  this 
reform.  Enhanced  political  engagement  of  Ministers  in  IMF  related  issues  is  certainly 
welcome. At this juncture, such engagement is best achieved through improvements in the 
functioning  of  the  IMFC.  We  value  the  IMFC  as  a  consensus  based  body  and  believe 
enhancement  of  the  legitimacy  of  the  Fund  will  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  IMFC  as 
well. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2010
Redistributing the chairs in the Executive Board on a more equitable basis amongst 
27. 
the regions of the world is also a priority. An appropriate balance needs to be struck between 
representativeness and effectiveness. This could involve changes to the size of the Board, 
including  a  possible  reduction,  without  affecting  the  representation  of  emerging  market 
economies  and  developing  countries.  The  special  majority  threshold  of  85  per  cent  brings 
decisions  closer  to  a  consensus  and  we  see  no  compelling  reason  to  change  the  existing 
voting majorities in the Fund. 
Developments in the Constituency 
28. 
I now turn to developments in my constituency.  
India  
The Indian economy is recovering rapidly from the growth slowdown caused by the 
29. 
crisis.  Current  estimates  are  that  real  GDP  had  grown  at  7.2  per  cent  during  the  just 
completed fiscal year 2009–10, up from 6.7 per cent during 2008–09. For policy purposes, 
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has placed the baseline projection of real GDP growth for 
2010–11  at  8.0  per  cent  with  an  upside  bias.  The  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  measures 
initiated in the wake of the global financial crisis played an important role, first in mitigating 
the  adverse  impact  from  the  crisis  contagion  and  then  in  ensuring  that  the  economy 
recovered quickly. 
30. 
The  developments  on  the  inflation  front,  however,  are  worrisome.  Inflation,  which 
was  earlier  driven  entirely  by  supply  side  factors,  is  now  getting  increasingly  generalised. 
Keeping in view the inflation risk, the Reserve Bank embarked on a calibrated exit from the 
expansionary monetary policy. The Union Budget of 2010–11 has begun the process of fiscal 
consolidation by programming a reduction in the revenue deficit to 4.0 per cent of GDP from 
5.3 per cent, and in the fiscal deficit to 5.5 per cent from 6.7 per cent during the previous 
year.  Going  forward,  three  major  uncertainties  cloud  the  outlook  for  inflation.  First,  the 
prospects of the monsoon in 2010–11 are not yet clear. Second, crude prices continue to be 
volatile. Third, there is evidence of demand side pressures building up. On balance, keeping 
in  view  domestic  demand-supply  balance  and  the  global  trend  in  commodity  prices,  the 
baseline projection for WPI inflation for March 2011 is placed at 5.5 per cent. Against this 
background, the conduct of monetary policy will continue to condition and contain perception 
of  inflation  in  the  range  of  4.0–4.5  per  cent.  This  will  be  in  line  with  the  medium-term 
objective of 3.0 per cent inflation consistent with India’s broader integration into the global 
economy.  In  this  context,  accommodative  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced  economies, 
coupled  with  better  growth  prospects  in  India,  could  trigger  large  capital  flows  into  the 
country. While the absorptive capacity of the Indian economy has been increasing, excessive 
flows pose a challenge for exchange rate and monetary management. 
Sri Lanka 
31. 
The economy of Sri Lanka demonstrated resilience, growing at 3.5 per cent in 2009 
amidst challenging domestic and external conditions. This performance was largely due to 
the steady recovery in the economy since the second quarter of 2009, building up to a robust 
growth  of  6.2  per  cent  in  the  final  quarter.  Coordinated  and  timely  policy  actions  of  the 
authorities were instrumental in turning around the domestic economy, enabled by the end to 
the  prolonged  conflict.  Enhanced  investor  confidence  in  the  economy  was  reflected  in  a 
sharp reversal in foreign financial flows, resulting in an unprecedented surplus in the balance 
of payments (BOP) of US $ 2.7 billion. The level of foreign exchange reserves rose by more 
than  450  per  cent  to  a  historic  high  level  of  US  $  5.1  billion  by  end-2009.  A  notable 
achievement  was  the  sharp  deceleration  in  inflation  to  4.8  per  cent  by  end  2009  from 
28.2 per cent in June 2008, a result of stringent monetary policy measures adopted over the 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 5
last two years and the significant decline in global commodity prices. Inflation, as measured 
by  the  year-on-year  change  in  the  Colombo  Consumers’  Price  Index  (CCPI),  eased  to  an 
average  rate  of  3.4  per  cent  in  2009,  the  lowest  since  1985.  Timely  policy  actions 
successfully  mitigated  the  contagion  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  failure  of  a  few 
entities  connected  to  certain  domestic  financial  institutions.  The  strong  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework  and  enhanced  risk  management  systems  enabled  the  financial 
system  to  withstand  the  shocks  from  the  external  and  domestic  fronts  and  maintain 
confidence  in  the  financial  system.  In  a  challenging  environment,  financial  institutions 
remained  profitable  and  reasonably  well  capitalised,  although  credit  risk  increased  due  to 
tight  market  conditions.  Despite  several  measures  introduced  during  2009,  there  was  a 
significant shortfall in revenue due to the slowdown in economic activities and the contraction 
in  imports.  In  addition,  government  expenditure  increased  due  to  higher  security  related 
spending  during  the  decisive  phase  of  the  conflict  and  continued  urgent  rehabilitation, 
resettlement and reconstruction(RRR) activities since the second half of the year, as well as 
increased  salaries  and  wages,  interest  payments  and  expenditure  on  continuing  public 
investment projects. Accordingly, the budget deficit widened to 9.8 per cent of GDP in 2009 
compared  to  the  revised  target  of  7.0  per  cent  leading  to  an  increase  in  the  borrowing 
requirement. The end to the prolonged internal conflict and the restoration of peace provide 
greater  optimism  for  economic  prosperity  and  a  strong  basis  for  long-term  sustainable 
development, supported by appropriate policies.  
Bangladesh  
32. 
A broad-based upturn is taking hold in Bangladesh, drawing strength from the multi-
speed  global  recovery  and  robust  domestic  demand  that  has  been  supported  by  resilient 
workers’  remittances  and  the  fiscal  stimulus.  In  fact,  Bangladesh  has  been  adequately 
resilient to external shocks, particularly to the adverse impact of the recent world recession. 
Despite  these  unfavorable  conditions,  its  external  position  remains  robust  with  sufficient 
foreign exchange reserves and positive current account balances. Manufacturing returned to 
positive  growth  in  the  second  half  of  2009–10  and  a  rising  trend  in  industrial  imports  is 
pointing  to  industrial  activity  firming  up  further.  There  are  also  lead  indications  that  the 
decline  in  merchandise  exports  is  bottoming  out,  with  swelling  order  books  in  respect  of 
textile  and  apparel  exports  which  constitute  more  than  three-fourths  of  total  exports.  The 
growing  geographical  diversification  of  export  markets  in  favour  of  Japan  and  China  is 
offsetting sluggish demand in the traditional export markets of North  America and Europe. 
Construction activity is buoyant, especially in urban areas, fuelled by remittances and surging 
real estate prices. Service sector activity has also gained strength, especially in education, 
health,  retailing  and  catering,  and  financial  services.  Agricultural  production  lost  some 
momentum  in  2009–10  after  the  strong  growth  of  4.6  percent  in  the  preceding  year. 
Improved  terms  of  trade  for  the  farm  sector,  timely  availability  of  inputs  and  credit  should 
brighten  the  prospects  for  agriculture  in  2010–11,  barring  unforeseen  weather  adversities. 
Overall, real GDP growth is expected to be in the range of 5.5–6.0 percent in 2009–10 with 
an upside bias as against 5.9 percent in the previous year, thus extending strong and stable 
economic growth over nearly one decade. Inflation in terms of consumer prices has been on 
an easing path, retreating to 5.1 percent in October 2009 from 6.6 percent at the beginning of 
2009–10.  Reflecting  the  hardening  of  international  food  and  non  food  commodity  prices, 
however, domestic prices have been firming in recent months and may edge up to around 
6.5  percent  by  June  2010.  With  domestic  demand  conditions  remaining  strong  and  with 
private sector credit and imports picking up, monetary and liquidity conditions have tightened. 
The inter-bank call money rate which went below one percent in July 2009 is now above four 
percent. On the other hand, public sector borrowing from the banking system has declined, 
freeing  up  resources  for  growing  private  sector  activities.  It  is  expected  that  the  stance  of 
monetary policy will continue to remain accommodative while maintaining price stability. In 
respect  of  public  finances,  contingent  fiscal  pressures  on  the  government  are  relatively 
benign  as  outstanding  guarantees  for  state  owned  enterprises  are  low.  However,  public 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2010
finances would be impacted by expenditure cutbacks on account of implementation capacity 
constraints, notwithstanding higher external and non-bank financing. The estimated budget 
deficit  for  2009–10  is  placed  at  4.5  percent  of  GDP  as  against  the  projected  level  of  5.0 
percent.  Efficient  and  expeditious  implementation  of  development  programme  projects  can 
create  conditions  for  crowding  in  private  sector  investments  and  together  with  monetary 
policy, can support broad-based, inclusive and environmentally sustainable growth.  
Bhutan 
33. 
Bhutan’s  economic  performance  has  been  strong  in  the  recent  past  anchored  in 
political stability and prudent economic policies. The country is well on its way to achieving it 
Millennium  Development  Goals  with  the  10th  Five  year  Plan  (2008–13)  outlining  a  wide-
ranging development agenda. The impact of the financial crisis very limited and confined to 
the tourism sector. Growth is expected to be close to 7 per cent throughout the medium term 
supported by the Punatsangchhu-I and Mangdechhu hydropower projects. Average inflation 
was lower in 2009, at about 4 percent but following inflation developments in India, inflation 
has  risen  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010.  Government  revenue  and  expenditure  both  rose 
strongly  in  2008/09,  with  revenue  rising  to  39  percent  of  GDP  from  33  percent,  and 
expenditure  to  41  percent  from  33  per  cent.  In  the  external  sector,  convertible  currency 
reserves remain high, while rupee reserves have increased sharply in recent months. In the 
financial sector, credit growth is still strong but slowing somewhat in the private sector. The 
focus of the financial sector liberalisation policy is on increasing competition and efficiency in 
the sector and three new private sector banks have been licensed and external commercial 
borrowing was also permitted for selected private sector entities.  
Concluding observations 
Concerted and decisive actions by both advanced and emerging and developing countries 
helped the world to deal with an unprecedented financial and economic crisis. Our response 
has  strengthened  international  cooperation  and  instilled  confidence  that  together  we  can 
secure the financial stability of the world and achieve sustainable economic growth. Towards 
this objective, a number of significant and concrete steps have been taken, an important one 
being the substantial strengthening of the Fund, including refinements in its surveillance, the 
expansion of resources and the improvement of lending facilities. Looking ahead, the Fund 
will  have  a  pivotal  role  in  warning  about  future  crises,  strengthening  the  defences  of  its 
membership  against  potential  threats  to  stability,  mitigating  the  hardships  brought  on  by 
crises if and when they strike, and in general, fostering a global environment conducive to 
strong and sustainable growth. This will require the Fund to reshape and redefine its role and 
mandate  so  as  to  adapt  to  the  requirements  of  changing  times.  A  lot  has  been  achieved 
towards a new-look Fund, but more needs to be done, and in particular, the organisational 
and governance reforms that are being envisaged to vest it with acceptability, legitimacy and 
independence. 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 7
