Louis Kasekende: Overview of the Ugandan economy 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Louis  Kasekende,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  a 
workshop for launch of the revised reporting returns for commercial banks, credit institutions 
and MDIs, Kampala, 19 February 2010. 
 The Executive Director Supervision 
The Executive Director Research/Directors 
Staff of Bank of Uganda 
Staff of Commercial Banks, Credit Institutions, Microfinance Deposit taking Institutions, and 
Bank of Uganda 
Distinguished Resource Persons 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Good morning.  
You  are  once  again  very  welcome  to  this  workshop  concerning  the  launch  of  the  revised 
reporting  forms  of  assets  and  liabilities  for  financial  institutions  supervised  by  Bank  of 
Uganda. Thank you for honoring our invitation and for your continued close cooperation with 
the Bank of Uganda, in the pursuit of overall macroeconomic stability for our country.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  on  account  of  prudent  macroeconomic  management,  the  Ugandan 
economy has remained resilient on the whole in the face of the global financial crisis, which 
later  culminated  into  a  global  economic  recession.  The  gradual  effects  of  the  global 
economic slowdown on the Ugandan economy can be viewed from two angles: first, there 
was a sudden exit of offshore players in September and October 2008. Second, the balance 
of payments was adversely affected through reductions of export earnings in some sectors, 
portfolio  flows,  interest  income  on  offshore  investments,  and  remittances.  The  Bank  of 
Uganda  responded  by  letting  the  economy  adjust  to  these  exogenous  shocks  through  the 
flexible  exchange  rate  policy  stance.  Secondly,  Bank  of  Uganda  continued  to  pursue  a 
monetary policy stance to ensure price stability. Most recently, Bank of Uganda’s monetary 
policy  has  aimed  at  boosting  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  in  order  to  support 
economic growth. The recovery of the balance of payments is now being observed. There is 
now stability in the financial markets and rapid reduction of inflation.  
Overall, real GDP turned out to be 7.1 percent in the financial year 2008/09 and is projected 
at  6.3  percent  for  this  financial  year  2009/10.  Despite  the  economic  slowdown,  this 
performance  remains  remarkable  given  that  the  IMF  (World  Economic  Outlook,  January 
2010) projection for Sub Saharan African region is only 1.5 percent for 2009 and 4.3 percent 
for 2010.  
It is worth noting that the financial sector has continued to remain safe and sound on account 
of prudent risk-based supervision and regulation. The sector was not affected by the toxic 
assets that led to the global financial crisis in the first place. Particularly, the banking sector 
in  Uganda  has  not  suffered  the  large  deterioration  in  asset  quality  that  affected  banks  in 
many countries. The average capital adequacy ratio of Ugandan banks has remained well 
above the prudential minimum of 12 per cent for the past three years and the banks’ overall 
liquidity remained good.  
However  caution  should  be  exercised  to  ensure  that,  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  banks 
remain  solvent,  profitable  and  liquid  while  allowing  for  increased  intermediation  to  finance 
economic activity. In addition, it is important that financial innovation and outreach continue 
to take place to meet customer needs. In this regard, the Bank of Uganda, in 2009 set up the 
Financial  Stability  Department  which  was  charged  with  the  mission  of  identifying  and 
assessing potential systemic risks to the structure and functioning of the financial system and 
to develop measures to reduce those risks.  
BIS Review 19/2010 
 1
Bank  of  Uganda  will  continue  to  pursue  a  monetary  policy  stance  aimed  at  boosting 
aggregate  demand  and  growth  while  maintaining  price  stability.  The  Bank  of  Uganda  also 
intends to introduce major reforms to the monetary policy in the next five years; which will 
include shifting to an inflation targeting regime as well as the transition to a single currency in 
the East African Community.  
I wish to stress that to enable adoption of these new reforms as well as a smooth transition to 
a  monetary  union  and  advancement  of  data  harmonization  efforts  in  the  East  African 
Community;  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that  financial  institutions,  among  other  data 
providers,  submit  timely  and  accurate  statistics,  based  on  international  best  practice.  The 
reporting forms, which we are about to launch, have been designed to enable you to submit 
data  to  Bank  of  Uganda,  which  is  comparable  across  nations  both  within  and  outside  the 
East African Community. These revised forms will enable Bank of Uganda to collect more 
comprehensive and appropriate data to guide the conduct of monetary and credit policies.  
Finally, I thank you for all the efforts you have put in, the comments and feedback on the 
proposed changes, as all of these have enabled the revision of the reporting forms to be a 
success.  We  look  forward  to  your  continued  efforts  in  the  improvement  of  the  quality  of 
statistics.  
I wish you fruitful deliberations during this half day workshop.  
I now declare the new reporting forms launched.  
I thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 19/2010
