Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Vision of Asia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Official 
Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  –  “Vision  of  Asia  Award  Acceptance 
Speech”, London, 30 June 2010. 
 It is my great honour to be here today to receive this Vision of Asia Award from the Official 
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF). I would like to thank Lord Desai, for his 
generous  introduction  and  the  advisory  board  of  OMFIF  for  this  recognition.  As  a  policy 
maker  from  an  emerging  economy  in  Asia  –  for  almost  three  decades  –  it  has  been  both 
exhilarating and most rewarding. While being challenged to the limit, in particular, during the 
Asian financial crisis, the Asian economies have now emerged stronger and more resilient. 
This decade has seen a dramatic change in the nature of the globalisation process. As this 
process  intensifies,  Asian  economies  have  demonstrated  their  flexibility  to  adjust  and 
respond  to  the  opportunities  and  challenges  that  have  emerged.  The  initial  wave  of 
globalisation was in the form of trade. This was followed by the globalisation of corporations 
and  more  recently  by  the  globalisation  of  financial  flows.  The  recent  global  financial  and 
economic  crisis  has  called  for  the  globalisation  of  policy  given  the  limits  for  policy  at  the 
national level and the need to address cross border developments that have implications on 
the domestic financial system and hence the domestic economy.  
The  global  economy  and  the  international  financial  system  have  entered  a  new  era.  A 
fundamental transformation of the global landscape is taking place. Arising from the growing 
disparity in growth performance between the developed and emerging world, increasingly the 
economic power in the global economy is becoming more dispersed. The Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) estimates the emerging economies’ share 
of  global  economic  output  will  exceed  that  of  the  developed  world  by  2011.  By  2030,  the 
emerging economies are expected to account for 60% of total world output.  
The  benefits  of  globalisation  are  thus  becoming  more  balanced.  In  2000,  the  emerging 
economies  accounted  for  80%  of  the  world  population  but  only  generated  40%  of  global 
income.  By  2030,  it  is  estimated  that  85%  of  the  world  population  from  the  emerging 
economies will generate 60% of the income. This is reinforced by increased trade between 
emerging economies. While world trade has quadrupled between 1990 to 2008, trade flows 
between emerging economies increased ten-fold.  
Asia  is  very  much  part  of  this  global  shift  that  is  taking  place.  Following  a  decade  of 
significant  economic  and  financial  transformation,  Asia  has  emerged  as  a  major  growth 
centre in the global economy. Asia now accounts for one third of world output and 28% of 
world  trade.  This  progress  and  development  has  created  employment  and  improved  living 
conditions, lifting millions out of poverty. While Asia is one of the most diverse regions in the 
global economy, it has been able to take advantage of the complementarities in the region to 
generate significant expansion in intra-regional trade, intra-regional investment activities and 
increased intra-regional financial flows.  
Vision of Asia 
This award speaks to the growing importance of Asia within the world economy. Allow me to 
touch on three major trends in Asia that are likely to influence Asia’s role in the world as we 
advance into the future. First, the role of the growing cumulative domestic demand in Asia for 
the regional and global output. Second, the role of Asia in the more efficient intermediation of 
funds  mobilised  in  Asia  arising  from  the  more  pronounced  regional  financial  integration. 
BIS Review 91/2010 
 1
Third,  is  the  policy  strategies  being  adopted  by  the  region  to  address  challenges  and  the 
model for the management for international relations. 
The  economic  transformation  of  Asia  in  this  decade  has  resulted  in  Asia  becoming  an 
important  source  of  cumulative  demand  in  the  global  economy.  Rising  incomes,  low 
unemployment,  a  young  demographic  structure  that  has  higher  propensity  to  consume, 
relatively low level of household debt and policies to encourage consumption have spurred 
consumption demand. Other measures being initiated include putting in place social safety 
nets  in  the  form  of  schemes  and  programmes  for  education,  healthcare,  retirement  and 
unemployment benefits. This has not only resulted in significant expansion of the retail trade 
sector in the region but Asia is increasingly becoming an important consumer in the global 
economy. 
Private  investment  activity  has  also  resumed  following  a  period  of  excess  capacity  due  to 
overinvestment  prior  to  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  There  are  also  plans  for  massive 
investment in infrastructure development in the region. While Asia has the internal capacity 
from its high savings to finance these investments, the resulting higher import demand that 
these  investments  will  generate  will  contribute  to  the  further  unwinding  of  the  global 
imbalances.  This  stronger  domestic  consumption  and  investment  demand  in  Asia  is  also 
being supported by the strengthened and more developed financial systems. The relatively 
low level of leverage of the corporate sector and the continued access to financing support 
this trend. 
While regional economic integration has always been part of the Asian economic landscape, 
regional financial integration has been a more recent phenomenon. While regional financial 
integration  will  facilitate  the  already  strong  trade  and  investment  linkages  in  the  region,  a 
more important aspect of financial integration for Asia is that it will facilitate a more efficient 
intermediation of funds within Asia. Asia’s more developed financial markets and continued 
initiatives  to  liberalise  the  financial  sector  will  also  strengthen  inter-linkages  with  both  the 
traditional  financial  markets  and  with  new  financial  centres  in  other  emerging  economies. 
Going  forward,  products  from  Asian  financial  markets  can  be  expected  to  increasingly 
assume  greater  importance  as  an  asset  class.  It  will  thus  increase  the  potential  for  the 
diversification of risks and contribute towards stability of the international financial system. It 
will also expand the options for investors and borrowers and thus, contribute to more efficient 
allocation of financial resources across borders. In addition, the development of the capital 
markets  in  the  Asia  region  will  have  the  important  role  in  channelling  part  of  the  sizable 
savings of Asia back into productive investments in the region. With greater liberalisation of 
the  financial  sector  and  the  capital  account,  and  the  increased  linkages  of  the  national 
payments systems in Asia, and the greater presence of regional institutions in the individual 
domestic  financial  systems,  the  trend  for  increased  financial  flow  within  the  region  will 
continue. Given Asia’s favourable economic prospects and more developed financial market, 
Asia is already attracting volatile capital flows. 
The route that Asia is taking to forge greater financial integration will however be different 
from that of Europe. Unlike in the European Union, Asia has not ventured to have centralised 
institutions  to  coordinate  financial  integration. Rather,  it  has  leveraged  on  existing  regional 
groupings and existing networks to forge greater collaboration in areas of common interest. 
Secondly, a common currency is not on Asia’s medium term agenda. To minimise exchange 
rate  risks  and  facilitate  intra-regional  trade  and  investment,  countries  have  ventured  into 
arrangements to use domestic currencies for trade settlements. 
Let me touch on policy and strategies adopted in Asia. Asia has tended to not adhere to rigid 
ideologies  but  rather  focus  on  institutional  building  and  financial  market  development, 
strengthening  of  the  payment  systems  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework. 
Indeed, many of the reforms that are now being widely debated to address the weaknesses 
observed in the global financial system during this crisis have already been implemented in 
Asia.  This  includes  the  adoption  of  sound  liquidity  frameworks,  substantially  strengthened 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2010
governance  and  risk  management  practices,  comprehensive  financial  safety  nets,  and  the 
implementation of counter-cyclical measures such as loan-to-value ratios. While a decade of 
financial  reforms  have  paid  off, 
increased  regional  efforts  on  surveillance,  crisis 
management,  liquidity  support  arrangement,  and  financial  supervision  and  development  of 
regional financial markets continue to be the focus of attention going forward. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  global  economy  is  experiencing  a  significant  and 
fundamental  shift.  Asia  is  very  much  at  the  centre  of  this  shift.  As  Asia  becomes  an 
increasing  source  of  demand  and  as  a  more  financially  integrated  Asia  becomes  more 
interlinked with the rest of the world and as Asia further strengthens its resilience, the stage 
is set for Asia to assume a more prominent role in the global economy. 
In the endeavour to achieve the shared goals of balanced global growth and the common 
interest of global financial stability, Asia holds the potential and the promise of a platform for 
meaningful collaborations towards attaining sustainable global solutions and progress in this 
more inter-connected world. 
BIS Review 91/2010 
 3
