Nout Wellink: The Basel Committee and regulatory reform 
Remarks by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  2010  Spring 
Meeting, Vienna, 11 June 2010. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I wish to thank Charles Dallara and the Institute for this opportunity to discuss the work of the 
Basel Committee and its role in reforming the regulatory framework. All of us in the financial 
community  are  now  at  a  pivotal  junction  that  will  significantly  re-shape  how  banks  and 
supervisors alike conduct their business. In my remarks this morning I would like to explain 
the rationale for the Basel Committee’s reform programme and describe its key elements. I 
will then detail for you the benefits of our programme and my expectations for finalising our 
work. 
Rationale for the Basel Committee’s reform programme 
II. 
I  will  begin  by  discussing  why  we  are  doing  what  we  are  doing.  The  Basel  Committee’s 
reform programme includes the measures finalised by the Committee last summer dealing 
with  stronger  trading  book  capital  standards  along  with  higher  requirements  for  complex 
securitsations  and  exposures  to  off-balance-sheet  vehicles.  In  addition,  the  measures 
proposed  last  December  represent  a  fundamental  strengthening  of  the  Basel  II  framework 
and introduce for the first time minimum global standards for liquidity risk. These reforms are 
designed to respond to key pre-crisis shortcomings, which became painfully evident during 
the crisis.  
The  banking  sector  entered  the  crisis  with  too  much  leverage  and  inadequate  liquidity 
buffers.  These  were  accompanied  by  poor  governance  and  risk  management  as  well  as 
inappropriate  incentive  structures,  especially  related  to  compensation.  The  combination  of 
these factors was manifest in poor underwriting, the mispricing of credit and liquidity risk, and 
excess  credit  growth.  When  the  crisis  hit,  these  shortcomings  and  weaknesses  in  the 
banking sector amplified and deepened the downturn.  
You  know  the  outcome:  huge,  rapid  deleveraging;  big  losses  by  banks;  a  deep  recession; 
and massive direct support from the public sector in the form of capital injections, guarantees 
and liquidity. While not every bank required this direct support, all banks and counterparties 
benefited indirectly from these efforts and the broader fiscal and economic stimulus of the 
economy.  
Now, in the face of this experience, minimum standards for capital and liquidity need to be 
raised substantially so that the banking sector can withstand future periods of stress, thus 
enhancing  financial  stability  and  promoting  more  sustainable  growth.  The  banking  sector 
must serve as a stabilizing force and not as an amplifier of shocks.  
It  is  precisely  this  mandate  that  the  G20  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors 
endorsed this past weekend when they met in Korea. They voiced their full support for the 
work  of  the  Basel  Committee,  which  forms  the  core  of  the  G20’s  financial  and  regulatory 
reform agenda. 
At present, the minimum standard for the highest quality capital is just 2% of common equity 
to  risk  weighted  assets  –  it  is  even  less  when  you  factor  in  necessary  deductions  from 
capital.  
And with respect to liquidity, no global minimum standard currently exists. Leading up to the 
crisis,  liquidity  buffers  were  inadequate  and  excessive  reliance  was  placed  on  short-dated 
wholesale money to fund long term illiquid assets.  
Banks have made progress to strengthen capital levels and liquidity buffers but more needs 
to be done. In addition, when competitive pressures reassert themselves, there is the risk of 
a  renewed  race  to  the  bottom  to  the  unacceptable  pre-crisis  status  quo.  Moreover,  public 
sector  finances  have  been  stretched  and  must  be  consolidated.  There  is  no  public  sector 
appetite to engage in the types of banking sector support measures of the past three years. 
Banks therefore must use their return to profitability – which is due in part to public sector 
support – to boost capital and liquidity buffers. Significant risks remain in the economy and 
the financial system, and it would be unacceptable if banks did not use this opportunity to 
bolster their resilience to future shocks. Finalising the Basel Committee capital and liquidity 
reforms will raise resilience and provide greater certainty and stability in the markets as to 
the new standards towards which the sector must move. 
It  would  be  unwise  to  think  that  this  crisis  only  holds  lessons  for  a  limited  class  of  banks, 
business  models  or  regions.  All  countries  need  to  build  bank  sector  resilience  because 
shocks have originated from all regions of the world, from all types of asset classes, and from 
all kinds of business models.  
Key elements of the BCBS reform programme 
III. 
It is for these reasons that we have proposed our reform programme. Now let me tell you 
what it is we seek to achieve.  
Capturing all the risks  
The first objective must be to capture all significant risks in the capital framework. During the 
initial  phase  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  majority  of  losses  and  the  build  up  of  leverage 
occurred  in  the  trading  book.  At  the  same  time,  the  trading  book  rules  did  not  adequately 
capture  all  of  the  key  risks  to  which  banks  were  exposed.  As  a  consequence,  capital  for 
trading book exposures was distressingly inadequate. In response, the Committee finalised 
last  year  a  series  of  enhancements  to  the  trading  book  rules.  These  higher  capital 
requirements capture the credit risk of complex trading and derivative activities and require 
banks to calculate a stressed value-at-risk. 
The  crisis  also  exposed  weaknesses  in  banks’  risk  management  and  measurement  of 
securitisation  and  off-balance-sheet  exposures.  This  shortcoming  resulted 
large, 
unexpected  losses.  The  Committee’s  July  2009  enhancements  included  new  rules  to 
strengthen  the  treatment  for  certain  securitisations  in  Pillar  1  by  introducing  higher  risk 
weights for resecuritisation exposures.  
Counterparty credit risk is another key risk for which the regulatory capital improvement is 
needed. The December enhancements proposed by the Committee are meant to strengthen 
the  resilience  of  individual  banking  institutions  and  reduce  the  risk  that  shocks  are 
transmitted from one institution to the next through the derivatives and financing channel.  
in 
Raising the quality of the capital base 
The  Committee’s  efforts  to  improve  risk  coverage  are  a  crucial  element  of  the  capital 
adequacy equation but this is only half the story. The other half relates to the quality of the 
capital  base  backing  banks’  risk  exposures.  The  Committee  has  proposed  a  series  of 
measures  that  would  overhaul  the  definition  of  capital.  This  is  the  second  objective  of  our 
reform programme and it is set out broadly along two lines. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2010
First, the level and the share of the highest quality capital in Tier 1, namely, common equity 
and  retained  earnings,  will  rise  substantially.  During  the  crisis,  losses  came  directly  out  of 
retained  earnings  but  because  of  other  forms  of  financial  instruments  in  the  capital  base, 
some banks maintained deceptively high Tier 1 capital ratios. Moreover, in the case of many 
banks, non-common Tier 1 capital instruments ultimately had to be converted into common 
equity before confidence was restored.  
Second,  and  just  as  important,  our  proposal  introduces  a  rigorous  set  of  deductions  and 
exclusions  from  common  equity  to  arrive  at  a  more  transparent,  meaningful  definition  of 
capital and to restore the credibility of the Tier 1 capital base. 
Leverage ratio as a backstop to the risk based requirement 
A third objective is the introduction of a leverage ratio to backstop the risk-based system. At 
the  micro,  firm-specific  level,  many  firms  were  too  aggressive  in  gaming  the  system.  The 
risks that built up in the trading book with inadequate regulatory or economic capital were a 
case  in  point.  Many  firms  engaged  in  hedging  strategies  where  the  risk  magically 
disappeared  from  internal  risk  reports  and  capital,  only  to  reappear  as  basis  risk, 
counterparty credit risk or illiquid positions that could not be sold. Many supervisors did not 
do enough to prevent this compression of risk-weighted assets. 
From a macro prudential perspective, we again saw a cycle of leverage building up in the 
banking system, which the market forced down in the most destabilizing manner, amplifying 
procyclicality and the downturn of the real economy. Moreover, market participants piled into 
what  were  perceived  to  be  the  lowest  risk-weighted  assets,  such  as  repos,  sovereign 
lending, and triple-A asset backed securities. While these assets may have been viewed as 
low risk at the bank level, we instead saw the build-up of system wide risks in these asset 
classes, which ultimately came back to haunt many institutions.  
Buffers to withstand shocks 
Another  objective  is  the  need  to  build  greater  buffers  into  the  banking  sector  to  withstand 
severe  shocks.  Banks  are  at  the  centre  of  the  credit  intermediation  process,  both  in  bank 
dominated countries and those where capital markets are more developed. Greater buffers 
will  help  prevent  the  amplification  of  shocks  between  the  financial  and  real  side  of  the 
economy.  
These buffers need to take various forms. 
First, we need to introduce more forward-looking provisioning. The Committee is promoting 
stronger provisioning practices through a number of channels. It is working closely with the 
accounting standard setters to develop a robust and operational expected loss approach for 
provisioning.  
Second,  we  need  to  introduce  more,  prudent  valuation  practices  for  financial  instruments. 
The Committee last year issued guidance to banks and banking supervisors to strengthen 
valuation  processes.  The  Committee  also  continues  to  work  with  the  accounting  standard 
setters 
for  valuation 
adjustments  to  avoid  the  misstatement  of  both  initial  and  subsequent  profit  and  loss 
recognition when there is significant valuation uncertainty.  
Third, there needs to be a capital conservation buffer as proposed in our December reform 
package.  At  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  a  number  of  banks  continued  to  make  large 
distributions  in  the  form  of  dividends,  share  buy  backs  and  generous  compensation 
payments even though their individual financial condition and the outlook for the sector were 
deteriorating.  More  recently,  many  banks  have  returned  to  profitability  but  have  not  done 
enough to rebuild their capital buffers to support new lending activity. This dynamic does not 
help to make the system more resilient and it amplifies procyclicality. Much of this is due to a 
to  develop  sound  valuation  standards.  These  should  provide 
collective action problem, which the conservation framework seeks to address. The proposed 
framework promotes the conservation of capital and the build-up of adequate buffers above 
the minimum that can be drawn down in periods of stress, subject to appropriate measures 
that are coordinated with the national supervisor. The approach is not intended to take away 
freedom  from  a  well-governed  board,  but  rather  to  provide  more  clarity  regarding  the 
supervisory response. 
The Committee is also working on a countercyclical buffer framework to protect the banking 
sector from excessive credit growth. It will follow up with more detail on the design of this 
framework.  What  is  clear  from  history  is  that  the  banking  sector  is  most  vulnerable  during 
periods of excessive credit growth. 
Finally,  we  need 
from  excess 
to  address 
interconnectedness  and  the  perception  that  some  banks  are  too  big  to  fail.  This  is  being 
addressed through a variety of means.  
 
the  problem  of  systemic  risk  arising 
First,  we  are  introducing  capital  incentives  to  use  central  counterparties  for  OTC 
derivatives;  
Second, there will be higher capital for trading and derivative activities, as well as 
complex  securitisations,  which  are  associated  with  systemic 
risk  and 
interconnectedness; 
Third, there is a need for more capital for inter-financial sector exposures which are 
more correlated; 
Fourth,  the  Committee  is  reviewing  the  appropriate  capital  treatment  of  systemic 
banks (in coordination with the FSB); and 
Fifth,  the  Committee’s  recent  recommendations  for  cross-border  bank  resolution 
provide a practical way to begin addressing the systemic risk issue at cross-border 
banks.  
    Liquidity 
Strong  capital  is  a  necessary  but  not  sufficient  condition  for  banking sector  stability.  Many 
banks got into trouble because they were financing long dated, illiquid assets with short-term 
wholesale  funding.  Other  banks  simply  did  not  have  an  adequate  buffer  of  highly  liquid 
assets  to  ride  out  a  period  of  severe  stress.  Many  institutions,  in  their  liquidity  planning, 
assumed that they would experience difficulties, but that this would occur in an overall benign 
environment.  
Our  response  is  to  introduce  a  global  liquidity  framework  which  establishes  minimum 
standards for funding liquidity risk, thus preventing another race to the bottom in this area. 
Banks must hold a stock of high-quality liquid assets that is sufficient to allow them to survive 
a 30-day period of acute stress. This is complemented by a longer term, structural ratio to 
promote the funding of activities with more stable sources of funding on an ongoing basis. 
Banks  can  meet  these  standards  by  changing  their  funding  profile,  making  them  less 
vulnerable to liquidity shocks. 
Better supervision, risk management and transparency 
The measures I just outlined will help improve bank and bank system resilience. At the same 
time, they need to be accompanied by better supervision and risk management. An important 
lesson from this crisis is the need for better, more rigorous supervision and this key theme 
pervades the Committee’s work. Just a glance at our recently published work would highlight 
the Committee’s drive to raise the bar for both supervision and risk management: last year’s 
supplemental Pillar 2 guidance, our liquidity risk management sound principle, methodology 
for assessing compensation practices, valuation practices, stress testing and bank resolution 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2010
are just a few examples. The Committee is putting in place rigorous mechanisms to follow up 
on its standards to ensure that they are implemented across the membership. 
Finally, we need to do a better job at system wide supervision. Most banking crises emerge 
when  there  are  common  vulnerabilities  and  concentrations  across  the  banking  sector  and 
other  financial  firms.  It  therefore  is  critical  that  we  integrate  bank  level  supervision  with  a 
broader understanding of financial sector and macroeconomic vulnerabilities.  
As we roll out these reforms, it will be important that we ensure the perimeter of regulation 
keeps  up  with 
innovation.  Activities  which  combine  substantial  maturity 
transformation and liquidity risk should be subject to more bank-like regulation. We also need 
to be vigilant about major regulatory differences for like activities that could put pressure on 
the soundness of the regulated sector.  
financial 
Impact assessment, calibration and implementation and conclusion 
IV. 
Before I conclude let me say a few words about the Basel Committee’s process for finalising 
its reform package. I would like to emphasise three key features of the Committee’s work that 
help ensure that all the parts work together and that the new regulatory package succeeds.  
First, there is public consultation. The Committee is conducting a thorough analysis of the 
nearly 300 comments received covering thousands of pages. We are carefully reviewing the 
comments and this will help further inform the final design and calibration of the Committee’s 
proposals. 
Second,  there  is  calibration.  The  Committee  is  conducting  a  comprehensive  quantitative 
impact  study  to  assess  the  effect  of  its  reform  package  on  individual  banks  and  on  the 
banking industry as a whole. 
The  Committee  is  also  conducting  a  so-called  top-down  impact  assessment,  which  will 
complement the bottom-up, firm-specific QIS work. The top-down calibration work will help 
inform  the  overall  calibration  of  the  capital  requirements,  minimum  and  regulatory  buffers, 
factoring in the cumulative impact of the July and December 2009 reform measures and any 
adjustments to them. Any analysis of appropriate minimum levels must recognise that, to be 
credible, they need to cover historically severe losses. Buffers need to be sufficiently high to 
withstand  sector  wide  stress  while  remaining  above  a  credible  minimum.  The  calibration 
needs to be set at a level that is appropriate to promoting long term stability. Where there are 
tradeoffs,  these  should  go  in  the  direction  of  giving  banks  the  time  to  reach  the  new 
standards instead of watering down the standards themselves. Failure to put in place high 
quality standards for the long term simply sets the system up for another banking crisis down 
the road.  
Third, we are assessing the benefits and costs of the Basel Committee standards and I think 
it fitting that I close on this note. The past three years should serve as a strong reminder to 
us all of the benefits of mitigating banking crises. The costs of a banking crisis include the 
direct  losses  borne  by  security  holders,  the  massive  scale  and  diversity  of  public  sector 
intervention measures which have strained public finances and will need to be scaled back 
over time, and the large fall in national and global economic output and employment.  
Unfortunately,  such  episodes  are  not  confined  to  recent  history  and  occur  much  more 
frequently  and  have  much  greater  economic  impact  than  any  of  us  feel  comfortable  with. 
Moreover, the history of crises also shows that some of these costs are persistent.  
Raising capital and liquidity standards will reduce the probability and impact of crises, and 
bring with it large benefits. These benefits include:  
 
avoiding  both  the  temporary  and  additional  permanent  reductions  in  output  and 
employment that occur during banking crises;  
   greater stability of economic output and associated increases in welfare that result 
from lower output volatility during non-crisis periods; 
a  more  stable  banking  system  that  is  able  to  withstand  shocks  from  outside  the 
banking  sector  rather  than  amplifying  the  effects  of  such  shocks  on  the  real 
economy;  
lower risk premia; and  
more efficient allocation of resources and the avoidance of excessive credit growth 
that is often allocated to certain sectors leading up to a crisis. 
As  with  the  benefits,  the  costs  of  raising  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  can  have  both 
temporary  and  permanent  elements.  The  temporary  costs  we  believe  can  be  managed 
through  appropriate  transition  periods  –  in  some  cases  there  has  already  been  very 
significant adjustment forced by the market and supervisors. The Basel Committee and the 
FSB are in the process of assessing these temporary costs and the results of this work will 
help inform the appropriate transition period to the new standards. We will ensure that the 
banking sector can move to the new standards through earnings retention and reasonable 
capital raising. We will also ensure that banks can move to the new liquidity standards in an 
orderly manner. 
When  it  comes  to  the  long  term  costs,  the  impact  is  not  clear.  On  the  one  hand,  higher 
capital requirements and liquidity standards could increase the cost of funding. On the other 
hand, more stable, less leveraged banks would raise average ratings, improve the terms on 
which  banks  could  raise  funds,  and  lower  the  required  return  on  equity.  Moreover,  in  a 
competitive market, it is not at all clear that most of the costs of higher capital and liquidity 
requirements would be passed on to the consumer.  
One thing however is clear. Raising minimum capital requirements from their current levels 
will  involve  large  and  permanent  net  benefits  by  raising  the  stability  of  the  system  and 
promoting more sustainable growth. Moreover, these benefits accrue immediately for every 
additional dollar (or Euro) of capital and liquidity. This is critical in an overall economic and 
financial environment of continued uncertainty and risk.  
It  is  absolutely  essential  –  indeed  it  is  our  duty  to  shareholders,  taxpayers  and  future 
generations – to reflect on the lessons of this crisis to safeguard against something like this 
happening again. We have a common goal and we must work together to achieve it. 
6 
 BIS Review 80/2010
