Sada Reddy: Economic contribution of tourism – the way forward 
Speech by Mr Sada Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Fiji Tourism Forum 
2010, Suva, 20 August 2010. 
 The Attorney-General & Minister for Trade & Tourism, 
Chairman of the Organising Committee for the Forum, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies & Gentlemen 
Good Morning 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  to  you  on  the  Economic  Contribution  of  Tourism  –  
The Way Forward. 
I recall we met around this time last year when I had the pleasure of speaking to this august 
forum on a similar topic.  
Before I speak to you on the topic for this morning, I wish to first discuss very briefly, recent 
developments  in  the  Fiji  economy  in  the  context  of  the  global  economic  and  financial 
developments. 
This time last year we were still faced with a very uncertain global environment. While there 
were indications of gradual recovery in some economies, the mood was still very uncertain. 
However, it is very pleasing to note that the world economy has recovered much sooner and 
stronger than expected and is now on a solid growth.  
According  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  July  2010  World  Economic  Update, 
world growth this year is now projected at 4.6 percent. This compares with the projection of 
2.5  percent  growth  around  mid-last  year.  This  shows  a  substantial  upward  revision  to  the 
global growth rate.  
In  line  with the  improved  outlook  for  the  world  economy,  the  performances  of  our  5  major 
trading partner economies from this year onwards are all expected to be positive.  
Driving the improved recovery in global growth  is strong performances in Asia, particularly 
India and China which are expected to each record around 9 to10 percent growth in 2010.  
Of particular importance to Fiji tourism is the growth forecasts for Australia, New Zealand and 
US. The Australian economy is chugging along pretty well while the NZ and US economies 
are also expected to recover from the low levels of last two years.  
Therefore,  against  this  background,  we  expect  good  recovery  in  tourism  from  these 
economies.  However,  one  needs  to  be  a  little  cautious  on  this  front  as  most  analysts  say 
there are still some risks that some economies may not see a sustained recovery.  
In line with the global economy, Fiji’s economy is also expected to show a positive growth of 
1.8 percent this year.  
This expected growth has been supported largely by the growth in tourism. The activity in the 
mining  and  manufacturing  sectors  also  looks  promising.  The  exports  of  fish,  timber  and 
mineral water are also looking positive.  
However,  sugar  production  does  not  look  very  promising.  Sugar  production  is  expected  to 
decline  further  significantly  this  year  due  to  continuing  milling  problems  and  drop  in  cane 
production. Lower cane production is due largely to very low rainfall this year while mill up 
grade works has not delivered the efficiencies that were expected. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 1
future  business  expectations 
Consumption indicators show that consumer spending has recovered somewhat. Net Value 
Added Tax (VAT) collections in the first 6 months of the year rose by around 7 percent on a 
yearly  basis;  a  good  part  of  this  growth  in  VAT  revenue  could  be  due  to  the  growth  in 
tourism. Bank lending figures also support some increase in consumption demand.  
Looking  ahead,  recent  survey  results  on 
indicate  a 
strengthening of investor confidence as more businesses expect an increase in investment in 
plant and machinery as well as in building and construction.  
Labour market sentiments also look positive. 
In line with our expectations, growth in exports was positive in the first four months of the 
year, rising by 16 percent, on an annual basis. This is attributed to increases in earnings from 
fish, mineral water, timber and gold. Looking ahead, total exports are expected to grow by 
12 percent this year. Last year, exports fell by 16 percent.  
On  the  other  hand,  imports  declined  by  7  percent  annually  in  the  first  four  months  of  this 
year. However, for the year as a whole, imports are expected to grow by 10 percent. The 
slower growth in imports against a higher growth in exports naturally has a positive influence 
on our balance of payments. This is reflected in the trade balance declining by 20 percent to 
$469 million in the first four months of the year.  
As  far  as  the  inflation  rate  is  concerned  we  have  seen  a  significant  slowdown  in  recent 
months as the effects of the devaluation worked through the economy. The inflation rate fell 
to 5.4 percent in July after peaking at 10.5 percent in April.  
Another important economic indicator that we monitor closely is our level of foreign reserves. 
I am pleased to say that the foreign reserves have held up very well so far this year and is 
currently at around F$1.2 billion, equivalent to between 3.5 to 4 months of imports of goods 
and non-factor services.  
Let  me  now  move  to  the  topic  that  you  had  asked  me  to  speak  on  i.e.  the  economic 
contribution of tourism and the way forward.  
Ladies and gentlemen, over the past 5 years, the total estimated contribution of the tourism 
sector to the economy, taking into account both its direct and indirect impact as well as the 
impact of its induced activities, has averaged around 30 percent.  
Employment in the hotel industry has increased over the years, rising from 26,700 in 2003 to 
approximately  39,000 
industry 
employment may be around 40,000 now. This level represents a little under a third of total 
formal sector employment.  
In addition to tourism’s significant contribution to output and employment, this sector is also a 
major foreign exchange earner for the country. 
Tourism  earnings  averaged  around  $820  million  in  the  last  three  years,  compared  with 
$250 million for remittances, $200 million for sugar exports and $130 million for fish receipts. 
Earnings  from  other  exports  such  as  garments  and  mineral  water  averaged  around 
$100 million.  
This  year,  tourism  earnings  are  expected  to  grow  further  by  around  11  percent  to  around 
$910 million.  
Visitor arrivals for the first 5 months of this year rose by over 22 percent to 217,000, over the 
levels in 2009. We expect to hit 600,000 visitors this year. If we reach this number this year, 
then this will be the highest visitor arrivals on record. The outlook for visitor arrivals for 2011 
and 2012 also look very promising with arrivals expected to reach 660,000 by 2012.  
Australia  and  New  Zealand  continue  to  be  our  major  source  markets.  Figures  on  resident 
departures  from  these  respective  countries  show  that  in  the  January–May  2010  period, 
Australian departures for Fiji rose by 49 percent to 105,000 visitors when compared with the 
in  2008.  Preliminary  estimates  show 
the  hotel 
that 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2010
same  period  last  year.  Over  the  same  period,  tourist  departures  from  New  Zealand  to  Fiji 
rose by 22 percent.  
Nevertheless, there is potential for Fiji to tap into the huge Asian market given that more and 
more Asians are now travelling abroad as their income levels have increased. Tourists from 
Asia for the past 5 years have averaged around 45,000 annually. Better airline connectivity 
between Fiji and Asia through the introduction of flights to Hong Kong last year augurs well 
for the tourism industry.  
With  respect  to  occupancy  rates,  it  is  encouraging  to  see  that  it  has  increased  to  more 
normal levels of over 60 percent after declining to around 40 percent in the last two years. Of 
course, efforts need to be made to increase occupancy rates to over 70 percent to optimally 
utilise tourism infrastructure.  
In  my  view,  the  tourism  sector  holds  huge  promise  for  our  country  given  that  most  of  the 
other  sectors  are  not  performing  as  well.  However,  there  are  challenges  moving  forward. 
One  area  that  could  easily  become  a  constraint  to  future  tourism  growth  would  be  the 
availability of a good mix of hotel rooms. This maybe adequate now but in two to three years, 
this  will  definitely  become  an  issue.  Therefore,  investment  in  more  hotels  will  be  critically 
important  to  sustain  the  current  rate  of  growth  of  visitor  arrivals.  As  it  takes  nearly  two  to 
three years to get a hotel completed, it may be necessary that more investment in this area 
starts soon.  
Another  important  challenge  for  the  industry  is  the  relatively  low  retention  rate  for  the 
industry,  estimated  at  around  44  percent.  In  comparison  with  other  countries,  Fiji  retains 
much less of the tourism dollar when compared with other developing countries at between 
50–60 percent and advanced countries at between 80–90 percent.  
One area that has recently come to Government’s attention is the loss of Vat revenue from 
packaged  tours.  Almost  all  services  provided  to  packaged  tours  are  of  a  domestic  nature 
except for airfares (excluding Air Pacific). Therefore VAT should be payable on all domestic 
services.  Unfortunately,  Fiji  has  been  losing  out  on  the  VAT  revenue  for  packaged  tours. 
Government should study this issue and see how it can plug this leakage.  
To  support the  Government’s  focus  on  agriculture  and  to reduce  the country’s  reliance  on 
imports, the industry is encouraged to continue its efforts to this end. The recent collaborative 
effort between the Fiji Islands Hotel and Tourism Association and the Ministry of Agriculture 
is commendable but more and a sustained effort is needed.  
The Reserve Bank of Fiji is also doing its part to support the Government’s efforts to boost 
the  economy  through  the  tourism  sector.  Recent  initiatives  by  the  RBF  include  the 
engagement of an Asian Development Bank (ADB) Consultant to conduct a review on the 
local  value  added  content  requirement  for  a  sustainable  tourism  industry.  Once  this  report 
becomes available the Bank will consult with the key stakeholders to see how best we can 
get our tourism industry to contribute more in terms of local value added.  
In this regard the RBF will also work with the commercial banks and other lending agencies 
to ensure that new lending is targeted more towards hotels which have significant local value 
added. 
The RBF has also embarked on a programme to bring about changes in the hotel food and 
beverages services so that more and more local inputs are utilised by the hotel industry. In 
this  regard  the  RBF  has  recently  provided  scholarship  to  a  local  chef  from  the  Training 
Productivity  Authority  of  Fiji  (TPAF)  for  a  two  month  attachment  in  a  five  star  resort  in 
Malaysia to receive training on how to specialise in the use of local foods in the preparation 
of local hotel menus, in particular high value menus. Upon the chef’s return the RBF will work 
with TPAF and the Fiji Hotel and Tourism Association to provide training to other local chefs 
on  the  use  of  local  inputs.  It  is  also  the  intention  of  the  RBF  to  make  an  Annual  Prime 
Minister’s Award to a chef who creates the most innovative local input menu or dish. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 3
You might well ask as to why the RBF is taking such interest in the tourism industry. As I said 
before given the size of the industry in the domestic economy the country will benefit greatly 
if  we  are  able  to  increase  the  local  value  added.  It  will  significantly  add  to  our  balance  of 
payment and also increase incomes to our farmers and assist in more employment creation. 
The  Bank  has  also  made  funds  available  for  exports  and  import  substitution  through  its 
recently revamped Import Substitution and Export Finance Facility (ISEFF). This facility can 
be accessed through the commercial banks and the Fiji Development Bank.  
The RBF also relaxed its policy on foreigners to borrow in the domestic market for purchase 
or construction of residential properties. This is to encourage the building and construction 
industry and also for the development of integrated resorts with residential accommodation. 
I also wish to mention here a related new policy of Fiji My Second Home Scheme which was 
introduced last year. The scheme provides an opportunity for citizens of other countries to 
make  Fiji  their  second  home.  The  financial  criteria  under  the  scheme  is  the  compulsory 
opening of a fixed deposit account of $100,000 for participants over 50 years, and a fixed 
deposit  account  of  $150,000  for  participants  below  50  years.  Interest  income  from  these 
deposits  is  exempt  from  tax.  From  the  3rd  year  onwards,  a  minimum  of  $50,000  must  be 
maintained in the account, participants of this scheme can use the funds expenses relating to 
house  purchase,  education  and  medical  purposes.  More  details  can  be  obtained  from  the 
RBF website. 
Through these various initiatives, the Bank hopes to encourage more activity in the tourism 
sector and help lift economic growth.  
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the key strengths of Fiji’s attraction as a tourism destination is 
the pristine environment that we enjoy but take for granted most of the time. Many countries 
which currently enjoy  very high growth rates and high living standards unfortunately suffer 
seriously from environmental degradation and overcrowding. Therefore, Fiji needs to have a 
policy on sustainable tourism development which preserves and secures our environment for 
future generations. In this regard it is critically important that all developments, in particular, 
large scale tourism developments, are strictly regulated.  
In this regard, I wish to once again reiterate the need for eco-friendly tourism development 
which  uses  more  renewable  energy  technology  and  building  designs  to  minimise  the 
importation of fossil fuel. The Government ministries in charge of planning, environment and 
energy  need  to  work  very  closely  with  the  various  stakeholders  to  ensure  that  we  have 
policies to give effect to these strategies. We do have some policies already in place but one 
needs to ask how effective these are. 
If properly implemented, these strategies will add more value to our tourism and differentiate 
our tourism product from many other destinations. 
One of the key challenges for the Government is to keep the infrastructure developed and 
maintained.  Substandard  infrastructure  will  have  serious  implications  for  the  growth  of 
tourism  in  Fiji.  Therefore,  long  term  planning  is  absolutely  necessary  to  develop  adequate 
infrastructure  in  terms  of  electricity,  water  supply,  roads,  bridges,  airports,  hospitals, 
telecommunications, etc. Fiji’s infrastructure has been left neglected for a number of years 
but it is good to see more activity in some of these areas recently. 
In summary, ladies and gentlemen, the tourism industry is a major contributor to the growth 
and  development  of  our  country.  Its  importance,  as  I  highlighted  earlier,  underscores  the 
need for all stakeholders, not only the Government, but the private sector and the community 
in  general,  to  work  together  and  make  every  effort  to  raise  our  tourism  industry  to  a  level 
where it can compete more effectively with the rest of the world.  
Against the adverse impact of recent global and domestic developments, tourism contributed 
significantly to turn the economy around from this year. 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2010
I  am  confident  that  with  the  efforts  of  everyone,  the  tourism  industry  will  continue  to  grow 
strongly and achieve its growth target of 1.1 million visitors and $1.2 billion earnings by 2016, 
if not sooner.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 5
