Jean-Pierre Danthine: Signals from the financial markets and 
developments in the implementation of Swiss monetary policy 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 17 June 2010. 
 As has been pointed out in the speeches of my two colleagues, reports on the economy are 
quite positive and indicate a faster economic recovery than anticipated. The signals from the 
financial markets, however, are less favourable and I will be talking about them in the first 
part of my remarks. I will devote the second part of my comments today to developments in 
the implementation of monetary policy over the last few months. These developments result 
from  the  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  adopted  by  the  Swiss  National  Bank 
(SNB) to combat the financial crisis and to ensure price stability in line with its mandate.  
International financial markets experience an uncertain period  
The period of calm which prevailed on international markets from spring 2009 onwards gave 
way  to  a  new  phase  of  uncertainty  in  the  second  quarter  of  2010.  Since  April  2010,  the 
climate on financial markets has deteriorated again. Share prices have fallen, credit risk has 
risen  and  instability  has  increased  on  the  major  foreign  exchange  markets.  As  Philipp 
Hildebrand  has  already  stated,  the  return  of  uncertainty  chiefly  reflects  investors’  doubts 
about the capacity of certain countries to service their debt. These doubts are reflected in a 
significant increase in risk premia for sovereign debt in these countries, which has prompted 
them  to  establish  major  cost-cutting  programmes.  This  situation  is  weighing  on  financial 
markets, despite the relatively favourable reports of economic recovery at the global level. 
Indeed, current market uncertainty has reached a high level, although it remains lower than 
that observed during the recent crisis. To give an example, the VIX index (which measures 
uncertainty on the equity market) and the CDX index (which measures credit risk) are both 
rising  again.  However,  they  are  still  significantly  lower  than  at  the  end  of  2008,  i.e.  at  the 
peak of the subprime crisis (cf. chart 1). 
The  uncertainty  associated  with  the  fiscal  situation  of  certain  European  countries  has  also 
triggered  another  rise  in  tension  on  the  interbank  market  for  US  dollars.  To  counter  this, 
several central banks, including the SNB, have reactivated swap facilities in cooperation with 
the Federal Reserve in order to provide dollar liquidity that may be required for the smooth 
functioning of the markets. In Switzerland, the interbank market has remained calm. Indeed, 
the  ample  supply  of  liquidity  has  reduced  Swiss  franc  interbank  rates.  As  can  be  seen  in 
chart  2,  risk  premia  on  the  Swiss  franc  interbank  market  have  also  declined.  They  fell  by 
more than a half in May while, during the same period, US dollar risk premia on the interbank 
market in the US rose again. 
Alongside the uncertainty, investor risk aversion has grown over the last few months. As a 
result,  there  has  been  a  movement  of  capital  in  the  direction  of  investments  that  are 
considered to be more secure (flight to quality). This is reflected, for example, in a rise in the 
gold price since February 2010. In May 2010, the gold price in Swiss francs reached new 
heights. 
The  flight  to  quality  has  also  had  consequences  for  Switzerland,  since  our  country  has 
traditionally been regarded as a safe haven for investors. This situation has been reinforced 
by  the  fact  that,  until  now,  the  Swiss  economy  has  withstood  the  crisis  better  than  most 
developed countries. This has resulted in upward pressure on the Swiss franc, which has led 
to  repeated  interventions  on  the  foreign  exchange  market.  The  liquidity  injected  into  the 
market  in  the  course  of  these  interventions  has  reduced  Swiss  franc  interest  rates,  in 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 1
particular  for  short  term  maturities.  In  addition,  the  yield  on  10-year  Swiss  Confederation 
bonds fell to below 1.50% in May 2010. For the sake of completeness, it should be pointed 
out that the Swiss franc has not been the only currency to appreciate. The yen, the US dollar 
and the currencies of the Nordic countries have also strengthened against the euro. 
Investing foreign exchange reserves  
As  already  mentioned  by  Philipp  Hildebrand,  the  SNB  had  to  implement  unconventional 
monetary  policies  in  order  to  combat  the  financial  crisis  and  avert  deflation  risks.  This 
resulted in an expansion in the SNB balance sheet, which took place in two stages. In the 
first  stage,  during  the  crisis,  the  SNB  made  use  of  EUR/CHF  swaps,  while  in  the  second 
stage, when it was confronted with the appreciation of the Swiss franc, it intervened on the 
foreign  exchange  market.  As  part  of  these  unconventional  measures,  the  SNB  purchased 
Swiss franc bonds issued by private sector Swiss borrowers and temporarily extended the 
terms of its repo operations. 
Today I am going to focus on the impact that the SNB’s interventions have on its balance 
sheet.  In  these  interventions,  the  SNB  purchased  euros  as  well  as,  to  a  lesser  extent, 
US dollars. These acquisitions led to a significant increase in currency reserves, which rose 
from CHF 95 billion in December 2009 to over CHF 230 billion at the end of May 2010. 
The foreign exchange acquired through SNB interventions has been placed in securities. The 
SNB’s investment policy is founded on the criteria of security and liquidity, but also return. In 
order  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  security  and  liquidity,  the  SNB  has  focused  on  the 
purchase  of  liquid  instruments  of  first-class  quality.  All  investment  activity  is  carried  out 
according to a strategy based upon diversification, while also taking into account potentially 
major  but  low-probability  events.  A  further  aim  of  this  strategy  is  to  ensure  maximum 
resilience of the SNB balance sheet. For the sake of completeness, let me add that, given 
the accumulation of additional dollar reserves, the issuance of SNB Bills initiated in February 
2009 to finance the SNB stabilisation fund is no longer necessary. Consequently, the SNB 
will suspend its issuance of SNB USD Bills. The last auction will be held on 21 June 2010.  
As  has  already  been  mentioned  by  Philipp  Hildebrand,  the  extent  of  foreign  exchange 
interventions  are  leading  to  a  higher  risk  concentration  for  the  SNB.  However,  monetary 
policy considerations remain paramount. Furthermore, we need to keep the overall picture in 
mind. Thus, since our portfolio is well diversified, no loss has been recorded overall since the 
beginning  of  the  year.  This  is  due,  in  particular,  to  investments  in  foreign  currencies  other 
than euro as well as our gold investments, which also constitute one of our main sources of 
risk. What is more, the important time period is the long term and over that horizon potential 
exchange rate losses should be offset (at least in part) by  the return on foreign exchange 
investments.  Finally,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  SNB  has  set  aside  substantial 
provisions to absorb any possible future losses. 
Transition from a liquidity deficit to excess liquidity in the financial system 
The unconventional measures taken by the SNB to combat the impact of the crisis and to 
avert  deflation  risks  have  led  to  an  ample  supply  of  liquidity  to  the  financial  system. 
Therefore,  we  have  witnessed  a  gradual  shift  from  a  liquidity  deficit  to  a  situation 
characterised by excess liquidity. In fact, before the crisis, banks had to obtain liquidity from 
the SNB in order to satisfy their minimum reserve requirements. Today, they have sufficient 
liquidity  to  function  without  having  to  finance  themselves  via  the  SNB.  This  situation  of 
excess liquidity is of a permanent nature. 
The  transition  from  a  liquidity  shortage  to  excess  liquidity  does  not,  however,  change  the 
SNB’s monetary policy strategy, which is still aimed at stabilising the three-month Libor within 
the target range set by the SNB. The implementation of this strategy has nevertheless been 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2010
adjusted to reflect the new liquidity conditions. In times of a liquidity shortage, the SNB must 
supply  the  markets  with  liquidity  to  keep  the  Libor  at  the  targeted  level.  If  there  is  excess 
liquidity, it must drain liquidity from the market in order to keep the Libor at the same desired 
level (cf. chart 3). This situation can be compared with that of a driver going up a mountain 
pass. Driving up the hill, he pushes on the gas pedal in order keep the vehicle driving at a 
certain speed. On the way down, however, he must step on the brake continue to travel at 
the same pace. 
Monetary policy with SNB Bills and reverse repos 
The SNB is not the only central bank that finds itself in a situation of excess liquidity. The 
majority of central banks which have taken unconventional monetary policy measures are in 
the same position. Central banks have a range of measures at their disposal to reduce this 
excess  liquidity.  After  analysing  the  different  alternatives,  the  SNB  decided  to  use  a 
combination of SNB Bills and reverse repos. These instruments are perfectly in line with our 
monetary policy strategy. There is, however, still a range of alternative instruments available, 
should there be a need for them. 
Let  me  explain  briefly  how  the  method  chosen  by  the  SNB  works.  As  I  have  already 
mentioned, the SNB aims to keep the three-month Libor within a certain target range. This 
rate depends on the level of liquidity in the financial markets. If there is excess liquidity, the 
SNB must withdraw a certain amount to influence the level of the Libor. In so doing, it uses a 
two-pronged approach: on the one hand, it issues SNB Bills with different terms. Banks or 
investors  who  purchase  these  bills  pay  the  SNB  with  liquid  funds,  which  are  thus  drained 
from the financial system. On the other hand, the SNB also makes use of reverse repos in 
order to complete the withdrawal of liquidity achieved by the use of SNB Bills. In a reverse 
repo, the SNB delivers securities to a bank in exchange for liquid funds, thereby absorbing 
liquidity from the financial system. Reverse repos with a term of, in general, one week are 
used  to  manage  short-term  liquidity.  SNB  Bills,  on  the  other  hand,  are  used  to  manage 
liquidity  in  the  longer  term  (one  month  or  more).  By  combining  these  two  instruments,  the 
SNB is able to determine the volume of liquidity it wants to drain from the system, thereby 
influencing  the  three-month  Libor.  The  SNB  continues  to  use  a  three-month  Libor  target 
range as its reference band for monetary policy. 
The use of SNB Bills and reverse repos  
The  SNB  has  been  issuing  SNB  Bills  since  October  2008.  At  beginning  of  this  month,  a 
secondary market for buying and selling these short-term debt certificates was established. 
This  secondary  market  improves  market  liquidity.  SNB  Bills  have  other  advantages.  First, 
their flexible terms can be adapted to the monetary policy  objectives. Second, they permit 
greater flexibility and can be issued at high volumes. 
The  SNB  has  been  stepping  up  the  issuance  of  SNB  Bills  since  March  2010.  It  currently 
offers SNB bills with terms ranging from one week to three months. The total amount of SNB 
Bills  outstanding  last  week  amounted  to  about  CHF  80  billion.  This  made  it  possible  to 
reduce  sight  deposits  to  around  CHF  70  billion.  SNB  Bills  and  reverse  repos  are 
characterised  by  their  extraordinary  flexibility,  allowing  for  an  efficient  implementation  of 
monetary  strategy  that  is  fully  compatible  with  the  monetary  policy  concept  that  has  been 
proven and tested for several years now. In employing these instruments, the SNB continues 
to operate in an environment that is both familiar to and stable for its different partners. It is 
nevertheless ready to adjust its monetary policy instruments quickly, should this be required 
by developments in the financial markets. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 3
  4 
 BIS Review 85/2010
 5
BIS Review 85/2010 
 