Rasheed Mohammed Al-Maraj: Luxembourg – a global financial services 
centre 
Keynote  address  by  HE  Rasheed  Mohammed  Al-Maraj,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Bahrain,  at  a  seminar  “Luxembourg  –  a  global  financial  services  centre”,  Manama, 
11 January 2010. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to 
Bahrain  and  to  have  this  opportunity  to  discuss  matters  of  common  interest  between 
Luxembourg and Bahrain. 
As I am sure you know, the economies of Bahrain and Luxembourg have many similarities. 
In both cases we act as a financial services hub for a wider economic region. In Bahrain’s 
case, this region is the Middle East and North Africa, including the six member States of the 
Gulf  Cooperation  Council.  In  consequence,  like  Luxembourg,  the  combined  assets  of  our 
financial industry represents several multiples of the size of our economy. 
Traditionally,  Bahrain  has  concentrated  on  developing  our  banking  industry,  including  the 
wholesale banks that provide project finance throughout the wider MENA region. However, in 
recent years, in line with the Vision 2030 Plan, Bahrain has sought to diversify its financial 
sector. We have seen a growing presence of insurance companies and fund managers. As 
of  November  2009,  there  were  2,610  authorised  funds  established  in  Bahrain  managing 
assets of over nine billion US dollars. While I realize that this is small in comparison with the 
size of Luxembourg’s fund management industry, this is part of the financial sector that we 
are seeking to develop further and we expect it to grow rapidly in the coming years. 
The  financial  crisis  has  caused  many  financial  centres  to  review  their  development 
strategies.  Bahrain  is  no  exception  to  this  trend,  even  though  the  crisis  has  had  only  a 
modest impact on our financial system. Throughout the difficult period of 2008 and 2009, our 
financial  markets  continued  to  function  normally  and  the  Government  of  Bahrain  did  not 
consider it necessary to take some of the extraordinary measures, such as recapitalization of 
banks and providing blanket guarantees, that had been adopted in other parts of the world. 
Although we needed to place two wholesale banks into administration in the course of 2009, 
these  events  did  not  have  a  spill-over  effect  to  the  wider  financial  system.  In  fact,  the 
financial markets seem to have taken comfort from the prompt and effective action taken by 
the CBB in dealing with these two problem banks. 
In Bahrain, as in the rest of the world, the impact of the financial crisis was felt first through a 
withdrawal  of  liquidity,  especially  in  US  dollars.  In  the  final  quarter  of  2008  we  faced  a 
situation  in  which  our  financial  institutions  were  facing  liquidity  pressures,  owing  to  the 
market reaction to the Lehman Brothers failure. To offset the liquidity outflow that had taken 
place  after  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  Central  Bank  instituted  a  new  swap 
facility  that  permitted  banks  to  exchange  US  dollars  for  Bahrain  dinar  at  no  penalty.  This 
helped greatly to ease liquidity conditions in Bahrain’s money markets and allowed the 2008 
year-end to pass without any significant market disruptions. 
As 2009 unfolded, liquidity pressures gave way to rising credit losses. Within Bahrain itself, 
losses reported by banks have been in line with those we would expect in a normal business 
cycle. The domestic impact of the crisis has been limited in large part due to the fact that our 
real  estate  market  had  not  experienced  high  levels  of  speculative  activity.  However,  since 
Bahraini banks are major providers of credit throughout the MENA region, they have been 
affected by credit defaults elsewhere, and by problems in the real estate sector elsewhere in 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
the region. Nonetheless, the high levels of capital adequacy of our banks has allowed them 
to absorb these losses and the banking system remains on a very solid footing. 
A further source of strength for Bahrain’s financial sector has been our position as a hub for 
Islamic finance. Owing to the Sharia prohibition on speculative activity and the requirement 
that financial transactions be backed by real assets, the Islamic financial industry has been 
less affected by the global financial crisis than the conventional sector. While this sector has 
no  room  for  complacency,  as  its  customers  are  just  as  likely  to  suffer  from  the  economic 
downturn as those of conventional banks, we nonetheless believe that there are enormous 
opportunities for Sharia-compliant finance to take up some of the slack created by problems 
in the conventional financial industry. The Sukuk market, in particular, is one that we believe 
provides a flexible financing mechanism which contains enormous potential. With Bahrain’s 
long track-record and supportive regulatory regime for Islamic finance, we believe that this is 
an aspect of the financial sector that is ripe for further development. 
Let me again welcome you to Bahrain and thank you for your participation in this important 
event. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
