Bandid Nijathaworn: The role of Early Warning Systems in economic 
policy formulation 
Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the panel 
discussion  on  “The  Role  of  Early  Warning  Systems  in  Economic  Policy  Formulation”,  IMF 
High-level  seminar  “Early  Warning  Systems  and  Their  Role  in  Surveillance”,  Singapore, 
9 February 2010. 
 First, let me thank the IMF for the invitation. At first, when I was asked to speak on this panel, 
I  was  not  sure  why  the  Fund  is  organizing  a  high-level  seminar  in  Asia  on  Early  Warning 
Systems, as interest on the topic seems to have faded completely with the recovery of the 
Asian economies from the crisis in early 2000’s. Then, it becomes clear that the resurgence 
of interest on EWS, now called EWE or Early Warning Exercises, is very much the mandate 
of  the  G20  that  requires  the  IMF  and  the  FSB  to  lead  the  conduct  of  such  exercises  in 
response to the current crisis. Given the severity of the current crisis, I think this initiative is 
important and needs to be supported.  
For  this  afternoon,  I  want  to  make  three  observations  on  how  the  new  Early  Warning 
Exercises  can  be  made  most  useful  to  help  sustain  global  growth  and  maintain  financial 
stability,  especially  in  light  of  the  lessons  learned  from  the  current  and  past  crises.  My 
observations will be on: (1) the nature of future crises; (2) their implications for the role and 
the conduct of EWE going forward; and (3) some suggestions on what should constitute the 
important components of the EWE process.  
First, on the nature of future crises. One criticism we often hear about EWS in the past is that 
the system is often good in replicating the last crisis but is less useful in anticipating future 
crises. This point I believe has been echoed also in today’s seminar. A key reason for this is 
the way the EWS models have been calibrated to fit the explanation for the last crisis, and 
hence,  becomes  less  useful  for  anticipating  future  crises  when  circumstances  or  the  risk 
factor  change.  Similarly,  lessons  learned  from  the  previous  crisis  tend  to  over-prepare 
policymakers  for  a  repeat  of  a  similar  crisis,  thereby  leaving  them  vulnerable  to  the  new 
cause of the next crisis. Therefore, for EWE to be useful, it must have the ability to anticipate 
the nature of future crises with certain accuracy. This, of course, is going to be a demanding 
task,  but  it  is  this  quality  that  the  EWE  process  needs  to  have.  This  is  because  without 
certain degree of accuracy, it will be difficult to persuade policymakers to collectively become 
engaged in addressing certain risk and vulnerabilities. 
In my view, the task could be easier achieved if the focus of EWE is narrowed down to the 
really important systemic issues i.e, the issues that have high-global impact but are beyond 
the capabilities of market and individual economies to  monitor and make assessment. For 
example, instead of trying to spot vulnerabilities in all the possible key risk, in all markets, 
and  in  all  economies,  EWE  should  narrow  its  focus  instead  on  the  systemically-important 
issues,  especially  the  known-unknowns.  This  include  the  robustness  of  the  key  global 
financial  markets  and  infrastructure,  risk  relating  to  the  systemically-important  large 
economies  and  the  operations  of  the  internationally-important  financial  institutions.  Such 
focus  will  make  the  whole  EWE  process  more  valuable  and  complements  well  with  the 
surveillance that are done elsewhere at the country or regional level.  
With  regards  to  the  nature  of  future  crises,  a  few  realities  have  emerged  from  the  current 
global financial turmoil.  
First, it is clear from recent experience that nobody is above crisis. Crisis can happen in any 
economy regardless of whether it is large or small, developed or emerging, with or without a 
sophisticated  financial  system,  and  regardless  of  whether  the  country  adopts  a  fixed  or 
flexible  exchange  rate  system.  And  once  happens,  the  impact  is  large  because  of  the 
BIS Review 19/2010 
 1
globalized  nature  of  markets  that  drives  the  spillover  or  contagion.  For  emerging  markets, 
this means the risk of future crises are wide-ranging and can be both externally and internally 
induced. And as we have seen in the current crisis, the impact from an externally-induced 
crisis through contagion can be as large as an internally-induced or home-grown crisis.  
Second,  given  the  tendency  that  lessons  from  past  crises  will  encourage  policymakers  to 
adopt more cautious policy and reform, this change in the policy conduct will help reduce the 
likelihood of an internally-induced crisis based on policy weakness, domestic misalignment, 
and  moral  hazard.  Instead,  the  nature  of  future  crises  will  relate  more  to  the  externally-
induced factors.  
Third,  features  of  the  externally-induced  crises  will  mirror  a  fundamental  shift  from  crises 
based on macro-misalignment in the individual economies to crises based on failures of key 
markets,  system,  and  institutions,  that  are  systemically  important  and  have  a  global-wide 
impact  because  of  the  underlying  interconnectedness.  The  issues  of  trust,  robustness  of 
markets  and  financial  infrastructure,  counterparty-risk,  information  gap,  as  well  as,  liquidity 
will  become  important  possible  triggers  of  the  future  market  disruptions.  In  addition, 
geopolitical events or trade tension can also lead to disruptions in global liquidity and trigger 
a global-wide impact. 
The main message here is that, going forward, future crises will be different. They will relate 
less to misalignment in the individual economies because of better policy and regulation, but 
will relate more to the resiliency of the global system, market and institutions, as well as the 
ability of the policymakers to prevent or address the vulnerabilities beforehand.  
Forth,  for  emerging  markets,  the  most  threatening  externally-induced  crises  going  forward 
will be those that relate to the concentration of global liquidity, either too much or too little, in 
the  form  of  large,  persistent,  and  volatile  capital  flows  that  overwhelm  the  capacities  of 
individual countries to manage and adjust to. And the most worrying aspect of this is that the 
trigger  would  lie  outside  the  controls  of  emerging  market’s  policymakers  since  the  flows 
would be the results of market conditions and policy prescription elsewhere.  
Let me now turn to my second observation on the implications that the changing nature of 
future crises can have for the conduct of EWE going forward. On this, I have four points to 
make.  
First, in view of the changing nature of future crises, it is therefore important that the thrust of 
the EWE is mindful of this possibility. In my view, the focus of EWE should expand beyond 
macro-misalignments based on historical relationships to include assessing the robustness 
and  the  resiliency  of  the  systemically-important  markets,  system,  and  institutions.  This 
means the key objective of EWE will not be to forecast future crises per se, but to identify 
vulnerabilities  in  the  most  important  areas  in  advance,  especially  those  risks  that  are  not 
covered by market data or by the surveillance process elsewhere.  
Second, for EWE to be effective and comprehensive, it should be done at two levels to cover 
both the global dimension and the country-specific dimension of risk. The global dimension 
must be the responsibilities of the IMF and the FSB given their comparative advantage as 
international  organization.  And  as  I  already  noted,  EWE  by  the  IMF  and  the  FSB  should 
focus on monitoring the development of risk in the key global financial markets, risk linked to 
activities  of  the  internationally-important  financial  institutions,  and  the  economic  conditions 
and policies of the systemically-important economies. These are the areas of risk that have 
global-wide implications but are not being monitored sufficiently relative to their importance.  
Third, the focus of the EWE at the country-level also needs to expand beyond detecting and 
avoiding  local  macro-misalignments,  and  to  include  assessment  of  the  resiliency  and 
robustness  of  the  domestic  economy  and  financial  system  to  withstand  large  external 
shocks. The key point here is that, even with good policies, crisis can happen to an economy 
if the externally-induced factors overwhelm the abilities and the robustness of the domestic 
economy to cope with.  
2 
 BIS Review 19/2010
And forth, the value of early warning is that warning leads to the needed actions being taken 
in advance. This means the EWE process should serve to facilitate actions to deal with the 
important  risk  and  issues  by  the  relevant  parties.  To  serve  this  end,  credibility  and 
effectiveness of the EWE depends on appropriate degree of transparency of the structural 
models and its appropriateness to the context, whether national or markets, as much as its 
track record.  
In closing, let me summarize my points in the form of suggestions for the current efforts on 
the EWE.  
First, the focus of EWE should expand beyond detecting misalignments to include assessing 
vulnerabilities and robustness of the global markets, system, and institutions. 
Second,  EWE  should  be  a  two-level  process.  The  global  level  process  focuses  on  the 
systemically important markets, institutions, and economies. At this level, the FSB can play a 
role  in  ensuring  consistent  implementation  of  regulatory  standards,  as  well  as  undertaking 
stress-testing to check the robustness and the resilience of the key markets, institutions, and 
system.  Likewise,  EWE  at  the  country-level,  which  can  be  a  part  of  the  normal  article  IV 
cycle, should have an additional focus on stress-testing the resiliency of the economy and 
domestic financial system to large external shocks. The shock scenario can be a common 
set of assumptions provided by the IMF for all countries and draws on EWE findings at the 
global level. This will provide a good connection between the perceived global systemic risk 
and the abilities of the individual economies to handle them.  
Lastly,  EWE  must  be  part  of  a  global  policy  process,  in  that  information  of  EWE  must  be 
used and if needed leads to timely policy action. On this note, increased transparency of the 
process, as well as its recommendations, can be a way of allowing market to have a view 
and force the issue.  
I  hope  this  has  been  useful.  Let  me  stop  here  and  again  I  want  to  thank  the  IMF  for  the 
invitation. Thank you.  
BIS Review 19/2010 
 3
