Axel A Weber: International risk sharing and global imbalances 
Concluding remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the Bundesbank Spring Conference on “International Risk Sharing and Global Imbalances”, 
Eltville, Germany, 28 May 2010. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Before this spring conference on “International Risk Sharing and Global Imbalances” comes 
to an end, I would like to thank you for your contributions, your interesting papers and your 
enlightening discussions. For me as a central banker and a former academic, the conference 
was highly stimulating. The topic of the conference was well chosen, as there is a continuing 
debate on the role of global imbalances and international financial integration as an amplifier 
or even a cause of the current financial crisis. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  degree  of  international  financial  integration  has  determined  the 
size of the crisis and the speed with which it has spread. The quick spillover of the financial 
turmoil  from  the  US  housing  market,  where  it  started  in  the  summer  of  2007,  to  financial 
markets  all  over  the  world  and  the  fact  that  virtually  all  industrialised  countries  have  been 
affected  are  unprecedented.  A  more  subtle  question  is  the  extent  to  which  financial 
integration  and  global  imbalances  contributed  to  its  emergence.  However,  this  question 
cannot be addressed without looking at deficiencies in the structure of the financial market 
such as developments in the risk transfer process and regulatory failure, which have been 
rightly identified as the major causes of the financial crisis. Let me therefore first address the 
interdependencies between financial market integration, global imbalances and the financial 
crisis. Thereafter, I will briefly comment on the global reform process, which is under way. 
Global imbalances in the light of the financial crisis 
2. 
Opinions  differ  greatly  on  the  extent  to  which  global  imbalances  have  contributed  to  the 
financial crisis. Whereas some economists believe that the imbalances are not closely linked 
to the financial crisis, others argue that they have been one of its main causes. These are 
both extreme positions and, as is often the case, the truth may lie somewhere in-between. 
The  line  of  argument  put  forward  by  Obstfeld  and  Rogoff  is  fairly  convincing,  namely  that 
global  imbalances  and  the  financial  crisis  have  common  causes  and  that  international 
financial integration was an important factor contributing to the build-up of global imbalances. 
It is these causes, not the resulting current account positions, that we should focus on. 
Of course, without the integrated financial system, deficit countries would not have been able to 
maintain the persistently high private and public spending we observed in the decades before 
the  financial  crisis.  By  implication,  export-oriented  countries  accumulated  unprecedented 
amounts  of  wealth  abroad,  even  though  the  underlying  mechanisms  were  quite  different. 
Naturally, in this global setting, financial innovation went hand in hand with the transfer of huge 
amounts of funds from surplus to deficit countries. It is important to note that the emergence of 
current  account  deficits  and  surpluses  is  not  bad  per  se.  For  an  economy  with  an  ageing 
population,  for  example,  current  account  surpluses  and  the  associated  accumulation  of  net 
foreign wealth might well be a reasonable and efficient market outcome as its consumption rate 
is  expected  to  grow  in  the  future.  As  long  as  the  global  distribution  of  production  and 
consumption reflects undistorted saving and investment decisions that put capital to the most 
productive  use,  it  contributes  to  global  growth  and  prosperity.  In  the  same  vein,  financial 
innovation generally has positive effects, as it provides access to high-yield investment projects 
and thereby allows better risk sharing and lifecycle consumption smoothing. 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 1
However, we know that in reality both processes have not always functioned that well. The 
undervaluation  of  exchange  rates  due  to  fixed  exchange-rate  regimes  in  some  emerging 
market  economies  as  well  as  the  false  perception  of  wealth  which  accompanied  the 
emergence  of  asset  price  bubbles  have  distorted  the  global  distribution  of  production  and 
consumption and caused a build-up of global imbalances. In addition, the financial crisis has 
revealed  serious  deficiencies  in  the  process  of  financial  innovation  and  international  risk 
sharing,  which  were  not  only  harmful  and  inefficient  per  se  but  also  further  promoted  the 
build-up  of  global  imbalances.  Instead  of  reducing  risk  and  increasing  transparency,  the 
process  of  global  capital  transfer  via  highly  structured  products  encouraged  savers  to 
accumulate  more  risk  than  they  were  aware  of  and  than  they  could  afford,  which  in  turn 
reduced  borrowers’  discipline  rather  than  ensuring  it.  The  paper  by  Mendoza  and  his 
co-author “Financial Innovation, the Discovery of Risk and the US Credit Crisis” presented at 
this  conference  sheds  light  on  the  underlying  mechanism  by  which  insufficient  knowledge 
about the true riskiness of the financial environment – which was, as we know today, the rule 
rather than the exception in the years preceding the financial crisis – can lead to a period of 
over-optimism 
to 
underestimate the deterioration of economic fundamentals and to over-borrow. The following 
readjustment,  by  contrast,  may  cause  a  credit  crunch,  a  surge  in  private  savings  and 
therefore a collapse in consumption. 
In the course of the crisis, many of  these effects along with a serious economic downturn 
could  be  observed  in  most  industrialised  countries.  Moreover,  global  trade  declined 
dramatically when the financial crisis spread to the real economy, a development which also 
hit the previously fairly unaffected emerging market economies. Overall, the extent and the 
depth  of  the  recent  crisis  have  raised  awareness  that  the  ongoing  global  integration  of 
financial  markets  and  economic  activities  increases  the  vulnerability  of  the  whole  system 
despite the unquestionable positive effects with which it is associated. With the stabilisation 
of the markets and the incipient recovery, the focus has therefore shifted from managing the 
current crisis to preventing future crises. Given the international dimension of the crisis, this 
process is rightly taking place at the international level. In the following, I would like to outline 
the main elements of the reform process initiated by the G20 in order to create a more stable 
financial system. 
financial  markets. 
this  situation, 
investors  are 
inclined 
the 
In 
in 
Elements of the regulatory reform process 
3. 
A  cornerstone  of  the  attempt  to  create  a  more  stable  financial  system  is  the  reform  of 
banking  regulation.  Thereby  we  should  begin  with  the  individual  bank  ?  that  is,  on  the 
microprudential level of regulation. The relevant regulatory framework on this level are the 
Basel II rules, which have been implemented by a large number of countries. As the crisis 
revealed some shortcomings of the Basel II framework, the G20 commissioned the Financial 
Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to work towards a reform of 
the current rules. A first set of relevant measures was published in the summer of 2009 as a 
direct reaction to the subprime crisis. Among others, these measures include stricter capital 
requirements  for  market  risk  and  securitisation  as  well  as  heightened  risk  management 
requirements. Additional proposals were put forward in December 2009. Aiming at enhancing 
the resilience of the banking sector, these proposals include a new liquidity standard as well 
as  a  revised  definition  of  capital,  which  should  increase  its  quality,  consistency  and 
transparency. Apart from that, the introduction of countercyclical capital buffers should help 
to  mitigate  procyclicality.  Furthermore,  the  introduction  of  a  leverage  ratio  is  planned  to 
alleviate a problem which is addressed in another paper presented at this conference. Tille 
and  his  co-authors  highlight  the  danger  which  highly  leveraged  institutions  present  for 
financial  and  macroeconomic  stability  in  their  paper  “Rational  Risk  Panics”.  Throughout 
2010,  the  proposed  measures  will  be  calibrated  on  the  basis  of  an  extensive  quantitative 
impact study. The fully calibrated set of measures will then be issued by the end of 2010 and 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2010
the new standards will be phased in by the end of 2012 provided that economic recovery is 
assured. 
Although the envisaged reforms will strengthen the existing rules, they will not change their 
underlying  principles.  In  essence,  the  Basel  II  framework  seeks  to  limit  banks’  risk-taking 
behaviour  by  making  it  more  expensive  and  thus  less  attractive.  Against  this  backdrop, 
recent proposals to prohibit certain risky activities altogether pursue a more radical course. 
One  fundamental  problem  of  such  an  approach  is  that  the  complete  prohibition  of  certain 
activities is a very far-reaching market intervention, especially since these activities do not 
necessarily have zero economic value-added. Contrary to the Basel II approach, the penalty 
imposed on risky activities would become infinite. Thus, given the inherent trade-off between 
the  efficiency  costs  of  intervention  and  its  benefits,  a  reformed  Basel  II  framework  might 
provide a more balanced solution. This is also the case with regard to the introduction of an 
additional tax for the banking sector. Even though such a tax could be useful in recouping 
some of the costs of the crisis, it is an inferior instrument in terms of internalising the effects 
of risky activities on financial stability. Hence, the reform of the Basel II framework is rightly 
given preference by regulators and should be implemented with priority by policymakers. 
Regardless  of  its  actual  design,  the  general  objective  of  regulation  on  the  microprudential 
level is to have a first line of defence by reducing the likelihood of individual bank failures. 
However,  given  our  globalised  and  interconnected  world  and  the  interdependence  of 
financial  institutions  and  markets,  even  the  failure  of  a  single  institution  might  lead  to 
systemic  disruptions.  Thus,  it  is  necessary  to  complement  a  strengthened  microprudential 
regulation  with  a  macroprudential  stance  which  as  a  second  line  of  defence  takes  into 
account the stability of the financial system as a whole. One major aspect of macroprudential 
regulation would be the treatment of systemically important financial institutions. Although the 
revised  Basel  II  framework  is  part  of  a  solution  to  this  problem,  broader  reforms  are 
necessary.  These  might  include  capital  surcharges  for  systemically  important  institutions, 
better resolution regimes as well as a stronger market infrastructure. 
On the whole, the G20 agenda is a very ambitious endeavour to strengthen the resilience of 
the financial system. Many of the regulations I have mentioned are highly complex, and the 
right  calibration  is  very  important.  Therefore,  economic  research  plays  a  crucial  role  in 
ensuring  the  success  of  the  initiated  reforms.  This  is  particularly  true  of  the  design  of 
procyclical capital buffers and surcharges for systemically important financial institutions. But 
of  course  there  are  many  other  very  interesting  strands  of  research,  some  of  which  have 
been covered at this conference. Quite a few papers aim, for example, to create a deeper 
understanding  of  systemic  risk  and  contagion  mechanisms,  which  are  surely  key  issues 
when it comes to dealing with future crises. In their paper “Structural Estimation of Systemic 
Risk:  Measuring  Contagion  in  the  Sub-Prime  Crisis”,  Rigobon  and  his  co-authors  have 
developed  a  measure  of  international  contagion  which  allows  us  to  assess  the  role  of 
systemic risk for the global economy. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Addressing  the  broader  context  of  global  developments  which  have  contributed  to  the 
financial crisis and in particular the role which global imbalances have played, you have dealt 
with an interesting but also very complex issue at this conference. This question is far from 
being resolved, and I am sure that it will occupy researchers for quite some time to come. 
That is not less the case for those strands of research that deal with how to strengthen the 
financial  system.  Seen  in  this  light,  times  have  seldom  been  as  exciting  for  economic 
research as they are right now. I would like to encourage you to continue with your work and 
wish you much success. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 3
