European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
14 January 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our first 
press conference in 2010. Let me take this opportunity to wish you all a Happy New Year. 
We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was 
also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. Taking 
into account all the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting 
on 3 December 2009, price developments are expected to remain subdued over the policy-
relevant horizon. The latest information has also confirmed that towards the end of 2009 euro 
area  economic  activity  continued  to  expand.  However,  some  of  the  factors  supporting  the 
growth in real GDP are of a temporary nature. Overall, the Governing Council expects the 
euro  area  economy  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace  in  2010,  recognising  that  the  recovery 
process  is  likely  to  be  uneven  and  that  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  uncertainty.  The 
outcome of the monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressure over 
the medium term, given the ongoing parallel decline in money and credit growth. All in all, we 
expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the 
purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  Medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations 
remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following the 0.4% quarter-on-quarter increase in real GDP in the third quarter of 2009, the 
latest  information  confirms  that  towards  the  end  of  last  year  economic  activity  in  the  euro 
area continued to expand. The euro area has been benefiting from a turn in the inventory 
cycle  and  a  recovery  in  exports,  as  well  as  from  the  significant  macroeconomic  stimulus 
under  way  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system. 
However, a number of the supporting factors are of a temporary nature. Furthermore, there is 
likely to be a drag on activity for some time to come on account of the ongoing process of 
balance sheet adjustment in the financial and non-financial sectors, both inside and outside 
the euro area. In addition, low capacity utilisation rates are likely to dampen investment, and 
unemployment in the euro area is expected to increase somewhat further, thereby lowering 
consumption growth. For these reasons, the euro area economy is expected to grow only at 
a moderate pace in 2010 and the recovery process could be uneven. 
The Governing Council continues to view the risks to this outlook as broadly balanced. On 
the  upside,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus being provided and from other policy measures taken. Confidence 
may also improve further, and the global economy as well as foreign trade may recover more 
strongly  than  projected.  On  the  downside,  concerns  remain  relating  to  a  stronger  or  more 
protracted than expected negative feedback loop between the real economy and the financial 
sector,  renewed  increases  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  the  intensification  of 
protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  disruptive  market  movements  related  to  the 
correction of global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, as expected, euro area annual HICP inflation increased 
further in December 2009 to stand at 0.9%, after 0.5% in November. The rise mainly reflects 
upward  base  effects  stemming  mostly  from  the  drop  in  global  energy  prices  a  year  ago. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
Inflation is expected to remain around 1% in the near term. Looking further ahead, inflation is 
expected  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon,  with  overall  price,  cost  and 
wage developments staying subdued in line with a slow recovery in demand in the euro area 
and  elsewhere.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  emphasise,  once  again,  that  inflation 
expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
Risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. They relate, in particular, to the outlook for 
economic activity and the evolution of commodity prices. Furthermore, increases in indirect 
taxation and administered prices may be stronger than currently expected owing to the need 
for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  both  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  and  loans  to  the 
private sector were negative in November, standing at –0.2% and –0.7% respectively. The 
concurrent declines to historically low growth rates recorded in these two series over the past 
months  support  the  assessment  of  a  decelerating  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion 
and low inflationary pressures over the medium term. Looking ahead, M3 and credit growth 
are likely to remain very weak or negative for some time to come. 
The decline in actual monetary growth is likely to overstate the deceleration in the underlying 
pace  of  monetary  expansion.  This  is  due  to  the  continued  steep  slope  of  the  yield  curve, 
which explains shifts of funds out of M3 into longer-term deposits and securities. At the same 
time, the interest rate constellation continues to foster divergent developments in the main 
components  of  M3,  as  the  narrow  spreads  between  the  rates  on  different  short-term  bank 
deposits  reduce  the  opportunity  costs  of  shifting  funds  from,  for  instance,  short-term  time 
deposits into overnight deposits. As a result, M1 continued to grow at a robust annual rate of 
12.6% in November, when annual M3 growth turned negative. 
The negative annual growth of bank loans to the private sector conceals a return to positive 
annual rates of growth in the case of loans to households, while the annual growth of loans 
to non-financial corporations became more negative. Such divergence remains in line with 
business cycle regularities, with turning points in the growth of loans to enterprises typically 
lagging those in economic activity. In the case of households, the latest data provide further 
confirmation  of  a  levelling-off  at  low  rates.  In  the  case  of  non-financial  corporations,  the 
decline in loans continues to reflect mainly a strong net redemption of loans with a shorter 
maturity, while lending and borrowing at longer maturities remained positive. The subdued 
levels of production and trade, as well as the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the business 
outlook, will probably continue to dampen firms’ demand for bank financing in the months to 
come.  In  the  meantime,  financing  conditions  for  enterprises  have  improved  over  recent 
months  in  terms  of  the  cost  of  both  bank  credit  and  market  financing.  In  this  respect,  the 
continued negative flows in short-term bank loans to non-financial corporations observed in 
recent months may partly reflect better possibilities for substitution with different sources of 
longer-term financing.  
Banks  have  continued  to  reduce  the  size  of  their  overall  balance  sheets,  mainly  through 
downsizing the assets held vis-à-vis other banks. The challenge remains to adjust the size 
and structure of balance sheets while ensuring the availability of credit to the non-financial 
sector.  To  address  this  challenge,  banks  should  use  the  improved  funding  conditions  to 
strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  and,  where  necessary,  take  full  advantage  of 
government support measures for recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Taking into account all the 
information  and  analyses  that  have  become  available  since  our  meeting  on  3  December 
2009, price developments are expected to remain subdued over the policy-relevant horizon. 
The latest information has also confirmed that towards the end of 2009 euro area economic 
activity  continued  to  expand.  However,  some  of  the  factors  supporting  the  growth  in  real 
GDP  are  of  a  temporary  nature.  Overall,  the  Governing  Council  expects  the  euro  area 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2010
economy to grow at a moderate pace in 2010, recognising that the recovery process is likely 
to  be  uneven  and  that  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  uncertainty.  A  cross-check  of  the 
outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the 
assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressure  over  the  medium  term,  given  the  ongoing  parallel 
decline in money and credit growth. All in all, we expect price stability to be maintained over 
the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households. 
Medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
We  will  continue  our  enhanced  credit  support  to  the  banking  system,  while  taking  into 
account  the  ongoing  improvement  in  financial  market  conditions  and  avoiding  distortions 
associated with maintaining non-standard measures for too long. The Governing Council will 
also continue to implement the gradual phasing-out of the extraordinary liquidity measures 
that  are  not  needed  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  past.  In  order  to  counter  effectively  any 
threat to price stability over the medium to longer term, the liquidity provided will be absorbed 
when necessary. Accordingly, we will continue to monitor very closely all developments over 
the period ahead. 
As  regards fiscal  policies,  many  euro  area  governments  are  faced  with  high  and  sharply 
rising fiscal imbalances. The very large government borrowing requirements carry the risk of 
triggering rapid changes in market sentiment, leading to less favourable medium and long-
term  market  interest  rates.  This,  in  turn,  would  dampen  private  investment  and  thereby 
weaken the foundations for sustained growth. Moreover, high levels of public deficit and debt 
would  place  an  additional  burden  on  monetary  policy  and  undermine  the  credibility  of  the 
provisions of both the Treaty on European Union and the Stability and Growth Pact as a key 
pillar  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  Governing  Council  therefore  calls  upon 
governments  to  decide  and  implement  in  a  timely  fashion  ambitious  fiscal  exit  and 
consolidation  strategies  based  on  realistic  growth  assumptions,  with  a  strong  focus  on 
expenditure  reforms.  Tax  cuts  should  only  be  considered  over  the  medium  term,  when 
countries  have  regained  sufficient  room  for  budgetary  manoeuvre.  In  this  regard,  current 
government commitments to start consolidation in 2011 at the latest and to go well beyond 
the structural benchmark for adjustment of 0.5% of GDP per annum represent the minimum 
requirement for all euro area countries. The success of fiscal adjustment strategies will also 
depend,  crucially,  on  appropriate  national  budgetary  rules  and  institutions  and  requires 
transparent  budgetary  procedures,  as  well  as  reliable  and  complete  government  finance 
statistics.  
Turning to structural reforms, an appropriate restructuring of the banking sector should play 
an important role. Sound balance sheets, effective risk management, and transparent as well 
as  robust  business  models  are  key  to  strengthening  banks’  resilience  to  shocks,  thereby 
laying the foundations for sustainable economic growth and financial stability.  
The Eurosystem will submit its response to the European Commission’s public consultation 
on the EU 2020 strategy, which is designed as a successor to the current Lisbon strategy. To 
address future challenges, the EU 2020 strategy should focus on raising potential growth and 
creating  high  levels  of  employment  through  well-functioning  labour  and  product  markets, 
sound  financial  systems  and  sustainable  fiscal  policies.  The  aim  is  to  achieve  a  highly 
competitive social market economy, as spelled out in the Treaty.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 3
