Subir Gokarn: Interview with Business Standard 
Interview with Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, conducted by 
the Business Standard, Mumbai, 1 February 2010. 
 Friday’s  was  the  first  monetary  policy  that  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Deputy  Governor  Subir 
Gokarn has been involved with directly, and the experience has been rewarding. “The rigour 
of the process was a revelation,” one of the youngest deputy governors that the central bank 
has had says. In his first interview to a newspaper after taking charge two months earlier, 
Gokarn, 50, explains the rationale for the measures. Edited excerpts: 
The  RBI  Governor  compared  himself  with  Abhimanyu  in  the  Mahabharata.  How 
difficult is the situation?  
The context for that is that it was very easy to do what was done in October 2008 onwards. 
Once the severity of the crisis was recognised, a lot of actions were taken in a very short 
period of time which completely changed the balance of the policy stance. Obviously, there is 
a need to correct it now and to take it to normalcy. So, when you start moving towards that, 
even if it is a correct thing to do, it can be potentially disruptive. Returning from the situation, 
the sequence, and pacing the activity is going to be critical. Going forward, that’s really the 
challenge. 
RBI expects the government to do quite a few things. The policy statement also makes 
a lot of assumptions. What happens if these are not met? 
The commitment made in the last Budget was that the fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP 
will be 5.5 per cent in 2010–11. There is no basis for us to assume that it will be anything 
different.  So,  our  estimate  of  the  funding  requirement  in  order  to  support  the  government 
borrowing programme, as well as the growing demand for credit from the private sector, has 
been factored into our decision while increasing the cash reserve ratio by 75 basis points. 
The  policies  we  make  today  are  because  of  what  we  believe  the  macroeconomic 
environment will be over the next few months. 
So,  we  have  to  assume  certain  things  on  growth,  inflation,  liquidity,  fiscal  deficit,  market 
borrowings and capital inflows. In that assessment, we have to allow, and have indeed done 
so, for some cushion if some of these assumptions go wrong. 
Capital  flows  are  a  worry.  Have  you  factored  in  the  possibility  of  intervening  in  the 
market and using instruments to check capital inflows? 
An  important  lesson  from  2006  onwards  is  that  nothing  should  be  off  the  table.  When  we 
went in for market stabilisation bonds, it was on the basis of the recognition that conventional 
instruments were not adequate. In September–October 2004 and since December 2006, we 
reverted to the use of CRR (Cash Reserve Ratio) as an instrument of liquidity management. 
Earlier,  the position  was  that  we  would  try  and  wean  ourselves  away  from  the  use  of  that 
instrument and focus only on policy rates. But, we are now using it (CRR) actively. 
The  same  criterion  applies  to  any  measure  that  might  relate  to  capital  inflows,  whether 
quantity  restrictions  or  price  restrictions.  There  is,  currently,  no  proposal  to  use  either  of 
these but if the situation warrants, we will not deny ourselves the opportunity of using them. 
What is your estimate of the current account deficit for 2010–11? 
We have not put out a formal assessment but we do not see any threat. In any event, we do 
expect that capital inflows will be more than adequate to cover the current account deficit. 
We have to decide on how we are going to manage the balance of payment surplus. There is 
no intervention in the exchange rate market with an exchange rate target in mind. Look at the 
exchange rate movement during the last couple of years – from a bottom of around Rs 52 (a 
BIS Review 12/2010 
 1
dollar)  to  a  top  of  Rs  39.  Such  a  wide  variation  does  not  suggest  management  of  the 
exchange rate. 
Volatility may be managed but the levels over this period of time have not. At the same time, 
we cannot ignore the fact that massive swings in the exchange rate are disruptive, as many 
stakeholders do not have the capacity to mitigate foreign exchange risk. Developments like 
foreign exchange futures obviously help and we are moving further down that road. 
RBI has projected 7.5 per cent GDP growth and then talked about unbalanced growth. 
How do you reconcile the two? 
If  you  focus  on  the  aggregate,  the  number  looks  reasonable.  But,  when  you  look  at  the 
disaggregated  picture,  it  is  still  an  unbalanced  recovery.  There  is  still  a  relatively  high 
dependence on government spending. What this tells you is that the private sector is yet to 
provide  full  comfort  in  terms  of  its  participation  in  the  recovery  process.  So,  that  is  a  risk. 
Similarly,  some  sectors  such  as  consumer  durables  and  automobiles  are  doing  very  well, 
while others are sluggish. Again, this suggests a narrow set of drivers  and there are risks 
inherent in that. We do not overplay the risks, but we cannot ignore these either. It is quite 
likely that our stance would have been different if we had much greater comfort in the broad-
basing of the recovery. 
RBI has made money more expensive without hiking rates. Was the central bank a bit 
too hawkish? 
The  objective  (of  the  75  basis  point  CRR  hike)  was  to  extract  excess  liquidity  from  the 
system.  That’s  because  we  are  looking  at  a  situation  where  food  inflation  is  clearly  a 
problem.  As  the  recovery  gains  momentum,  which  is  what  we  expect,  the  risks  of  food 
inflation spilling over into more generalised inflationary pressures increase. Our approach to 
mitigating  that  risk  is  by  anchoring  inflationary  expectations,  to  which  excess  liquidity 
contributes. 
When we looked at an increase of 50 basis points as the possible starting point, we felt it 
would  not  be  enough.  We  felt  that  a  75-basis  point  hike  would  provide  a  better  balance 
between anchoring inflationary expectations and sustaining the momentum of the recovery. 
The goal was certainly not to surprise the market. 
What  is  RBI’s  assessment  on  credit  flow?  If  the  overall  liquidity  for  the  last  two 
months  is  still  around  Rs  100,000–110,000  crore,  then  the  credit  growth  that  banks 
have been talking about is not there. 
The projection for credit growth is a function of a number of things. Some sectors are doing 
better than the others, but overall demand for credit is still relatively sluggish. Corporates are 
using alternate sources of funding and internal accruals. So, when growth picks up, as we 
expect in 2010–11, it will have some impact on credit growth. We will have some indication of 
the borrowing schedule after the Budget and we will ensure the liquidity scenario does not 
become destabilising for growth. 
You have talked about real estate prices. How big is the threat to the banking system 
and was there some talk of putting some checks on lending? 
We  don’t  have  a  view  on  what  real  estate  prices  should  be.  The  concern  is  driven  by  the 
degree  of  exposure  the  financial  sector  has  to  the  sector  and  whether  that  exposure  is  a 
source  of  risk  that  could  destabilise  the  system.  If  we  feel  the  exposure  is  becoming 
threatening, we will take measures. We don’t want to do anything directly to real estate. We 
don’t want to tell banks not to lend to real estate, but banks need to be aware of the risks 
their exposures to this sector add to their portfolios. 
What are RBI’s expectations from banks? 
One, the needs of the legitimate borrowers should be met fairly. This applies to small and 
medium  enterprises,  as  there  is  a  perception  of  inadequate  flow  to  this  segment  and  it  is 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2010
hurting the ability of these businesses to take advantage of the recovery. Two, it is important 
to play safe. Here, in the context of segments such as real estate, banks should not jump on 
opportunities that appear very attractive in the short term, while compromising on prudence. 
We do not want to squeeze the recovery and deny the needs for financing, but we do not 
want them to go overboard in risk taking. That’s the balance we are expecting. 
How big is the threat of large bad debt on the restructured portfolio? 
It is clearly something you need to watch out for. It may put some stress on certain individual 
banks. When the restructuring option was given, it was based on the premise that genuine 
borrowers  in  distress  as  a  result  of  the  liquidity  squeeze  would  be  subject  to  that 
restructuring.  The  risk  was  that  assets  that  were  not  fundamentally  sound  would  also  be 
given the option. You cannot blame the concept of restructuring. 
Some  automobile  companies  said  yesterday  that  the  sales  momentum  would  lose 
steam after the CRR hike. 
Let me use an automotive analogy. If you are driving a car at 100 kmph and know the road 
ends five kms later, what do you do? Do you begin to gradually apply the brakes now or do 
you wait till you are near the end of the road and then slam the brakes? Both are legitimate 
options:  the  question  is  which  is  riskier.  We  clearly  take  the  view  that  if  we  see  a  barrier, 
which is now in the form of inflationary pressure building up, it is better to use the first option 
and gently apply the brakes. This way, you gradually adjust to the optimal speed and it is 
safer than the second option which can throw a lot of things out of gear. 
Outside RBI, people  always wonder how  much backseat driving is done from Delhi. 
Now  that  you  have  been  in  RBI  for  a  while,  do  you  find  an  element  of  backseat 
driving? 
At the end of the day, we basically want the same thing, which is growth with stability. We 
want growth to be as high as possible, we want inflation to be as low as possible, we want 
financial  stability  and  we  want  stability  on  the  external  front.  At  any  given  point  in  time, 
priorities may differ somewhat, but the overall framework is one of co-ordination. We have 
said in our policy that the government should bring the fiscal situation under control. Would 
you accuse us of backseat driving? 
Next year, private sector loan demand will pick up, while government borrowings will 
remain around the same level and inflows are expected to rise. So, will it be one of the 
tougher years from the policy making perspective? 
There is some notion of a trend rate of growth, say, in the 8–9 per cent range. If the economy 
grows  beyond  that  trend,  that  is  overheating.  We  cannot  remain  over  the  trend  for  a  long 
period of time without stoking inflationary pressure, for the simple reason that the economy 
does not have the capacity to grow faster than that rate. If the factors you are talking about 
take  the  economy  above  the  trend,  the  risks  of  overheating  develop  and  from  a  macro-
economic stability perspective, we have to address those. 
Our  focus  is  on  whether  this  is  being  done  within  the  overall  capacity  of  the  economy  to 
sustain that growth rate. If growth is above trend, we need to find ways of dampening. There 
is some difficulty, of course, in identifying what the sustainable trend is in such a dynamic 
and volatile environment. This is an ongoing analytical objective. 
This is your first monetary policy. What are your first impressions about RBI? 
The  process  is  very  intense  and  the  amount  of  information  and  analysis  that  comes  in  is 
much larger than I appreciated as an outsider. What I have discovered is that the density of 
information and the amount of processing is huge. So, the confidence in the correctness of 
the decision is far more than it would have been, based on the data that I had available to me 
on the outside. It’s an extremely consultative process, both internally and externally, with RBI 
staff from many departments, banks and other market participants. The rigour of the process 
was a revelation; I did not appreciate it from the outside. 
BIS Review 12/2010 
 3
