Ewart S Williams: Opportunities available for business growth in 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Employers’ Consultative Association Conference, Port-of-Spain, 21 January 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  commend  the  Employers’  Consultative  Association  (ECA)  for  staging  this 
conference  that  brings  together  the  employer  community  to  exchange  ideas  on  how  best 
they could build and sustain their competitiveness in today’s highly volatile environment. This 
discussion is most timely since the economy is now at an important inflexion point, at which 
we need to devise new strategies to maintain our growth momentum and living standards, 
over the medium term. 
It is worth noting that we are essentially a private sector economy and that real economic 
growth on a sustainable basis could only be generated by the private sector. I would go 
further to add that while the energy sector has brought us to where we are, given its future 
prospects,  it  is  going  to  be  the  non-energy  private  sector,  to  take  us  the  rest  of  the 
journey.  
The private sector now faces several challenges but a whole host of opportunities.  
As you know, the economy registered very rapid growth in the period 2001–2007, when real 
GDP increased at an annual rate of 7.6 per cent. While growth in the period was driven by 
the expansion of the energy sector, reflecting in the main, the establishment of liquid gas and 
other  petro-chemical  facilities,  the  non-energy  sector  also  expanded  briskly  –  at  a  rate  of 
5.4 per cent per year.  
What was interesting though was that the major growth drivers in the non-energy sector were 
construction, banking and real estate, and distribution (wholesale and retail). Manufacturing 
did  reasonably  well  but  on  the  basis  of  domestic  demand,  with  the  data  suggesting  that 
there was a leveling-off of non-energy exports.  
I  should  note,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  that  the  behaviour  of  the  economy  in  this  period  of 
surging oil and gas prices was not atypical for a resource-based economy and in fact, it was 
consistent with a thesis called “Dutch disease”. In line with this “thesis”, the buoyant energy 
sector spawned a boom in government revenues and expenditures, high inflation and wage 
increases,  a  loss  of  competitiveness  of  the  non-energy  export  sector  and  increased 
investment  in  non-tradable,  such  as,  real  estate  and  retail  establishments  (stores,  and 
restaurants and so on).  
With this pattern of development there was only limited diversification of the non-energy 
sector. In principle, this scenario could continue for a while, once the oil and gas industries 
continue to provide increasing amounts of foreign exchange to finance increasing imports of 
food,  for  the  construction  sector  (which  is  heavily  import-intensive)  and  for  the  retail 
industries.  
Since mid-2008 our economy has gone into a downturn similar to that of so many developed 
and developing economies all over the world. The indicators suggest that there has been a 
reduction  in  private  consumption  as  well  as  in  business  investment.  Activity  is  now  being 
sustained,  even  more  than  previously,  by  government  expenditures.  Clearly,  this  is  not 
sustainable.  While  some  of  the  current  stagnation  may  be  cyclical,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
something fundamental has changed. Going forward, it’s more than likely that fiscal policy 
will need to be more constrained to avoid an unacceptable public debt burden; and that the 
private sector will need to assume a greater role in driving the economy.  
BIS Review 7/2010 
 1
It is my view, ladies and gentlemen, that the uncertainties that surround our energy sector 
(including  the  maturing  oil  fields  and  the  pressures  to  reduce  global  energy  demand), 
combined with the impact of the international economic crisis, which has not yet fully run its 
course, make it very clear that we will have to find alternative growth sources to complement 
the energy sector, if we are to attain medium-term economic sustainability.  
All private sector business activities (including small and micro business activity) benefit the 
economy in some way. They meet specific consumer needs and they provide employment 
and income. For medium-term sustainability, however, we need a diversification strategy that 
focuses  on  sectors  that  exploit  our  comparative  advantage  and  which  are  efficient  and 
globally  competitive.  For  sustainability,  we  need  to  develop  more  of  those  activities  that 
generate foreign exchange or that save on foreign exchange.  
Against this background, our economy faces both immediate and longer-term challenges.  
The  immediate  challenge  is  to  spur  a  recovery  in  economic  activity  after  a  prolonged 
downturn. This afternoon the Central Bank will announce data for 2009, which suggest that 
real growth declined in the third quarter of 2009, making it the fourth consecutive quarter of 
GDP decline. The indicators suggest that private sector construction remains depressed; that 
private  sector  investment  in  the  non-energy  sector  is  at  a  low  point  and  that  the 
manufacturing sector is operating with significant spare capacity.  
The stagnation in economic activity is reflected, in a tangible way in the absolute decline in 
bank credit outstanding. After increasing by 13.7 per cent year on-year in 2008, bank credit 
outstanding  declined  by  4  per  cent  in  the  year  to  November  2009.  This  is  a  significant 
reversal. The absence of credit demand is being reflected in record levels of excess liquidity 
and historically low savings rates.  
Notwithstanding Government’s expansionary fiscal stance, to facilitate an economic rebound 
in  2010,  there  must  be  some  resurgence  in  business  activity.  And,  this  is  not  as  far 
fetched as some would like to believe as many of the pre-conditions for such a rebound 
already exist. Let me cite a few:  
• 
Inflation has come down sharply, to the lowest level in decades. This, together with 
the slack in labor markets, should result in an easing of wage pressures, which 
should help business recovery.  
Oil and gas prices have stabilized at higher prices than we expected a year ago. 
Oil prices, which were targeted in the budget at US$55 per barrel are now hovering 
between US$75–US$80 per barrel. Gas prices, which were targeted in the budget at 
US$2.75 per mmbtu are now in the region of $5.00–$6.00 per mmbtu.  
 These higher prices are important for several reasons.  
• 
First, the record shows that strong oil and gas prices serve to bolster consumer and 
business confidence.  
Second, these higher prices should strengthen fiscal performance, compared with 
budget, reducing the projected budget deficit, thus supporting subdued inflation, low 
interest rates and a strong foreign reserve position. All these factors are conducive 
to an economic rebound.  
Banks’  lending  rates  are  the  lowest  they  have  been  in  years  and  banks  have  an 
abundance of funds for credit expansion. And with interest rates likely to remain low 
for some time, private construction and other projects, which were postponed for the 
last year, could now be taken up.  
Indications are that recovery in regional markets that rely on tourism and workers’ 
remittances  will  lag  behind  that  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  For  a  while,  therefore, 
business activity will need to rely even more than before, on the domestic market. 
   2 
 BIS Review 7/2010
However, the replenishment of inventories, after a year of de-stocking, should also 
provide for an increase in domestic demand.  
But the immediate urgency of an  economic rebound in 2010,  should not blind us to the 
overriding  longer  term  goal,  which  is  the  achievement  of  self-sustaining  growth  to 
maintain  our  living  standards.  To  achieve  this,  a  meaningful  economic  diversification 
should be our overwhelming policy objective.  
As  indicated  in  the  Government’s  Vision  2020  strategy,  diversification  should  be  pursued 
through  the  creation  of  new  businesses  producing  high-end  goods  and  services  that  are 
globally  competitive.  This  strategy  imposes  responsibilities  on  the  state  as  well  as  on  the 
private sector.  
I am certain that over the past few years, both the state and the private sector have taken 
important  steps  towards  setting  the  basis  for  economic  diversification.  However,  as  I  saw 
somewhere, “an international crisis is a terrible thing to waste”, the implication being that 
we should convert our current mis-fortunes into an opportunity to finally diversify the 
economy, while some energy sector revenues are still forthcoming.  
What are the primary obligations of the state in respect of economic diversification?  
At  the  macro-economic  level,  Government’s  role  is  the  provision  of  the  public  goods  and 
services  that  are  essential  to  the  growth  process.  Thus,  the  focus  should  be  on  the 
improvement of our economic infrastructure – specifically roads, water, electricity, ports and 
so on. Government has indeed announced sizable investment programmes in these areas, 
starting this fiscal year. Government has also been paying great emphasis on education and 
training. Hopefully this emphasis would serve to create a culture that institutionalizes 
continuous learning and a “can do” attitude which is critical for an environment conducive 
to innovation.  
The  Government  also  has  responsibility  for  maintaining  an  enabling  environment.  While 
there  are  several  elements  under  this  heading  (including  macro-economic  stability), 
“business facilitation” is one that requires particular attention.  
Based  on  data  from  the  World  Bank’s  study  Doing  Business  2010,  compared  with  other 
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago fares rather poorly as 
regards  the  time  required  to  set  up  a  business  (to  get  the  necessary  approvals  and 
permits  etc.),  and  as  regards  enforcing  contracts.  Many  of  our  competitors  have 
overhauled  business  registration  procedures  with  the  use  of  online  systems,  for  example. 
Many of our competitors have established efficient “one-stop” shops to reduce cumbersome 
bureaucracy. The greater use of the electronic payments methods, updated bankruptcy laws 
and more efficient property registration procedures would also help certainly reduce the cost 
of doing business.  
The Government has made efforts at trade facilitation – specifically through the conclusion of 
several  free  trade  agreements  and  double  taxation  treaties.  However,  from  the  data 
available, the expansion of trade under these agreements has been limited to date.  
As  for  the  private  sector  responsibilities,  you  business  people  know  that  creating  and 
sustaining  viable  competitive  industries,  require  an  intensified  focus  on  productivity 
enhancement. Increasing productivity has become even more important as China, India 
and other emerging market countries increase their presence in the world economy.  
Our businesses need to make more efficient use of labor and capital through continuous job 
training, greater use of modern IT and ICT technology and ongoing innovation. And under 
innovation, I include more efficient processes and new products, as well as the development 
of new technology.  
It is my view, ladies and gentlemen, that our current economic challenges present us with a 
golden  opportunity  for  advancing  an  agenda  of  social  partnerships  among  the 
Government,  business  and  labour.  The  conventional  approach  to  business  development 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 3
requires that entrepreneurs read price and market signals, and invest in response to these 
signals.  
More  and  more  emerging  market  countries  are  supplementing  this  market  model  with  an 
industrial  policy  strategy  that  involves  close  collaboration  between  government  and 
business in selected industries, with the Government helping in research and development, 
training,  market  development  and  even  joint  in  venture  financing.  In  many  cases, 
Government’s assistance is time-bound to the early stages of business development when 
the risks are greatest. Many countries also stipulate that once these businesses are up and 
running they should be available for public participation.  
There  are  many  other  initiatives  that  would  certainly  facilitate  the  needed  diversification 
effort. I am referring, for example, to the broadening of the capital market to provide more 
risk capital; expanded financing arrangements, including venture capital for small business 
financing and greater exploitation of the advantages we possess for outsourcing (including 
through the International Financial Centre).  
Many  business  sector  leaders  argue  that  fiscal  incentives  are  the  key  to  business 
expansion. I am not totally against fiscal incentives but I wonder whether their impact is not 
exaggerated. Many available fiscal incentives are not fully utilized and even those that are, 
have not provided the necessary impetus for business expansion and development.  
I  believe  that  there  is  a  case  for  targeted  fiscal  incentives  that  are  tied  to  employment 
creation, new markets, training, and research and development. I believe also that, in the 
final analysis, what will spur the diversification of the economy is a tax system with low rates 
that is simple, equitable and efficient.  
I would like to end by reiterating that our medium term economic fortunes are in your hands. 
The country depends on you, as private sector entrepreneurs, to take risks and to innovate; 
to be more aggressive in seeking out investment opportunities; and to plan for the long-term. 
You must rise to this challenge if the business sector is to expand and if the economy is to 
enjoy sustained growth. I am confident that you have the capacity to do this because you 
have so demonstrated in the past.  
I wish you a very productive and rewarding two-day conference.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2010
