Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Empowering entrepreneurial Filipinos thru 
microfinance 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  2010  Microentrepreneur  of  the  Year  official  launch, 
Manila, 21 May 2010. 
 Fellow advocates of the microfinance sector, good afternoon and congratulations! Yes, ladies 
and gentlemen, we have many reasons to celebrate.  
First, this annual national search for outstanding Filipino microentrepeneurs is on its 8th year. 
This speaks well of the commitment of those involved in this program.  
And so, let us give a big hand to Citi Philippines headed by Sanjiv Vohra; the Microfinance 
Council of the Philippines headed by Mr. Ruben de Lara; the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and 
my fellow central bankers; and finally my hardworking co-members at the National Selection 
Committee  which  includes  Philippine  Daily  Inquirer  Chairperson  Marixi  Rufino-Prieto; 
SM Investments  Vice  Chairperson  Tessie  Sy-Coson;  former  MBM  Antonino  Alindogan; 
GMA Network CEO Atty. Felipe Gozon; Go Negosyo Movement Head and RFM Corporation 
CEO Joey Concepcion; Chair of the Leadership and Strategy Department of the Ateneo de 
Manila University and Finance Educator of the Year Dr. Darwin Yu; and Ayala Corporation 
President  Fernando  Zobel  de  Ayala.  They  are  not  only  hardworking  judges,  they  are  also 
deeply engaged in supporting microentrepreneurs. Palakpakan po natin silang lahat.  
Another  reason  to  celebrate  is  the  continued  growth  and  development  of  the  microfinance 
sector  in  the  Philippines  that  has  produced  so  many  inspiring  success  stories.  This  has 
allowed us to sustain our annual search across the country. Of course, this has made the 
work  of  the  National  Selection  Committee  members  more  difficult  but  ultimately  more 
satisfying. Let us therefore celebrate the transformative power of microfinance with a round 
of applause. 
I am also pleased to report that our efforts to promote microfinance and financial inclusion in 
our country have placed us in the international radar screen. In particular, survey results of 
the  First  Annual  Global  Microfinance  Index  and  Study  –  which  was  conducted  by  the 
Economist Intelligence Unit of The Economist Group – measured the state of the regulatory 
framework, investment climate and institutional development.  
Overall,  the  Philippines  ranked  3rd  out  of  55  countries,  next  to  usual  leaders  Peru  and 
Bolivia.  Further,  the  Philippines  ranked  1st  overall  in  the  area  of  regulatory  framework. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  survey  results  reflected  the  gains  we  have  made  together  in 
microfinance. Let us therefore give ourselves a well-deserved round of applause!  
With  the  continuing  support  of  all  stakeholders,  the  new  policies  and  programs  we  have 
crafted are bound to further expand and deepen our microfinance sector.  
I refer in particular to the following circulars the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas issued this year:  
Circular 678 on Housing Microfinance and Circular 680 on Micro-Agri Loan Products 
 
which  address  the  needs  of  microfinance  clients  beyond  enterprise  loans.  These 
circulars  give  banks  the  opportunity  to  expand  the  range  of  services  they  provide 
their  clients,  even  as  they  maintain  microfinance  privileges.  This  includes  no 
collateral  requirements  or  the  acceptance  of  collateral  substitutes,  cash  flow  and 
character  based  lending,  small  and  frequent  amortizations,  as  well  as  simple 
documentary requirements. 
In  March,  the  Bangko  Sentral  issued  Circular  683  which  allows  thrift,  rural  and 
cooperative banks – subject to certain rules and regulations – to sell, market, and 
 BIS Review 71/2010 
 1
service  approved  microinsurance  products  by  licensed  insurance  providers.  Thrift, 
rural  and  cooperative  banks  are  ideal  distribution  channels  for  microinsurance 
products as they are the trusted financial institutions in the countryside and have a 
deeper  understanding  of  the  low  income  market.  Recent  calamities  from  flooding 
and destructive typhoons underscore the importance of having adequate insurance 
protection especially for the poor who are more vulnerable to various risks. For thrift, 
rural and cooperative banks, therefore, microinsurance is a groundbreaking initiative 
that allows them to participate in a business that was once limited only to universal 
and commercial banks. 
On  the  other  hand,  Bangko  Sentral’s  Circular  685  provides  the  rules  for  the 
recognition  of  Microfinance  Institution  Rating  Agencies  or  MIRAs.  This  should 
improve  access  to  financing  and  capital  as  ratings  have  proven  effective  in 
enhancing  the  quality  of  microfinance  institutions  in  terms  of  transparency, 
discipline,  and  overall  governance.  This  should  also  promote  investments  in  the 
Philippine microfinance industry.  
 These  are  the  circulars  the  Bangko  Sentral  issued  this  year  to  promote  the  further 
development of our microfinance sector. With the support of all stakeholders, we should start 
seeing positive results from these initiatives.  
I  also  look  forward  to  the  participation  of  more  banks  in  the  microfinance  sector.  As  of 
December 2009, there were more than 200 banks engaged in microfinance with total loans 
outstanding of about P6 billion lent out to about 900,000 borrowers.  
By any yardstick, these are good numbers. However, with millions of Filipinos still living in 
poverty,  we  should  commit  to  do  more  together  to  do  better  in  spreading  the  gospel  of 
microfinance  and  how  it  can  uplift  and  transform  individuals,  families,  as  well  as 
communities.  
We have seen these transformations happen, year after year, in the hundreds of entries to 
our  annual  search  under  the  Microentrepreneur  of  the  Year  Awards  and  even  Joey’s  Go 
Negosyo program. This year, we are bound to learn more inspiring stories we can share and 
many more role models we can follow.  
I  hope  that  our  banks  will  also  be  more  proactive  in  spreading  the  inspiring  stories  of  our 
awardees so that many more Filipinos will realize that viable and sustainable business can 
start from micro loans.  
Fellow  advocates  of  microfinance,  let  us  continue  to  work  together  in  providing  a  truly 
inclusive  and  empowering  financial  system  for  our  people.  Mabuhay  ang  microfinance! 
Mabuhay ang Pilipino! Marami pong salamat sa inyong lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2010
