Masaaki Shirakawa: Revisiting the philosophy behind central bank policy 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Economic Club of 
New York, New York, 22 April 2010.  
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  your  kind  introduction.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  an  honor  to  have  the 
opportunity  to  speak  today  at  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York,  with  its  over  one  hundred 
years of history at the heart of the world’s financial markets. 1907, the year this esteemed 
Club was founded, is also remembered as the year when the United States was struck by a 
nationwide banking crisis. There had been a few unsuccessful attempts to set up a central 
bank before the crisis, but in the aftermath of the Panic of 1907, the momentum to establish 
one  strengthened,  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System  was  created  in  1913.  Interestingly 
enough, the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve and the Economic Club of New York have 
had  ties  since  the  early  days.  Mr.  Benjamin  Strong,  the  first  President,  or  at  that  time  the 
Governor, of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York spent three months in Japan in 1920, 
developing a strong personal bond with the then Governor of the Bank of Japan, Junnosuke 
Inoue1. On his return to the United States, Governor Strong donated many volumes of books 
to  the  Bank  of  Japan  on  the  US  financial  system  and  the  Federal  Reserve.  One  of  those 
books was, “A History of Currency in the Unites States”, written by the first Chairman of this 
Club,  Mr.  Barton  Hepburn2.  The  book  can  still  be  found  in  our  Bank’s  library,  and  by 
observing  the  red  underlines  on  the  pages  of  the  book,  I  can  comprehend  that  my 
predecessors had thoroughly read this book to study how the US had dealt with the financial 
crisis. 
Speaking of financial crises, Japan experienced a severe financial crisis in the 1920s, and 
this  led  to  the  introduction  of  on-site  examinations  of  financial  institutions  by  the  Bank  of 
Japan, which continues to be a valuable source of information for the central bank today. For 
several decades after this crisis, the Japanese financial system did not face serious strains to 
its stability. However, from the mid-1990s to the early part of the 2000s, we were once again 
hit by a major financial crisis. In the case of the US, the current financial crisis which started 
in August 2007 is the worst crisis since the Great Depression-era. I assume many of you who 
are  sitting  here  today  had  known  of  past  financial  crises,  but  did  not  expect  to  actually 
experience  a  crisis  of  this  scope  and  magnitude  during  your  life  times.  When  we  were 
experiencing  our  own  bubble  more  than  twenty  years  ago,  I  myself  certainly  did  not 
anticipate the severity of the crisis which we were to experience. Japan experienced its crisis 
more  than  ten  years  ago,  but  watching  the  US-triggered  financial  crisis  unfold  and  spread 
across  the global  financial  system,  I  cannot  but  help  feel a  sense  of déjà  vu.  There  are  a 
number of similarities between these two episodes, for example, optimism immediately after 
the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  delay  in  implementing  some  key  policy  measures,  a  prolonged 
economic  downturn,  hostility  towards  financial  institutions,  criticism  aimed  at  supervisors, 
regulators and central bankers, to name some. 
The current crisis has not reached the end of its cycle yet. However, as far as I can see at 
the  moment,  two  pressing  issues  have  emerged.  First,  we must  bring  the  global  economy 
back  to  a  sustainable  growth  path.  Second,  we  must  prepare  measures  to  prevent  the 
recurrence of such a crisis. The Bank of Japan is making our utmost efforts to tackle these 
                                                 
1   See Governor Strong’s remarks at the Tokyo Ginko Club (The Tokyo Bankers Club) during his stay in Japan 
[Strong (1920)]. 
2   Hepburn (1915). 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 1
two challenges, working in cooperation with the Federal Reserve and other authorities. If we 
were  to  find  a  silver  lining  in  the  financial  crisis,  it  would  be  that  it  has  given  all  of  us, 
including  financial  institutions,  non-financial corporations  and  policymakers,  the  opportunity 
to rethink the validity of the mindset upon which business strategies are developed, and of 
the  philosophy  behind  the  policy  conduct  that  we  had  become  so  accustomed  to.  In  what 
follows, I would like to elaborate on these issues. 
Why do financial crises repeatedly occur? 
Why do financial crises, and for that matter bubbles which precede them, occur repeatedly? 
Many reasons are given – lax risk management, excessive leverage, existence of financial 
institutions  which  are  perceived  to  be  too-big-to-fail,  failure  of  supervision,  excessively 
accommodative  monetary  policy  and  the  list  goes  on.  I  generally  agree  with  such 
assessments,  but  we  also  need  a  holistic  perspective  which  cannot  be  captured  just  by 
focusing  on  individual  causes.  From  this  perspective,  I  would  like to emphasize  that,  what 
one could term as a “cycle of confidence” which evolves over a very long time horizon, plays 
a decisive role. Success breeds confidence which unfortunately turns into over-confidence or 
even arrogance. Complacency also sets in. The collapse of the bubble based upon this over-
confidence leads now to under-confidence, which is followed by rebuilding efforts. Then the 
cycle begins once again. 
During  the  latter  half  of  the  1980s,  Japan’s  economic  performance  stood  out  among  the 
advanced economies. While growth in the other G7 countries averaged 3.4%, the Japanese 
economy  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  5.1%.  The  inflation  rate  measured  by  CPI  was  on 
average  3.9%  in  the  G7  countries  excluding  Japan,  while  it  was  1.1%  in  Japan.  Although 
inflation targeting became popular later in the 1990s, if one were to apply the criteria used by 
countries  adopting  inflation  targeting,  Japan  would  have  received  an  “A+”  during  the  latter 
half  of  the  1980s.  Externally,  through  a  continuously  large  current  account  surplus,  Japan 
became  the  world’s  largest  net  creditor  nation.  In  this  benign  environment,  the  Japanese 
became  over-confident.  Of  course,  there  were  worrying  signs.  The  extension  of  credit 
increased  sharply  and  asset  prices  boomed  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1980s.  However,  an 
“irrational bull sentiment” engulfed society, drowning out such concerns. With regard to land 
prices, the belief that land prices would never fall overwhelmed people’s mind. Naturally, the 
need  for  monetary  policy  to  switch  to  a  tightening  mode  was  discussed.  In  fact,  excluding 
one source of information, all of the economic data such as high growth, tight labor markets, 
surge in bank lending, and bloated asset prices were pointing to the need for withdrawing 
accommodative monetary policy. The only exception was the rate of inflation. Stable prices 
were a strong rebuttal against the Bank of Japan, which was trying to take away monetary 
ease. Entering into the 1990s, the landscape changed dramatically with the bursting of the 
bubble, and the Japanese economy came up against huge difficulties. The average growth 
rate fell from 5.1% in the latter half of the 1980s to 1.5% in the 1990s. As a result, extreme 
pessimism  containing  irrational  elements,  or  what  one  can  call  “irrational  bear  sentiment”, 
emerged. There are multiple reasons for the sluggish performance of the Japanese economy 
in recent years and it would be inappropriate to over-emphasize the impact of the bursting of 
the  bubble  or  asset  deflation.  However,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  bubble  and  its  ensuing 
collapse had major implications for the long-term health of the Japanese economy. 
This “cycle of confidence” seems to apply not only to the Japanese economy, but also to the 
US  economy.  Since  the  mid-1960s,  the  performance  of  the  US  economy  started  to 
deteriorate, and the late-70s and early-80s were the worst period, facing both high inflation 
and low growth, or in another word, stagflation. However, policy efforts to revitalize the US 
economy  began  precisely  during  this  testing  time.  Chairman  Volcker’s  efforts  to  tame 
inflation and deregulation under the Reagan administration, both were set in motion during 
this difficult period, and the efforts gradually began to bear fruit over a long period of time. 
The rate of growth of the US economy accelerated from 3.1% in the 1980s to 4.0% in the 
latter half of the 1990s. This economic expansion briefly paused at the beginning of the new 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2010
century  due  to  the  collapse  of  the  IT  bubble,  but  accelerated  once  again  after  a  relatively 
short period. There was much discussion regarding the macro economy and how to interpret 
the  decrease  in  the  volatility  of  the  growth  rate  and  inflation  rate.  The  phrase  “Great 
Moderation” was repeatedly mentioned. In this environment, a very bullish view regarding the 
economic outlook prevailed. There was much debate about whether the rise in house prices 
was  a  bubble  or  not.  However,  the  basic  messages  we  repeatedly  heard  from  both 
policymakers  and  academia  here  in  the  United  States  were,  that  “there  will  not  be  a 
nationwide  decline  in  house  prices”  and  that  “even  if  a  bubble  were  to  burst,  it  would  be 
manageable through aggressive monetary easing”. With regard to the financial system, the 
presumption  was  that  the  risk  management  of  US  and  European  banks  were  much  more 
sophisticated and efficient than that of Japanese banks3. Unfortunately, as we all know now, 
such optimistic views proved to be wrong. Both the Japanese case and US case show how 
damaging over-confidence can be. 
Why couldn’t policy makers put on the brakes? 
I have taken you through a quick assessment of the recent bubbles in Japan and the United 
States from the perspective of a “cycle of confidence”. But looking around the globe, such 
episodes  are  not  confined  to  these  two  cases.  Just  looking  back  at  the  last  quarter  of  a 
century, there was the bubble and its collapse in the Nordic countries during the 1980s, and 
the Asian Miracle followed by the Asian currency crisis in the 1990s, to name a few. Human 
beings know that sometimes we become over-confident and our actions become excessive. 
That is why we have developed pre-set mechanisms to put on the brakes. The private sector 
has  various  devices.  For  example,  financial  institutions  have  internal  risk  management 
sections.  Market  discipline  is  extended  by  shareholders,  creditors  and  counterparties  to 
guard against excesses by senior  management of  financial institutions. Meanwhile, central 
banks  and  financial  regulators  and  supervisors  also  function  as  a  braking  device. 
Unfortunately,  in  these  crisis  episodes,  the  devices  in  both  the  private  and  public  sectors 
failed.  The  failure  of  these  two  sets  of  devices  entails  very  important  issues,  but  in  the 
interest of time, I will focus only on the public-sector device. As a central banker, I believe we 
need  to  examine  critically  and  thoroughly  the  failures  of  central  banks  and  financial 
regulators and supervisors. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
First  of  all,  let  me  touch  upon  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  There  has  already  been 
considerable  debate  about  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  emergence  of 
bubbles. One thing is clear: over-confidence is the core factor which breeds a bubble. In that 
sense,  bubbles  do  not  transpire  from  expectations  of  a  continuation  of  low  interest  rates 
alone.  This  is,  however,  only  a  half  of  the  truth.  The  other  half  is  that  bubbles  do  not 
materialize  without  expectations  that  low  interest  rates  will  continue.  For  me,  the  key 
question,  which  applies  to  many  central  banks  including  both  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the 
Federal Reserve, is that, why we, as central banks, maintained interest rates at such a low 
level, in spite of the uneasiness we felt at that time toward the bubble-like symptoms. There 
are three possible reasons. 
First, the economic environment has evolved in a way that imbalances in the economy do not 
readily show up in the form of changes in the price of goods and services. The success in 
attaining  price  stability  lent  support  to  public  confidence  in  the  central  bank’s  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  As  a  result,  inflation  expectations  of  private  sector  economic  entities 
became well-anchored to a low target inflation rate. Thus, imbalances in the economy began 
                                                 
3   See Tett (2009). 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 3
to  appear  in  forms  other  than  inflation  of  goods  and  services.  Imbalances  materialized  in 
different forms such as increases in asset prices and growth of credit extension. 
Second,  some  political,  economic  and  social  dynamics  influenced  central  bankers,  and  it 
became difficult for them to conduct monetary policy based on factors other than the inflation 
rate.  This  mechanism  is  quite  subtle.  The  logic  that  price  stability  is  a  precondition  for 
economic  stability  and  that  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  is  necessary  for  price 
stability, became gradually but firmly established in the 1990s. At the same time, the granting 
of independence naturally called for the strengthening of accountability. An easily identifiable 
benchmark  was  desired.  The  framework  which  best  fulfilled  such  needs  was  inflation 
targeting.  However,  under  an  inflation  targeting  regime,  the  debate  tends  to  center  on  the 
relationship between the target inflation rate and the actual or expected inflation rate. As a 
result, the cost of justifying adjustments in monetary policy becomes quite high in the eyes of 
central bankers, when such adjustments are aimed to deal with imbalances which appear in 
forms other than price indices. Economists focused their attention to the linkage between the 
output gap and the inflation rate, while awareness toward financial imbalances was limited. 
Factors which could not be captured through movements in the price of goods and services 
fell  through  the  cracks.  Institutional  changes  to  transfer  the  responsibility  for  financial 
regulation and supervision away from the central bank also accelerated this trend. 
Third,  the  meaning  of  the  danger  of  slipping  into  deflation  was  not  necessarily  correctly 
understood in a well balanced manner. In this context, Japan’s so-called “lost decade”, the 
experience  after  the  collapse  of  the  bubble,  was  often  cited  as  an  evident  example, 
emphasizing  the  harmful  effects  of  the  continuous  decline  in  the  price  of  goods  and 
services4. However, the serious difficulties that Japan faced were overwhelmingly caused by 
the fall in asset prices rather than the drop in the general rate of inflation. In the Japanese 
case, real estate prices in major metropolitan areas dropped by 70 to 80 percent from their 
peaks, while the cumulative fall in CPI was three percentage points between 1997 and 2004. 
Nonetheless, the Japanese experience was misinterpreted. The prevalent mood at that time 
can be easily noted in documents such as the IMF’s World Economic Outlook released in 
April 20035 and the transcripts of the 2003 Jackson Hole Economic Symposium hosted by 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City6. When the Federal Reserve reduced the target for 
the  federal  fund  rates  in  June  2003,  the  aim  to  avoid  “an  unwelcome  substantial  fall  in 
inflation” was provided as the reason for its action. Looking back, during this period, while the 
risks  of  deflation  were  highlighted  quite  strongly,  the  subtle  role  of  interest  rates  to 
dynamically  allocate  resources  tended  to  be  disregarded.  And  it  was  exactly  during  this 
period  that  the  seeds  of  the  crisis  were  sown  in  the  form  of  the  expansion  of  credit  and 
leverage, and the increase in maturity mismatches.  
Financial regulation and supervision 
Let me now move on to financial regulation and supervision. Since the mid-2000s, central 
banks and supervisors had sent out warning signals on the perceived excesses of various 
transactions through financial stability reports and speeches. However, beyond such steps, 
too few remedial actions were taken vis-à-vis individual financial institutions. Of course, it is 
always quite difficult to take preemptive action on individual financial institutions. But going 
beyond  such  general  comments,  I  believe  the  following  reasons  can  be  given  for  this 
constraint. 
                                                 
4   With regard to the appropriateness of the phrase, “lost decade”, see Shirakawa (2009). 
5   See Box1.1 “Could Deflation become a Global Problem?”, IMF (2003). 
6   Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2003). 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2010
First,  confidence  in  the  effectiveness  of  private  sector  self-regulation  or  the  disciplinary 
mechanisms  built  into  financial  markets  may  have  been  too  strong.  The  continued  benign 
conditions of the macro economy also had an effect. In the “Wealth of Nations”, Adam Smith 
emphasized  the  benefits  of  free  competition.  However,  it  seems  he  was  also  concerned 
about leaving market forces alone to dictate all aspects of economic activity. Case in point is 
the area of finance. He noted that if the rate of interest were to become too high, the greater 
part of the money would be lent to prodigals and projectors, and money would be kept out of 
the hands of sober people7. Before the current crisis, I had not made much of these words by 
Smith, but now I have come to feel that I need to assess its implications more carefully. 
Second, authorities became more cautious about the discretionary use of their supervisory 
powers. Regulation is a necessary tool in maintaining financial stability, but it is not possible 
to design regulation beforehand which can be applicable to all future situations. Therefore, 
effective supervision becomes important. What becomes necessary is a form of supervision 
which  is  adaptable  to  each  financial  institution’s  unique  risk  profile.  Naturally,  such 
supervision must involve some elements of discretion. However, as the pressure for stringent 
and  prompt  accountability  increased,  supervisors  became  more  cautious  about  exercising 
such discretionary powers. 
Third,  both  central  banks  and  supervisory  agencies  were  lacking  the  perspective  of 
assessing  the  risks  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  traditional  philosophy  of 
regulation  and  supervision  was  that  if  the  health  of  individual  financial  institutions  is 
maintained, the stability of the financial system will also be preserved. However, as the crisis 
has  shown,  the  interactions  among  financial  institutions  as  well  as  between  the  financial 
system and real economy played a critical role. In that sense, it was crucial to assess and act 
against  the  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  However,  such  a  macro-prudential 
perspective was not well established. 
Revisiting the philosophy behind policy 
I  have  examined  the  reasons  why  both  monetary  policy  and  regulatory  and  supervisory 
policy were not successful in putting on the brakes. Through such considerations, one feels 
afresh the strong influences of the policy philosophy of policymakers, and furthermore, of the 
conventional  wisdom  surrounding  policymakers  which  influence  their  behavior.  As  Keynes 
pointed out, “sooner or later, it is ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for good or 
evil”8. It is perhaps time that we revisit the philosophy behind monetary policy and financial 
regulation  and  supervision  which  we  have  become  so  accustomed  to  in  recent  years. 
Currently,  my  views  on  the  direction  for  reassessment  which  I  find  necessary  are  the 
following three points. 
First,  the  importance  of  the  objective  of  central  bank  policy.  Usually,  the  objective  of 
monetary policy is defined as price stability. In fact, such a definition seemed to be totally 
reasonable until recently. However, it has now been acknowledged that the role expected of 
central banks does not match one-to-one with price stability. The experience of the bubble 
shows that even when prices are stable, the economy can experience huge swings. What is 
expected of central banks is the attainment of a stable financial environment which provides 
a  basis  for  sustainable  growth.  Price  stability  is  certainly  one  important  element  of  the 
stability of monetary conditions. However, it is not confined to this. Rather, when a central 
bank becomes too fixated on short-term price stability, this may complicate the attainment of 
the ultimate objective of sustainable growth. 
                                                 
7   See Smith (1776). 
8   See Keynes (1936). 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 5
Second,  the  importance  of  effectively  gauging  the  stability  of  the  financial  environment. 
Central banks need to pay attention to a broad range of financial indicators, encompassing 
credit,  leverage,  and  maturity  mismatches.  A  “stable  financial  environment”  is  an  abstract 
concept  and  there  is  no  single  indicator  which  can  totally  capture  economic  and  financial 
conditions. However, I would say the same is also true for prices. Measuring prices of goods 
and services enabled by new technology is really daunting task. Price of a search engine is a 
good  example.  Even  if  we  seem  to  have  found  a  single  effective  indicator,  given  that  it 
cannot  provide  a  complete  picture  of  continuously  changing  economic  and  financial 
conditions, we must continue to review carefully a wide range of indicators. It is a demanding 
task, but we must undertake this challenge. 
Third, the importance of a healthy amount of discretionary powers. The public sector needs 
appropriate  discretionary  powers,  both  in  the  area  of  monetary  policy  and  financial 
supervision. In spelling out the conditions for exercising the “lender of last resort” function of 
the  central  bank,  Gerald  Corrigan  used  the  words  “constructive  ambiguity”9  when  he  was 
President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  In  recent  years,  the  pendulum  had 
swung substantially toward transparency. However, at the end of the day, the role of central 
banks,  regulators  and  supervisors  is  to  prevent  instability  of  the  economy  and  financial 
markets,  which  could  materialize  if  simply  left  to  the  free-market  competition.  If  actions  of 
policy  makers  were  based  on  mechanical  rules  which  could  be  fully  incorporated  into  the 
behavior of market participants, this may rather end up being a source of instability for the 
market and economy. I believe it is time to bring the pendulum back, at least to some extent, 
toward allowing more room for discretionary measures. 
Concluding remarks 
The points I have raised today mean going back to the basics of central banking. But, this 
does not mean returning to central banks of the past. The raison d’être of the central bank to 
achieve  stable  financial  environment  which  would  enable  the  achievement  of  sustainable 
growth remains unchanged. However, both the economy and financial markets are evolving 
continuously.  After  the  end  of  World  War  II,  until  relatively  recently,  a  stable  financial 
environment  was  almost  synonymous  with  price  stability.  Also,  we  were  quite  used  to  a 
financial  system  structure  where  the  health  of  commercial  banks  was  almost  synonymous 
with financial system stability. However, having experienced the current crisis, we have come 
to realize that such understandings are now outdated. 
When central banks are celebrating success, new problems may be beginning to emerge in 
the  private  sector  quietly.  By  the  same  token,  when  central  banks  are  facing  difficult 
challenges, the green shoots to resolve the problem may already be beginning to grow in the 
private sector. Risks always materialize but in new appearance. In this regard, central banks 
need  to  continuously  be  in  a  learning  mode.  As  with  private-sector  economic  entities, 
complacency  is  the  most  dangerous  risk  for  central  banks.  We  need  to  be  humble  as 
numerous challenges await the global economy. My colleagues and I at the Bank of Japan 
will  continue  to  come  to  grips  with  these  challenges,  working  in  cooperation  with  fellow 
central bankers, and financial supervisors and regulators. In finishing my remarks, I would 
like to request you in the private sector for your continued support and assistance, so that 
central banks can continue to progress. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
                                                 
9   See Corrigan (1990). 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2010
References 
Corrigan,  E.  Gerald,  “Statement  before  the  United  States  Senate  Committee  on  Banking, 
Housing and Urban Affairs,” Washington D.C., May 3, 1990. 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Symposium  proceedings  “Monetary  Policy  and 
Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy”, 2003. 
Hepburn, A. Barton, A History of Currency in the United States, New York: Macmillan, 1915. 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, April 2003. 
Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, 1936. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Way  Out  of  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis:  Lessons  and  Policy 
Actions,”  Speech 
at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0904c.htm. 
Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 1776.  
Strong, Benjamin, “Speech by Benjamin Strong, Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, at the Tokyo Ginko Club, May 24, 1920,” Papers of Benjamin Strong, file 1000.4, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Archive. 
Tett,  Gillian,  Fool’s  Gold:  How  the  Bold  Dream  of  a  Small  Tribe  at  J.P.  Morgan  Was 
Corrupted by Wall Street Greed and Unleashed a Catastrophe, Simon & Schuster, 2009. 
in  New  York, 
Japan  Society 
available 
2009, 
at 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 7
