Fabrizio Saccomanni: The global crisis and the future of the international 
monetary system 
Speech  by  Mr  Fabrizio  Saccomanni,  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Chinese 
Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, 15 April 2010.  
 The global crisis that hit the world economy since August 2007 has revived the long dormant 
debate about the adequacy of the institutional arrangements required to ensure stability in 
international economic and financial relationships on a global scale. 
The financial roots of the crisis have been widely analysed. Here, I intend to focus more on 
the macroeconomic drivers. I will try to argue that they are ultimately connected to a number 
of long-standing features of the international monetary system such as it has evolved since 
the  demise  of  the  Bretton  Woods  regime.  I  will  then  review  the  main  options  available  to 
reform the international monetary and financial system.  
in 
the 
The global crisis and its macroeconomic roots 
1. 
There  is  now  a  broad  consensus  that,  even  though  the  global  crisis  was  triggered  by 
dysfunctions 
financial  system,  unbalanced  global  macroeconomic  conditions 
contributed to the accumulation of large financial vulnerabilities (Visco, 2009 and 2010).  
The proximate cause of the crisis was the US housing boom, financed by an unprecedented 
expansion  of  mortgage  lending.  Regulators’  failure  to  correct  the  incentive  distortions 
introduced by financial innovation can largely explain the deterioration of lending standards, 
the widespread use of opaque financial instruments and the excessive risk-taking on the part 
of many international banks. Excessively easy monetary conditions contributed to encourage 
the rapid growth in mortgage borrowing and fed the rise in house prices.  
An easy monetary policy in the US and Japan – and, to a lesser extent, in the euro area – 
translated  into  a  loose  global  monetary  stance.  Very  low  interest  rates  in  main  financial 
centers  encouraged  capital  flows  to  economies  with  higher  interest  rates,  which  were 
induced  to  ease  policy  in  turn,  in  order  to  avoid  an  excessive  currency  appreciation. 
Countries that pegged their exchange rate to the dollar effectively adopted the US monetary 
policy stance, and absorbed capital inflows by accumulating large official reserves.  
The investment of official reserves in US Treasury securities financed the growing US current 
account  deficit  and,  at  the  same  time,  contributed  to  keep  Treasury  bond  yields  low. 
Investors  turned  increasingly  toward  riskier  assets  in  their  “search  for  yield”,  leading  to  a 
compression of risk premia on a broad range of financial assets, from equities to corporate 
and  sovereign  bonds,  thereby  boosting  asset  valuations.  National  housing  price  cycles, 
usually mainly driven by country-specific factors, became highly synchronized globally. 
For several years this financial market exuberance went hand-in-hand with sustained global 
growth  and  price  stability,  thus  feeding  the  illusion  that  the  conduct  of  economic  and 
especially  monetary  policy  could  reduce  underlying  risks,  and  that  whatever  risk  was  left 
could be easily diversified or shifted to those in a better position to bear it by efficient and 
sophisticated  financial  markets.  The  “speed  limit”  for  the  global  economy  appeared  for  a 
while to have been permanently raised, as the entry of China and other emerging economies 
in the global trading system effectively increased the world’s labour supply. At some point, 
however, bottlenecks emerged in commodity markets and global inflation picked up sharply. 
As  monetary  policy  was  tightened  and  housing  markets  peaked,  also  the  degree  of  risk 
diversification turned out to be more limited and the risk management practices of financial 
intermediaries much less sound than it had been previously assumed. 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 1
As the initial turmoil evolved into a fully-fledged crisis, the sharp fall in consumer and investor 
confidence translated into a dramatic and simultaneous contraction of demand, output and 
international trade, not only in advanced but also in emerging economies, which had hitherto 
been  largely  immune  from  the  crisis’  fallout.  The  severity  and  the  highly  synchronized 
character of the world recession can only be fully understood by considering that the financial 
crisis had hit what had been until then the keystone of global economic growth, i.e. the ability 
of US consumers to continue borrowing and spending. Without that “consumer of last resort”, 
the whole edifice crumbled.  
Flaws in existing international monetary arrangements 
2. 
There is a close connection between the macroeconomic imbalances that paved the way to 
the global crisis and some key features of existing international monetary arrangements. 
The Bretton Woods regime of adjustable exchange rate pegs collapsed in 1971–73 under the 
combined pressure of increased capital mobility and conflicting policy objectives among the 
largest economies. It has since been replaced by a “non system”, which is simply the result 
of individual countries’ choices among a broad menu of exchange rate regimes, ranging from 
monetary  unions  and  hard  pegs  to  freely  floating  rates.  Market  pressure  resulted  in  the 
gradual removal of capital controls, first in industrialised countries and then, from the 1990s, 
in emerging ones, paving the way to global financial integration. At the same time, increasing 
trade integration continued to provide a strong motive for countries to try to avoid excessive 
exchange rate fluctuations, since large and persistent exchange rate movements are difficult 
to  hedge  against  and  discourage  the  establishment  of  trade  relationships  that  require 
substantial long-term investment.  
Thus, contrary to predictions that increased capital mobility would lead to a polarization of 
exchange  regimes  around  the  extremes  of  either  “hard  pegs”  or  flexible  exchange  rates, 
many countries still adopt intermediate regimes, including various types of crawling pegs or 
managed  floating.  Individual  countries’  exchange  rate  preferences  can  reflect  a  variety  of 
structural factors and policy objectives. The result of these individual choices is a situation 
where  a  large  number  of  countries  de  facto  peg  to  the  US  dollar  or  actively  manage  their 
bilateral exchange rates with it; a smaller number of countries peg to the euro or to a basket; 
and several countries (mostly industrialized ones) allow exchange rates to float. 
This non-system lacks a mechanism capable of ensuring the global consistency of national 
objectives.  The  consequence  has  been  a  recurrent  systemic  instability  (see  Saccomanni, 
2008):  
 
since the 1970s exchange rates among the major currencies have experienced 
very large fluctuations with serious consequences for the real economy. Periods 
of US dollar overvaluation have entailed the demise of important US manufacturing 
sectors and have been accompanied by strong protectionist pressures; on the other 
hand, when the dollar was weak,  upward pressures on the yen and on European 
currencies  destabilized  the  respective  economies  and  greatly  complicated  the 
conduct  of  policies.  For  example,  in  Japan  in  the  late  1980s  the  easy  monetary 
stance  to  counter  the  yen’s  appreciation  allowed  a  huge  speculative  bubble  to 
develop;  the  subsequent  phase  of  yen  appreciation  in  the  early  to  mid-1990 
exacerbated the economy’s slide into stagnation. 
the  last  thirty  years  have  seen  repeated  episodes  of  currency  and  financial 
crises in emerging economies (the Latin America debt crisis of the early 1980s; 
Mexico  in  1994;  South-East  Asia  in  1997;  Russia  in  1998;  Argentina  in  2002). 
Although  the  proximate  cause  of  each  crisis  could  be  identified  in  specific  policy 
errors  and  structural/political  weaknesses  of  the  countries  in  question,  a  clear 
pattern recurs through all of them: a protracted underestimation of risks on the part 
of  lenders,  followed  by  an  abrupt  change  in  perceptions  and  a  “sudden  stop”  in 
BIS Review 55/2010
 2 
  capital  flows.  The  excesses  of  market  optimism  were  usually  connected  to  easy 
global  monetary  conditions,  and  the  trigger  of  the  crisis  was  often  a  monetary 
tightening in the United States.  
the  past  10–15  years  have  seen  a  sharp  widening  of  current  account 
imbalances. The US deficit widened from 1.7 per cent of GDP in 1997 to 6 per cent 
in  2006  with,  as  a  counterpart,  growing  surpluses  in  Japan,  China  and  the  oil 
exporting countries. The external imbalances largely reflected unbalanced domestic 
conditions:  a  sequence  of  asset  price  bubbles  in  the  United  States  (the  dot-com 
bubble in the late 1990s, the housing bubble after 2000); a sharp rise in saving and 
fall  in  investment  in  several  Asian  economies  in  reaction  to  the  crisis  of  1997;  an 
extremely high saving propensity in China. A widely shared concern has been that 
current account imbalances could be at some point be regarded by the markets as 
unsustainable,  triggering  a  sharp  reversals  of  capital  flows  with  destabilising 
consequences for the exchange rates of major currencies.  
Underlying  these  manifestations  of  global  instability  are  some  fundamental  weaknesses  of 
the existing international monetary arrangements.  
First, a well-functioning international monetary system must impose some form of discipline 
on  national  economic  policies.  In  its  original  conception  the  Bretton  Woods  system 
assumed that the discipline would be based on a set of rules enforced collectively through 
the  International  Monetary  Fund.  Now  the  enforcement  of  discipline  is  entirely  left  to  the 
markets and this poses several problems. First of all, its enforcement is far from uniform and 
symmetric: unsustainable current account surpluses are not sanctioned in the same way as 
deficits,  and  the  country  issuing the  dominant  reserve  currency  is  largely  immune,  since  it 
can finance deficits in its own currency as long as other countries are willing to accumulate 
reserves.  Moreover,  financial  markets  do  not  always  sanction  unsustainable  policies 
consistently,  because  their  perceptions  of  fundamentals  can  vary  over  time  and  are  often 
overshadowed by other drivers of capital flows. After long phases of disregard for mounting 
risks, markets often react “too much – too late”, resulting in sharp “boom and bust” cycles. 
Thus, market reactions often encouraged authorities to act in highly pro-cyclical ways. 
Secondly,  the  international  monetary  system,  like  a  domestic  monetary  regime,  needs  to 
provide  a  global  anchor  to  stabilize  inflation  expectations,  by  ensuring  that  the  monetary 
stance  is  appropriate  on  a  global  scale.  The  anchor,  in  earlier  times  provided  by  a  link  to 
gold,  is  now  in  practice  dependent  on  the  monetary  policy  frameworks  of  the  major 
economies. However, even when these countries adopt a sound monetary stance, this does 
not  automatically  ensure  an  appropriate  stance  at  a  global  level,  since  policies  conducted 
with  a  narrow  national  focus  may  overlook  global  sources  of  inflationary  pressures:  the 
recent  commodity  price  boom,  driven  by  buoyant  global  demand,  is  a  case  in  point. 
Moreover,  countries  that  peg  their  currencies  to  the  dollar  (or  otherwise  shadow  US 
monetary policy) effectively adopt the US policy stance. When many countries do this, the 
US monetary stance effectively becomes the prevailing stance in a large part of the world. 
This can lead to global monetary conditions that are either to easy or too tight for the world 
economy. 
A  third  important  feature  of  the  international  monetary  system  is  how  it  influences  the 
demand for official reserves and how that demand is met. The global demand for reserves 
has increased enormously over the past 10–15 years: foreign exchange reserves rose from 
about 1.4 trillion US dollars in 1995 to 7.5 trillion in 2009. An important motive for reserve 
holding has been precautionary: official reserves allow authorities to offset capital outflows in 
the  event  of  “sudden  stops”,  avoiding  exchange  rate  depreciations  or  the  need  to  seek 
conditional  financing.  Reserve  accumulation  could  also  be  the  by-product  of  an  export-led 
growth  strategy,  as  in  the  case  of  China.  The  accumulation  of  reserves  by  individual 
countries  can,  however,  involve  some  important  negative  externalities  for  the  global 
economy, as well as for the countries themselves. In order to accumulate reserves countries 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 3
this  end, 
inflows.  To 
need  either  to  run  current  account  surpluses  or  to  attract  (and  then  usually  sterilize) 
substantial  capital 
they  will  compress  domestic  demand  by 
implementing tight monetary and/or fiscal policies which may result, in the aggregate, in a 
deflationary bias on the world economy.  
In  summary,  the  present  arrangement  is  not  able  to  enforce  an  effective  discipline  on 
national economic policies in a reliable, timely and symmetric way; it cannot ensure that the 
global  monetary  policy  stance  is  appropriate  to  global  conditions;  and  by  encouraging 
countries to accumulate huge official reserves, which finance the current account deficits of 
the reserve currency country, it tends to feed large and persistent global imbalances. 
The options for reform 
3. 
In reviewing the potential alternatives to the present “non-system”, a first necessary step is to 
clear the ground from seemingly “simple” and “automatic” solutions. A return to a regime of 
fixed  exchange  rates  or  a  move  to  full  and  universal  exchange  rate  flexibility  are  the  two 
polar cases most frequently considered. I would argue that neither is feasible or desirable.1  
Exchange rate-based reform options  
3.1 
A system of rigidly fixed exchange rates would be impractical (unless there was a political 
willingness to establish a single world currency) and would not be viable without a return to 
generalised restrictions on capital mobility. Capital controls would need to be very pervasive 
to have any effectiveness, implying prohibitive costs and setting back financial development 
by several decades.  
The option of free floating has in theory a number of advantages: i) it would not require to 
accumulate  reserves  to  stabilize  the  exchange  rate;  ii)  it  would  preserve  monetary  policy 
autonomy;  iii)  it  would  protect  each  country  from  external  monetary  shocks;  iv)  markets 
would  enforce  an  effective  and  symmetrical  discipline  on  national  policies  across  all 
countries; v) it would avoid imbalances and instability as long as each country maintained its 
own house in order.  
The  real  world  is,  however,  far  from  the  idealized  representation  of  the  theory.  When  the 
hypotheses  of  perfectly  flexible  prices  and  costless  adjustment  are  abandoned,  and  we 
consider the actual working of the financial system in a world of imperfect information and 
incomplete  markets,  the  presumption  that  exchange  rates  will  smoothly  adjust  to  reflect 
changes in fundamentals soon appears unrealistic. In practice, changing market perceptions 
may make exchange rates volatile and lead them to diverge from fundamentals, especially 
where markets are thin and uncertainty high, as it is often the case in emerging economies. 
This experience explains why so many countries have displayed in practice a strong “fear of 
floating”.  
If  we  exclude  the  two  “pure”  exchange  rate  regimes,  the  only  option  available  is  that  of  a 
“managed” system based on international cooperation. However, it would be misleading to 
suppose  that  the  starting  point  of  any  reform  must  be  the  choice  of  the  exchange  rate 
regime.  There  are  other  important  features  that  deeply  affect  the  functioning  of  the 
international  monetary  system:  the  role  and  effectiveness  of  international  institutions;  the 
multilateral  surveillance  process;  the  available  mechanisms  for  creating  international 
reserves; international trade rules and the mechanism for resolving trade disputes; and the 
regulatory framework for international financial markets. Not surprisingly, much of the recent 
discussion in the G20 on how to improve the functioning of the system has centered on these 
issues. 
                                                 
1   For a detailed review of these issues, see Padoa Schioppa (2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2010
Towards an SDR-based international monetary system? 
3.2 
Before turning to the G20 strategy, I would like to review a proposal by Zhou Xiaochuan, the 
Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (Zhou,  2009).  After  identifying  a  fundamental 
problem  of  the  present  international  monetary  system  as  stemming  from  the  fact  that  a 
national currency is used as the main international reserve asset, Governor Zhou suggested 
that one of the goals of its reform should be creating “an international reserve currency that is 
disconnected from individual nations and is able to remain stable in the long run”. Indeed, “a 
super-sovereign  reserve  currency  managed  by  a  global  institution  could  be  used  to  both 
create and control global liquidity”. More specifically, he argued that the SDR, issued by the 
IMF, has the potential to become such a super-sovereign currency and that its role should be 
more actively promoted in the future, both through further increases in SDR allocations and 
by enhancing its use in international trade and in financial transactions.  
A proposal to increase SDR allocations has already been approved last year by IMF member 
governments;  the  new  large  SDR  allocation,  the  first  after  many  years,  has  effectively 
multiplied by a factor of 10 the outstanding amount of SDRs. Nevertheless, even after the 
latest  increase,  SDRs  still  represent  less  than  5  per  cent  of  global  foreign  exchange 
reserves. 
The proposal that the IMF and the international community should actively promote the use 
of the SDR in trade an financial transactions is equally stimulating, and has been echoed by 
several  academics  and  policy-makers.2  At  present,  the  SDR  can  be  regarded  as  an 
international currency only in a limited sense of the term, because it is a basket of currencies, 
is  not  issued  by  a  central  bank,  and  its  use  is  restricted  to  “authorised”  institutions  of  the 
official sector. Countries cannot use SDRs directly to intervene in the exchange market, but 
need  first  to  convert  them  into  a  “true”  currency.  In  any  case  the  possibility  to  use  SDRs 
directly in interventions would require, first of all, the existence of a private SDR market. This, 
however,  has  never  taken  off  in  practice,  even  though  no  technical  obstacles  to  it  would 
seem to exist. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  interesting  to  contrast  the  case  of  the  SDR  with  that  of  the  ECU,  the 
basket  of  currencies  introduced  in  1979  in  the  context  of  the  European  Monetary  System 
which  eventually  merged  into  the  euro.  While  the  use  of  ECU,  much  like  the  SDR,  was 
restricted to transactions among official holders, during the 1980s and 1990s a large private 
market of ECU-denominated financial instruments developed. Substantial amounts of ECU-
denominated  bonds  were  issued  and  an  interbank  market  in  ECU  deposits  developed, 
supported by an agreement among a group of private banks to establish an ECU clearing 
arrangement,  as  well  as  markets  in  a  wide  array  of  ECU  derivative  instruments.  In  this 
context European central banks acquired reserves in private ECUs, which could be used to 
carry out interventions directly in ECU. The rapid growth of a private ECU market benefited 
from the support of Community institutions and some national official institutions (including 
the  Bank  of  England),  which  issued  debt  denominated  in  ECU,  thus  providing  the  critical 
mass that helped the market to take off. Moreover, EU institutions assured legal certainty of 
the definition of the ECU basket and its continuity.  
As  in  the  case  of  the  ECU,  instruments  denominated  in  a  basket  –  like  the  SDR  –  that 
included  all  the  major  currencies  would  represent  a  natural  hedge  for  companies  whose 
business is global. Once a liquid market for SDR instruments existed, it should be attractive 
for such companies to manage the bulk of their financial operations in SDRs rather than in 
the  individual  currencies.  The  crucial  difficulty,  however,  is  reaching  the  critical  mass  that 
would  allow  the  development  of  a  deep,  diversified  and  liquid  market,  where  transaction 
                                                 
2   See for example Williamson (2009), Kenen (2010) and Padoa-Schioppa (2010). For a discussion of the issue 
of  reforming  the  international  monetary  system,  see  Greenwald  and  Stiglitz  (2008),  Bergsten  (2009), 
Eichengreen (2009), Cooper (2009), Mateos y Lago et al. (2009). 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 5
costs would be sufficiently low that the natural advantages of the SDR can emerge. Given 
the  inertia  that  comes  with  network  externalities  and  economies  of  scale  and  of  scope, 
reaching  such  a  critical  mass  would  be  virtually  impossible  unless  public  policy  plays  an 
active role. The type of actions that were used to foster the development of the ECU market 
could  be  a  starting  point.3  Over  time,  the  SDR  could  become  widely  used  in  trade 
transactions. Producers of internationally traded commodities may want to set prices in a unit 
that is a much better proxy than the dollar of the composition of their imports. This, in turn, 
would encourage trade invoicing in SDR, creating a further inducement for countries to hold 
reserves in SDR. It is likely that for the SDR, incentives to its use as a unit of account, means 
of payment and store of value would be mutually reinforcing. 
Enhancing the role of the SDR may require, at some point, revising the composition of the 
SDR basket in order to make it more representative of the world’s main economic regions. 
Two elements should, however, be  kept in mind: first, for operational reasons, it would be 
preferable to continue to restrict the basket to a limited number of major currencies; second, 
all the component currencies should be fully convertible and have well developed financial 
markets with full capital mobility, since by allowing arbitrage to keep the valuation of SDR-
based  instruments  in  line  with  that  of  instruments  in  the  component  currencies,  this  would 
facilitate both their development and their acceptance. This implies that the inclusion of the 
Chinese  renminbi  in  the  SDR  basket,  highly  desirable  on  economic  grounds,  may 
nonetheless need to be postponed until sufficiently developed and open renminbi financial 
markets exist. 
It is important now to ask in which ways an enhanced role of the SDR could contribute to 
address  the  fundamental  flaws  of  the  existing  international  monetary  system.  This  is  a 
complex question and I have only some tentative answers. First, once the SDR becomes a 
true reserve asset, there would be an incentive for countries with a broadly diversified set of 
trading partners to manage their currencies with reference to the SDR, while those that are 
closely integrated with one particular region could continue to maintain a link to a regional 
currency (the dollar, the euro and, in the future, the renminbi). Countries that peg or manage 
exchange  rates  vis-à-vis  the  SDR  would  presumably  choose  to  accumulate  reserves  in 
SDRs rather than in US dollars. Second, regular IMF allocations of SDRs, and the fact that 
these would be regarded as “true” reserves, would help diminish the pressure for countries to 
try to accumulate other currencies by maintaining undervalued exchange rates and sterilizing 
capital  inflows,  which  in  the  recent  past  has  been  a  driving  factor  behind  the  widening  of 
global imbalances.  
I think these effects would be important contributions to a more balanced and stable system, 
although they would be felt only gradually as the SDR increases its role. Still, two important 
issues  would  remain  unresolved.  First,  exchange  rates  among  the  major  currencies  may 
continue to undergo wide fluctuations, even though these may have less destabilising effects 
on  third  currencies  to  the  extent  that  many  of  these  would  be  linked  to  the  SDR.  Second, 
since  the  SDR  would  remain  a  currency  basket  without  its  own  central  bank,  the  “global 
monetary  stance”  would  continue  to  be  a  “weighted  average”  of  the  stances  of  the  major 
economies. Although IMF decisions on SDR allocations and cancellations could potentially 
influence the stance, the complex and politically-charged decision making process on SDR 
allocations may not be suitable for conducting an efficient monetary policy on a global scale. 
                                                 
3   For example, national governments and multilateral institutions could start issuing SDR-denominated debt on 
a regular basis. Once a sufficient volume of debt instruments at different maturities exists, the market itself can 
be  expected  to  develop  derivative  instruments  based  on  them.  Moreover,  it  should  not  be  too  difficult  for 
international institutions, working with private banks, to foster the establishment of a clearing arrangement for 
private  SDR  deposits.  Ways  could  also  be  found  to  connect  the  private  and  the  official  SDR  market 
(something  that  did  not  exist  in  the  case  of  the  ECU),  either  by  easing  the  legal  restrictions  on  the  use  of 
official SDRs or through an institution acting as a clearinghouse. 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2010
In order to facilitate the transition to an SDR-based system, it may in any case be necessary 
to set up at the IMF SDR-denominated reserve accounts where members could deposit their 
currency reserves and obtain in exchange SDR deposits, as suggested by Governor Zhou. 
This  closely  resembles  the  idea  of  a  “Substitution  account”,  which  has  a  long  history  in 
international monetary reform negotiations in which I was personally involved (Micossi and 
Saccomanni, 1981). In the broader context of Governor Zhou’s proposal, this could be seen 
as a way of smoothing the transition to an SDR-based system, avoiding the uncertainty and 
potential  currency  instability  associated  to  the  shift  in  the  composition  of  global  reserves 
(Kenen, 2010). 
The  rationale  for  establishing  a  “Substitution  account”  is  twofold.  First,  it  would  allow 
countries  to  rebalance  their  reserve  composition  through  off-market  transactions,  thus 
avoiding  undesirable  exchange  rate  effects  of  the  liquidation  of  large  amounts  of  dollar 
reserves. Second, it would also be possible to share or shift the exchange rate risk from the 
original  holders  of  dollar  reserves  to  other  parties.  This  second  result,  however,  would 
depend on the specific technical arrangements.4  
Clearly, the financial implications of the alternative risk-sharing arrangements would be very 
different, and would depend crucially on how exchange rates are expected to move after the 
reserve  transfer.  The  negotiation  of  any  arrangement  of  this  kind  should  therefore 
presumably be part of a more general agreement on a reform of the international monetary 
system. To the extent that such a reform would remove the underlying structural roots of the 
dollar’s  weakness,  it  could  also  help  make  the  exchange  rate  risk  more  acceptable  (see 
Williamson 2009; Kenen 2010).  
The G20 reform process  
4. 
A  crucial  test  of  the  commitment  of  policy-makers  in  the  major  countries  to  address  the 
weaknesses  of  the  existing  global  monetary  and  financial  system  and  to  set  the  global 
economy  on  a  sustainable  growth  path  will  be  the  outcome  of  the  ongoing  efforts  to 
rebalance  global  demand  through  enhanced  policy  coordination.  This  effort  is  currently 
centered  around  the  so-called  “Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and  Balanced  Growth” 
launched  by  the  G20  last  year  in  Pittsburgh  (Saccomanni,  2010).  It  envisages  the 
identification by each G20 country of detailed policy measures aimed at achieving the agreed 
common  objectives,  with  a  mutual  assessment  process,  assisted  by  the  IMF,  where  the 
adequacy,  consistency  and  effective  implementation  of  those  measures  will  have  to  be 
evaluated.  
The  choice  of  the  G20  as  the  leading  forum  for  cooperation  was  dictated  by  the  need  to 
strengthen the legitimacy of the process, recognising that a global readjustment could not be 
treated as a bilateral affair between a few major countries – no matter how big – or that it 
could  be  left  to  the  interplay  of  foreign  exchange  markets.  Every  effort  must  be  made  to 
ensure that the G20 process is successful. A failure would have serious implications for the 
growth  prospects  of  the  world  economy  and  might  set  in  motion  renewed  tensions  in  the 
global financial system and in exchange rate relationships. 
Europe  is  deeply  committed  to  play  its  role  in  the  adjustment  process.  Although  individual 
countries within the euro area have non-negligible surpluses or deficits, the area as a whole 
runs  an  approximate  balance  and  it  has  been  able  to  absorb  the  impact  of  a  dollar 
depreciation of 45 percent vis-à-vis the euro between early 2002 and mid-2008, only partially 
                                                 
4   For example, if the dollar reserves were simply transferred to the IMF and the deposits acquired by reserve 
holders were denominated in SDR, the exchange risk would be shifted to all IMF members according to their 
quotas. If, however, the resulting IMF claim vis-à-vis the United States were also denominated in SDR, the US 
would then bear the risk (effectively giving an SDR guarantee on its dollar liabilities). The risk sharing problem 
is not regarded by most authors as insuperable. See Alessandrini and Fratianni (2009) and Kenen (2010). 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 7
compensated  by  the  dollar  appreciation  recorded  since  then.  Since  the  crisis,  the  need  to 
take measures to deal with its internal imbalances and to restore growth and competitiveness 
of its members has become an important policy priority for the European Union, as reflected 
in the EU 2020 Economic Program recently presented by the European Commission. A firm 
commitment  has  been  undertaken  at  the  highest  political  level  to  take  “determined  and 
coordinated action to safeguard financial stability in the euro area as a whole”. 
In the G20 strategy, the process of rebalancing and sustaining global growth is expected to 
be  supported  by  complementary  efforts  to  liberalise  the  trade  system  and  to  strengthen 
financial regulation. 
A commitment to maintain an open multilateral trading system has been strongly reaffirmed 
in every G20 statement, together with the objective of reaching “a successful conclusion of 
the  WTO’s  Doha  Development  Agenda  with  an  ambitious  and  balanced  outcome”.  But 
progress in this delicate area has been mixed. Anecdotal evidence provides confirmation of 
the fact that “low intensity protectionism” is spreading. Over 450 protectionist measures have 
been introduced last year by G20 members, both industrial and emerging countries, of which 
one-third  against  China.  The  Doha  negotiations,  moreover,  continue  to  be  hampered  by 
disagreements among industrial and emerging countries and that the practice of bilateral and 
regional trade agreements continues to pose a threat for the multilateral nature of the world’s 
trading system. 
Work on reforming the financial regulatory system is well under way under the aegis of the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB). The main areas of this critical work include: 
 
strengthening  the  global  capital  framework  (by  building  stronger  buffers  into  the 
financial system, covering capital, liquidity and provisioning); 
making global liquidity more robust (by introducing new minimum liquidity standards 
and a structural ratio to address liquidity mismatches); 
reducing  the  moral  hazard  posed  by  systemically  important  institutions  (by 
envisaging specific additional capital, liquidity and prudential requirements to reduce 
the complexity of group structures); 
strengthening  accounting  standards 
transparency and the mitigation of pro-cyclicality); 
expanding oversight of the financial system (to ensure that all systemically important 
activity – such as that of the hedge funds and credit rating agencies – is subjected to 
appropriate oversight and regulation); 
strengthening  the  robustness  of  the  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  market 
(strengthening capital requirements and incentives, moving to central counterparties 
or organized exchanges); 
the  objective  of  convergence, 
(with 
     The enormous complexity of the technical issues at stake, the strength of conflicting vested 
interests  and  the  expanded  number  of  participants  in  the  negotiations  explain  why  the 
process of financial reform is still underway more than two years after the outbreak of the 
crisis. Nevertheless, a high degree of consensus has been reached on the main components 
of the reform and it seems unlikely at this stage that the process will be stalled. 
 The outline of a new international monetary system is being drafted within the G20 and in the 
broad  fora  of  the  academic  community  of  the  public  opinion.  The  main  pillars  of  a  new 
system – a stability oriented anchor for macroeconomic policies; an open multilateral trading 
system;  a  more  resilient  and  risk-averse  regulatory  regime;  a  reserve  regime  based  on  a 
multilateral asset – are in different stages of construction. The world economy shows signs of 
recovery  but  it  is  essential  that  the  pace  of  reform  is  not  slowed  down.  It  is  imperative  to 
8 
 BIS Review 55/2010
reduce significantly the risk for the world economy of a devastating crisis such as the one we 
have just experienced. This requires to tackle the potential sources of instability that lie in our 
very imperfect international monetary arrangements.  
IMF 
Staff 
Position 
Istanbul, 
system”, 
Meeting, 
Economic 
Association 
References 
Alessandrini, P. and M. Fratianni (2009), “Dominant currencies, Special Drawing Rights and 
supranational bank money”, World Economics, Vol. 10, No. 4, Oct./Dec. 
Bergsten,  C.F.  (2009),  “The  dollar  and  the  deficits”,  Foreign  Affairs,  Vol.  88,  No.  6, 
November/December. 
Cooper, R. (2009), “The future of the dollar”, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 
Policy Brief PB09–21, September, http://www.iie.com/publications/pb/pb09–21.pdf. 
Eichengreen, B. (2009) “The dollar dilemma”, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 88, No.5, Sept./Oct. 
Greenwald, B. and J. Stiglitz (2008), “A modest proposal for international monetary reform”, 
International 
June, 
http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/ipd/pub/Modest.Proposal.COMBINED.pdf. 
Kenen, P. (2010), “The substitution account as a first step toward reform of the international 
monetary  system”,  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics,  Policy  Brief  PB10–6, 
March, http://www.iie.com/publications/pb/pb10-06.pdf. 
Mateos  y  Lago,  I.,  R.  Duttagupta  and  R.  Goyal  (2009),  “The  debate  on  the  international 
monetary 
November, 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/spn/2009/spn0926.pdf. 
Micossi,  S.  and  F.  Saccomanni  (1981),  “The  substitution  account:  The  problem,  the 
techniques and the politics”, BNL Quarterly Review, No. 137, Nov.–Dec. 
Padoa-Schioppa, T. (2010), “The ghost of Bancor: the economic crisis and global monetary 
disorder”,  speech  at  a  Conference  organized  by  the  Foundation  International  Triffin, 
http://www.notre-europe.eu/uploads/tx_publication/Speech-TPS-LouvainLaNeuve-
25.02.2010.pdf. 
Saccomanni,  F.  (2008),  Managing  international  financial  instability.  National  tamers  versus 
global tigers, Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Saccomanni,  F.  (2010),  “Turning  the  page  on  an  era  of  irresponsibility”,  The  International 
Spectator, Vol. 45, No. 1, March. 
Visco,  I.  (2009),  “The  global  crisis:  the  role  of  policies  and  the  international  monetary 
system”, paper presented at the G20 Workshop on the global economy, Mumbai, India 24–
26 May 2009, http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/Visco_250509.pdf. 
Visco,  I.  (2010),  “Global  Imbalances,  the  Financial  Crisis  and  the  International  Monetary 
System”, World Economics, Vol. 11, No. 1, January–March 2010, forthcoming. 
Williamson, J. (2009), “Why SDRs could rival the dollar”, Peterson Institute for International 
Economics,  Policy  Brief  PB09–20,  September,  http://www.iie.com/publications/pb/pb09–
20.pdf. 
Zhou,  X.  (2009),  “Reform  of  the  international  monetary  system”,  People’s  Bank  of  China, 
March, http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english//detail.asp?col=6500&ID=178. 
SPN/09/26, 
Note, 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 9
