Zamani Abdul Ghani: Strengthening governance to derive value 
Keynote  address  by  Dato’  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  International  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism  Financing  Conference  2010, 
Kuala Lumpur, 19 July 2010. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome all of you to this Second Annual International Conference 
on Financial Crime and Terrorism Financing. There has been an overwhelming response this 
year where participation, including international participation, has significantly increased from 
last year. I believe that this stems from the success of the first conference. There is also no 
doubt of increasing interest of the financial industry in preserving the integrity of the financial 
system, particularly from the threats of financial crime and terrorism financing. Let me begin 
by congratulating Malaysia’s Compliance Officers Networking Group (or the CONG Group) 
for  successfully  organising  this  conference.  The  CONG  Group  has  worked  tirelessly  in 
collaboration  with  the  Institute  of  Bankers  Malaysia,  the  Securities  Industry  Development 
Corporation,  the  Malaysian  Insurance  Institute  and  the  Asian  Institute  of  Finance.  In  the 
preparatory  discussions  with  members  of  the  CONG  Group,  I  personally  witnessed  the 
dedication, hard work and commitment shown by the Group in bringing out the best of the 
industry  through  this  Conference.  Needless  to  say,  we  in  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  or  the 
Central Bank of Malaysia, has given our specific support to this Conference. I also wish to 
register our special welcome to all participants and for the 60 international participants from 
14 countries, including our special guest from CAMLMAC, i.e., the Financial Intelligence Unit 
of the People’s Republic of China. 
The  presence  of  renowned  experts  amongst  us  today  from  domestic  and  international 
institutions in this Conference is testimony to the fact that the areas that we will be discussing 
during  the  next  two  days  are  not  only  domestic  issues,  but  universal  ones  as  well.  These 
issues are indeed global issues faced by financial institutions worldwide. On this note, I wish 
to thank the speakers and moderators who have made their way to Kuala Lumpur, many of 
whom are from half-way around the world. It is indeed an honour for us to have all of you 
here to speak at this Conference. 
The  theme  for  the  conference,  i.e.,  “Strengthening  Governance  to  Derive  Value”  is 
significantly  relevant  and  timely.  The  increasing  sophistication  and  the  broadening  of  the 
reach  and  network  of  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing  (or  ML/TF)  globally  have 
elevated  the  ML/TF  threat  to  the  next  level.  This  calls  for  greater  strategic  action,  more 
intensified  efforts,  and  better  coordination  among  key  stakeholders,  both  domestically  and 
internationally,  to  address  this  concern.  Strong  governance  among  the  stakeholders, 
however, remains the key and integral component within the national AML/CFT framework, 
to  prevent  the  escalation  of  ML/TF  risks.  More  importantly,  strong  governance  in  financial 
institutions is and will remain a critical safeguard and is pertinent in the overall prevention of 
ML/TF activities. Striving to enhance the level of governance in this area will not only result in 
lowering  the  overall  threat  of  ML/TF  in  Malaysia,  but  would  also  enable  the  financial 
institutions  to  derive  greater  value  for  themselves,  and  in  the  process,  reduces  the  cost 
associated with the ML/TF prevention activities. 
I will briefly share my thoughts today on this issue by covering three key items; firstly (a) the 
current  emerging  trends  of  ML/TF;  secondly  (b)  policy  and  strategic  response  by  the 
authorities  in  Malaysia  on  these  emerging  trends;  and  finally  (c)  our  expectations  on  the 
financial institutions in response to these trends. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 1
Emerging ML/TF trends 
ML/TF  is  notable  for  the  diversity  of  its  forms,  players,  location  and  settings.  While  it  is 
normally described in the sequential elements of placement, layering and integration, the real 
activities are very fluid. Recent global ML/TF trends indicate that the criminals, especially the 
professional launderers, will exploit  every possible gap in the formal and informal  financial 
system  to  launder  the  illegal  proceeds.  They  are  known  to  misuse  the  payment  and  fund 
transfer system, including wire transfer and remittance services, internet payments, mobile 
payment and stored value card, to channel the illegal proceeds within and across borders. 
The traditional laundering methods of cash smuggling, via casino, investment and insurance 
policies  are  increasingly  being  used  together  with  other  methods  such  as  through  the 
banking  facilities  to  avoid  detection.  In  March  2010,  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (or 
FATF) issued a report on Money Laundering Vulnerabilities of Free Trade Zones, indicating 
the rising threats of trade based money laundering. Apart from this report and the periodical 
typologies reports, the FATF has issued a number of reports relating to specific laundering 
methods; such as through securities, football and gaming sectors in 2009; vulnerabilities of 
internet payment system and commercial websites in 2008; and the real estate sector, VAT 
Carousel Fraud, and the misuse of corporate vehicles, such as trust and company service 
providers in the previous years. 
For Malaysia, consistent with the global trend, the financial system continues to be one of the 
preferred modes of channelling proceeds of crime. In recent years, it is observed that there is 
a  combination  of  three  common  methods.  The  first  is  the  increasing  use  of  repository 
accounts whereby immediate withdrawals are made once deposits have been received. The 
other two methods consist of fast movement of  money across borders and involvement of 
third  parties  in  laundering  activities.  While  this  is  not  peculiar  to  Malaysia,  financial 
institutions are advised to ensure strong controls in place to deter and detect these activities. 
An example of the modus operandi on the above involves the smuggling of dirty monies into 
Malaysia by the agents of a criminal ring. The agents will subsequently deposit cash into the 
accounts of various entities and individuals in the few bank branches operating at the border 
towns.  The  deposits  remain  in  the  accounts  only  for  a  limited  period  of  time,  where  the 
runners or the agents will withdraw the cash to be further wire-transferred and/or smuggled 
to another neighbouring country, as instructed by the syndicates. Along with this example, it 
is  also  observed  that  transferring  illicit  fund  overseas  has  evolved  into  another  preferred 
laundering  method.  This  is  especially  so  for  funds  involving  prominent  personalities,  and 
large value funds arising from illegal investment, illegal deposit taking and other fraudulent 
activities.  All  financial  institutions  are  also  urged  to  have  adequate  controls  in  place  to 
manage the risks arising from these activities that could potentially affect their operation and 
reputation. 
Another  notable  global  AML/CFT  trend  is  the  growing  emphasis  on  the  result  and 
effectiveness  of  the  implementation  of  AML/CFT  measures.  Measuring  effectiveness  has 
been a component in the current assessment of national AML/CFT framework undertaken by 
the FATF, FATF-Style Regional Bodies (FSRBs) and multilateral agencies, including the IMF 
and  the  World  Bank.  In  fact,  in  the  recent  FATF  initiative  to  identify  jurisdictions  with 
significant ML/TF strategic deficiencies, much emphasis has been given as to how well the 
jurisdiction implemented the AML/CFT measures. This is ultimately measured by the overall 
result  of  the  implementation.  The  result  is  used  to  measure  the  effectiveness  of  every 
component  of  AML/CFT  measures  covering  the  aspect  of  legal,  preventive  measures, 
financial intelligence and law enforcement, as well as domestic and international cooperation. 
For  this,  it  is  important  that  we  are  well  prepared  for  the  next  round  of  evaluation  on 
Malaysia, which may be scheduled from the next year onward. From our past experience, a 
national  AML/CFT  assessment  demands  the  joint  efforts  of  all  stakeholders,  including  the 
financial institutions. Participation, contribution and cooperation by all stakeholders are very 
critical in ensuring that the result of the assessment truly reflect our strong commitment in not 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2010
only  meeting  the  international  standards,  but  also  in  achieving  the  desired  result  in 
combating  ML/TF.  Therefore,  I  wish  also  to  call  upon  all  stakeholders  of  our  AML/CFT 
regime at every level to make due preparation for the coming assessment on Malaysia, while 
continuing our concerted efforts in preventing for the interest of the country, against ML/TF 
risks. 
Shifting gear of AML/CFT implementation action 
Let me now touch on the second area in terms of policy and strategic response of authorities. 
The Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism Financing Act 2001 (or AMLATFA) has been 
in  operation  for  the  past  eight  years  with  the  basic  foundation  of  the  required  framework, 
such as legal, regulatory and institutional infrastructures, already in place. In the 2007 Mutual 
Evaluation  exercise,  Malaysia  is  recognised  as  having  good  AML/CFT  framework  through 
good  ratings  obtained  in  many  areas,  comparable  to  those  jurisdictions  with  excellent 
AML/CFT framework. We have addressed, since then, most of the recommendations set out 
in the Mutual Evaluation Report (or MER), including the only Non-Compliant rating in terms 
of  SR  IX  by  implementing  the  cross  border  cash  transportation  declaration  system  since 
January 2010. 
Moving forward, considering the rising threat of cross border money laundering and greater 
emphasis  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  AML/CFT  framework,  a  more  strategic  approach  is 
undertaken. This is also undertaken as a tool to support the Malaysia’s National Key Result 
Areas (NKRAs), particularly the first and the second NKRAs, i.e., initiatives to reduce crime 
and  combat  corruption.  For  this,  Malaysia  has  formulated  (in  2009)  a  3-year  National 
AML/CFT  Strategic  Plan  2010–2012  as  a  strategic  tool  to  achieve  the  desired  results  of 
AML/CFT regime. The Strategic Plan includes a set of strategies to achieve specific Desired 
Outcomes in four key areas; focused implementation; enhancement of the legal framework; 
improvement of the institutional framework; and capacity building. The Plan covers not only 
the  aspect  of  preventive  measures  for  financial  institutions  and  designated  non-financial 
businesses  and  professions  (DNFBPs),  but  also  the  aspects  of  legal,  financial  intelligence 
and law enforcement, as well as domestic and international cooperation. 
As the Strategic Plan will be officially rolled out soon, Bank Negara Malaysia and the relevant 
agencies have started to implement the action plan in stages. The ML/TF investigation and 
prosecution have been intensified. To date, there have been 94 money laundering cases at 
various stages of prosecution, with more than 3000 charges involving proceeds amounting to 
RM1.2 billion. Law enforcement agencies have also stepped up capacity and efforts to curb 
laundering  of  illegal  proceeds.  Three  main  law  enforcement  agencies  for  the  AMLATFA 
investigations,  i.e.,  the Royal  Malaysian  Police,  the  Malaysian  Anti-Corruption  Commission 
and the Royal Customs Malaysia have established dedicated AML/CFT units to give focus to 
ML/TF  investigations  and  expedite  overall  enforcement  actions.  Other  related  enforcement 
agencies have also geared up to achieve the same progress. 
For Bank Negara Malaysia, we will remain vigilant on the level of compliance of the financial 
institutions with the AML/CFT rules and measures. Thematic examination will continue to be 
carried  out  on  AML/CFT  compliance  of  the  financial  institutions,  and  other  reporting 
institutions, when the need arises. 
Non-compliance incidences will be dealt with based on the seriousness of the issue. We will 
not compromise on serious matters, such as tipping-off, as those are the foundation of the 
AML/CFT framework. Apart from that, we are fully aware of the concern of not to cause the 
“overshooting” of AML/CFT implementation so as to affect the financial inclusion agenda. For 
this, Malaysia will be involved, under the umbrella of the APG and jointly with the FATF on 
initiative  related  to  financial  inclusion,  in  particular  to  look  at  best  practices  to  ensure  that 
implementation of the AML/CFT measures is not a barrier to financial inclusion. In Malaysia, 
the  subject  of  financial  inclusion  is  actually  embedded  in  the  National  agenda  and 
implemented  with  the  full  participation  of  the  financial  sector.  A  snapshot  on  the 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 3
implementation result currently shows that 80% of the population has some form of savings 
account. In term of penetration of deposit and loan accounts, Malaysia is currently among the 
highest  in  the  world  with  ratio  of  3,300  deposit  accounts  per  1,000  adults  and  1,100  loan 
accounts per 1,000 adults. Malaysia has also been championing the structured advance of 
Islamic finance around the world. Such a structured advance of Islamic finance is in fact part 
and parcel of financial inclusion. In this regard, we believe that Malaysia is able to support 
the  work  of  the  FATF  and  the  APG  on  initiative  related  to  financial  inclusion  through  the 
sharing of our experience. 
In addition, given that ML/TF activities often involve predicate offences under the purview of 
more than one enforcement agencies, there is an increase of collaborative initiative among 
the  law  enforcement  agencies.  This  is  manifested  in  the  establishment  of  collaborative 
platform at management and working levels of relevant agencies. Again, these are aimed at 
coordinating  collective  actions  at  domestic  and  regional  level  against  ML/TF  and  other 
related  predicate  crimes.  Within  the  platform,  several  working  level  task  forces  have  been 
set-up to facilitate joint investigations and enforcement actions. 
Expectation on financial institutions to strengthen AML/CFT governance and 
capability 
Let me now move to the third and final area for my remarks today, that is on our expectation 
on how financial institutions should respond to these developments. Given the significance of 
the new developments highlighted earlier, it is our expectation to see the Board of Directors 
and  Senior  Management  of  reporting  institutions  (RIs)  to  be  the  key  drivers  in  AML/CFT 
initiatives.  The  Board  and  senior  management  are  responsible  to  ensure  that  the  financial 
institutions  stand  ready,  in  terms  of  controls  and  resources,  to  face  the  upcoming 
developments and challenges. 
For this purpose, it is pertinent that, in implementing an AML/CFT internal programme, the 
board of directors and senior management ensure that it is in compliance with the AMLATFA 
and  the  related  regulatory  guidelines,  in  particular,  the  three  important  aspects  of  an 
AML/CFT internal programme. 
The first aspect, i.e., customer due diligence or CDD, is the foundation to effectively prevent 
criminals  from  accessing  the  financial  system.  In  today’s  internet  environment  and 
technologically savvy society, cross border transactions can be executed within seconds. It is 
for this speed in which transactions can be carried out that we need to be vigilant to ensure 
that the provisions of such excellent systems are not abused for illegitimate purposes. We 
just  like  to  emphasize  on  ways  to  look  out  for  false  identity,  complex  structure  with  the 
intention to hide the true beneficial owner and the use of gatekeepers as proxies. 
The second important element of the AML/CFT programme, is the submission of suspicious 
transactions  reports  or  STRs  and  Cash  Threshold  Reports  or  CTRs  to  the  Financial 
Intelligence  Unit  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  Such  reports  do  not  in  any  way  implicate  the 
customers of any unlawful activity or that investigation will commence as soon as the STRs 
or CTRs are lodged. Let me reiterate that the submission of these reports is to facilitate the 
gathering  of  financial  intelligence  for  analysis  purposes.  Then,  it  is  equally  important  to 
establish a range of red flags to enable detection of suspicious transactions. One important 
area is to be alert on high risk jurisdictions. Bank Negara Malaysia has, from time to time, 
provided  information  on  this  area  such  as  circulars  on  countries  that  are  deficient  in  their 
AML/CFT regime as identified by the FATF. In addition, please do keep yourself updated on 
sanctions from the United Nations as well as reports from multilateral organisations, such as 
the UNODC, which report on AML/CFT matters for a number of countries. Information from 
various sources would support the STRs and CTRs mechanism. 
The effective implementation of internal AML/CFT programme relies strongly on the capacity 
and  capability  of  the  resources supporting  the programme.  This  is  translated  into  the  third 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2010
key  aspect  of  the  AML/CFT  programme,  that  is  the  provision  of  adequate  and  applicable 
resources to the compliance section of your institution. It is the responsibility of your Board 
and  management  to  ensure  that  the  compliance  section  is  given  due  consideration  and 
importance in terms of resources. 
It is within this context that I see the financial institutions corporate social responsibility (CSR) 
should  be  undertaken.  The  financial  institutions  can  continue  to  play  a  bigger  role  in 
contributing  towards  reducing  crime  and  corruption,  especially  through  the  reporting  of 
Suspicious  Transaction  Reports  (STRs).  To  date,  the  STR  received  from  reporting 
institutions have contributed to about 300 ML/TF investigations. The STRs, which is “trigger 
alert”  for  any  ML/TF  activities  going  through  the  institutions,  has  steadily  increased  (52% 
annually) due the overall improvement in compliance practice among reporting institutions. 
I  wish  to  stress  that  having  strong  AML/CFT  practice  is  not  only  pertinent  to  ensure  the 
country’s  AML/CFT  risks  are  carefully  managed,  but  it  is  also  important  for  the  financial 
institutions  to  lower  the  cost  of  doing  business  arising  from  AML/CFT  investigations  and 
cases.  Concerted  effort  by  law  enforcement  agencies  has  resulted  in  an  average  annual 
increase  of  86%  in  cases  under  prosecution  and  forfeiture  without  prosecution.  Without 
having  adequate  controls  and  system  in  place,  financial  institution  will  face  challenges  in 
responding to the increasing demand from law enforcement agencies. In addition, it is also 
observed  that  international  financial  institutions  have  strengthened  AML/CFT  monitoring  of 
their  counterparts,  and  are  taking  actions,  such  as  enhanced  due  diligence  or  cease 
correspondent relationship, if the need arises. These would not only affect the cost of doing 
business,  but  also  has  an  impact  on  the  level  of  competitiveness  at  both  domestic  and 
international levels. 
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, I believe that the sharing of new trends and developments would tremendously 
benefit all of us today to have a better perspective of this global issue. I am also glad to note 
that some of the CEOs of our financial institutions will be sharing their insights on this issue 
and how they drive AML/CFT issue in their institutions. I hope that this sharing of insight will 
be an annual event, with better participation from other institutions. More importantly, I hope 
that this event will be the catalyst for more robust and comprehensive AML/CFT measures in 
each of the financial institution in Malaysia. We are to internalise the theme “Strengthening 
Governance to Derive Value” in our institution. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 5
