Ben S Bernanke: Federal Reserve’s exit strategy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 25 March 2010. 
 Chairmen Frank and Watt, Ranking Members Bachus and Paul, and other members of the 
Committee and Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve’s 
strategy for exiting from the extraordinary lending and monetary policies that it implemented 
to  combat  the  financial  crisis  and  support  economic  activity.  As  you  know,  I  previously 
submitted  prepared  testimony  for  a  hearing  on  this  topic  that  was  canceled  because  of 
weather  conditions.  I  request  that  that  testimony  be  included  in  the  record  of  this  hearing. 
This morning, in lieu of repeating my previous prepared statement, I would like to summarize 
some  key  points  from  the  earlier  testimony  and  update  the  Committee  on  recent 
developments. 
Broadly  speaking,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  response  to  the  crisis  and  the  recession  can  be 
divided  into  two  parts.  First,  our  financial  system  during  the  past  2–1/2  years  experienced 
periods  of  intense  panic  and  dysfunction,  during  which  private  short-term  funding  became 
difficult  or  impossible  to  obtain  for  many  borrowers.  The  pulling  back  of  private  liquidity  at 
times  threatened  the  stability  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  and  severely  disrupted 
normal channels of credit. In its role as liquidity provider of last resort, the Federal Reserve 
developed  a  number  of  programs  to  provide  well-secured,  mostly  short-term  credit  to  the 
financial system. These programs, which imposed no cost on taxpayers, were a critical part 
of the government’s efforts to stabilize the financial system and restart the flow of credit to 
American  families  and  businesses.  Besides  ensuring  that  a  range  of  financial  institutions  
– including depository institutions, primary dealers, and money market mutual funds – had 
access  to  adequate  liquidity  in  an  extremely  stressed  environment,  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
lending helped to restore normal functioning and support credit extension in a number of key 
financial markets, including the interbank lending market, the commercial paper market, and 
the market for asset-backed securities. 
As  financial  conditions  have  improved,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  substantially  phased  out 
these  lending  programs.  Some  facilities  were  closed  over  the  course  of  2009,  and  most 
others  expired  on  February  1.1  The  Term  Auction  Facility,  under  which  fixed  amounts  of 
discount  window  credit  were  auctioned  to  depository  institutions,  was  discontinued  in  the 
past  few  weeks.  As  of  today,  the  only  facility  still  in  operation  that  offers  credit  to  multiple 
institutions,  other  than  the  regular  discount  window,  is  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities 
Loan Facility (TALF), which has supported the market for asset-backed securities, such as 
those  backed  by  auto  loans,  credit  card  loans,  small  business  loans,  and  student  loans. 
Reflecting notably better conditions in many markets for asset-backed securities, the TALF is 
scheduled  to  close  on  March  31  for  loans  backed  by  all  types  of  collateral  except  newly 
issued commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and on June 30 for loans backed by 
newly issued CMBS.2  
                                                 
1   The exit from these programs is substantially complete: Total credit outstanding under all programs, including 
the regular discount window, has fallen sharply from a peak of $1–1/2 trillion around year-end 2008 to about 
$71 billion last week. 
2   The TALF extends three- and five-year loans, which will remain outstanding after the facility closes for new 
loans.  The  later  scheduled  closing  of  the  CMBS  portion  of  the  facility  reflects  the  Board’s  assessment  that 
conditions  in  that  sector  remain  highly  stressed,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  CMBS  securitizations  are  more 
complex and take longer to arrange than other types. 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 1
In addition, the Federal Reserve has been normalizing the terms of regular discount window 
loans. We have reduced the maximum maturity of discount window loans from 90 days to 
overnight for nearly all loans, restoring the pre-crisis practice. In mid-February the Federal 
Reserve  also  increased  the  spread  between  the  discount  rate  and  the  upper  limit  of  our 
target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  from  25  basis  points  to  50  basis  points.  We  have 
emphasized that both the closure of our emergency lending facilities and the adjustments to 
the  terms  of  discount  window  loans  are  responses  to  the  improving  conditions  in  financial 
markets.  They  are  not  expected  to  lead  to  tighter  financial  conditions  for  households  and 
businesses and hence do not constitute a tightening of monetary policy, nor should they be 
interpreted as signaling any change in the outlook for monetary policy. 
The second part of the Federal Reserve’s response to the crisis and recession, besides the 
provision  of  liquidity  to  the  financial  system,  involves  both  standard  and  less  conventional 
forms of monetary policy. After reducing short-term interest rates nearly to zero, the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) provided additional monetary policy stimulus through large-
scale  purchases  of  Treasury  securities,  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS),  and 
agency debt. All told, the Federal Reserve purchased $300 billion of Treasury securities and 
will  conclude  purchases  of  $1.25  trillion  of  agency  MBS  and  about  $175  billion  of  agency 
debt  at  the  end  of  this  month.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  purchases  have  had  the  effect  of 
leaving the banking system highly liquid, with U.S. banks now holding more than $1.1 trillion 
of reserves with Federal Reserve Banks. A range of evidence suggests that these purchases 
and the associated creation of bank reserves have helped improve conditions in mortgage 
markets and other private credit markets and put downward pressure on longer-term private 
borrowing rates and spreads. 
At its meeting last week, the FOMC maintained its target range for the federal funds rate at  
0  to  1/4  percent  and  indicated  that  it  continues  to  anticipate  that  economic  conditions, 
including  low  rates  of  resource  utilization,  subdued  inflation  trends,  and  stable  inflation 
expectations,  are  likely  to  warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  of  the  federal  funds  rate  for  an 
extended period. In due course, however, as the expansion matures, the Federal Reserve 
will need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to prevent the development of inflationary 
pressures. The Federal Reserve has a number of tools that will enable it to firm the stance of 
policy at the appropriate time. 
Most  importantly,  in  October  2008  the  Congress  gave  the  Federal  Reserve  statutory 
authority  to  pay  interest  on  balances  that  banks  hold  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  By 
increasing  the  interest  rate  on  banks’  reserves,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  able  to  put 
significant upward pressure on all short-term interest rates, as banks will not supply short-
term funds to the money markets at rates significantly below what they can earn by holding 
reserves  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  Actual  and  prospective  increases  in  short-term 
interest  rates  will  be  reflected  in  turn  in  higher  longer-term  interest  rates  and  in  tighter 
financial conditions more generally. 
The Federal Reserve has also been developing a number of additional tools it will be able to 
use to reduce the large quantity of reserves currently held by the banking system. Reducing 
the quantity of reserves will lower the net supply of funds to the money markets, which will 
improve  the  Federal  Reserve’s  control  of  financial  conditions  by  leading  to  a  tighter 
relationship between the interest rate paid on reserves and other short-term interest rates. 
Notably, to build the capability to drain large quantities of reserves, the Federal Reserve has 
been  working  to  expand  its  range  of  counterparties  for  reverse  repurchase  operations 
beyond the primary dealers and to develop the infrastructure necessary to use agency MBS 
as collateral in such transactions.3 In this regard, the Federal Reserve recently announced 
                                                 
3   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2010
the  criteria  that  it  will  apply  in  determining  the  eligibility  of  money  market  mutual  funds  to 
serve as counterparties in reverse repurchase agreements. 
As an additional means of draining reserves, the Federal Reserve is also developing plans to 
offer to depository institutions term deposits, which are roughly analogous to certificates of 
deposit  that  the  institutions  offer  to  their  customers.  A  proposal  describing  a  term  deposit 
facility was recently published in the Federal Register, and the Federal Reserve is finalizing a 
revised  proposal  in  light  of  the  public  comments  that  have  been  received.  After  a  revised 
proposal  is  reviewed  by  the  Board,  we  expect  to  be  able  to  conduct  test  transactions  this 
spring and to have the facility available if necessary thereafter. The use of reverse repos and 
the deposit facility would together allow the Federal Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of 
dollars of reserves from the banking system quite quickly, should it choose to do so. 
When  these  tools  are  used  to  drain  reserves  from  the  banking  system,  they  do  so  by 
replacing  bank  reserves  with  other  liabilities;  the  asset  side  and  the  overall  size  of  the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet remain unchanged. If necessary, as a means of applying 
monetary  restraint,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  has  the  option  of  redeeming  or  selling 
securities. The redemption or sale of securities would have the effect of reducing the size of 
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as well as further reducing the quantity of reserves in 
the  banking  system.  Restoring  the  size  and  composition  of  the  balance  sheet  to  a  more 
normal configuration is a longer-term objective of our policies. In any case, the sequencing of 
steps and the combination of tools that the Federal Reserve uses as it exits from its currently 
very accommodative policy stance will depend on economic and financial developments and 
on our best judgments about how to meet the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate of maximum 
employment and price stability. 
In sum, in response to severe threats to our economy, the Federal Reserve created a series 
of special lending facilities to stabilize the financial system and encourage the resumption of 
private  credit  flows  to  American  families  and  businesses.  As  market  conditions  and  the 
economic  outlook  have  improved,  these  programs  have  been  terminated  or  are  being 
phased  out.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  promoted  economic  recovery  through  sharp 
reductions  in  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  and  through  large-scale  purchases  of 
securities.  The  economy  continues  to  require  the  support  of  accommodative  monetary 
policies. However, we have been working to ensure that we have the tools to reverse, at the 
appropriate  time,  the  currently  very  high  degree  of  monetary  stimulus.  We  have  full 
confidence that, when the time comes, we will be ready to do so. 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 3
