Jean-Claude Trichet: Welcome message at the Annual General Assembly 
of the Manufacturers’ Association of Israel (MAI) 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual 
General  Assembly  of  the  Manufacturers’  Association  of  Israel  (MAI),  Tel  Aviv,  21 January 
2010. 
 Dear President Brosh,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to extend a welcome message to the Annual General Assembly of the 
Manufacturers’ Association of Israel. Your meeting is taking place in challenging times for the 
global, European and Israeli economies. Not surprisingly, Israel, as a very open economy, 
has been adversely affected by the global financial crisis. I also note that the Israeli economy 
has been quite resilient compared with other advanced economies. Israel can rightfully take 
pride  in  its  recent  economic  performance,  as  well  as  in  its  achievements  in  economic 
development more broadly. 
Your  country  has  close  economic  ties  with  Europe  and  is  highly  integrated  into  the  global 
economy, so I think it would be useful to consider two questions: what is the outlook for the 
euro area economy; and what are the lessons of the global financial crisis? 
In the euro area, real GDP growth in the third quarter of last year returned to positive territory 
following  five  quarters  of  contraction.  We  expect  the  euro  area  economy  to  grow  at  a 
moderate  pace  in  2010.  I  should  add,  though,  that  the  recovery  process  is  likely  to  be 
uneven, and the outlook remains subject to high uncertainty. 
The upside and downside risks are broadly balanced. On the upside, there may be stronger 
than anticipated effects stemming from the extensive macroeconomic stimulus that has been 
provided  by  the  authorities.  Confidence  may  also  improve  further  and  foreign  trade  may 
recover more strongly than projected.  
On  the  downside,  concerns  remain  as  regards  negative  interactions  between  the  real 
economy and the financial sector, which may be stronger or more protracted than expected. 
Renewed  increases  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  the  intensification  of  protectionist 
pressures  and  disruptive  market  movements  related  to  the  correction  of  global  external 
imbalances  remain  other  downside  risks  for  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area  and 
beyond.  
Budget  deficits  in  euro  area  countries  must  be  reduced  in  a  timely  fashion  to  maintain 
confidence  in  public  finances.  Avoiding  protectionism  and  disruptive  market  movements 
related  to  global  imbalances  will  require  a  high  degree  of  international  cooperation  among 
policy makers in advanced and emerging market economies.  
This brings me to my second point: what are the lessons of the financial crisis? Given the 
magnitude  and  the  negative  spillovers  of  the  financial  crisis  on  economic  growth,  on 
unemployment and on public finances, the citizens in our countries will not forgive us, if we 
fail to draw the right lessons from the crisis. In my view, there are three main lessons to be 
learnt: 
• 
• 
• 
first, the need to build a more resilient financial sector, 
second, the need for fully coordinated measures to that end at the global level, and 
third,  the  need  for  all  systemic  economies  to  embark  on  sound  macroeconomic 
policies over the medium and long term. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 1
The epicentre of the crisis was located in the financial sector. Therefore the global financial 
system  has  to  be  made  more  resilient.  Current  efforts  are  under  way,  and  the  focus  must 
now be on implementation. This concerns both financial regulation as well as oversight. In 
the  EU,  financial  sector  supervision  is  on  the  way  to  be  strengthened  in  a  two-pronged 
approach. A European System of Financial Supervisors will be established to permit better 
coordination  among  national  authorities  that  oversee  financial  regulation.  And  a  European 
Systemic Risk Board will be responsible for macro-prudential supervision. This new body will 
provide early warnings and issue recommendations to help prevent any renewed build-up of 
excessive risk in the financial system as a whole.  
These measures are not the end of the road on regulatory and supervisory reform, but, once 
implemented, a significant step forward. Although they are aimed at the financial sector, they 
will serve the economy as a whole, not least manufacturers. The manufacturing industry has 
a stake in a stable and resilient financial system.  
The  crisis  has  revealed  the  very  high  level  of  interconnectedness  of  the  global  financial 
system.  This  constitutes  a  compelling  case  for  very  close  international  cooperation  and 
solutions at the global level. There is an overwhelming need to implement global reforms in a 
coordinated fashion and along the same concepts, in order to preserve a global level playing 
field that would be solid and resilient.  
Finally, the crisis has again stressed the need for all policy-makers to contribute to financial, 
macroeconomic and price stability over the medium and long term. In the area of monetary 
policy,  a  sound  legal  and  institutional  framework  for  central  banks  promotes  medium-term 
and  stability  orientation.  The  primary  mandate  of  the  ECB  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  To 
fulfil this mandate, the ECB and national central banks are institutions whose independence 
is firmly enshrined in law.  
This framework has been crucial to anchoring inflation expectations. It has also facilitated our 
task of maintaining price stability in the euro area, both at times of heightened inflationary 
pressures and at times of deflationary risks stemming from financial distress. I am convinced 
that a clear commitment to price stability by independent central banks has beneficial effects 
in countries and regions all over the world. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me conclude by saying that business is, by its very nature, an act of trust, an expression 
of  confidence.  This  is  all  the  more  true  in  the  manufacturing  industry,  where  decisions  on 
investment are often made with a long time horizon. Confidence is exactly what has been 
short in supply during the crisis. Central banks have to be anchors of stability and confidence 
–  and  not  only  in  turbulent  times.  When  the  crisis  unfolded,  they  reacted  swiftly  and 
decisively.  This  was  true  worldwide,  including  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  Israel  under  the 
leadership of my colleague Stanley Fischer, with whom I enjoy an extremely confident and 
friendly relationship.  
By solidly anchoring expectations of price stability over the medium term, central banks are 
consolidating confidence and contributing to a sustainable recovery.  
I wish you a successful meeting and thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2010
