Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook 
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  to 
invited foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 8 April 2010. 
 The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 24 March, Monetary Policy Report 1/10 and previous speeches. Please note 
that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since  our  meeting  a  year  ago,  the  international  economy  has  begun  to  recover  from  the 
financial  crisis.  Norway  has  weathered  the  crisis  better  than  most  countries.  In  my 
presentation today, I would therefore like to discuss how underlying economic forces have 
benefitted  the  Norwegian  economy  through  two  “golden  decades”.  I  will  comment  on  the 
Government Pension Fund Global and how the financial crisis has influenced its investments 
and returns. A key lesson from the crisis has been the need for international cooperation and 
collective  action.  Before  concluding,  I  will  therefore  highlight  the  importance  of  multilateral 
and statutory-based institutions for sound international economic governance. 
The Norwegian economy – two golden decades 
The  economic  downturn  in  Norway  proved  to  be  mild.  Norway  has  not  experienced  a 
pronounced downturn since the crisis around 1990, when a cost crisis, an employment crisis 
with a sharp increase in unemployment and a decline in output, a currency crisis, a fall in 
property prices and a banking crisis all occurred at the same time. 
A long upturn followed from 1992 to 2008. National income rose by an annual rate of 5.4 per 
cent in this period, far higher than the rate of output growth in the mainland economy. Income 
growth was even higher than in the post-war period in the 1950s and 1960s. 
 BIS Review 44/2010 
 1
Major structural reforms 
Behind these favourable developments were the major structural reforms of the 1980s and 
1990s that resulted in an expanded production capacity in the Norwegian economy. Capital 
and  credit  markets  were  liberalised.  It  became  easier  to  establish  and  build  up  new 
businesses. The EEA and WTO agreements resulted in stronger competition and increased 
flows  of  goods  and  services,  labour  and  capital.  As  a  result  of  the  1992  tax  reform,  the 
welfare  state  could  be  funded  with  reduced  impact  on  wealth  creation.  The  framework 
conditions  for  the  electricity  market,  telecom  market,  aviation  and  broadcasting  were 
changed. Trade was liberalised. State-owned companies were listed on the stock exchange 
and new forms of managing public agencies were developed. Industrial policy no longer kept 
unprofitable enterprises afloat. Subsequently, the business sector experienced a long period 
of high productivity growth. 
Moreover, shifting forces have driven the economy. In the wake of the crisis around 1990, 
labour  costs  decreased to  a  low  level  compared  with  Norway’s  trading  partners  and  wage 
settlements were moderate. In 1995, the cost level was 10 to 12 per cent below Norway’s 
average for the oil age from 1970 until now.  
 2 
  BIS Review 44/2010
In addition, real interest rates in Norway fell markedly through the 1990s from high levels. 
This  was  because  the  fixed  krone  exchange  rate  regime  maintained  through  the  period 
managed to bring down inflation and inflation expectations.  
Moreover, growth in public spending was rapidly reduced once business sector activity had 
recovered. 
 Economic shift 
Over the past decade Norway experienced an economic shift. The cost level began to rise. 
This  was  related  to  the  sharp  improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  at  the  time  and  a 
gradual  pickup  in  growth  abroad.  Prices  for  Norwegian  exports  such  as  oil,  gas,  metals, 
minerals, fish and freight, rose markedly, while prices for imported goods fell. From 2003 to 
2008, terms-of-trade gains alone pushed national income up by more than 20 per cent, or a 
good 4 per cent per year. 
Institutions  and  mechanisms  had  also  been  put  in  place  to  manage  the  sharp  increase  in 
income.  Norway’s  sovereign  wealth  fund,  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global,  and  the 
fiscal guidelines were established with the express purpose of making the mainland economy 
less susceptible to fluctuations in the oil price. Improved terms of trade, higher revenues and 
increased government spending contributed to a stronger krone and a shift in real resources 
towards sheltered sectors. At the same time, the fiscal rule provided  a basis for growth in 
business  sectors  other  than  the  oil  industry  and  the  public  sector  through  the  decade. 
Norway  had  a  plentiful  supply  of  labour  from  new  EU  member  countries  and  experienced 
several years of high output growth. At the same time, the inflation target for monetary policy 
adopted in 2001 provided a sound anchor for inflation expectations. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 3
 Autumn 2008 
In  2008,  the  expansionary  period  was  drawing  to  a  close.  Costs  had  risen  sharply,  credit 
growth had been strong, the key policy rate had been raised and house prices had started to 
fall.  Petroleum  revenue  spending  over  the  central  government  budget  had  increased,  but 
employment  in  traditional  industries  was  still  high.  Despite  Norway’s  high  cost  level, 
merchandise exports and supplies of goods and services to the oil industry held up well due 
to strong demand.  
Instead  of  a  gradual  slowdown,  economic  growth  came  to  an  abrupt  halt  in  autumn  2008 
when  the  global  financial  crisis  peaked.  Demand  for  Norway’s  exports  fell  markedly. 
Norwegian  banks  proved  to  be sensitive  to  the  credit freeze  in  global money  markets  and 
stopped providing new loans.1 
However, Norwegian banks were not as exposed to loan losses – at home and abroad – as 
banks  in  other  countries.  The  economic  downturn  proved  to  be  milder  in  Norway  than 
elsewhere,  but  the  banking  sector  seems  also  to  have  performed  its  craft  fairly  well. 
Moreover,  government  and  central  bank  liquidity  provision  measures  were  effective.  The 
liquidity crisis passed quickly and a solvency crisis did not occur in Norway’s banking system. 
The rapid rebound in oil prices and a weaker krone provided a boost to the economy. The 
interest  rate  was  lowered  sharply  to  a  historically  low  level  and  public  spending  increased 
markedly.  The  downturn  was  milder  than  we  had  expected  when  the  interest  rate  was 
reduced – partly because oil prices proved to be higher than expected and partly because 
the policy measures were more effective than we had dared to assume. Therefore, we now 
expect to raise the policy rate at a gradual pace back to more normal levels. 
The emerging economies were hardest hit by the global crisis in the late 1990s. This time 
OECD countries were the most severely affected. But Norway largely escaped both crises. 
Overall,  output  fell  less  in  Norway  than  in  other  countries  and  is  recovering  more  quickly. 
Unemployment has remained low.  
                                                 
1  
IMF Country Report No. 10/24. Norway: Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2010
Norway is not unique 
We  cannot  expect  underlying  forces  to  be  as  beneficial  in  the  future.  Real  interest  rates 
cannot  be  expected  to  fall.  Another  sharp  boost  to  export  prices  is  not  likely.  In  addition, 
there are vulnerabilities in the Norwegian economy. Labour has never been as costly, and 
businesses  may  be  at  a  disadvantage  in  tenders  and  competitions  given  the  current  high 
level  of  spare  capacity  in  other  countries.  Moreover,  it  has  never  been  more  profitable  to 
relocate activities abroad.  
During  the  upturn,  Norwegian  firms  fared  well  in  spite  of  high  costs,  thanks  to  efficiency 
gains, high turnover volumes and price increases. Despite the high cost of Norwegian labour, 
there  has  been  virtually  full  employment.  Markets  will  be  more  demanding  ahead.  Despite 
the floating exchange rate, our cost level cannot be expected to fall to any great extent as 
economic conditions are weaker in other European countries than here. 
The industrial structure in Norway’s relatively small economy is different from that of other 
advanced  economies.  The  emergence  of  new  Asian  market  economies  is  beneficial  for 
Norway owing to its sizeable commodity exports and freight transport. This is also reflected in 
Norway’s equity market. 
 The value of Norwegian listed companies correlates closely with the value of companies in 
emerging market economies. Norway is vulnerable to a slowdown in growth in Asia. In such 
a  scenario,  commodity  prices  might  fall  and  the  terms  of  trade  deteriorate.  Norway’s  high 
cost  level  could  at  the  same  time  make  it  difficult  for  the  business  sector  to  shift  to  new 
markets. 
Petroleum revenue spending 
Government  petroleum  revenue  spending  influences  Norway’s  cost  level  and  trade 
conditions in international markets. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 5
 According to the fiscal policy guidelines, petroleum revenues should be phased gradually into 
the economy, approximately in pace with the expected real return on the Government Pension 
Fund Global, which is estimated at 4 per cent per annum. In periods of high or rapidly rising 
unemployment,  the  use  of  petroleum  revenue  can  be  increased,  and,  inversely,  fiscal 
retrenchment is needed during periods of high economic activity and resource scarcity.2 
It  now  appears  that capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  may  return  to  a  normal 
level in one and a half to two years – and with a somewhat lower unemployment rate than 
today. A different path can be met with an interest rate response. Our understanding of the 
fiscal  rule  is  that  the  government  budget  for  2012  or  at  the  latest  for  2013  should  aim  at 
bringing down petroleum revenue spending to 4 per cent of the capital in the Pension Fund.  
The scale of petroleum revenue spending – growth in public expenditure – is important for 
developments  in  competitiveness,  also  referred  to  as  the  real  krone  exchange  rate,  in  the 
long term. But, in the short term, the krone exchange rate can vary widely, and it depreciated 
in autumn 2008 when capital sought safe havens. This helped Norwegian manufacturing in 
the first phase of the downturn. Since then, the krone has appreciated considerably.  
In  2009  and  2010,  government  petroleum  revenue  spending  shows  a  substantial  increase 
and foreign investment via the Pension Fund a decrease. This leads to higher commercial 
demand for the Norwegian krone which directly contributes to its appreciation.  
More fundamentally, the krone is influenced by the difference in activity at home and abroad 
and how fast the interest rate has to be increased in Norway to keep inflation low and stable. 
The economic geography of Norway will change over the next 10 to 15 years. The domestic 
cost level and the real economy crisis abroad will put pressure on jobs and businesses in 
manufacturing communities.  
And  as  mentioned,  the  most  important,  perhaps  the  only,  instrument  available  to  the 
authorities in addressing this challenge is to restrain petroleum revenue spending.  
Petroleum revenue investment 
Let me now turn to the Government Pension Fund Global. 
                                                 
2   See for example the National Budget for 2010, box 3.1, p. 53. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2010
It took a generation from the time the first oil field was discovered in the North Sea until the 
government  began  to  set  aside  economic  rent.  The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was 
established in 1990 and the first transfer to the wealth fund was made in 1996. 
 Each  year  since  that  time,  as  a  savings  plan,  the  government  has  set  aside  a  portion  of 
current  income  from  petroleum  activities  as  deposits  in  the  Fund.  Today,  the  value  of  the 
Fund is around NOK 2.6 trillion, or about 115 per cent of 2009 GDP in Norway.  
New transfers will likely be made to the Fund for perhaps a little more than another decade. 
The Fund will in that case continue to grow and may reach twice its current size. The actual 
build-up of the Fund may span a short generation. 
The Fund will thereafter enter a new phase. With lower revenues from oil and gas activities, it 
will  no  longer  receive  capital  transfers  from  the  government.  When  oil  and  gas  revenues 
cease to provide the government with economic rent, only the annual real return on the Fund 
can be used on a permanent basis.  
In the mid-1990s, oil prices were around USD 20 per barrel and revenues were set aside. 
This year the oil price must be over USD 50 per barrel to generate sufficient oil revenues to 
make transfers to the Fund. We must be prepared for wide variations in oil prices, and the 
first year without transfers of oil revenues – but rather withdrawals – may be approaching.  
BIS Review 44/2010 
  7
Increase in equity share 
Under the Fund’s investment strategy, more equities are purchased when equity prices fall and 
fewer when prices rise. Thus, the Fund purchased a large volume of equities in the period from 
2001 to 2003 and during 2008 and 2009. As a result the Fund currently holds a little more than 
1¾ per cent of listed European equities and roughly 1 per cent of all listed equities. 
The Fund’s stock holdings are spread across different countries, sectors and regions. In the 
early  days  of  the  Fund,  the  benchmark  portfolio  was  restricted  to  investments  in  Western 
Europe,  North  America,  Japan,  Brazil  and  a  limited  number  of  countries  from  all  over  the 
world.  Today  the  benchmark  portfolio  is  more  diversified  and  includes  a  large  number  of 
countries globally. 
 8 
  BIS Review 44/2010
In  2008  it  was  decided  to  increase  the  share  of  emerging  market  assets  in  the  Fund’s 
benchmark portfolio. Thus, investments in these markets have grown. 
 The government has stated that the expected annual return on the Fund will be close to 4 
per cent over time. Since its establishment, the average return has been 2.7 per cent. It was 
only a little more than a year ago that we witnessed the steepest fall in global capital markets 
in our time. By maintaining the Fund’s risk profile it is fairly probable that the average return 
will gradually approach 4 per cent again. 
Last year was the best in the Fund’s history. Gains in international equity and fixed income 
markets led to a record annual return of 25.6 per cent in 2009.3 However, developments in 
                                                  
3   Government Pension Fund Global – Annual Report 2009. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 9
2009 must to a large extent be viewed in light of the financial crisis and are mainly due to a 
reversal of the negative results in 2007 and 2008.  
Multilateral approach to global challenges 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  the  international  economic  order  and  developments  in  multilateral 
institutions over the past few years. 
The international order and Norway 
In  recent  years,  increasingly  assertive  non-statutory  bodies  have  emerged  in  the  area  of 
international  economic  and  financial  collaboration,  most  notably  the  G20.When  the  global 
financial crisis unfolded, the G204 rose to the task. Nevertheless, I believe that the role of 
non-statutory bodies and the statutory institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)5,  must  be  reconsidered  to  promote  the  necessary  multilateral  approach  to  global 
governance.  
Norway  has  a  long-held  tradition  of  participating  actively  in  multilateral  cooperation  and 
institutions has actively backed the multilateral responses to the financial crisis. As a global 
investor with an open market economy, Norway has a strong and vested interest in the well-
being of global financial markets. This interest is shared with most market participants, large 
and small. We have a common interest in a market-based international order, supporting a 
level playing field and sound economic governance.  
Lessons from the crisis 
A  key  lesson  from  the  global  crisis  is  the  need  for  multilateral  cooperation  and  collective 
action.  It  relates  to  the  framework  for  polices  on  prevention,  resolution,  reform  and 
implementation. It also relates to the institutional set-up. The IMF has played a pivotal role in 
presenting the initial lessons from the crisis, in providing finance to countries with temporary 
balance  of  payments  needs,  and  in  preparing  the  overall  framework  for  the  international 
policy  response.  When  the  good  times  return,  we  must  avoid  memory  failure  and  remind 
ourselves of these facts of life.  
Shaping the global governance structure 
At their summit in Pittsburgh last September, the G20 leaders “…designate[d] the G20 to be 
the premier forum for our international economic cooperation”. 
As an effective and powerful group, the G20 featured prominently in the broad international 
efforts to stabilise the global economy in late 2008 and early 2009. Without its prompt and 
comprehensive action, the consequences of the crisis would have been much worse. Among 
the G20 measures of 2009 were the efforts to strengthen confidence in international financial 
institutions, the IMF in  particular, to permit it to play an effective role in tackling the crisis. 
Indeed,  the  G20  increasingly  uses  the  IMF  as  an  instrument  of  its  policy  implementation. 
                                                 
4   The membership of the G20 comprises Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, 
Indonesia, Italy, Korea, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the 
United States and the European Union. The G20 was formed as a new forum for cooperation and consultation 
on matters pertaining to the international financial system. It studies, reviews, and promotes discussion among 
key  industrial  and  emerging  market  countries  of  policy  issues  pertaining  to  the  promotion  of  international 
financial stability, and seeks to address issues that go beyond the responsibilities of any one organization. 
5   The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an organisation of 186 countries, working to foster global monetary 
cooperation, secure financial stability, facilitate international trade, promote high employment and sustainable 
economic growth, and reduce poverty around the world. 
10 
 BIS Review 44/2010
Nevertheless  international  policy  cooperation  has  moved  out  of  statutory  bodies  and  into 
groups of a select few, bypassing established channels and fora. Other countries are called 
upon to contribute to efforts agreed by the G20.  
Policy action and global imbalances 
The large global imbalances that contributed to the current crisis are likely to widen anew, if 
they  are  not  addressed  effectively.  This  would  again  put  at  risk  the  stability  of  the  global 
economy. Global and prompt policy action is therefore warranted yet again. To this end, the 
G20  has  embarked  upon  an  unprecedented  exercise  in  policy  collaboration  with  the  IMF. 
Still, the G20 lacks the legitimacy that historically has been associated with a truly multilateral 
framework.  Its  ambitious  economic  cooperation  should  be  anchored  in  a  multilateral 
institution.  The  IMF  is  the  logical  choice.  With  G20  merging  its  activities  with  those  of  the 
IMF, both will attain wider acceptance and legitimacy. 
Success in the ambitious tasks of the G20 can only be welcomed by the rest of us. However, 
it  is  a  weakness  that  the  members  of  the  G20  represent  only  themselves.  Virtually  entire 
groups of countries and regions are left out. They have no voice and no representation in the 
work of the G20 or in the institutions which it chooses to set up to further its agenda. This is 
at  variance  with  the  principles  of  multilateralism  and  international  cooperation  that  have 
prevailed since the end of the Second World War. Over time, this could easily weaken not 
only  the  G20  process, but  also  the  IMF  as  it will  be  perceived  as  increasingly  guided  and 
controlled by the G20.  
A strong institution like the IMF must be at the centre of multilateral economic and financial 
cooperation.  Virtually  all  the  countries  of  the  world  participate  and  are  represented  in  the 
IMF. To be able to continue to play an effective role, the IMF needs to enjoy confidence and 
trust, and to be seen as having a legitimate structure of governance. Last but not least, the 
IMF needs to be financially strong, to have at its disposal financial resources commensurate 
with its tasks, including the ability to provide prompt and significant financial support when 
needed.  
In closing, I would emphasise certain key principles: 
 
First,  systemically  important  countries  need  to  collaborate  effectively  on 
consistent economic policies. Their success is vital not only for their own good, 
but also for that of others, including small open economies.   
Second, this collaboration should be anchored in a multilateral and statutory-
based  system  of  representation,  for  example  through  constituencies,  where 
smaller countries would participate, even if indirectly.  
Third,  the  constituencies  should  have  rotating  representation,  where  small 
countries, at least periodically, could participate directly.  
  Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 11
