Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Moving the economy forward through banking 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the 
Annual Convention of the Chamber of Thrift Banks, Manila, 12 March 2010. 
 Mr.  Pascual  M.  Garcia  III,  President  of  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks,  the  new  officers  and 
trustees  of  the  chamber  this  2010,  the  various  member  banks  comprising  the  CTB,  our 
colleagues in banking and from media, ladies and gentlemen, a very pleasant good morning. 
It is a pleasure to join you again for your annual convention. On a personal note, it certainly 
feels good to be back in circulation, both literally and figuratively. As many of you may know, 
this is my first speaking engagement after my leave of absence. Indeed, industry events such 
as CTB’s annual convention are simply too important to miss. And while the BSP has always 
valued directly interfacing with stakeholders, I must say that events over the past month have 
only  renewed  my  keen  interest  to  learn  from  others,  as  opportunities  present  themselves, 
knowing now (more than ever) that change can come rather quickly. 
The economy and the Philippine banking industry 
Indeed, change is clearly the mantra today. The global economy is in the midst of a massive 
restructuring of the  market landscape. And while we have  witnessed encouraging signs of 
recovery,  there  are  recurring  reminders  that  all  is  not  yet  well.  Moving  forward,  change 
beckons  but  we  must  jointly  share  the  task  of  choosing  the  changes  that  we  desire  and 
laying the foundation for instituting these collective changes. 
Change though can never be absolute. Moving forward means that we appreciate where we 
are, and what we have. When considered against the economic dislocations transpiring at 
the global stage, the Philippines performed well in both 2008 and 2009. As we expected, last 
year’s  growth  was  modest  but  we  certainly  stayed  positive  and  did  not  venture  into  a 
recession. More importantly, other key economic measures suggest that all was not bad: 
 
 
 
 
 
Lower inflation at 3.2%;  
Higher systemic liquidity;  
Larger BOP surplus at USD5.3 billion;  
More remittance at USD17.3 billion despite predictions of sharp reversals;  
All-time  high  Gross  International  Reserves  at  USD44.2  billion  which  translates  to 
almost  nine  (8.98)  months  of  coverage  for  imports  of  goods  and  services 
(vs. 5.95 months’ worth at end 2008); and  
A better portfolio balance of our external debts with only 1 out of every 10 dollars of 
debt now due in the short-term. 
 At the heart of the country’s better fortune during this global crisis is a banking system that 
continued to manifest resiliency and strength in 2009. Unlike previous crises, we continued to 
mobilize deposits and funded new loans. Credit quality for the system as a whole in fact has 
been improving with NPL ratios declining, while coverage ratios generally increasing. Thus, 
despite  the  global  financial  turmoil,  our  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  for  the  Philippine  banking 
system (on a consolidated basis) has remained largely stable at around 15.68%. 
BIS Review 30/2010 
 1
The challenge of managing risk 
My point in all these ladies and gentlemen is that macro-financial indicators cannot exist in a 
vacuum and must be seen in the context of the prevailing environment. For banking markets 
worldwide, managing financial risks has been the unifying theme for several decades now. 
We see this, for example, in the issuance by the BIS via the BCBS Core Principles, the Basel 
Accord and the array of best practice documents on specific types of risks. 
The net effect is that the international order has achieved uniformity in the treatment of banks 
as institutions that generate and mitigate risks. Instead of differentiating one bank type from 
another, the stylized framework distinguishes across financial risks with much less concern 
with how we categorize banks. 
As you are well aware, we employ the same approach here. Thrift banks for example have 
been accorded the ability to conduct activities that previously were limited to commercial and 
universal banks. In the last 2–3 years alone, the Monetary Board approved, among others: 
 
 
 
 
Your ability to apply for a end-user derivatives license (circ 594);  
Your ability to issue foreign currency LCs (circ 650);  
Limited trust operations (circ 583); and  
Investments  in  readily  marketable  foreign-currency  denominated  debt  instruments 
for those with FCDU license (circ 565 and 575). 
All of these help diversify your operations. Yet, these do not come free and they bring with 
them the need for more prudent exercise of individual bank judgement. 
There is no greater challenge today than to do a better job at identifying financial risks and 
prudently managing these on our respective balance sheets. The difficulty is that these risks 
are  themselves  quickly  evolving  and  may  typically  be  layered  across  transactions  in  ways 
that often are neither obvious nor transparent. 
This is certainly no small task. Using the four new activities I mentioned that thrift banks may 
conduct as examples, these expose you to greater amounts of credit risks in trade finance 
(FCY  LCs),  market  risks  in  derivatives  (as  end-users)  and  in  the  FCDU  books  (for  the 
investments in FCY debt securities) while operational risks arise in the limited trust. 
All  of  these  will  clearly  add  pressure  on  both  your  risk  culture  and  compliance  program. 
These two aspects are not buzz words to which we pay mere lip service. Behind them are 
real responsibilities that the bank must explicitly bear. In effect, you choose whether or not 
you  wish  to  take  this  business  road.  Once  that  choice  is  made,  the  burden  of  prudently 
managing risks is no longer a choice. It becomes a shared responsibility – among banks and 
between  the  regulator  and  the  regulated  –  because  we  are  all  accountable  for  attaining 
financial stability. 
The challenge for thrift banks 
For thrift banks, the immediate challenge is to consider the evolving dimensions of financial 
risks  as  you  further  develop  within  your  niche  markets  while  prudently  exploring  new 
possibilities  in  due  course.  The  expansion  of  your  balance  sheet  in  2009  –  deposits  grew 
12% while gross loans grew by 8.6% – confirms that resources are being mobilized and can 
be deployed. 
Following your mandate to provide medium to long term peso financing, we expect you to 
remain pro-active in residential real estate undertakings and auto loans both of which thrift 
banks  dominate.  Loans  for  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (SMEs)  have  consistently 
represented one-fifth of your industry’s exposure and represents a niche that the economy 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2010
relies  on  you  to  nurture  and  develop.  The  families  of  our  overseas  workers  are  another 
market that you could further expand services to1. To fully tap into the needs of the SMEs 
and  OF  families,  however,  you  will  need  to  cover  the  vast  expanse  of  the  Philippine 
archipelago with your network of over 1,300 banking offices. Currently NCR and Calabarzon 
are the main hubs of thrift bank operations and this leaves the rest of the economy as an 
upside potential. 
Further to this, the BSP has adopted a liberalized branching policy which you can avail of to 
reach a broader market constituency. I urge you also to further consider and subsequently 
deploy  technology  so  that  you  can  bridge  the  geographical  divide  of  our  archipelago. 
E-banking  is  also  now  a  reality  and  you  can  parlay  this  to  truly  provide  credit  and  saving 
access to a holistic Philippine market. 
I  am  happy  to  note  that  you  have  taken  advantage  of  our  policy  initiatives  to  improve  the 
reach  of  banking  services.  I  understand  that  last  year,  thrift  banks  have  deployed  an 
additional  95  ATM  units,  bringing  the  total  thrift  banks’  ATM  units  to  959  nationwide.  In 
addition, there were 15 thrift banks that started to engage in electronic and mobile banking 
activities as of end-December 2009. 
From the policy side, we welcome receipt and continue to evaluate your proposals such as 
the ability to extend long-term foreign-currency loans, the possibility of a more pro-active use 
of FX swaps and engaging in bancassurance. 
In considering all these possibilities, I trust that you and I agree that the underlying thread will 
still be the alignment of your risk culture and compliance program to the demands of these 
expanded business lines. 
Here, it is worth pointing out briefly that there are performance differences which the industry 
may want to further look into. For example, while the Philippine banking system consolidated 
CAR was 15.68% in June 2009 (latest available), the thrift banking industry was at 11.47%. 
Whereas  the  system  as  a  whole  reflected  an  NPL  ratio  of  3.66%  in  December  2009,  the 
comparable metric for the thrift banking industry was at 7.27%. Don’t get me wrong. The BSP 
does  appreciate  the  gains  that  the  thrift  banking  industry  has  achieved  through  time.  But 
change beckons change and we must continue to strive to work towards further gains where 
possible. 
Another area of change is certainly the most revered facet of a democracy. As it has often 
been observed, elections entice institutions to forestall business plans, opting instead to “wait 
and see” before charting their business future. For banks, this strategy will render you as a 
passive observer which precisely is the role that will be most detrimental to economic activity. 
This will not benefit anyone and can only hurt everyone. I urge you then to stay focused on 
your target markets and fulfil the needs of the banking public through the political transition. 
We were strong enough to weather a global financial meltdown; surely, a political transition 
should be less of an issue. 
In closing ladies and gentlemen, let me point out that adversity brings with it hope of new 
opportunities while relative triumph can only invite further trials. The adversities of our past 
have made us stronger and it is now up to us to show that we can meet the challenge of 
continuing trials. 
I urge all of us present here to seize these opportunities to move forward. I encourage the 
banking  industry  to  be  the  stimulus  for  the  real  economy.  I  challenge  the  thrift  banks  to 
feverishly  build  on  your  gains.  Let  us  collectively  lead  the  way  towards  broader-based, 
accelerated and sustained economic growth. 
Thank you and good morning. 
                                                
 
1 
In 2009, about $23 million of OF remittances were coursed through Thrift Banks. 
BIS Review 30/2010 
 3
