Hu Xiaolian: The cooperative relation between adjustment of production 
factor price and reform of the exchange rate regime 
Article  by  Ms  Hu  Xiaolian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  Beijing, 
30 July 2010. 
 China  faces  a  major  challenge  and  the  task  of  restructuring  the  economy  and  achieving 
sustainable and balanced growth. To realize these goals and to transform the growth pattern, 
the Chinese government has taken a series of decisive measures, especially in the field of 
the price reform of production factors, energy saving and emission reduction, e.g. promoting 
the resource tax and fee reform, increasing the cost of polluting the environment, raising the 
minimum wage of enterprise employees, and etc. The price of labor, resource and energy 
and  environment  cost  are  generally  on  the  rise.  In  this  context,  further  reform  of  the  RMB 
exchange  rate  regime  requires  in-depth  analysis  on  the  relation  between  factor  price 
adjustment and the reform of RMB exchange rate regime. 
1. 
It is necessary to adjust production factor  prices as the economy develops. 
The benefits brought by economic development should be shared by the whole society and 
lead  to  higher  wages.  Significant  demographic  change  is  underway  in  China.  In  the  first 
decade of the 21st century, the growth of working-age population moderated compared with 
the last two decades of the 20th century. Total working-age population may even decline in 
the  next  5  to  10  years.  With  such  a  demographic  change  and  continued  and  massive 
migration of surplus rural labor into the urban area, the Chinese economy is approaching the 
Lewis Turning Point, where labor surplus is expected to drain off and pressures for pay rise 
will mount. For years, wages for unskilled workers of export-oriented processing enterprises 
rose quite slowly, but migrant worker shortage frequently seen in recent years points to the 
fact that the wage for workers, especially that of the migrant workers, can no longer remain 
as low as previously was. Moreover, the Foxconn incident has drawn increased attention to 
the  issue  of  low-income  workers,  pressing  for  substantial  rise  of  minimum  wages  in  many 
areas.  
In the meantime, as the economy grows in size and consumes more energy and resources, 
bottlenecks  will  become  more  acute.  With  urbanization  and  industrialization  rapidly 
progressing, the fast growing Chinese economy consumes massive amount of energy and 
resources  and  faces  mounting  pressures  to  protect  the  environment  and  address  climate 
change. It is a general global trend that prices for non-renewable energy and resources and 
environment  cost  will  be  on  a  rise.  From  2003  to  2009,  the  purchasing  price  index  of  raw 
materials,  fuel  and  power  rose  by  a  total  of  35.6  percent,  partly  due  to  price  hike  on  the 
international  market  and  partly  as  a  result  of  manufacturing  and  export  expansion 
domestically.  As  China’s  economic  development  enters  a  new  stage,  growing  public 
awareness of resource scarcity and environment protection adds to the pressure of energy 
and  resource  price  adjustment.  In  short,  production  factor  price  will  have  to  be  adjusted 
regardless of the Balance of Payments (BOP) status.  
2. 
The adjustment of production factor prices in a broad sense is an important 
component  of  China’s  economic  system  reform.  The  Chinese  government  has 
emphasized  the  need  and  made  continued  efforts  to  adjust  the  structure  of  income 
distribution,  including  raising  the  share  of  household  income,  promoting  price  reform  of 
energy  products  such  as  petroleum,  gas,  water  and  electricity  to  have  in  place  a  more 
reasonable price  system  for  basic  products,  raising  pollution  charge  and  fee  standards  for 
sewage and garbage treatment to deepen the reform of environment protection charges. In 
addition  to  direct  price  adjustments,  measures  have  been  adopted  to  reinforce  law 
enforcement  examination  on  environmental  protection,  keep  market  in  order,  forbid 
defaulting  on  wage  payment  to  migrant  workers,  set  a  ceiling  for  maximum  working  hours 
BIS Review 103/2010 
 1
and etc. All these measures will lead to a rise in the production factor price in general. When 
adjusting  factor  prices,  usually  consideration  will  be  given  to  how  to  handle  the  relations 
between  reform  and  inflation  on  the  one  hand  and  between  reform  and  primary  income 
distribution and redistribution on the other hand, and whether to compensate those affected 
negatively by such adjustments. Therefore, the adjustment of production factor prices needs 
to be planned and designed as an integral part of the whole reform package.  
3. 
Adjustment  of  production  factor  prices  and  exchange  rate  movements  can 
substitute and complement each other. The Central Economic Work Conference outlined 
the  goal  of  expanding  domestic  demand  and  lessening  the  reliance  on  net  export  in  the 
pursuit of national economic development, restructuring and growth pattern upgrade. Further 
reform  of  the  exchange  rate  regime  and  adjustment  of  production  factor  prices  in  a  broad 
sense both contribute to the goals above. Rapid adjustment of production factor price help 
ease  appreciation  pressures  and  a  floating  RMB  exchange  rate  regime  alleviate  upward 
pressures on production factor prices. The two substitute each other to a certain extent. A 
proper mix of the adjustment of production factor prices and exchange rate changes based 
on  the  economic  circumstances  will  be  more  effective  to  serve  policy  goals  than  adopting 
merely one of both. For example, compared with a substantial pay rise without enhancing the 
flexibility of exchange rate regime, a two-pronged approach will be more effective to promote 
stability and help ensure that the improvement of productivity and efficiency of enterprises is 
kept  abreast  with  the  rise  of  wage  level.  This  is  particularly  true  under  upward  price 
pressures. If the wage and price levels are allowed to rise unchecked while exchange rate is 
fixed,  inflationary  expectations  will  be  reinforced,  heightening  uncertainties  in  consumption 
and investment and exposing the working population to higher inflationary risks. Therefore, 
adjustment  of  production  factor  price  and  the  floating  of  exchange  rate  complement  each 
other.  
4.  
Adjustment of production factor price and greater exchange rate flexibility are 
different  in  frequency,  flexibility,  working  mechanism  and  scope  of  influence.  First, 
factor price adjustment measures aimed to establish a market-based pricing mechanism will 
intensify inflationary pressures and have distributional effect, and need to be supported by 
other  policies.  Thus  frequent  price  adjustment  is  neither  practical  nor  plausible.  Under  a 
managed floating exchange rate regime, the RMB exchange rate moves in both directions to 
reflect changes in economic circumstances and BOP. 
Second, the two differs in terms of flexibility. In a managed floating exchange rate regime, 
the  exchange  rate  is  more  flexible  and  moves  in  two  directions,  whereas  the  price  of 
production  factors  is  somewhat  rigid.  As  resources  and  energy  are  becoming  increasingly 
scarce, prices will go up in general; once introduced, environmental protection fee will always 
be levied and have little chance of being revoked; the efforts of reducing emission of carbon 
dioxide and other greenhouse gas will be strengthened; Labor compensation is also rigid as 
its long term adjustment tends to be one way except the occasional downward  movement 
caused by crisis and major technological breakthrough. Exchange rate, on the other hand, 
will  move  in  both  directions  to  respond  to  market  supply  and  demand  when  the  current 
account is in surplus or deficit.  
Third, the two reforms  impact resource allocation in different ways.  Exchange rate floating 
affect prices of imported goods and the general price level fairly quickly and alter the relative 
price between tradables and non-tradables. Exchange rate appreciation will move resources 
from tradable sectors to non-tradable sectors, and promote the development of services and 
other tertiary sectors and economic restructuring. Production factor price adjustment affects 
relative price of various categories of prices and is usually designed to enable prices to play 
a fundamental role in resource allocation.  
Fourth, the two reforms affect different enterprises. In the case of exchange rate reform, a 
stronger  yuan  is  likely  to  affect  the  price  competitiveness  of  exporters,  but  is  a  favorable 
change to enterprises that import large quantity of raw materials and semi-finished goods to 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2010
meet domestic demand. In the case of production factor price adjustment, higher labour and 
resources price and environmental protection cost will affect the corporate sector as a whole. 
Although enterprises are able to reduce the burden through technical innovation and higher 
resource  utilization  efficiency,  the  overall  impact  of  such  adjustment  will  be  extensive  and 
transmitted through a longer chain.  
Fifth, the two reforms have different impacts on inflation. Production factor price adjustment 
will directly increase inflation pressure. If the RMB exchange rate appreciates in response to 
market  demand  and  supply,  that  will  directly  reduce  the  domestic  currency  denominated 
price  of  imported  goods,  and  reduce  inflation  pressure  through  changes  towards  a  more 
balanced BOP account and the subsequent reduction of passive base money supply. 
5.  
The production factor price adjustment and exchange rate regime reform can 
work together to achieve the intended outcome. On the one hand, a more flexible RMB 
exchange rate will create a low-inflation environment for the reform of production factor price, 
and  will  not  stand  in  the  way  of  such  reform.  Past  experience  has  shown  that  the  major 
consideration of production factor price adjustment is the concern for its impact on inflation 
and  income  distribution.  For  example,  gasoline  surcharge  to  tax  reform  has  been  in 
deliberation  for  more  than  a  decade,  and  much  debate  is  on  the  necessary  conditions, 
timing, and distribution effect of such reform. The major concern is whether the price reform 
of  production  factor  will  cause  inflation  and  have  a  big  impact  on  income  distribution. 
Exchange rate reform can mitigate the impact and promote production factor price reform. 
Moreover,  when  formulating  the  inflation  range  for  monetary  operations,  consideration  has 
been given to such reform.  
On the other hand, the adjustment of production factor prices helps alter the cost-ineffective 
pattern of economic and trade growth both directly and indirectly. Such adjustment promotes 
the upgrade of export-oriented industries and makes enterprises more adaptive and resilient 
to volatility of market prices. It also helps ease the expectation of RMB appreciation, reduce 
short-term  capital  inflows,  lessen  pressures  from  the  international  community  and  thus 
provides  a  facilitating  environment  for  further  reform  of  RMB  exchange  rate  regime. 
Therefore,  the  reform  of  exchange  rate  regime  and  adjustment  of  production  factor  prices 
complement rather than working against each other. Effective coordination of the two policy 
tools is essential to stable macroeconomic development. 
To  sum  up,  adjustment  of  production  factor  prices  and  further  reform  of  exchange  rate 
regime  both  contribute  to  realize  the  goals  for  macroeconomic  management,  as  they  help 
optimize resource allocation, incentivize enterprises to improve management and speed up 
technological  innovation,  reduce  consumption  of  resources  and  energy,  and  promote  the 
restructuring  and  sustainable  development  of  the  economy.  Reform  of  the  exchange  rate 
regime  and  adjustment  of  production  factor  prices  substitute  and  complement  each  other. 
They can be implemented in parallel. Unwavering efforts should be made to further reform 
the exchange rate regime and the pricing mechanism of production factors to consolidate the 
foundation for a balanced and sustainable economic development.  
BIS Review 103/2010 
 3
