 Axel A Weber: 7th Bundesbank Lecture 2010 – introductory remarks 
Introductory  remarks  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  
at the 7th Bundesbank Lecture 2010, Berlin, 14 September 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am very pleased to welcome you to this year’s Bundesbank Lecture, which is being held at 
the Old Town Hall in the very heart of Berlin. The Old Town Hall was built between 1902 and 
1911 as an extension of the “Red Town Hall”, which is just a stone’s throw from here. From 
1949 to 1990, the Old Town Hall was the seat of the Council of Ministers of the then GDR, 
and, in 1990, the Unification Treaty between the two German States was negotiated in this 
very building. Today, it serves as the seat of the Senator for the Interior of the federal state of 
Berlin. The room we are in is the “Bear Hall”, named after the statue of a bronze bear in the 
middle of the hall. This statue – the bear is Berlin’s heraldic symbol – had been exiled to East 
Berlin’s zoo for four decades before it returned in 2001. 
It is in these historic surroundings that we have gathered for the 7th Bundesbank Lecture. I 
am particularly grateful that Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, will be our 
speaker today. Mark, my special welcome to you and thanks a lot for accepting our invitation. 
It is an honour to have you here. 
Let me say a few brief words about both this event and our speaker for today. 
On the event 
2. 
When we established the Bundesbank Lecture in 2004 we had two objectives in mind: The 
first  objective  was  to  raise  the  Bundesbank’s  profile  further  in  the  German  capital.  The 
second aim was to provide a high-level forum for public debate on economic and monetary 
policy issues. Especially this second objective seems to have gained in importance given our 
turbulent  times  and  the  intellectual  uncertainty  they  have  provoked.  Consequently,  we  are 
happy to look back on a long line of very distinguished speakers – including, of course, Mark 
Carney,  but  also  Alan  Greenspan,  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  Ben 
Bernanke, Mario Draghi and Dominique Strauss-Kahn. 
On the subject 
3. 
It is no surprise that the financial crisis has dominated this event during the recent past. We 
have just entered the fourth year of the crisis and it still seems too early to announce its end. 
However, we certainly are in a phase where the lessons learnt are being turned into political 
reality. This is especially true for the reform of financial regulation. 
Great effort has been put into addressing the shortcomings in the regulatory framework that 
were revealed by the crisis. At the global level, a comprehensive reform agenda was set in 
train by the G20 summits in Washington, London and Pittsburgh. The envisaged reforms aim 
at creating a strong regulatory framework that ensures financial stability and supports steady 
and sustainable economic growth. The major step towards that end will be the reform of the 
Basel II framework for capital regulation. Relevant proposals were put forward in December 
2009 by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The proposed measures have since 
been calibrated and have been decided as a package last weekend in Basel by the meeting 
of Governors and Heads of Supervision. In November, the G20 will take the final decision on 
the implementation of this package. 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 1
 The new rules will shape the financial system for years to come. There is some concern in 
the financial industry regarding the possible negative impacts of financial reform on the real 
economy. It is argued that, by placing additional burdens on banks, their capacity to hand out 
loans is constrained to a degree that might reduce economic performance. However, recent 
studies by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and others show that the impact of 
financial reforms on economic performance is likely to be rather small. Nevertheless, this is 
an important issue and I am glad that Mark will be covering it in more detail. The title of his 
speech  is  “the  economic  consequences  of  the  reforms”  and  he  is  indeed  the  right  man  to 
provide the necessary insights. 
On the speaker 
4. 
During his career, Mark Carney has been working on all sides of the financial system, so to 
speak.  With  a  sound  academic  background  from  Harvard  and  Oxford,  he  joined  the 
investment bank Goldman Sachs in 1990. For the next 13 years, he worked in the banks’ 
offices in London, Tokyo, New York and Toronto. In 2003, he became Deputy Governor of 
the Bank of Canada. A year later, he left the bank and assumed the post of Senior Associate 
Deputy Minister of Finance. In this function, he represented Canada in various international 
forums, including the Financial Stability Forum which is now the Financial Stability Board. In 
2008, he returned as Governor to the Bank of Canada. 
It is this blend of different viewpoints and experiences that makes Mark Carney the perfect 
speaker for today’s subject. Mark, I am looking forward to hearing your insights. The floor is 
yours. 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2010
