Jean-Claude Trichet: Introductory statement before the Plenary of the 
European Parliament 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  before  the 
Plenary of the European Parliament, Brussels, 25 March 2010. 
 Introduction  
Sehr geehrter Herr Präsident, 
sehr geehrte Damen und Herren Abgeordnete, 
ich freue mich, anlässlich der Debatte zur Entschließung über den Jahresbericht 2008 der 
Europäischen Zentralbank heute bei Ihnen zu sein.  
Aufgrund der Parlamentswahlen im vergangen Jahr hat sich die diesjährige Debatte deutlich 
verschoben.  
Aber  dies  eröffnet  mir  die  Möglichkeit,  die  wesentlichen Entwicklungen  im  letzten  Jahr  vor 
der neu gewählten Plenarversammlung zu erörtern, und am Ende auch auf die aktuelle Lage 
einzugehen.  
Comme vous le savez, la BCE se félicite des relations très étroites avec le Parlement, qui 
vont bien au-delà des obligations prévues par le Traité. Nous avons établi, au fil des années, 
un dialogue très fructueux.  
Aujourd’hui, dans mon exposé, je passerai brièvement en revue les évolutions économiques 
observées  en  2009  et  les  mesures  de  politique  monétaire  prises  par  la  BCE.  Ensuite, 
j’aborderai quelques points soulevés dans votre proposition de résolution et je terminerai par 
quelques remarques sur la situation actuelle.  
Economic developments and monetary policy over the past year 
1. 
So what have been the key developments in the economy and in monetary policy over the 
past year?  
In 2009, the European Central Bank was operating in an environment that future economic 
historians are likely to describe as the most difficult one for advanced economies since the 
Second World War.  
Following the profound intensification of the financial crisis in the autumn of 2008, the year 
2009 started with a continued synchronised fall in economic activity worldwide.  
Until around April last year, economic activity was declining, month after month, faster than 
any  model  had  predicted.  That  is  why  we  have  often  characterised  what  we  were 
experiencing as a “free fall” in economic activity.  
The  immediate  policy  action  taken by  central  banks,  governments  and  Parliaments  across 
the world stopped this “free fall” and laid the foundations for a gradual recovery in Europe 
and  elsewhere  over  the  course  of  2009.  I  would  venture  to  say  that  if  central  banks, 
governments and Parliaments around the world had not acted as resolutely as they did, it 
could have become the most difficult episode for advanced economies since the First World 
War. 
The ECB was in the vanguard of the world’s central banks. We have confirmed our capability 
to take bold and timely action.  
BIS Review 37/2010 
 1
Our “trademark”, which was vital for maintaining confidence, has been the ability to take the 
necessary immediate and exceptional decisions whilst, at the same time, remaining inflexibly 
attached to our primary objective of maintaining price stability in the medium term.  
The  ECB’s  medium-term  orientation  in  its  interest  rate  policy  and  in  the  design  of  non-
standard measures has helped to contain the emergence of both deflationary and inflationary 
risks.  
Inflation  expectations  remained  well  anchored  throughout  the  crisis,  while  we  provided 
essential support to the real economy through the banking system and the financial markets. 
Some  of  the  most  important  non-standard  measures  that  we  used  were  an  unlimited 
provision of liquidity to banks, an extension of operations for periods of up to one year and a 
moderate,  yet  highly  effective  purchase  programme  for  covered  bank  bonds,  which 
reactivated this segment of the bank funding market. 
Overall,  our  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  –  which  are  known  collectively  as 
“enhanced credit support” – have served the euro area economy well.  
They have supported the functioning of the money market, contributed to improving financing 
conditions and allowed for a better flow of credit to the real economy than could have been 
achieved through interest rate reductions alone. By and large, banks have been passing on 
the sharply lower key ECB interest rates to households and businesses.  
Designing a timely exit strategy from our non-standard measures was a central part of the 
ECB’s  response  to  the  crisis.  In  September  last  year,  we  set  out  our  overall  strategy.  In 
December, we decided on its implementation.  
The guiding principle is that to the extent that the situation returns to normal, keeping such 
measures in place for longer than required risks changing the behaviour of financial market 
participants in an undesirable manner.  
We do not wish to breed dependency.  
Thus,  in  December  2009,  we  began  to  gradually  phase  out  some  of  our  extraordinary 
liquidity  measures,  taking  account  of  improvements  in  financial  markets.  In  particular,  we 
scaled back the number, frequency and maturity of longer-term refinancing operations.  
But we have committed to maintaining fully accommodating liquidity support to the euro area 
banking system until at least October this year. 
The  Governing  Council  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  is 
appropriate,  and  that  the  continued  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  bodes  well  for 
price stability in the medium term.  
Specific issues raised in the European Parliament’s draft resolution 
2. 
Let me now turn to some of the issues you raise in your draft resolution. 
On  the  issues  of  accountability  and  transparency,  we  very  much  appreciate  the  regular 
dialogue with the European Parliament and the constructive spirit with which this exchange is 
conducted.  
I  therefore  welcome  the  ECON  Committee’s  repeated  support  for  our  quarterly  monetary 
dialogue.  An  independent  institution  like  the  ECB,  which  is  accountable  to  the  European 
people, has to be in close contact with their elected representatives.  
We consider the ECB to be one of the world’s most transparent central banks. Our practice 
of holding a press conference immediately after the Governing Council meeting on monetary 
policy  each  month  remains  a  pioneering  initiative  that  has  not  yet  been  replicated  by  our 
major sister institutions. With the publication of our comprehensive Introductory Statement in 
real-time, we explain policy decisions and their underlying rationale.  
2 
 BIS Review 37/2010
During the crisis, we have further intensified our communication efforts and thereby helped to 
smooth  financial  market  reactions,  to  build  confidence  and  to  lay  the  foundations  for 
recovery.  
You  also  requested  the  views  of  the  ECB  on  the  establishment  of  a  clearing  house  for 
instruments such as credit default swaps (CDSs) within the euro area. I would like to say that 
the robustness of euro-denominated CDS markets is of direct relevance for the Eurosystem 
as regards control over its currency and financial stability in the euro area.  
Central counterparty clearing is very important not only for delivering transparency, but also 
for  diversifying  and  sharing  risk  exposures  and  reducing  the  incentives  to  take  excessive 
risks.  Certain  financial  instruments,  which  were  introduced  for  hedging,  should  not  be 
misused for speculation. Regulators should be able to undertake effective investigations into 
possible improper conduct.  
The outlook for EMU during challenging times  
3. 
Mr President, honourable members of the European Parliament, 
An economic recovery is in progress, but this does not mean that the crisis is over.  
For  one  thing,  we  know  that  the  pace  of  recovery  will  be  uneven  and  we  cannot  rule  out 
setbacks.  
For  another,  we  are  still  facing  numerous  challenges  regarding  the  reform  of  our  financial 
system. Finance must play a constructive role, and not a destructive one, in our economies.  
The  litmus  test  for  a  constructive  role  is  that  finance  serves  the  real  economy.  To  ensure 
such a role, we still need to improve the functioning of financial systems considerably further. 
Thus  far,  a  great  deal  of  attention  has  been  focused  on  the  banking  sector.  But  effective 
reforms also have to look very closely at non-bank financial institutions and at the set-up and 
functioning of financial markets.  
Financial markets are not always efficient.  
They  are  not  always  deep  and  liquid.  Nor  do  they  always  represent  a  fair  competition  of 
views and positions. Often, specific market segments can  be oligopolistic, dominated by  a 
few  large  players.  In  such  markets,  the  views  of  powerful  players  can  trigger  trends  that 
move valuations way out of line with fundamentals.  
We have to devise mechanisms and incentives to ensure that finance does not spiral out of 
control in the destructive way that it did just prior to the crisis.  
We  have  to  contain  systemic  disruptions  that  lead  to  economic  hardship  for  the  people  of 
Europe. Setting up the European Systemic Risk Board, legislation for which is currently being 
considered by the Parliament, is part of the correct response to this challenge.  
There  are  other  challenges  facing  the  European  economy,  and  these  are  associated  with 
public finances and sovereign financial health. 
Within Europe’s economic and monetary union, there is a clear allocation of responsibilities.  
With respect to that allocation of responsibilities, everyone can count on the commitment of 
the ECB to maintain price stability in the euro area as a whole over the medium term.  
Meanwhile, we have not only this commitment, but we also have a track record of nearly a 
dozen years.  
Based  on  our  latest  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  this  year,  the  average  annual 
inflation rate in the first 12 years of the euro is likely to stand at around 1.95%. That is in line 
with  our  definition  of  price  stability:  “below  2%,  but  close  to  2%”.  The  ECB’s  commitment, 
strategy and track record are consistent.  
BIS Review 37/2010 
 3
But the smooth functioning of Europe’s economic and monetary union cannot rest on a single 
pillar. EMU rests on two pillars, the monetary and the economic one. 
Policy-makers  at  the  national  level  must  likewise  contribute  to  the  success  and  stability  of 
EMU and they need to deliver policies that are in line with its principles. In particular, they 
must keep public finances sound and their economies competitive.  
In  the  current  circumstances,  where  Europe  faces  further  pivotal  decisions,  it  is  more 
important than ever to recognise that a prosperous union requires determined action by all. 
Whatever  direction  the  upcoming  decisions  regarding  the  current  situation  may  take,  the 
most important issue is that Europe’s policy-makers live up to their responsibilities.  
Monetary Union in Europe is far more than a monetary arrangement. It is a union of shared 
destiny.  
Wir teilen ein gemeinsames Schicksal. Nous partageons un destin commun. Condividiamo 
un destino commune. Compartimos un destino común.  
This destiny is for our common good, and it is the vision of our founding fathers. Monetary 
Union is not a matter of convenience. It is part of an overarching process of advancing the 
integration of the people in Europe that began after the Second World War.  
It received a new impetus with the fall of the iron curtain. Europe has seized the opportunity 
to  unite  people  of  sovereign  nations  in  a  union of  prosperity,  stability  and  values.  I  am,  of 
course,  aware  of  the  great  breadth  of  discussions  about  underlying  decisions  and  actions  
– both within Europe and outside Europe. Many people are questioning the direction in which 
we as European citizens, European nations and European policy-makers are going. 
In my view, this discussion is under way not because we have failed – it is because we have 
been  successful.  Europe  has  succeeded  in  virtually  everything  it  had  wanted  to  achieve. 
Uniting  a  continent  in  which  many  capital  cities  have,  at  diverse  points  in  history,  been 
capitals of the world is an achievement that is often overlooked.  
I believe we often play this achievement down. And we are often too quick to criticise our 
institutions  and  processes.  But  they  have  generally  worked  well,  even  in  the  most  difficult 
times.  During  the  financial  crisis,  for  example,  European  institutions  and  processes  have 
remained effective. We have avoided on this side of the Atlantic dramatic events that could 
have  triggered  a  new  intensification  of  the  crisis,  which  started  in  the  U.S.  in  September 
2008. And we have not had any mishap with the passing in any of our numerous Parliaments 
of  a  financial  support  package.  Europe  is  functioning  and  it  is  delivering  what  its  citizens 
need.  
Through  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  we  have  achieved  a  considerable  degree  of 
cohesion and stability – and we must protect that achievement. It is within this context that I 
appreciate the commitment of euro area Member States, made on the occasion of the last 
European  Council  meeting,  to  take  determined  and  coordinated  action,  if  needed,  to 
safeguard financial stability in the euro area. 
Let me also take advantage of my presence in front of the European Parliament to lay out 
what I already mentioned in the hearing before the Economic and Monetary Committee on 
Monday.  It  is  the  intention  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  to  keep  the  minimum  credit 
threshold  in  the  collateral  framework  at  investment  grade  level  (BBB–)  beyond  the  end  of 
2010. In parallel, we would introduce, as of January 2011, a graded haircut schedule, which 
will continue to adequately protect the Eurosystem. I will provide the technical details when 
reporting on the Governing Council decisions of our next meeting on 8 April.  
4 
 BIS Review 37/2010
Conclusion 
The  introduction  of  the  single  currency  just  over  a  decade  ago  represents  the  greatest 
achievement in the history of European integration to date – a process that has ensured six 
decades of peace and prosperity in Europe. 
The global financial crisis has brought fresh challenges to which we in Europe have all risen. 
Our Monetary Union and our very close ties, inside the single market, with all EU Member 
States’ economies have prevented the crisis from being compounded by currency crises, as 
in the traumatic experiences of the early 1990s.  
Today,  Europe  faces  further  pivotal  decisions.  Our  common  task  is  to  ensure  continued 
peace and prosperity, to make our union an even more attractive place to live and work in.  
For this purpose, we need strengthened surveillance and strengthened cooperation. We also 
need to revive the sense of common purpose, the shared ideals that motivated our founding 
fathers. Their endeavour was visionary and all what we see in today’s world confirms their 
lucidity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 5
