V K Sharma: Affordable housing and housing finance 
Address  by  Mr  V  K  Sharma,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference  on  “Affordable  Housing  and  Housing  Finance”,  organised  by  the  National 
Housing Bank, in association with the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation, 
New Delhi, 27 January 2010. 
 1.  Mr.  Abdul  Qadeer  Fitrat,  Governor,  Central  Bank  of  Afghanistan,  Mr.  Arun  Maira, 
Member,  Planning  Commission,  Mr.  R.  Gopalan,  Secretary,  Department  of  Financial 
Services, Mrs. Kiran Dhingra, Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, 
Mr. Kamran Shehzad, Deputy Governor, State Bank of Pakistan, Mr. S. Sridhar, Chairman 
and  Managing  Director,  National  Housing  Bank,  Mr.  Paolo  Martelli,  Director,  South  Asia, 
International  Finance  Corporation,  Mr.  R.V.  Verma,  Executive  Director,  National  Housing 
Bank, distinguished guests and invitees, members of the electronic and print media, ladies 
and gentlemen. 
2. 
First of all, I would wish to thank National Housing Bank for giving me this honour and 
privilege to address this distinguished and august audience. The National Housing Bank was 
set up as a wholly owned subsidiary of Reserve Bank of India under the National Housing 
Bank Act, 1987, to act as a principal apex national agency to promote housing finance by 
providing financial and other support to housing finance institutions. 
I  must  acknowledge  that  the  theme  of  the  conference  is  contextually,  and  topically, 
3. 
most appropriate and relevant, considering that it represents a very key element/component 
in India’s indefatigable pursuit of the national agenda of sustainable and inclusive economic 
growth and prosperity. I must also acknowledge that the conference agenda is indeed quite 
comprehensive what with almost everything that there is to “Affordable Housing and Housing 
Finance”  included,  and  to  be  expertly  handled  by  a  formidable  line  up  of  internationally 
renowned and distinguished professionals. I would, therefore, not venture to encroach upon 
their  professional  expertise  and  would  instead  confine  my  remarks  to  what  to  my  mind 
represent  key  prudential  and  systemic  concerns  in  affordable  housing  involving  optimally 
harmonising  and  balancing  the  interests  of  lenders  and  borrowers  in  the  housing  finance 
market.  Coming  to  brass  tacks,  I  would  wish  to  draw  attention  to  a  fairly  standard  and 
generally prevalent predilection on the part of banks and lenders to extend long-term floating-
rate, including, more recently, teaser, housing loans. This is typically rationalized by arguing 
that  lenders’  liability  maturity-profile  is  short-term  and,  therefore,  it  is  only  prudent  that 
lenders make either short-term loans, or long-term loans, which involve frequently resetting 
interest  rates  depending  upon  the  evolving  market  interest  rates.  While  prima  facie  this 
rationalization  may  seem  unexceptionable  from  the  point  of  view  of  lenders,  on  a  more 
incisive analysis, it turns out that, in the medium to long term, it is neither in the interests of 
borrowers, nor lenders. This I say because a floating-rate loan typically transfers interest rate 
risk  to  borrowers  who,  unlike  lenders,  are  far  less  endowed,  in  terms  of  expertise  and 
capacity, to hedge and manage interest rate risk every which way one looks at it. In other 
words,  such  floating-rate  long-term  loans  effectively  substitute  interest  rate  risk  of  lenders 
with  potential  credit  risk  in  terms  of  creating  potential  non-performing  housing  loans.  Of 
course, lenders might still argue that in some, or most cases, housing loan borrowers might 
prefer  a  floating-rate  loan  to  a  fixed-rate  one.  But  then,  it  is  precisely  where  the  Reserve 
Bank of India’s guidelines with regard to customer appropriateness and financial literacy and 
credit  counseling,  enjoined  upon  banks,  come 
typically  an 
unsophisticated,  and  uninitiated,  borrower  may  be  driven  largely  by  the  prevailing  lower 
short-term interest rates, almost completely oblivious to the potentially higher interest rates 
over such a long time horizon, as, say, 10 years, or more. At another level, a fixed-rate loan 
is  because 
in.  This 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 1
has more certainty both for borrower and lender and should, therefore, be more prudent one 
to make. 
4. 
In support of my above proposition, I would like to cite the US example. In the USA, 
housing  finance  is  pre-dominantly  of  the  fixed-  rate  long-term  mortgage  variety  with  an 
embedded  call  option  in  favour  of  borrower  to  pre-pay,  and  refinance,  mortgage  should 
interest  rates  decline  during  the  maturity  of  the  mortgage.  This  structure  makes  housing 
more  affordable  to  small  borrowers  as  they  enjoy  either  a  fixed-rate,  or  a  lower  rate.  Of 
course, the option premium is built into the fixed-rate of mortgages in the way of  a higher 
rate. However, during the low interest rate environment in the USA up to the end of 2003, 
when  the  Federal  Funds  rate  was  at  its  lowest  at  1  per  cent,  a  new  trend  of  floating-rate 
mortgages,  which in the USA are known as Adjustable Rate Mortgages (ARMs), emerged 
with, of course, its “teaser-rate variant” where, as we know, interest rates were set at rates 
lower than the ruling market rates during the initial period and variable rates, higher than the 
corresponding market rates, in the subsequent period. It is, of course, history now that when 
the  Federal  Reserve  started  raising  interest  rates  from  2004  through  2006–07,  there  were 
widespread defaults precisely in the floating-rate/teaser loan/ARM segment with, of course, 
collateral damage in the conforming, fixed-rate mortgage segment as well.  
5. 
If, by now, I have been persuasive enough to disarm and convert lenders to the above 
proposition, I must still answer the legitimate question that lenders would logically have as to 
how  then  to  make  a  long-term  fixed-rate  loan,  whether  for  housing,  or  for  infrastructure, 
without creating any serious asset-liability mismatch in their balance sheets. To this question, 
I  have  a  very  simple  market-based  solution  which  is  that  banks/lenders  can  easily  have 
recourse  to  a  very  liquid  and  vibrant  IRS  (Interest  Rate  Swaps)  market,  where,  as  on 
22 January 2010, outstanding notional principal amounts aggregated Rs. 38 trillion (almost 
75% of the total banking assets in India as also of the nation’s GDP), and easily transform 
their short-term liability into a long-term fixed-rate one and thus create a synthetic long-term 
fixed-rate mortgage financing by doing the following : 
(a) 
Receive fixed-rate for one year and pay floating overnight rate in the IRS market. 
(Assuming banks’ average liability is about one year). 
Receive  floating  overnight  rate  and  pay  10-year  in  IRS  market.  This  effectively 
synthetically  transforms  a  one  year  floating-rate  liability  of  bank  into  a  synthetic 
10-year  fixed-  rate  liability.  By  loading  margin  over  this  rate,  banks  can  make  a 
10-year fixed-rate loan to a mortgage borrower. And, significantly, considering that 
IRS trades about 50 to 80 basis points below sovereign yield, it is win-win for both 
banks  and  long-term  fixed  rate  mortgage  borrower  who,  even  after  bankers’ 
spreads/margins, will be able to borrow at a reasonable spread over 10 year G-Sec 
yield  (currently  7.55%).  Significantly,  this  can  be  applied  equally  to  creating  long-
term fixed-rate financing solutions for long gestation infrastructure projects as well. 
That is as simple as it can get in terms of creating two-in-one fixed-rate long-term 
market-based financing solutions for both affordable housing and infrastructure. And 
considering  that  the  outstanding  housing  loans  constitute  a  mere  10%,  and 
outstanding  infrastructure  loans  of  banks,  a  mere  8%  of  the  total  outstanding 
notional principal amount of IRS of Rs. 38 trillion, the above solution is perfectly do-
able. However, I would still leave the thought with this distinguished and discerning 
audience to explore and take it forward.  
With these remarks, I close my address and wish the Conference all success that it 
6. 
so much deserves. Thank you all so very much. 
(b) 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2010
