Perks M Ligoya: Safeguarding Malawi’s foreign exchange reserves 
Speech by Dr Perks M Ligoya, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the official launch 
of the Exchange Control Manual, Blantyre, 29 December 2009. 
 President, Bankers’ Association of Malawi 
Chief Executives of commercial banks 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Compliments of the season. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  officially  launch  the  Exchange  Control  Manual.  On  behalf  of 
Reserve Bank of Malawi and indeed on my own behalf, I welcome you all to this memorable 
event. 
Distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  objectives  of  the  official  launch  of  the 
Exchange Control Manual are three-fold: 
a) 
To  present  the  Exchange  Control  Manual  to  its  ultimate  users-authorized  dealer 
banks and the business community. 
To  assure  exporters  and  importers  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  is  fully 
committed to economic liberalization that it embarked upon some fifteen (15) years 
ago. 
To  garner  support  and  cooperation  of  banks  and  the  business  community  in 
ensuring prudent use of foreign exchange reserves. 
b) 
c) 
In order to achieve these objectives, let me start by mentioning that the main challenge (and 
particularly  so  in  recent  times)  for  Malawi  as  an  emerging  economy  is  the  generation  of 
sufficient foreign exchange reserves to meet the economy’s growing import demand. 
Malawi’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  volatile  due  to  the  economy’s  over-reliance  on 
primary  commodity  exports  and  in  particular  a  few  agriculture  exports.  This  reliance  will 
continue to undermine the country’s foreign reserves position unless significant progress is 
made in growth and diversification of exports. 
While export diversification on its own may not be a panacea for an improvement in foreign 
exchange  reserves,  the  principle  that  export  diversification  can  contribute  to  reducing 
instability of export earnings is widely accepted. Thus, Government in its quest to mitigate 
Malawi’s  external  vulnerability  and,  more  generally,  the  country’s  overall  economic 
performance and welfare, continues to take initiatives to promote export diversification. 
The generation of adequate foreign exchange reserves is key to Malawi’s growth prospects. 
Apart  from  supporting  the  Malawi  Kwacha  exchange  rate,  reserves  are  also  essential  in 
supporting economic growth through imports of industrial raw materials, agricultural inputs, 
medicines and other basic necessities. 
Government,  in  this  regard,  continues  to  undertake  initiatives  to  boost  and  preserve  the 
country’s  foreign  exchange  reserves.  One  such  initiative  is  the  computerization  of  export 
proceeds tracking system. We are all aware that in November 2008, the Bank rolled out the 
Foreign  Exchange  Statistical  Database  System,  which  is  now  being  used  to  monitor  and 
enforce repatriation of export proceeds to Malawi. 
Imports  have  grown  phenomenally  in  the  past  three  years  due  to  increased  demand  for 
machinery and industrial raw materials, and most importantly, agricultural inputs particularly 
fertilizer. Other imports have also registered a significant growth both in volume and value 
terms. This largely explains the depletion in the country’s foreign exchange reserves. 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 1
These developments have necessitated a review of the Exchange Control regime. You will 
recall, Ladies and Gentlemen, that Exchange Controls in Malawi pre-date our independence 
i.e.  we  had  exchange  controls  before  1964  when  Malawi  became  independent.  The 
Exchange Control Act has, thus, undergone several reviews and repeals over the years to 
re-align it with dynamic macroeconomic developments and hence make it more relevant. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  let me  mention that the Exchange  Control Manual being launched 
today,  has  been  prepared  to  act  as  a  guide  to  authorized  dealer  banks  in  dealing  with 
exchange  control  issues.  The  Manual  also  addresses  the  issue  of  completing  relevant 
exchange control forms. These forms have been reviewed to conform to the 5th Edition of 
International  Monetary  Fund’s  Balance  of  Payments  Manual.  Bankers,  importers  and 
exporters will recall that we had numerous forms. These have now been harmonized and we 
are now talking of three only. 
The manual contains instructions on how authorized dealer banks should process Exchange 
Control  applications  for,  among  other  things,  advance  payment  for  imports:  You  will  recall 
ladies and gentlemen, that these have always been referred to Reserve Bank of Malawi for 
approval.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  now  delegating  this  authority  to  banks  to  handle  advance 
payment  applications  of  up  to  $20,000.  Anything  in  excess  of  that  value  will  however  be 
referred to the Reserve Bank of Malawi for approval. 
Authorized dealer banks will find the manual to be useful not only in distinguishing between 
current and capital and financial account transactions but also in determining the minimum 
that is required in support of Exchange Control applications. 
The Manual also reflects a commitment by Authorities to move from controls to a more liberal 
regime. You will note, Ladies and Gentlemen, that most Exchange Control transactions that 
hitherto  required  prior  Central  Bank  approval  no  longer  requires  such  action  from  the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi. 
The Manual also recognizes recent developments in the management of exports and export 
proceeds in Malawi. 
It is, therefore, important that authorised dealer banks exercise due diligence in processing 
Exchange Control applications. Authorized dealer banks should also ensure consistency and 
uniformity of policy implementation in carrying out duties entrusted to them through strict and 
impartial application of Exchange Control instructions. 
Banks are therefore encouraged to consult the Reserve Bank of Malawi whenever in doubt 
with regard to the interpretation and implementation of exchange controls. 
Trade liberalization ushers in new challenges in terms of Exchange Control administration. In 
order to deal with these challenges, Government is working on further amendments to the 
Exchange Control Act which will enhance penalties for offenders but, at the same time, allow 
for more transparency and easier implementation of the Act. In order to effectively manage 
the process, the Bank needs the cooperation and active participation of all institutions and 
individuals gathered here. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  now  have  the  singular  honour  to  declare  the  Exchange  Control 
Manual  officially  launched  for  full  application  by  authorized  dealer  banks  effective 
1st January, 2010. 
I thank you all for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2010
