Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Handelsblatt 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in 
Handelsblatt, Germany, conducted by Ms Marietta Kurm-Engels and Mr Andreas Hoffbauer 
on 12 May and published on 14 May 2010. 
 Handelsblatt  (HB):  Mr  Trichet,  you  intend  to  withdraw  all  of  the  liquidity  that  you  are 
currently injecting into the markets via the purchase of government bonds. Do we have to 
face inflation in the euro area? 
Trichet: No, not at all. Price stability is our primary mandate and over the past 11½ years we 
fulfilled  our  mandate  successfully.  We  have  not  changed  our  monetary  policy  stance.  The 
additional liquidity that we are providing through the purchase of government bonds will be 
withdrawn  again.  Interest-bearing  time  deposits  are  an  appropriate  way  to  withdraw  this 
liquidity. 
HB: What induced you to take this extraordinary step on Monday morning? You had made 
no mention whatsoever thereof at the press conference just three days earlier. 
Trichet: On Thursday afternoon and Friday, we were facing a situation that we regarded as 
fundamentally  abnormal.  That  situation  deteriorated  abruptly,  sharply  and  extensively.  The 
very moment where the agreement was reached in Europe to provide Greece with financial 
support and the imminent decision of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to approve the 
Greek standby should have contributed on the contrary to ease tensions in the markets … 
HB: … which was not the case? 
Trichet:  No,  the  contrary  happened.  The  situation  in  a  number  of  financial  markets  was 
hampering  the  transmission  of  our monetary  policy,  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  we  had 
judged  to  be  appropriate  precisely  the  previous  Thursday.  That  had  to  be  put  right.  The 
exceptional circumstances demanded that we act swiftly. 
HB: What volume will the purchase programme have? 
Trichet: I do not provide any figures at the moment. 
HB: The markets would like to know in somewhat more detail how you intend to absorb the 
liquidity again. 
Trichet: Allow me to repeat myself: We are not changing our monetary policy stance. We are 
not embarking on quantitative easing. We will withdraw the liquidity that we will inject mainly 
through tendering term deposits. 
HB: Will that be possible? 
Trichet: Of course. It does not present technical difficulties. That is what we intend to do. 
And let me say, that what counts, is our determination and the fact that we are true to our 
primary  mandate  of  safeguarding  price  stability.  The  Governing  Council  will  not  tolerate 
inflation. 
HB: Is Greece an isolated case? Could the same happen to other countries as well? 
Trichet: Greece was clearly in a unique exceptionally grave situation before it embarked on 
its adjustment programme. But I call solemnly upon all countries to implement programmes 
commensurate to recover sound fiscal situation. 
HB: What has to be done? 
Trichet:  What  we  must  achieve  first,  are  sound  and  rigorously  implemented  adjustment 
programmes fully in line with the commitment of Governments to take all measures needed 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 1
to  meet  their  fiscal  targets  this  year  and  the  years  ahead  in  line  with  excessive  deficit 
procedures and to accelerate fiscal consolidation and ensure the sustainability of their public 
finances. 
HB: Do you see any risks for European taxpayers? 
Trichet: Our message from the very outset has been that risks for European taxpayers will 
not materialise if all governments concerned are faithful to all their commitments. They must 
keep to the rules and commitments. They must behave themselves properly and alert their 
peers, the other Governments, to also behave properly. Mutual surveillance is essential. 
HB: Do you now start the same what the central banks in the United States and the United 
Kingdom have already been doing for a while? 
Trichet: That is not comparable. What the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have 
done was “quantitative easing”. They were injecting liquidity into the markets and that with 
the  explicit  goal  of  augmenting  the  overall  liquidity.  As  I  said  already  what  we  are  doing 
through the Securities Market Programme is not quantitative easing. 
HB: Is the ECB violating the spirit of the Treaty of Maastricht? 
Trichet: No, not at all. We cannot imagine doing anything that would violate the Treaty – not 
even  for  a  moment.  What  we  are  doing  is  of  course  in  conformity  with  the  Treaty’s  letter. 
What we are doing is in full conformity with the spirit of the Treaty. 
HB: Why are you now being criticised by the banks? 
Trichet: Are we? If so, it is probably because we are doing things that we have not been 
asked to do by them. That would be proof of our independence vis-à-vis interest groups. That 
refutes  the  argument  that  we  have  acted  as  a  result  of  pressure  from  the  banks.  I  am 
therefore very pleased to be being criticised by the banks. 
HB: You don’t see any threat to the ECB’s credibility? 
Trichet:  After  the  first  12  years  of  the  euro,  despite  all  difficulties  -  oil  and  commodities 
shocks  and  financial  crisis  –  we  will  have  delivered  price  stability  fully  in  line  with  our 
definition,  less  than  2%  close  to  2%.  That  is  the  proof.  The  Executive  Board  and  the 
Governing Council are inflexibly attached to price stability. And our credibility does not rely 
on words but on deeds and on our own track record. 
HB: And is this also valid for the decision taken during the weekend? 
Trichet:  As  regards  our  Sunday  decisions  they  were  of  the  same  nature  as  those  taken 
earlier in the crisis when we adopted non-standard measures. Where necessary we take our 
decisions  swiftly,  like  in  2007  and  2008,  but  without  ever  losing  our  sense  of  direction: 
medium- and long-term price stability. 
HB:  The  Governing  Council’s  most  recent  decision  was  not  unanimous.  Was  there  an 
argument? 
Trichet: I can confirm that three of the four decisions were unanimous or taken on the basis 
of a consensus. One decision namely the Securities Market Programme was decided, as I 
have already said, by an overwhelming majority. All our decisions – including last Sunday’s – 
are taken after weighing up all the pros and cons. 
HB: Were you not in contact with authorities? 
Trichet:  Yes,  I  was  in  contact  with  my  good  friend  Ben  Bernanke,  the  Chairman  of  the 
Federal Reserve and other central bank governors, throughout the evening and the night. It 
was not only a European but also a global serious situation. 
HB:  For  more  than  ten  years,  the  ECB  was  able  to  keep  inflation  in  the  euro  area  under 
control.  Now,  all  of  a  sudden,  the  Union  has  stopped  functioning  properly.  What  has 
happened? 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2010
Trichet: We are currently facing challenges on a global scale. The events that we are now 
seeing  have  ceased  to  be  a  matter  solely  for  Europe.  The  challenge  of  running  sound 
sustainable  fiscal  policies  is  the  problem  affecting  most  of  the  world’s  major  industrialised 
countries. That needs to be understood. The crisis in private financial markets has now been 
followed  by  severe  tensions  in  the  public  sector.  Ultimately,  all  industrialised  countries  are 
very much in the same boat. 
HB: From Athens are coming only nice words, just words… 
Trichet:  No,  nice  words  aren’t  the  only  thing  coming  out  of  Athens.  Tough  measures  are 
already being adopted – measures that were certainly long overdue. But these are not just 
nice words. 
HB: What was agreed? 
Trichet: The Commission in liaison with the ECB and the IMF will monitor very closely the 
implementation  of  the  measures.  But  what  is  also  decisive  that  all  Governments  take  fully 
their responsibilities of surveillance. It is true for all the other 15 and of course for Germany 
amongst them. Germany is the largest economy in the euro area and a country which has a 
tradition of sound fiscal management. I count on the very active role of all countries including 
Germany inserting the function of surveillance. 
HB: Should the ECB not also have been tougher and more vocal in its criticism of European 
governments in recent years? 
Trichet: The Governing Council has been public in asking Governments to embark on better 
and sounder fiscal policies on the occasion of all our monthly meetings. You have heard me 
being  vocal  in  all  my  press  conferences.  I  had  to  counter  in  the  name  of  the  Governing 
Council, the attempt to destroy the Stability and Growth Pact in 2004 and 2005. This attempt 
was engineered by the big countries of the euro area, including Germany and France and by 
the Chancellor of Germany and by the President of France of the time. And in all Euro group 
meetings since five years I call Ministers to regain control not only of their budget but of all 
nominal evolutions including unit labour costs. 
HB: What needs to be changed? 
Trichet: We certainly do need change in Europe – fundamental change. Not only in the area 
of surveillance and monitoring of fiscal policy, but also as regards structural reform policies 
and competitiveness policies. 
HB: Examples? 
Trichet:  We  need  to  improve  drastically  everything:  the  quality  of  the  diagnosis  and 
recommendations  by  the  Commission,  much  more  stronger  procedures  –  and  where 
necessary automatic procedures and tools – to prevent ex ante bad policies, and much more 
effective sanctions ex post. I will make all these points with the greatest energy in the Van 
Rompuy Committee. 
HB: Will the measures adopted by the ECB now dampen growth in Europe? 
Trichet:  No.  It  is  a  complete  fallacy  to  say  that  fiscal  soundness  dampens  growth.  It  is 
exactly  the  contrary.  It  is  the  absence  of  fiscal  credibility  which  dampens  growth.  Medium 
term  sound  and  credible  fiscal  policies  are  a  major  prerequisite  for  confidence.  And 
confidence  of  the  households,  confidence  of  the  entrepreneurs  and  confidence  of  the 
investors is what is indispensable for the recovery. 
HB: Did you ever think that you would have to take such difficult decisions as President of 
the ECB? 
Trichet: I have had to take difficult decisions throughout my career – including as President 
of the Paris Club in the 80’s and Chairman of European Monetary Policy Committee in the 
90’s as well as Governor of the Banque de France. I have been involved in just about all of 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 3
the crises of the last 30 years. But it is true that the decisions taken today, in the context of 
the worst global crisis since World War II at the level of the euro area as a whole are of an 
extreme importance; it is for my colleagues and me an immense responsibility. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2010
