 Deepak Mohanty: Monetary policy framework in India – experience with 
multiple-indicators approach 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference of the Orissa Economic Association, Baripada, Orissa, 21 February 2010. 
 The assistance provided by Shri Binod B. Bhoi is acknowledged. 
1. 
I am honoured to deliver the 2nd Professor Baidyanath Mishra Lecture. Prof. Mishra 
is a multi-faceted personality: an economist, an educationist and an institution-builder. Above 
all, he is a great teacher who inspired generations of students. I thank the Orissa Economic 
Association for giving me this opportunity. 
2. 
I will set out how the framework of monetary policy has evolved over the last two 
and half decades. First, I will touch upon the objectives of monetary policy and then discuss 
briefly  about  how  monetary  framework  has  evolved  globally  before  dwelling  on  the  Indian 
experience. I will conclude with an overall assessment of the monetary policy regime in India. 
Objectives of monetary policy  
I.  
3.  
Central  banks  derive  their  objectives  from  their  respective  mandates.  Monetary 
policy  could  have  either  a  single  objective  of  price  stability  or  multiple  objectives  besides 
price stability. In the literature and in practice, price stability is considered as the dominant 
objective of monetary policy. 
4.  
The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 delineates the basic functions 
of the Bank as “to regulate the issue of Bank notes and keeping of reserves with a view to 
securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit system 
of the country to its advantage”. The objectives of monetary policy evolved from this broad 
guideline as maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to the productive 
sectors  of  the  economy.  In  practice,  monetary  policy  endeavoured  to  maintain  a  judicious 
balance between economic growth and price stability.  
5.  
The question is how do we define price stability? Price stability does not mean zero 
inflation.  It  is  considered  as  a  low  and  stable  order  of  inflation.  This  is  because  both  high 
inflation  and  deflation  impose  costs  on  the  economy  by  way  of  loss  of  output  and 
misallocation of resources. For advanced economies, an inflation rate of about 2 per cent is 
equated  with  price  stability.  For  an  emerging  market  economy  (EME)  like  India,  going 
through significant structural changes, a slightly higher rate of inflation which allows relative 
prices to adjust smoothly can be considered appropriate. The Chakravarty Committee (1985) 
had defined an inflation rate of 4 per cent per annum as tolerable for India. 
6. 
India  is  a  moderate  inflation  country  with  the  long-term  average  inflation  rate 
remaining in a single digit of about 7.5 per cent since 1970–71. Over this 40-year period, the 
average  inflation  rate,  however,  has  decelerated  to  about  5.5  per  cent  in  the  decade  of 
2000s. The medium term objective of monetary policy is to bring down the average inflation 
rate to around 3.0 per cent consistent with India’s integration with the global economy.1  
7. 
While  a  low  level  of  inflation  is  essential  to  sustain  high levels  of  growth,  it  is  not 
sufficient  to  maintain  financial  stability,  as  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  recent  global 
financial  crisis.  Consequently,  besides  price  stability,  ensuring  orderly  conditions  in  the 
                                                 
1   Reserve Bank of India (2010), Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for the year 2009–10, Reserve Bank 
of India, January 29, 2010. 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 1
financial markets has become a key policy concern. In this context, it may be indicated that 
financial  stability  had  emerged  as  another  important  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  India 
much  before  the  crisis.  Thus,  monetary  policy  in  India  has  evolved  to  have  multiple 
objectives of price stability, financial stability and growth. These objectives are not inherently 
contradictory,  rather  mutually  reinforcing.  Price  and  financial  stability  are  important  for 
sustaining high levels of growth which is the ultimate objective of public policy. 
Evolution of monetary policy framework  
II.  
8.  
In order to attain the objectives of policy it is necessary to have a consistent policy 
framework. At a theoretical level, the evolution of monetary framework could be traced to the 
desire  to  reduce  inflationary  bias  in  the  economy  through  various  refinements  under  the 
broader  debate  on  “rules”  versus  “discretion”  in  policy  making,  and  more  recently, 
“constrained discretion” which believes that the doctrines of “rules” and “discretion” are not 
mutually exclusive2. In practice, the nature of the framework is contingent upon two important 
considerations.  First,  the  level  of  development  of  financial  markets  and  institutions;  and 
second, the degree of openness of the economy to trade and capital flows. In India, like most 
other  countries,  the  monetary  policy  framework  has  evolved  in  response  to  and  in 
consequence  of 
transmission 
mechanism. 
financial  developments  and  shifts 
the  underlying 
in 
How did monetary policy framework evolve globally? 
9. 
In order to achieve the objectives of monetary policy which are not under the direct 
control of central banks, monetary authorities typically set “intermediate targets”, which bear 
a  stable  relationship  with  the  overall  objectives  of  monetary  policy3.  The  selection  of 
intermediate  target  is  also  conditional  upon  the  channels  of  monetary  transmission  –  the 
process  through  which  monetary  policy  actions  impact  the  ultimate  objectives.  Historically, 
although credit targets were prevalent, the concept of a formal intermediate target emerged 
with the monetarist emphasis on money targeting in an environment of worsening inflation in 
the 1970s and observed stable relationship among money, output and prices. A number of 
major  central  banks  such  as  Switzerland,  Germany,  Japan,  the  UK,  the  USA,  France, 
Australia  and  Canada  adopted  monetary  targets  in  the  mid-1970s.  In  the  1980s,  financial 
market innovations reduced the need for financial intermediation by the banking system and 
in turn began to impart volatility to the behaviour of monetary aggregates. The consequent 
weakening of the stable relationship among money, output and prices made many advanced 
country central banks to move towards signaling monetary policy stance through setting of 
interest  rates.  Monetary  targeting,  however,  continued  in  some  form  in  many  bank-based 
economies  in  continental  Europe  such  as  Germany,  France  and  Switzerland  where  it  was 
possible to establish money demand stability with redefinition of monetary aggregates. 
10. 
Given  the  under-developed  nature  of  financial  markets  coupled  with  the  quantity-
based  credit  channel  of  monetary  transmission,  money  target  was  considered  suitable  in 
case  of  developing  countries.  In  the  1980s,  monetary  targeting  was  adopted  in  many 
developing  countries  such  as  Brazil,  China,  Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  Peru,  Philippines, 
Russia  and  Venezuela.  As  financial  innovations  spread  to  developing  countries  and  they 
became more open to external capital flows, monetary targeting proved less effective.  
                                                 
2   Bernanke, Ben S. “Constrained Discretion and Monetary Policy”. Remarks before the Money Marketeers of 
New York University, New York, February 3, 2003. 
3   Friedman,  B.  (1990),  “Targets  and  Instruments  of  Monetary  Policy”.  In  B.  Friedman  and  F.  Hahn  (eds.) 
Handbook of Monetary Economics, Amsterdam, North-Holland. 
 The weakening of monetary targeting framework, both in advanced and developing 
11. 
countries,  triggered  a  search  for  alternate  monetary  frameworks.  As  it  was  also  widely 
recognised  that  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  sustainable  growth  by  maintaining  price 
stability,  beginning  with  New  Zealand  in  1989,  a  number  of  advanced  and  developing 
countries moved to “inflation targeting”. Under this approach, central banks target the final 
objective, i.e., inflation itself rather than targeting any intermediate variable. Among the major 
central banks, the Bank of England (BoE) formally adopted inflation targeting in 1992. 
12.  
The  US  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  follows  a  more  eclectic  approach,  which  can  be 
termed as risk management approach, in pursuit of its twin objectives of price stability and 
maximum employment. Under the risk management approach, the Fed takes a policy view 
on  interest  rate  on  consideration  of  balance  of  risks  to  inflation  and  growth.  Although  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  a  single  mandate  of  price  stability,  it  is  not  an inflation 
targeting central bank. Its policy decisions are based on a “two pillars” strategy comprising of 
“economic  analysis”  and  “monetary  analysis”.  Money  supply  continues  to  be  an  important 
variable in its analytical tool under the second pillar reflecting the enduring influence of the 
German Bundesbank which was a major monetary targeting central bank. Notwithstanding 
the  difference  in  approach  among  central  banks,  price  stability  is  accepted  as  the 
predominant objective of monetary policy. 
How did monetary policy framework evolve in India? 
13.  
In India also, monetary policy framework has undergone significant transformation 
over time. In the 1960s, as inflation was considered to be structural and inflation volatility was 
mainly caused by agricultural failures, there was greater reliance on selective credit controls. 
The  aim  was  to  regulate  bank  advances  to  sensitive  commodities  to  influence  production 
outlays, on the one hand and to limit possibilities of speculation, on the other. In the 1970s, 
there was a surge in inflation on account of monetary expansion induced by expansionary 
fiscal policies besides the oil price shocks. By the early 1980s, there was a broad agreement 
on the primary causes of inflation. It was argued that while fluctuations in agricultural prices 
and oil price shocks did affect prices, sustained inflation since the early 1960s could not have 
occurred  unless  it  was  supported  by  the  continuous  excessive  monetary  expansion 
generated by the large-scale monetisation of the fiscal deficit4. 
14.  
Against  the  backdrop,  the  Committee  to  Review  the  Working  of  the  Monetary 
System  (Chairman:  Prof.  Sukhamoy  Chakravarty;  1985),  set  up  by  the  Reserve  Bank, 
recommended a monetary targeting framework to target an acceptable order of inflation in 
line with desired output growth. It also recommended for limiting monetary expansion through 
the process of monetisation of fiscal deficit by an agreement between the Reserve Bank and 
the  Government.5  With  empirical  evidence  supporting  reasonable  stability  in  the  demand 
function for money, broad money (M3) formally emerged as an intermediate target. Under this 
approach, a monetary projection is made consistent with the expected real GDP growth and 
a tolerable level of inflation6. The framework was, however, a flexible one allowing for various 
feedback effects. Moreover, money supply target was relatively well understood by the public 
at large.7 
                                                 
4   Reserve Bank of India (2005), Report on Currency and Finance 2003–04, pp 53–79. 
5   But  it  took  almost  twelve  years  to  fructify  when  automatic  monetization  through  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  was 
abolished and a system of Ways and Means Advances (WMA) was introduced in 1997. 
6   Technically, in a simple form, if expected real GDP growth is 6 per cent, the income elasticity of demand for 
money is 1.5 and a tolerable level of inflation is 5 per cent, the broad money (M3) expansion target can be set 
at 14 per cent (M3 growth = 1.5 x 6 + 5 = 14%). 
7   Rangarajan, C. (1997), “Role of Monetary Policy”, Economic and Political Weekly, December 27. 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 3
With the pace of trade and financial liberalization gaining momentum following the 
15.  
initiation  of  structural  reforms  in  the  early  1990s,  the  efficacy  of  broad  money  as  an 
intermediate target of monetary policy came under question. The Reserve Bank’s Monetary 
and Credit Policy for the First Half of 1998–99 observed that financial innovations emerging 
in the economy provided some evidence that the dominant effect on the demand for money 
in the near future need not necessarily be real income, as in the past.  
16.  
Since  the  mid-1990s,  apart  from  dealing  with  the  usual  supply  shocks,  monetary 
policy  had  to  increasingly  contend  with  external  shocks  emanating  from  swings  in  capital 
flows, volatility in the exchange rate and global business cycles. Subsequently, increase in 
liquidity  emanating  from  capital  inflows  raised  the  ratio  of  net  foreign  assets  (NFA)  to 
Reserve Money (Chart 1). This rendered the control of monetary aggregates more difficult. 
Consequently, there was also increasing evidence of changes in the underlying transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy with interest rate and the exchange rate gaining importance 
vis-à-vis quantity variables.8 Bank credit to private sector as a per cent of GDP also started 
rising,  though  it  still  remains  low  as  compared  to  advanced  economies  and  many  EMEs 
underscoring  the  potential  for  greater  credit  penetration  (Table  1).  These  developments 
necessitated refinements in the conduct of monetary policy.  
 
                                                   
8   Reserve  Bank  of  India  (1998),  The  Working  Group  on  Money  Supply:  Analytics  and  Methodology  of 
Compilation (Chairman: Dr. Y.V. Reddy). 
   
17.  
Against  this  backdrop,  the  Reserve  Bank  formally  adopted  a  “multiple  indicators 
approach”  in  April  1998  with  a  greater  emphasis  on  rate  channels  for  monetary  policy 
formulation. As a part of this approach, information content from a host of quantity variables 
such  as  money,  credit,  output,  trade,  capital  flows  and  fiscal  position  as  well  as  from  rate 
variables  such  as  rates  of  return  in  different  markets,  inflation  rate  and  exchange  rate  are 
analyzed  for  drawing  monetary  policy  perspectives.  The  multiple-indicators  approach,  as 
conceptualised  when  Dr.  Bimal  Jalan  was  the  Governor,  continued  to  evolve  and  was 
augmented by forward looking indicators and a  panel of parsimonious time series models. 
The forward looking indicators are drawn from the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey, 
capacity  utilization  survey,  professional  forecasters’  survey  and  inflation  expectations 
survey9. The assessment from these indicators and models feed into the projection of growth 
and inflation. Simultaneously, the Reserve Bank also gives the projection for broad money 
(M3), which serves as an important information variable, so as to make the resource balance 
in the economy consistent with the credit needs of the government and the private sector. 
Thus,  the  current  framework  of  monetary  policy  can  be  termed  as  an  augmented  multiple 
indicators approach as illustrated below (Exhibit 1). 
                                                 
9   Following  the  recommendations  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Working  Group  on  Surveys  (Chairman:  Deepak 
Mohanty;  2009),  the  results  of  some  of  the  surveys  such  as  the  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  and 
Industrial Outlook Survey are disseminated in the public domain (www.rbi.org.in). 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 5
  
This large panel of indicators is at times criticised as a “check list” approach, as it 
18.  
does not provide for a clearly defined nominal anchor for monetary policy. However, given 
the level of financial market development, the evolving nature of monetary transmission and 
the need to maintain the resource balance between the government and the private sector, 
monetary policy assessment becomes inherently complex.  
19.  
Globally, it is now recognised that the task of monetary management has become 
more challenging. In view of central banks operating in an environment of high uncertainty 
regarding  the  functioning  of  the  economy  as  well  as  its  prevailing  state  and  future 
developments, a single model or a limited set of indicators may not be a sufficient guide for 
monetary  policy.  Instead,  an  encompassing  and  integrated  set  of  data  is  required.  This 
reinforces the usefulness of monitoring a number of macroeconomic indicators in the conduct 
of monetary policy. In the context of the recent crisis, it is argued that monitoring money and 
credit  may  help  policymakers  interpret  asset  market  developments  and  draw  implications 
from them for the economic and financial outlook.10 There is a need to raise awareness in 
the central banking community of the importance of monetary analysis and its implications, 
both for economies individually and globally.11 Thus, there is now increasing support for a 
broad-based approach to monetary policy. 
                                                 
10   Goodhart, C (2007) “Whatever Became of the Monetary Aggregate?” LSE Financial Markets Group Special 
Paper No. 172. 
11   Trichet,  Jean-Claude  (2010),  Panelist  Comments  on  “Fifty  Years  of  Monetary  Policy:  What  Have  We 
Learned?” at the Symposium for the 50th anniversary of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, February 9. 
 Experience with monetary framework in India 
III. 
Experience with monetary targeting approach 
An earlier paper12 examined the experience with the monetary targeting approach. 
20.  
Despite the adoption of formal monetary targeting, no specific money targets were set during 
the period 1985–90 except for fixing a ceiling linked to average growth of broad money (M3) 
in  previous  year(s).  This  was  because  there  continued  to  be  large  overhang  of  excess 
liquidity  due  to  primary  money  creation.  The  biggest  impediment  to  explicit  monetary 
targeting  was  the  fact  that  the  Reserve  Bank  had  no  controls  over  its credit  to the  central 
government,  which  accounted  for  the  bulk  of  the  creation  of  reserve  money.  The  Reserve 
Bank could at best set limits on the secondary expansion of money through instruments such 
as cash reserve ratio (CRR), statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) and selective credit controls. As a 
result, CRR reached its prescribed ceiling of 15 per cent of net demand and time liabilities 
(NDTL) of banks in July 1989 and the SLR reached the peak of 38.5 per cent in September 
1990.  Despite  these  measures,  however,  money  supply  growth  remained  high,  which 
contributed to inflation. The setting of monetary targets and actual achievements during the 
monetary targeting period is presented below in Table 2.  
 
                                                 
12   Mohanty  and  Mitra  (1999),  “Experience  with  Monetary  Targeting  in  India”,  Economic  and  Political  Weekly, 
January 16–23, pp 123–132. 
 BIS Review 24/2010 
 7
Experience with multiple indicators approach 
21.  
The process of financial liberalization and deregulation of interest rates introduced 
since  the  early  1990s  enhanced  the  role  of  market  forces  in  the  determination  of  interest 
rates and the exchange rate. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank placed greater emphasis on the 
money  market  as  the  focal  point  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  for  fostering  its 
integration  with  other  market  segments.  Following  the  Narsimham  Committee  (1998) 
recommendations, the Reserve Bank introduced the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) in June 
2000 to manage market liquidity on a daily basis and also to transmit interest rate signals to 
the  market.  Collateralized  borrowing  and  lending  operations  (CBLO)  was  introduced  as  a 
new money market instrument in January 2003. The call money market was transformed into 
a pure inter-bank market by August 2005 in a phased manner. 
As a result, the money market developed significantly over the years as reflected in 
22.  
increased  turnover  in  various  market  segments  (Table  3).  Along  with  developing  money 
markets,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  also  undertaken  various  measures  to  develop  the 
government  securities  and  foreign  exchange  market,  increasing  the  depth  of  the  financial 
markets (Chart 2).  
      23.  
All these reforms have also led to improvements in liquidity management operations 
by the Reserve Bank as reflected in general containment of call rates within the LAF corridor 
except occasional volatility. Apart from imparting stability in call money rates, this has also 
resulted in greater market integration as reflected in close co-movement of rates in various 
segments  of  the  money  market  (Chart  3).  The  rule-based  fiscal  policy  pursued  under  the 
Financial Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, by easing fiscal dominance, 
contributed to overall improvement in monetary management.  
 
 
During the recent period, the issue of managing large and persistent capital inflows 
24.  
in excess of the absorptive capacity of the economy added another dimension to the liquidity 
management operations. Initially, the liquidity impact of large capital inflows were sterilised 
through open market operation (OMO) sales and LAF operations. Given the finite stock of 
 BIS Review 24/2010 
 9
government securities in the Reserve Bank’s portfolio and the legal restrictions on issuance 
of its own paper, additional instruments other than LAF were needed to contain liquidity of a 
more enduring nature. This led to the introduction of the market stabilisation scheme (MSS) 
in  April  2004.  Under  this  scheme,  short  term  government  securities  were  issued  but  the 
amount remained impounded in the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet for sterilisation purposes. 
Interestingly,  in  the  face  of  reversal  of  capital  flows  during  the  recent  crisis,  unwinding  of 
such sterilised liquidity under the MSS helped to ease liquidity conditions (Chart 4).  
 
 
25. 
The efficient conduct of monetary policy is judged ultimately in terms of its ability to 
stabilise  real  economic  activity  and  inflation  and  also  ensuring  financial  stability  consistent 
with the policy objectives. An assessment of the multiple indicators approach for the period 
1998–99 to 2008–09 reveals that actual outcome of GDP growth has been generally higher 
than the projections indicated in the monetary policy statements, while it has generally been 
lower in case of inflation (Table 4).  
   Overall assessment 
IV. 
26.  
The  monetary  policy  framework  in  India  has  undergone  significant  shifts  from  a 
monetary targeting regime to a multiple indicators regime. Such a transition was conditioned 
by the developments of financial markets, increasing integration of the Indian economy with 
the global economy and changing transmission of monetary policy. The multiple indicators 
approach, conceptualized in 1998, has since been augmented by forward looking indicators 
from surveys and a panel of time series models. Moreover, the multiple indicators approach 
continues  to  evolve.  Though  the  multiple  indicators  approach  is subject  to  criticism  for  the 
absence of a clearly defined anchor, in the wake of the recent global financial crisis there is 
recognition of the usefulness of a broad indicators-based assessment of monetary policy. 
27.  
On  the  basis  of  the  above  assessment,  I  will  give  a  comparison  of  the  relative 
performance of the monetary regimes in terms of key macroeconomic variables over three 
periods:  (i)  the  decade  preceding  the  monetary  targeting  period  (1976–85);  (ii)  monetary 
targeting period (1986–98) and (iii) multiple indicators period so far (1999–2009) (Table 5).  
BIS Review 24/2010 
 11
 
28.  
 
     From this overall assessment, the following broad conclusions can be drawn. 
First, real GDP growth, on an average, has improved successively from 4.6 per cent 
in the decade prior to the monetary targeting period to 5.5 per cent in the monetary 
targeting period and further to 7.1 per cent in the multiple indicators period. Not only 
growth  has improved  but  it  has become  more  stable  under  the  multiple  indicators 
approach.  
Second,  headline  WPI  inflation,  on  an  average,  increased  during  the  monetary 
targeting regime alongside significant increase in fiscal deficit, although there was a 
reduction in volatility in inflation13. Under the multiple indicators approach, both WPI 
and  CPI  inflation  fell  significantly.  The  fall  in  inflation  was  accompanied  by 
substantial  reduction  in  fiscal  deficit.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  fiscal 
consolidation to sustain higher levels of growth with price stability.  
Third,  while  the  volatility  of  WPI  inflation  reduced  during  the  multiple  indicators 
period,  it  increased  for  CPI  inflation  reflecting  higher  volatility  in  food  prices.  This 
underlines the importance of supply management and a greater focus on agricultural 
development to contain food price inflation. 
Fourth, money supply (M3) growth declined over the regimes though volatility of M3 
increased  slightly  during 
indicators  regime  reflecting  emerging 
importance of interest rate in monetary transmission. The shift in operating objective 
to stabilise overnight interest rate so that it transmits through the term structure is 
reflected in a discernible reduction in the overnight interest rate with lower volatility.  
Fifth, exchange rate, on an average, has depreciated successively both in nominal 
and real terms. However, it has become more stable during the multiple indicators 
the  multiple 
                                                 
13   It  may,  however,  be  noted  that  in  the  pre-monetary  targeting  period,  higher  inflation  volatility  was  also 
significantly contributed by the two major oil price shocks. 
   approach  than  the  monetary  targeting  regime.  This  could  be  partly  attributed  to 
accumulation of reserves and management of exchange rate to contain volatility. 
Sixth,  the  improved  performance  of  monetary  policy  was  facilitated  by  supportive 
fiscal  policy  –  discontinuation  of  the  practice  of  automatic  monetisation  and  rule-
based  deficit  reduction  programme  under  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management  (FRBM)  Act  –  which  enhanced  instrument  independence  of  the 
Reserve Bank. 
Finally,  the  recent  overall  improvement  in  macroeconomic  performance  cannot  be 
ascribed to monetary policy alone. Apart from a rule-based fiscal policy, productivity 
enhancing structural reforms, sharp increase in saving and investment, increasing 
integration  with  the  global  economy,  a  low  global  inflation  environment  and  the 
unleashing of the entrepreneurial spirit of the private sector played an important role.  
BIS Review 24/2010 
 13
