Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The transformation of the international financial system 
and the role of the Islamic financial system 
Keynote address by Mrs Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
6th  World  Islamic  Economic  Forum,  “The  Transformation  of  the  International  Financial 
System and the Role of the Islamic Financial System”, Kuala Lumpur, 20 May 2010. 
 This  is  a  time  of  extraordinary  global  economic  challenge  and  uncertainty.  The  recent 
unprecedented  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  has  resulted  in  tremendous  damage 
across the world. The meltdown in the global financial system resulted in several setbacks 
including  bank  failures,  a  credit  crunch,  a  collapse  of  asset  markets,  massive  wealth 
destruction,  a  sharp  decline  in  trade  and  financial  flows  and  widespread  unemployment  in 
many  parts  of  the  world.  To  contain  the  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  economy, 
extraordinary and exceptional measures were taken by policymakers around the world. With 
the global economy now on the road to recovery, attention has turned towards securing a 
more permanent solution in shaping the global economy of tomorrow that would avoid such 
crisis of such proportions in the future. 
Significant steps are being taken by the international community to intensify efforts to reform 
and strengthen the international financial system. The aim is to build the foundations for a 
stronger and more inclusive global economy – built on the premise of sustainable growth and 
a greater shared prosperity. This global resolve is in fact, fundamentally in congruence with, 
and accentuates the role and relevance of Islamic finance on the global economic stage in 
this  post-crisis  era.  Islamic  finance,  through  its  emphasis  for  the  attainment  of  socio-
economic goals based on the objectives of Shariah, provides the discipline that enhances the 
prospect of strengthening the global economy and overall financial stability. 
The  relatively  better  performance  and  the  sustained  momentum  of  the  growth  in  Islamic 
finance  during  this  period  of  global  financial  turmoil  exemplifies  its  inherent  strengths  –  its 
emphasis  on  a  strong  linkage  to  productive  economic  activity  which  predisposes  the 
economy  to  financial  deepening  without  the  excesses,  its  emphasis  for  accountability, 
disclosure  and  transparency  and  its  inbuilt  checks  and  balances,  all  of  which  underpin 
Islamic finance as a stable form of financial intermediation that strengthens its prospects as a 
contributor to economic growth and financial stability. 
While the amount of funds managed in the Islamic financial system is still only a fraction of 
the  total  assets  of  the  international  financial  system,  it  represents  that  portion  of  financial 
activities that is truly supported by underlying productive capacity that generates growth of 
economies  across  continents.  It  is  this  form  of  financial  activities  that  we  would  want  to 
encourage,  as  opposed  to  the  financial  flows  that  are  destabilising  and  not  contributing  to 
generating real economic activity. 
The efforts to reform the international financial system by the international community have 
aimed  to  address  the  broad  range  of  flaws  and  weaknesses  that  has  contributed  to  this 
recent crisis and to restore confidence in the integrity of the global financial system. At the 
core of this reform agenda is the development of a new financial regulatory framework that 
would be more effective and that is premised on a greater emphasis on ethics, fairness, and 
accountability and that promotes global economic, social and environmental sustainability. It 
also  needs  to  be  anchored  on  a  balance  of  supporting  growth  while  maintaining  financial 
stability,  and  one  that  is  founded  on  greater  international  coordination  of  regulatory 
approaches and supervisory oversight with a crisis management framework that will reduce 
systemic risk and the severity of any such future financial crises. 
These  reforms  include  measures  to  raise  the  quality  and  level  of  capital  held  by  banking 
institutions,  strengthening  the  liquidity  risk  requirements  and  management,  implementing 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 1
forward-looking provisioning standards, and aligning compensation practices with long term 
performance.  Further  measures  also  include  the  improvement  in  transparency  and 
strengthening of the supervisory frameworks and arrangements for dealing with cross-border 
oversight  on  financial  groups  that  operate  beyond  domestic  shores.  This  has  also  been 
reinforced by the strengthening of macro-prudential regulation. The crisis had demonstrated 
that the collective behaviours of banking institutions and other highly leveraged institutions 
had  contributed  to  the  material  build-up  of  risks  in  the  financial  system  which  ultimately  in 
turn  undermined  financial  stability.  It  was  also  recognized  that  the  existing  regulatory 
framework was insufficient to address systemic risks. This has prompted a more integrated 
approach to the regulation with substantial strengthening of the macro-prudential elements of 
financial regulation. 
A major concern on the calibration of the regulatory reforms is its unintended consequences 
that could materially impair the vital role of the financial sector in the economy. Of concern is 
that  the  cumulative  impact  of  the  new  measures  may  affect  the  cost  and  availability  of 
financing  to  the  wider  economy.  There  needs  to  be  a  balance  between  long  run  financial 
stability and its potential increased costs to financial intermediation. This balance needs to 
combine regulatory and supervisory systems that are more forward looking and responsive 
to  risk;  while  having  in  place  appropriate  incentive  structures  for  financial  institutions  to 
prudently manage risks and strengthen conditions for market discipline to take effect. 
While the Islamic financial system has generally performed well during this global financial 
crisis,  several  valuable  lessons  can  be  drawn  from  this  crisis  in  our  efforts  to  strengthen 
further the Islamic financial infrastructure for a more resilient and stable financial system. In 
2009, a Task Force on Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability was formed by the IDB 
and the IFSB to undertake an assessment of Islamic finance during the global financial crisis 
and  to  identify  the  further  building  blocks  that  are  necessary  to  further  strengthen  the 
foundations  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  report  examines  the  conceptual  elements 
inherent in Islamic finance and their effects on financial stability and considers eight further 
areas of development in the Islamic financial architecture to enhance its ability to deal with a 
more challenging future operating environment. This Report completed in April this year aims 
to support the international efforts towards providing a strong foundation for financial stability 
in the global financial system. 
The eight areas for strengthening the financial infrastructure of Islamic finance address the 
institutional capacity both at the national and international level with the aim of contributing to 
global  financial  stability.  These  building  blocks  which  address  the  core  foundations  for  the 
development  of  Islamic  finance  include,  first,  ensuring  the  effective  implementation  of  the 
prudential  standards;  second, 
liquidity  management 
infrastructure; third, the establishment of strong financial safety nets; fourth, putting in place 
an  effective  crisis  management  and  resolution  frameworks;  fifth,  strengthen  further  the 
accounting,  auditing  and  disclosure  standards;  sixth,  having  an  effective  macro  prudential 
surveillance in place; seventh, having credible credit rating institutions and processes; and 
finally  eighth,  enhancing  close  international  cooperation  and  coordination  among  countries 
including in capacity building and talent development to support efforts at the national level to 
ensure financial stability. 
Islamic  finance  does  not  exist  in  isolation  and  as  it  becomes  an  increasingly  important 
component  of  the  global  financial  system,  it  will  inevitably  be  impacted  by  the  changing 
global  landscape  of  financial  regulation.  This  is  particularly  important  as  its  growth  gains 
momentum  both in terms of number of service providers and in terms of business volume 
and as the internationalisation process continues. The global call for improved regulation and 
increased oversight in an international financial environment that is fundamentally different 
will  thus  also  require  us  to  intensify  the  efforts  that  have  already  been  undertaken  to 
strengthen the financial regulation for Islamic finance. 
the  development  of  systemic 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2010
The financial reforms in Islamic finance to support sustainable and responsible innovation , in 
particular, need to leverage on its inbuilt strengths that set Islamic finance apart in performing 
its role in the mobilisation and allocation of resources to generate real economic activities. In 
Islamic finance, innovation is key in pushing the frontier of market development to generate 
the range of products and services, processes and functions. The key lies in preserving the 
benefits  of  innovative  initiatives  and  activities  whilst  ensuring  that  they  do  not  result  in 
negative  externalities.  This  comes  in  the  forms  of  its  strong  paradigm  in  governance, 
disclosure and transparency, as well as the emphasis that innovations are anchored in the 
objectives of Shariah and thus are for the benefit of the people. 
Importantly,  Islamic  finance  has  the  disposition  to  facilitate  financial  deepening  without 
financial  excesses  through  the  fundamental  Shariah  requirement  for  Islamic  financial 
transactions to be supported by an underlying economic activity and for socially-responsible 
financial  innovation.  Moreover,  the  profit-sharing  and  risk-sharing  characteristics  of  Islamic 
financial transactions strengthen the incentives for Islamic financial institutions to undertake 
the appropriate due diligence on the Islamic financial transactions to ensure that the profits 
are commensurate with the risks assumed. The Shariah board of Islamic financial institutions 
additionally serve as a rigorous process of endorsement of the experts, thus representing a 
vital institutional safeguard to ensure that the inherent strengths of Islamic finance are fully 
realised. This ensures that the products are offered with the intention to achieve real benefits 
for  the  investors.  It  would  therefore  reduce  the  tendency  for  extreme  behaviour  in  the 
financial system. 
More recently, the world’s attention had shifted from troubled banks to troubled countries with 
rising  sovereign  risks,  leading  to  further  rescue  packages  and  increased  anxieties  over 
contagion to financial markets in other parts of the world. Whilst these challenges continue to 
be  addressed  by  the  developed  economies,  the  emerging  economies  have  emerged  from 
this crisis with stronger growth performance. The Asian region in particular, has entered the 
crisis with solid economic fundamentals and more resilient financial systems and institutions. 
This  has  in  turn  substantially  limited  the  consequences  of  the  contagion.  With  the 
internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  in  this  decade,  it  has  further  reinforced  the  trend  of 
greater financial integration in emerging economies. This has reinforced the changing global 
pattern  of 
linkages 
strengthened between the emerging economies. 
In  the  more  recent  period,  with  the  enhanced  international  dimension of  Islamic  finance,  it 
has  become  an  increasing  form  of  intermediation  that  has  facilitated  economic  linkages 
between  emerging  economies.  In  addition,  it has  also  drawn  the  participation  by  the  more 
established  financial  centers  to  forge  stronger  financial  linkages  with  the  dynamic  growth 
regions  of  Asia  and  the  Middle  East.  Indeed,  this  would  contribute  towards  more  efficient 
mobilisation  of  funds  across  regions,  reinforcing  the  significance  of  Islamic  finance  as  an 
increasingly  important  channel  for  a  globally  more  inclusive  economic  development.  In  the 
aftermath of the crisis, Islamic finance will continue to spur new connectivity among nations 
as its role and relevance gains more significance, thereby contributing to a more balanced 
global growth. 
financial  and  economic 
financial  and  economic 
integration  as 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  it  is  the  very  premise  on  which  Islamic  finance  performs  its  intermediation 
function  that  strengthens  its  potential  role  and  relevance  in  advancing  the  growth  and 
development  agenda  towards  preserving  financial  stability  and  towards  strengthening 
economic and financial linkages between nations. By operating in accordance with the rules 
of Shariah, Islamic finance draws its strengths from its direct link to economic activity and its 
inherent requirement for prudent risk management and explicit disclosure and transparency 
thereby ensuring the viability of the activities in generating sufficient wealth to compensate 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 3
for  the  risks  involved.  These  inherent  strengths  will  continue  to  be  the  catalysts  driving  its 
transition into a new era of growth and development in this post-crisis world. 
As  Islamic  finance  transitions  to  its  next  stage  of  development  with  greater  international 
integration, the immense benefits that will be unleashed need to be accompanied by a higher 
level  of  resilience  to  be  well  positioned  to  manage  the  new  challenges  that  the  future  will 
bring. Our collective efforts to mobilise a higher level of global cooperation in promoting this 
outcome will also enhance the prospects of Islamic finance to contribute towards securing 
global financial stability and a greater shared economic prosperity. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2010
