Joseph S Tracy: What the Fed did and why 
Remarks by Mr Joseph S Tracy, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York,  at  the  Westchester  County  Bankers  Association,  Tarrytown,  New  York, 
25 June 2010. 
 In  my  remarks  this  morning,  I  would  like  to  look  back  over  the  events  of  the  past  several 
years and offer my perspective on what were the essential drivers of the financial crisis and 
the Federal Reserve’s interventions.1 I will review the changes that have been taking place in 
the  U.S.  financial  system  and  how  these  changes  created  the  conditions  conducive  to  the 
crisis. I will then discuss the developments in residential real estate financing that provided 
the catalyst for the crisis.  
With  this  background,  I  will  outline  the  interventions  that  were  carried  out  to  mitigate  the 
crisis, focusing on those conducted by the Federal Reserve. I will direct my remarks to the 
facilities  that  were  created  rather  than  to  the  actions  taken  for  individual  institutions  since 
these have been discussed extensively elsewhere. The lessons learned from the crisis are 
important for the design of the policy response aimed at reducing the likelihood that the U.S. 
economy ever again experiences this degree of trauma. 
I begin with the simple exercise of what name we should assign to this past crisis. At first 
blush, this may not seem like a useful exercise. But, as Shakespeare reminded us, names 
are important as they convey a sense of our understanding of the event. One name that has 
gained popularity is the “Great Recession”, which is dated as beginning with the bankruptcy 
of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008. This name conveys both the severity of what 
occurred, as well as the calamity of what was avoided. The contraction in real output in the 
six months following the demise of Lehman Brothers exceeded in size any other post World 
War II recession – in that sense, it was a great recession. However,  aggressive monetary 
and  fiscal  policy  actions  both  domestically  and  abroad  were  successful  in  preventing  a 
complete  meltdown  of  the  U.S.  and  the  world  economy.  In  that  sense,  the  name  also 
emphasizes what the crisis was not. However, the name tends to focus one’s attention too 
much on the effect and not the cause of the crisis. 
An  alternative  name  is  the  “Panic  of  2007”,  which  is  dated  as  beginning  with  the 
announcement  by  BNP  Paribus  on  August  9,  2007,  of  its  suspension  of  redemptions  for 
three  of  its  investment  funds.  This  name  stresses  the  financial  crisis  as  the  precipitating 
event  leading  up  to  the  severe  decline  in  real  economic  activity  slightly  more  than  a  year 
later. The name conveys that at its very basic level, the crisis was a form of a banking panic. 
The parallel to the name “Panic of 1907” is also a reminder to us that history has a way of 
repeating itself unless we learn and apply its lessons well. For this reason, it is useful to take 
a moment to recall the events of 1907. 
At the turn of the 20th century there was no Federal Reserve System. Banks then as today 
borrow short term in order to lend long term, making their profit on the difference in rates. At 
the  time,  the  banks’  short-term  liabilities  took  the  form  of  demand  deposits.  If  depositors 
began to worry about the quality of a bank’s loans and its ability to pay back its depositors, a 
run  on  the  bank  could  develop.  Once  started,  no  bank  on  its  own  can  stop  a  run  by  its 
depositors.  To  deal  with  these  liquidity  problems,  the  banks  developed  a  clearinghouse 
system whereby member banks could backstop each other. This system would work well as 
                                                 
1   These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or 
the Federal Reserve System. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 1
long as banking problems were sufficiently localized so that unaffected member banks could 
provide liquidity to those member banks facing a liquidity problem. 
The  problem  in  1907  was  that  credit  was  also  being  supplied  by  trust  companies  that 
operated  outside  of  the  clearinghouse  system.  Many  of  these  trusts,  including  the 
Knickerbocker  Trust,  lent  money  to  speculators  in  the  copper  market,  which  was 
experiencing a boom. So long as copper prices kept rising, these loans paid off. However, 
when copper prices began to fall, there was a wave of loan defaults leading to a run on the 
trusts that could not be stopped by the clearinghouse system. The resulting credit contraction 
sent the economy into recession, transmitting the problems to the banking sector. In the end, 
more than 240 banks failed even though the problem started outside of the banking sector. 
The basic mechanics of a bank run have remained the same over time. Due to the maturity 
mismatch  involved  in  credit  intermediation,  banks  in  particular  and  financial  institutions  in 
general  must  rely  on  trust  by  their  “depositors”  that  the  institution’s  assets  will  provide  the 
ability  to  pay  back  the  depositors.  The  fundamental  connection  between  liquidity  and  trust 
was well described by Walter Bagehot in 1873: 
“Every banker knows that if he has to prove that he is worthy of credit, however 
good may be his arguments, in fact his credit is gone.”2 
There are two problems that depositors face. The first is that they typically know very little 
about  a  particular  bank’s  investments.  This  reflects  both  the  lack  of  transparency  in  how 
banks  are  investing  their  funds,  and  a  lack  of  incentive  by  individual  borrowers  to  expend 
effort to try and learn this information – what economists call a public goods problem. The 
second  problem  is  that  a  depositor  does  not  know  what  other  depositors  think  about  the 
solvency of the bank. A bank may be solvent and a depositor may be convinced of that fact, 
but if most other depositors think differently and decide to withdraw their funds, then the bank 
will  have  to  sell  its  assets  and  will  likely  become  insolvent  leaving  the  patient  depositor 
unable  to  reclaim  his  funds  –  what  economists  call  a  coordination  failure  problem.  The 
combination of these two problems implies that increases in uncertainty regarding values of 
assets on a bank’s balance sheet create an environment susceptible to deposit runs. 
The  failure  of  the  clearinghouse  system  in  1907  was  a  catalyst  for  the  formation  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  System  and  its  power  as  a  lender  of  last  resort.  The  problem  of  deposit 
runs was effectively solved in 1934 with the institution of deposit insurance. Insurance solves 
the public goods and coordination failure problems discussed above. A depositor need not 
invest resources in determining which bank is a safe place to put his funds. Additionally, the 
depositor is guaranteed to get his funds back regardless of whether other depositors decide 
to  withdraw  their  funds.  The  moral  hazard  problems  created  by  deposit  insurance 
necessitated  that  the  banks  covered  be  subject  to  supervision  and  that  a  mechanism  was 
established  so  that  problem  banks  could  be  resolved  quickly  in  order  to  safeguard  the 
taxpayers’ money. 
There are many parallels between the Panic of 1907 and the events of 2007. In both cases, 
credit  intermediation  had  shifted  outside  of  the  core  banking  sector.  An  investment  boom 
preceded each panic – the earlier in copper and the later in housing – with much of the credit 
being  funded  by  sources  outside  of  any  existing  liquidity  protections.  When  the  bubbles 
began  to  deflate  and  prices  began  to  fall,  loan  defaults  quickly  developed  precipitating 
funding  runs  on  the  institutions  involved  in  extending  this  credit.  What  seemed  like  large 
liquidity  buffers  by  individual  firms  were  quickly  drawn  down.  Funding  withdrawals 
precipitated asset sales, which put further downward pressure on asset prices. The resulting 
credit contractions adversely affected the real economy, setting up an adverse feedback loop 
that exacerbated the initial losses. 
                                                 
2   Walter Bagehot, 1873. Lombard Street. London: Henry S. King and Co. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2010
Given  the  parallels  between  the  events  of  1907  and  2007  and,  more  importantly,  the 
similarities of the lessons learned from those episodes, I believe the most instructive name 
for our latest financial crisis is the “Panic of 2007”. In the rest of my remarks, I will explore in 
greater detail the factors behind the panic, as well as the responses by the Federal Reserve. 
The first question to explore is the extent to which the financial system had evolved over the 
past several decades.3 Over this period, demand deposits lost their market share to money 
market  mutual  funds,  which,  while  considered  safe,  are  not  guaranteed  like  deposits.  This 
made  it  increasingly  difficult  and  less  profitable  for  banks  to  fund  loans  on  their  balance 
sheets  using  deposits.  Securitization  markets  developed  where  loans  could  be  funded 
through the market by investors. In addition, money market mutual funds, securities lenders, 
institutional investors and businesses needed a safe way to deposit funds where they would 
earn  interest  but  retain  ready  access  to  their  funds.  Repurchase  agreements  or  “repos” 
developed  to  serve  this  need.  A  repo  is  a  short-term  collateralized  loan  that  shares  many 
characteristics  with  a  demand  deposit  except  that  repos  are  not  guaranteed.  At  the  same 
time, large firms increasingly raised funds by issuing commercial paper in the market rather 
than relying on bank loans – with the money market mutual funds being large investors in 
this paper. Large banks, as well, came to rely at the margin on non-deposit funding through 
the interbank funding market. The Fed acted as the lender of last resort for this market. 
This  system  of  market-based  credit  intermediation  has  been  called  the  “shadow  banking 
system”. The shadow banking system grew at a very fast rate over the past several decades. 
Chart 1 shows that by 1990, mortgage originations in the shadow banking system equaled 
originations in the banking system, and grew to more than double the level in the banking 
system by 2008. Chart 2 highlights the growth in securitization across many different asset 
categories besides residential mortgages, such as commercial real estate loans, auto loans, 
credit  card  loans  and  student  loans.  A  direct  consequence  of  this  growth  was  that  the  
short-term  liabilities  associated  with  the  shadow  banking  system  –  repos  and  commercial 
paper  –  exceeded  the  level  of  demand  deposits  as  seen  in  Chart  3.  Despite  this  rapid 
transformation  of  the  financial  system,  the  liquidity  protections  put  in  place  for  demand 
deposits (deposit insurance and access to the Fed’s discount window) were not available to 
these new funding sources. 
This lack of liquidity protection was a source of systemic risk that was building in the financial 
system – akin to underbrush that builds up in a forest over time increasing the risk of a major 
fire.  The  Panic  of  2007,  however,  required  a  trigger  –  a  spark  to  ignite  the  fire.  As  I  will 
describe in more detail in a moment, subprime mortgages provided the spark. Once the fire 
was started, the Fed was confronted with fighting the fire using a set of tools designed for a 
20th century banking crisis – not a 21st century shadow banking crisis. As a result, the Fed 
had to improvise and design new tools as it battled the financial blaze. Another choice would 
have  been  to  let  the  fire  burn  on  the  theory  that  this  is  the  best  way  to  clear  away  the 
underbrush that has built up over time. The great risk with this strategy is that the fire burns 
out of control creating considerable collateral damage in the process. If the choice is to fight 
the fire, then once the fire is extinguished the job remains to aggressively act to remove the 
underbrush – thus the urgent need for regulatory reform. 
There  were  two  necessary  ingredients  for  a  catalyst  for  a  financial  panic  in  the  shadow 
banking  system.  The  first  was  the  realization  by  investors  of  the  possibility  of  incurring 
significant  losses  on  some  securities.  The  second  was  uncertainty  over  which  securities 
would  sustain  these  losses  and  consequently  who  held  these  securities.  This  uncertainty 
enabled the financial crisis to also impact the banking system. Finding a way to reduce this 
uncertainty would prove to be a key step to dealing with the crisis. 
                                                 
3   For  a  good  review,  see  Tobias  Adrian  and  Hyun  Song  Shin.  2010.  “The  Changing  Nature  of  Financial 
Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007–2009”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 
439, Revised April. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 3
The housing boom had pushed house values significantly above fundamental values in some 
markets,  creating  the  possibility  of  substantial  losses  on  mortgages  written  on  houses  in 
these markets. The largest run-ups in house prices occurred in the “sand states” of Arizona, 
California, Florida and Nevada. One approach to measuring the degree to which houses had 
become overvalued is to compare the evolution of house prices to their replacement costs. 
For housing markets such as Las Vegas, which are surrounded by open land, the price of 
houses should not differ significantly from the cost of building a new house. These markets 
are characterized by what economists call a horizontal long-run housing supply curve. 
Chart 4 shows the ratio of house prices to estimated replacement costs over time for the four 
sand  cities  of  Las  Vegas,  Vallejo,  Phoenix  and  Miami.4  In  all  four  cities,  prices  relative  to 
estimated  replacement  costs  largely  stayed  in  a  tight  range  between  0.8  and  1.2  over  the 
1980s  and  1990s.  However,  by  2002  to  2003,  house  prices  broke  out  of  this  range  and 
reached values well in excess of 200 percent of the replacement cost in Vallejo and Miami, 
and 180 percent of replacement costs in Las Vegas and Phoenix. When the bubble burst in 
these markets, house prices were likely to drop by a large magnitude. 
Two  factors  were  important  in  creating  uncertainty  over  which  assets  were  going  to  suffer 
losses  given  a  burst  of  the  housing  bubble.  The  first  is  that  not  all  housing  markets 
experienced a boom. Chart 5 shows the ratio of house prices to replacement costs for Dallas 
and Chicago. This ratio never broke above 1.2 for Dallas, and peaked at 1.4 for Chicago. An 
implication is that the default risk on a mortgage (as well as the loss given default) depended 
not just on the risk profile of the borrower, but also on the specific location of the property. 
The second factor contributing to the uncertainty over the value of mortgage securities was 
the lack of transparency in their design. Key information about the specific mortgages was 
lost  in  the  process  of  securitizing  mortgages  in  the  first  place,  and  then  later  repackaging 
these mortgage securities into collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and CDOs-squared.5 In 
addition,  the  complexity  of  the  securities  meant  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  understand  the 
risks  even  if  an  investor  had  access  to  all  of  the  relevant  mortgage-level  information. 
Investors  in  AAA  rated  mortgage-backed  securities  were  initially  sanguine  about  these 
information problems since these securities were thought to have a very low loss probability 
as determined by the credit rating agencies. Once that assumption was no longer true, it was 
very difficult to acquire and process that information. 
How did house prices manage to depart so significantly from their fundamental value in some 
housing  markets?  Asset  booms  and  busts  have  been  a  feature  of  financial  markets  for 
centuries as documented by Reinhart and Rogoff in their recent book This Time is Different.6 
During  a  boom,  a  strong  motivation  for  purchasing  an  asset  is  the  expected  price 
appreciation  on  the  asset.  In  the  case  of  housing,  rising  prices  however  should  ration 
demand  through  two  constraints.  The  first  is  the  downpayment  constraint.  For  a  given 
required downpayment percentage, as house prices increase a borrower must come up with 
more cash for the downpayment. The second is the cash flow constraint. For a given interest 
rate and downpayment percentage, as house prices increase, the mortgage payment relative 
to  the  borrower’s  income  increases  making  the  mortgage  less  affordable.7  If  lenders  had 
maintained minimum downpayment percentages and maximum debt-to-income ratios as the 
                                                 
4   These charts were created by Joseph Gyourko, Wharton Real Estate Group. 
5   See Gary Gorton. 2008. “The Panic of 2007”. Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson 
Hole Conference, August. 
6   Carmen  Reinhart  and  Kenneth  Rogoff.  2009.  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
7   For speculators, the downpayment constraint is likely to be the more relevant since they do not intend to hold 
the mortgage for very long. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2010
housing boom began, then rising prices would have done a better job of rationing demand, 
thereby limiting the duration of the bubble and the extent of overvaluation in the markets. 
However, as Reinhart and Rogoff demonstrate repeatedly, “this time is different” so house 
prices were expected to continue to increase, which “justified” lenders’ decisions to lower the 
downpayment percentages and raise the allowable debt-to-income ratios. In 2001, at least 
half  of  new  subprime  mortgages  had  downpayments  of  20  percent  or  less,  and  at  least  a 
quarter  had  downpayments  of  11  percent  or  less.  By  2006,  at  least  half  of  new  subprime 
mortgages  had  downpayments  of  10  percent  or  less,  and  at  least  a  quarter  had  no 
downpayment at all. Similarly, in 2001, 42 percent of new subprime mortgages had debt-to-
income ratios that exceeded 34 percent (which is considered a high ratio meaning borrowers 
may  face  some  payment  stress),  while  by  2006  this  had  increased  to  62  percent.8  The 
continued increase in house prices eventually came to a stop when lending standards could 
not be eased any further to offset the effects of the higher prices. 
The  turndown  in  house  prices  quickly  led  to  a  significant  increase  in  subprime  mortgage 
defaults. This happened for two reasons. First, most subprime mortgages were designed in a 
way that created rollover risk. The typical subprime mortgage was a hybrid adjustable rate 
mortgage with the initial “teaser” interest rate fixed for two or three years, and then adjusting 
every six months thereafter. The first rate adjustment could be quite substantial and provided 
a strong incentive for the borrower to refinance the mortgage at that point in time. So long as 
house prices were rising, borrowers were able to refinance and roll over the loan. However, 
when  house  prices  began  to  decline,  lenders  were  unwilling  to  refinance,  and  as  a 
consequence, borrowers were often unable to pay the higher interest rates, which prompted 
defaults.  Second,  as  the  housing  boom  continued,  an  increasing  share  of  new  purchases 
were by investors (declared or undeclared) rather than by borrowers who intended to live in 
the house. The default decisions by investors are much more sensitive to declining house 
prices than those by owner-occupied borrowers. 
The  vast  majority  of  subprime  loans  were  financed  by  investors  through  placing  the  loans 
into  securities  that  were  sold  onto  the  market.  Most  of  the  securities  derived  from  these 
subprime mortgages were deemed  to be AAA rated by the rating agencies. The subprime 
mortgage  securities  differed  in  an  important  way  from  those  based  on  prime  conforming 
mortgages. For prime conforming mortgage-backed securities, the degree of credit protection 
for  the  AAA  investors  is  fixed  in  advance.  In  contrast,  for  subprime  mortgage-backed 
securities,  the  degree  of  credit  protection  for  AAA  investors  started  out  “thin”  and  built  up 
over the initial couple of years so long as mortgages did not default early in their life.9 At the 
peak of the housing boom, not only was leverage high for the individual subprime borrower, 
but leverage was high for the investors in lower rated subprime mortgage securities.10 This 
dynamic buildup of credit protection worked well so long as house prices kept increasing, but 
proved to be disastrous for investors in AAA subprime securities when house prices began to 
decline. 
The  AAA  rated  subprime  securities  were  then  used  as  collateral  against  repurchase 
agreements.  Given  how  safe  the  assets  were  thought  to  be,  very  small  haircuts  were 
required  for  these  loans.  In  addition,  the  composition  of  repo  loan  terms  shifted  toward 
                                                 
8   Andrew Haughwout, Richard Peach and Joseph Tracy. 2008. “Juvenile Delinquent Mortgages: Bad Credit or 
Bad Economy?” Journal of Urban Economics 64 (September): 246–257. 
9   Gary  Gorton.  “The  Panic  of  2007”.  Prepared  for  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole 
Conference, August 2008. 
10   You can think of the investors of the lower rated tranches as “buying” all of the subprime mortgages contained 
in the securities and borrowing funds from the investors in the highly rated securities. The thinner the initial 
credit  protection,  the  higher  the  initial  leverage  that  was  being  used  to  essentially  purchase  the  underlying 
subprime mortgages. Repackaging these securities into CDOs and CDO-squared securities further increased 
the effective leverage. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 5
overnight,  reaching  75  percent  in  2008.11  These  small  haircuts  implied  that  the  broker 
dealers  could  use  considerable  leverage  themselves  in  purchasing  these  securities.  So, 
leverage was high at all levels of the financial chain from the individual subprime borrowers, 
to the investors in the lower rated securities, and to the broker dealers who invested in the 
highly rated securities. At their peak, subprime mortgage related securities amounted to only 
around $1.2 trillion dollars – a relatively small size given the overall size of the repo market. 
Leverage, however, amplified the losses as house prices began to decline. 
Why did the point at which house prices peaked and started to fall in some housing markets 
spark a run on the repo market? Additionally, why did the problems in subprime mortgage 
assets  spread  quickly  to  other  assets?  Gary  Gorton  uses  the  analogy  of  an  E.  coli 
breakout.12 Suppose that E. coli is thought to have infected a small quantity of the country’s 
meat supply. The difficulty is that no one knows which batches of meat have been infected. If 
eating infected meat will cause the individual to become very sick, then the natural reaction is 
for  everyone  to  immediately  stop  eating  meat  altogether.  This  will  continue  until  the  entire 
meat supply has been recalled and inspected. Subprime mortgage defaults were the E. coli 
that infected the financial system. Some mortgage assets would lose significant value as a 
result,  but  it  was  difficult  to  know  which  mortgage  assets  were  “infected”  and  who  was 
holding these assets. The natural response was to pull back from these assets. 
In  a  deposit  run,  when  the  quality  of  a  bank’s  assets  is  brought  into  question,  depositors 
immediately  withdraw  their  funds  from  the  bank.  In  the  case  of  the  repo  market,  lenders 
raised  the  haircuts  required  for  the  repo  loans  or  refused  to  roll  over  the  repo  loans 
collateralized  by  subprime  mortgage  assets.  This  is  equivalent  to  a  partial  or  a  complete 
withdrawal of funds from the market by the lenders.13 In addition, the higher haircuts forced 
the  owners  of  the  assets  to  come  up  with  additional  cash  which  typically  meant  that  they 
were forced to sell assets. Given that there was little appetite to purchase mortgage-related 
assets,  high-quality  assets  had  to  be  sold  in  order  to  raise  this  cash.  This  put  downward 
pressure on the prices of these assets and increased the uncertainty regarding their future 
values leading to demands for higher haircuts on these assets, as well. The haircut spiral, 
can be seen in Chart 6. A fire sale dynamic developed, which depressed asset prices further 
leading to additional upward pressure on haircuts. 
The rapid deleveraging of the shadow banking system as the run progressed led to a sharp 
contraction in credit. We saw this earlier in Chart 2 with the near complete collapse in the 
asset-backed  security  market.  Banks  were  also  adversely  affected  by  this  run  on 
securitization markets since they used these markets as well to fund many types of loans. 
Several  banks  had  to  bring  onto  their  balance  sheets  previously  off-balance  sheet  entities 
that they had used to securitize loans. This used up balance-sheet capacity making it more 
difficult  for  banks  to  make  up  for  the  credit  contraction  going  on  outside  of  the  banking 
system.  The  problems  in  the  financial  system  spread  to  the  real  economy.  When  Lehman 
Brothers declared bankruptcy, a money market mutual fund – the Reserve Fund – “broke the 
buck”. The unanticipated losses incurred by the Reserve Fund expanded the bank run to the 
money market mutual funds. Since these funds were significant investors in the commercial 
paper  market,  this  transmitted  the  strains  to  the  commercial  paper  market.  Dollar  funding 
pressures were also increasing for firms operating outside the United States as their ability to 
access  dollars  through  the  foreign  exchange  markets  began  to  become  strained.  The 
                                                 
11   An overnight repo loan as compared with a longer term repo loan is the closest in nature to a demand deposit. 
See Tobias Adrian, Christopher Burke and James McAndrews. 2009. “The Federal Reserve’s Primary Dealer 
Credit Facility”. Current Issues in Economics and Finance 15, no. 4 (August). 
12   Gary  Gorton.  2010.  “Questions  and  Answers  about  the  Financial  Crisis”.  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, Working Paper No. 15787, February. 
13   Gorton, ibid. 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2010
subprime  “E.  coli  scare”  had  effectively  been  transmitted  far  and  wide  across  financial 
markets. 
Let me turn now to the interventions used to combat the financial crisis. The Fed knew much 
less  back  in  the  autumn  of  2007  than  we  know  now  about  how  far  and  wide  the  financial 
crisis was to spread and the implications this would have for the real economy. The initial 
response by the Fed was to use its traditional liquidity tools. On August 10, 2007, the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  issued  a  statement  indicating  that  the  discount  window 
was available as a source of liquidity to those firms that had access to the window. A week 
later, the FOMC cut the discount rate (the interest rate charged on discount window loans) by 
50 basis points (a half of a percentage point) and extended the available term for these loans 
from overnight to 30 days. Given that the liquidity strains were affecting many firms that did 
not have direct access to the discount window, a key for this intervention to be helpful was 
that depository institutions would pass the liquidity on to those firms that needed it the most. 
Using the earlier forest fire analogy, it was as if the Fed could not drop water directly on the 
burning section of the forest; rather, it had to drop the water on an adjacent section of forest 
and hope that somehow the water got to where it was needed. 
Several problems became apparent with this strategy. First, few discount loans were being 
taken out. There is a history of “stigma” associated with borrowing from the Fed’s discount 
window. Given the high degree of uncertainty in the financial markets in the autunm of 2007, 
this stigma effect likely became amplified. Second, given uncertainty about their own future 
liquidity needs, banks developed a strong “precautionary demand” for liquidity. This implied 
that they were less willing to lend out liquidity to other financial firms. Finally, it was becoming 
increasingly  difficult  to assess  the credit  risk  associated  with  lending  to  other  firms  even  if 
only for short terms. To use a medical analogy, the progression of a fever can be measured 
by a person’s temperature. The progression of problems in the interbank lending market can 
be measured by the spread between LIBOR and the overnight index swap (OIS) rates for a 
given term. Chart 7 shows the 3-month LIBOR/OIS spread. Prior to the onset of the financial 
crisis, this spread had been very narrow. Very soon after the BNP Paribus announcement, 
the “fever” shot up dramatically. 
The first new liquidity facility that was introduced to deal with these problems was the Term 
Auction Facility or TAF on December 12, 2007. The TAF program was designed to deal with 
the stigma problem associated with the discount window and also to make it easier for the 
New York Fed to sterilize the liquidity injections into the financial system. The TAF program 
auctioned  off  a  fixed  quantity  of  term  funding  to  depository  institutions  using  the  same 
collateral to back up the loans as can be pledged at the discount window. Since the quantity 
of funding was set in advance, it made it much easier than for discount window borrowing to 
offset this liquidity injection. More important, however, was the design concept: term funding 
priced  and  distributed  in  a  competitive  auction  would  hopefully  avoid  any  stigma  for  the 
winning participants of the auction. The TAF auctions were essentially a better way to dump 
more water on the same section of the forest covered by the discount window. However, the 
fire was still burning elsewhere. 
The inadequacy of the Fed’s traditional liquidity tools and their recent enhancement with the 
TAF  came  to  the  forefront  in  the  spring  of  2008.  Conditions  were  deteriorating  for  several 
primary  dealers,  including  Bear  Sterns.  The  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System  (all  of  the  governors  are  appointed  by  the  U.S.  president  and  confirmed  by  the 
Senate)  decided  to  activate  a  little  known  or  used  section  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  – 
section  13(3)  –  which  gives  the  Fed  the  ability  lend  to  any  “individual,  partnership  or 
corporation” in “unusual and exigent circumstances”. 
On March 11, 2008, the Fed announced the establishment of the Term Securities Lending 
Facility (TSLF). This program allowed primary dealers to swap a broad range of what had 
become  illiquid  assets  for  Treasury  securities  that  could  be  easily  financed.  This  program 
leveraged the Fed’s large holdings of Treasury securities. The TSLF, however, came too late 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 7
for  Bear  Sterns.  On  March  14,  the  Fed  again  using  its  section  13(3)  emergency  powers 
approved the takeover of Bear Sterns, the fifth largest investment bank, by JPMorgan Chase. 
Without  the  acquisition  by  JPMorgan  Chase,  Bear  Sterns  would  have  had  to  file  for 
bankruptcy since they were essentially cut off from market funding. Two days later, on March 
16, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) was introduced, essentially providing discount 
window  access  to  all  primary  dealers  in  an  effort  to  provide  a  backstop  to  their  liquidity 
needs. Like discount window lending, PDCF loans had to be “secured to the satisfaction” of 
the  Fed.  Chart  8  shows  borrowing  from  the  PDCF  in  comparison  to  borrowing  from  the 
discount  window.  With  the  TSLF  and  PDCF,  the  Fed  was  now  better  able  to  direct  water 
directly to where the fires were burning the hottest. 
At the same time that the Fed was using its traditional liquidity and new liquidity tools, it was 
also aggressively cutting the federal funds rate, which is its primary instrument for stimulating 
the  real  economy.  In  the  summer  of  2007,  the  fed  funds  rate  was  at  5.25  percent.  By 
March 18, 2008, the FOMC had reduced the federal funds rate by three percentage points to 
2.25 percent – including two unusual 75 basis point reductions one on January 22, 2008, and 
the other on March 18. The FOMC was well aware of the impact that the financial crisis could 
have on the real economy and was actively trying to offset these adverse effects. The FOMC 
made an additional 25 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate on April 30, and then 
held the policy rate constant over the summer at 2 percent. 
The  Panic  of  2007  turned  into  the  Great  Recession  of  2008  following  the  bankruptcy  of 
Lehman  Brothers  on  September  15  and  the  Fed’s  emergency  assistance  to  American 
International Group, Inc. In response, the Fed reduced the federal funds rate to essentially 
zero  by  mid-December,  instituted  swap  lines  to  provide  dollar  liquidity  to  foreign  central 
banks, added new liquidity facilities to target specific sectors of the shadow banking system 
and began to expand its balance sheet through asset purchases. To deal with problems in 
commercial paper market, the Fed introduced on October 27 the Commercial Paper Funding 
Facility  (CPFF)  to  backstop  issues  of  commercial  paper.  In  an  effort  to  restart  the 
securitization  market,  on  November  25,  the  Fed  announced  the  Term  Asset  Backed 
Securities Loan Facility (TALF).14 In December, the FOMC announced that it would begin to 
significantly  expand  its  balance  sheet  through  purchases  of  long-term  assets  including 
agency debt, agency mortgage-backed securities and long-term treasuries – the Large Scale 
Asset Purchase or LSAP program. Other interventions were taking place directed by different 
agencies and in conjunction with the Treasury. At the same time, fiscal policy was engaging 
with Congress approving the $750 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) program. 
Policy had entered the “whatever it takes” phase in an effort to keep the Great Recession 
from becoming something much worse.15 
By  the  spring  of  2009,  the  various  guarantees  and  backstop  liquidity  facilities  covering 
different sectors of the shadow banking system were in place. The last element required to 
deal  with  the  Panic  of  2007  was  to  address  the  uncertainty  over  the  viability  of  the  large 
systemically  important  financial  institutions.  A  horizontal  review  of  the  19  largest  financial 
firms was conducted to assess their capital needs under a “worse-than-anticipated economic 
scenario” – this was called the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program or SCAP (you can 
tell that we are fond of acronyms). 
There  were  two  design  features  of  the  SCAP  program  that  were  essential  for  its  ability  to 
reduce the uncertainty in financial markets. First, the process was designed to be transparent 
with  both  the  methodology  published  up  front  and  the  firm-by-firm  results  published  at  the 
conclusion. Second, if a firm was deemed to need capital but was unable to raise it in the 
                                                 
14   See  Brian  Sack.  2010.  “Reflections  on  the  TALF  and  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Role  as  Liquidity  Provider”. 
Remarks at the New York Association for Business Economists, June 6. 
15   David Wessel. 2009. In Fed We Trust. New York: Crown Business. 
8 
 BIS Review 92/2010
market,  Treasury  pledged  to  provide  the  capital.  The  SCAP  program  was  successful  in 
restoring a degree of confidence in financial markets and in enabling these financial firms to 
raise capital on their own. 
By the second half of 2009, the financial fever from the Panic of 2007 had finally broken with 
the 3-month LIBOR/OIS spread narrowing back to pre-crisis levels.16 The economy began to 
grow  again.  Having  served  their  purpose,  the  Fed’s  special  liquidity  facilities  have  been 
wound down. The policy focus has shifted to regulatory reforms and how to prevent a future 
financial  crisis.  To  be  successful,  these  reforms  must  deal  with  the  run  dynamics  in  the 
shadow banking system, as well as devise ways to limit the leverage cycle that is an integral 
part of asset booms and busts that can trigger a panic. If the lessons from the panics of 1907 
and 2007 are incorporated into the reforms, we may well avoid the Panic of 2107. 
                                                 
16   Recently the spread has widened with the onset of concerns over Greece. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 9
