Duvvuri Subbarao: Reserve Bank of India’s Platinum Jubilee 
celebrations – the outreach programme 
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the function 
releasing the RBI commemorative stamp by Smt Pratibha Devisingh Patil, Hon’ble President 
of India at the RBI office, New Delhi, 16 January 2010. 
 1. 
On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, it is my pleasure and privilege to welcome 
Your Excellency, the Hon’ble President of India for the release of the Commemorative Stamp 
marking  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Platinum  Jubilee.  This  occasion,  Your  Excellency,  is  truly 
special. This is the first time the First Citizen of the country has graced the New Delhi office 
of the Reserve Bank which has the honour and distinction of having been inaugurated by our 
first Prime Minister, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. 
2. 
A hearty welcome also to the Finance Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee; Minister of 
State  for  Finance,  Shri  Namo  Narayan  Meena  and  Minister  of  State  for  Communication 
& Information Technology, Shri Gurudas Kamat. We are delighted that so many of our past 
Governors, Deputy Governors, top management of the Reserve Bank and several dignitaries 
are here today. A big welcome to all of you. 
3. 
Seventy-five years is a relatively short span for an institution. Even so, the journey 
since its establishment in 1935 has been eventful for the Reserve Bank, shaping not only its 
intellectual evolution but also securing its preeminent position in the economic policy space 
of the country. During this time, there have been momentous changes – a paradigm shift in 
economic ideology, ever new perspectives on economic development, growing aspirations of 
people, path-breaking financial innovations and game changing technological breakthroughs. 
All these are changes which have influenced the Reserve Bank, and changes to which the 
Bank has had to respond in its own unique way. The Reserve Bank is proud to have been 
part  of  every  major  economic  event  and  policy  in  the  country,  and  its  broad  mandate 
underlines its enduring concern for the larger public good. 
4. 
While a lot of things have changed at the Reserve Bank over the last 75 years – our 
functions  and  responsibilities,  and  the  way  we  deliver  our  mandate  –  certain  things  have 
remained  the  same;  in  particular,  the  professionalism  and  integrity  with  which  the 
RBI discharges  its  mandate.  The  high  esteem  in  which  the  Reserve  Bank  is  held  today  is 
owing to the intellectual leadership and vision of successive Governors – many of whom are 
here with us today. 
5. 
Madam  President,  over  the  last  eight  months,  we  have  organized  a  series  of 
initiatives  and  events  to  mark  and  celebrate  the  Bank’s  Platinum  Jubilee  year.  The 
celebrations proceeded on three tracks. 
6. 
agenda and to showcase the Bank as a knowledge institution. 
7. 
reinforce a sense of belonging and inclusiveness among members of the RBI family. 
8. 
The final track of the Platinum Jubilee celebrations, and what will possibly have the 
most enduring value, is the outreach programme. The focus of the outreach programme has 
been financial inclusion and financial literacy. The top management of the Bank travelled to 
remote  villages  across  the  country  to  listen  to  ordinary  people,  see  and  understand  how 
grassroot institutions – self-help women’s groups, micro-finance institution, non-government 
organizations,  rural  cooperatives,  rural  branches  of  regional  and  mainstream  commercial 
banks – operate, and to learn of the challenges and opportunities for financial inclusion. In 
return, we also got an opportunity to explain to people what the Reserve Bank does, and how 
The second track is a set of internal events involving current and former RBI staff to 
The  first  track  has  been  a  series  of  learning  events  to  build  support  for  the  RBI’s 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
what  we  do  touches  the  everyday  life  of  people.  I  must  say  that  talking  to  people,  and 
importantly listening to them, has been an enormously rewarding, and in some ways, mind 
expanding experience. Besides, for all of us who went on the outreach, it has been a lot of 
fun. 
9. 
The single most important lesson of the outreach programme has been that financial 
inclusion is not just a public good; it is also a merit good. We are now even more sensitive 
than before to the importance of financial inclusion. We realize the enormity of the challenge. 
At the same time, we are also confident of meeting this challenge. 
10. 
Once again, a hearty welcome you, Madam, and to all the guests who have made 
time to be present here today for this flagship event of the Reserve Bank’s Platinum Jubilee. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
