Axel A Weber: The reform of financial supervision and regulation in 
Europe 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Institute 
of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 10 March 2010. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you here at the 
Institute  for  International  and  European  Affairs.  It  will  come  as  no  surprise  to  you  that  the 
financial  crisis  will  be  the  main  topic  of  my  speech.  However,  the  onset  of  the  crisis  lies 
nearly  two  and  a  half  years  in  the  past,  and  we  are  now  seeing  more  and  more  signs  of 
stabilisation and recovery. Therefore, I shall leave aside the current state of financial markets 
and shall instead try to look ahead, focusing on structural issues. 
In this regard, the main challenge for the years to come will be to create a more stable and 
more resilient financial system to prevent future crises. It is obvious, however, that such an 
ambitious  endeavour  will  not  happen  on  its  own.  Instead,  it  requires  strong  commitment, 
resolute efforts and broad reforms. Where to begin? 
 Lessons from the financial crisis 
2. 
The first step in any serious reform should be to gain a clear understanding of the events that 
occurred and their underlying causes. Even though it is a tempting thing to do, a crisis of the 
magnitude  we  have  been  witnessing  over  the  past  two  and  a  half  years  cannot  be  traced 
back to a single cause. In fact, there could be a hundred narratives, and each would appear 
to  explain  the  events  in  a  satisfying  manner.  The  most  popular  of  these  narratives  would 
revolve around the following explanations for the crisis: 
 
 
Gaps in the regulatory framework,  
distorted incentives inside the financial system, such as short-termist remuneration 
schemes,  
an insufficient resilience of the financial system,  
an institutional design of financial supervision that did not properly reflect the cross-
border dimension of crises, and  
a lack of awareness of systemic risks.  
 
All these narratives point to a number of lessons to be learned. And it is these lessons which 
show  us  the  direction  for  the  reform  of  the  financial  system.  With  regard  to  financial 
regulation  and  supervision,  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  cover,  broadly  speaking,  the  following 
four areas: 
 
 
First, we have to improve regulation and supervision at the microeconomic level.  
Second,  we  have  to  pay  greater  attention  to  systemic  risk  control  at  the 
macroeconomic level.  
Third,  we  have  to  ensure  an  effective  interplay  between  these  two  levels  of 
prudential supervision and a cross-check with the analysis of risks to price stability.  
And  fourth,  the  cross-boarder  character  of  the  crisis  means  that  we  also  have  to 
ensure close cooperation between national supervisors.  
  BIS Review 29/2010 
 1
To put it another way: there is more to a crisis than the microeconomic level, and there is 
certainly more to it than the national level. Currently, a great deal of effort is being put into 
transforming  these  lessons  into  the  necessary  reforms.  For  the  remainder  of  my  speech  I 
would like to focus on the European level and comment on some of these endeavours. 
Institutional aspects of European financial supervision 
3. 
Within  the  European  Union,  much  work  is  being  done  in  establishing  a  comprehensive 
financial architecture. Drawing on the lessons learned, this work is pursuing two goals. The 
first  goal  is  to  strengthen  the  macroprudential  level  of  supervision  and  ensure  an  efficient 
interplay with the microprudential level. The second goal is to strengthen cooperation among 
member states in the field of prudential supervision. In my following remarks, I would like to 
give a brief outline of the new architecture, address the role that central banks should play in 
this framework, and point out some crucial issues that still need to be discussed. 
Key components of the new European financial architecture 
3.1. 
To  gain  an  overview  of  the  key  components  of  the  new  architecture,  let  us  start  at  the 
macroeconomic level. Given the urgent need to reinforce the macroeconomic perspective 
of  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  the  European  Commission  decided  to  establish  an 
independent  institution  responsible  for  macroprudential  oversight  across  the  EU  financial 
system. The main goal of this European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) will be to avert and 
mitigate systemic risks to financial stability. To achieve this objective, the ESRB will set up an 
early warning system to identify the relevant risks. Whenever necessary, the ESRB will then 
issue warnings and recommendations to deal with the identified risks. These warnings and 
recommendations could be addressed to the Community as a whole, to individual member 
states, or to national supervisory authorities. 
To strengthen the link between micro and macroprudential supervision, the ESRB will work in 
close  cooperation  with  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  (ESFS).  The  ESFS 
forms the complementary part of the financial architecture at the microeconomic level. Its 
main goal will be to strengthen cooperation between the national authorities to account for 
the cross-border dimension of crises that arises from the existence of multinational financial 
firms  or  possible  contagion  effects.  With  this  objective  in  mind,  the  ESFS  will  establish  a 
network  consisting  of  national  financial  supervisors  and  three  new  European  supervisory 
authorities. The new authorities will replace the existing Level 3 Committees and cover each 
financial sector. 
 
The  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  will  be  responsible  for  supervision  of  the 
banking sector,  
the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESA)  will  be  responsible  for 
supervision of securities markets, and, finally,  
the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) will mainly 
be responsible for the supervision of insurance companies.  
  Although the exact design of the new authorities is still under discussion, the current version 
of  the  relevant  bill  would  assign  them  a  mostly  coordinative  role.  Consequently,  the  main 
objective  of  the  new  authorities  will  be  to  improve  cooperation  and  coordination  among 
member  states  as  well  as  convergence  in  supervisory  practices.  In  addition,  one  of  their 
tasks will be to ensure coordinative action in emergencies.  
The role of central banks 
3.2. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  question  of  the  role  which  central  banks  should  play  in  this 
framework.  Owing to the close links that exist between the financial system and monetary 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2010
the  micro  and 
the  macroeconomic 
policy,  central  banks  have  a  natural  interest  in  safeguarding  financial  stability.  They  also 
have a high level of expertise in monitoring macroeconomic developments that might impact 
on  financial  stability.  What  the  financial  crisis  also  demonstrated  was  the  crucial  role  that 
central  banks  play  in  restoring  financial  stability  once  a  crisis  occurs.  Moreover,  in  most 
countries, central banks are directly involved in banking supervision and thus form a natural 
link  between 
levels  of  prudential  supervision. 
Consequently, they should be adequately represented in the new financial architecture. 
In  line  with  the  latest  compromise  on  the  structure  of  the  ESRB,  the  European  System  of 
Central  Banks  will  indeed  assume  a  leading  role.  With  regard  to  the  composition  of  the 
General Board, for example, the compromise assigns 29 votes out of a total of 33 votes to 
representatives of the ECB and the national central banks. However, discussions on the final 
structure of the ESRB are still ongoing, and recent results have shown a tendency to weaken 
the role of central banks. Let me emphasise here that retaining the pivotal role for central 
banks, which was envisaged in the original compromise, is of great importance. 
Regarding  the  ESFS,  it  is  especially  the  European  Banking  Authority  where  central  banks 
should be adequately represented. This is not yet the case, however. It is planned that only 
the  ECB  will  be  represented  on  the  board.  Those  central  banks  that  are  not  the  sole 
supervisor  but  that  are  directly  involved  in  banking  supervision  should  have  the  right  to 
participate in the meetings and take part in confidential consultations. 
Critical issues 
3.3. 
The  new  financial  architecture  represents  a  major  step  towards  more  harmonised  and 
coordinated  micro-  and  macroprudential  supervision  within  the  European  Union.  A  critical 
question in this context is how macroprudential and monetary policies and their respective 
instruments should relate to each other. Answers to this question have to be found at both 
the  national  and  European  levels.  I  have  already  argued  that  central  banks  should  be 
involved  in  macroprudential  policy.  Furthermore,  an  important  lesson  of  the  crisis  for 
monetary policy is to keep a closer look on developments on financial markets, given their 
potentially large impact on inflation and output. At the same time, it is crucial to draw a clear 
line between the mandate and instruments of monetary policy, on the one hand, and tasks 
and instruments of financial regulation, on the other. Otherwise, the goal of securing price 
stability  might  be  compromised.  This  is  why  the  Eurosystem  has  made  it  clear  that 
safeguarding  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  remains  the  primary  goal  of  its  monetary 
policy. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, with regard to the institutional design of prudential supervision, the 
lessons  of  the  crisis  are  clear.  First,  we  have  to  improve  cross-border  cooperation  and 
harmonisation.  Second,  we  have 
the  macroeconomic  perspective  of 
supervision  and  integrate  it  properly  with  the  microeconomic  perspective.  With  the 
establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board and the European System of Financial 
Supervisors,  the  European  Union  has  taken  a  number  of  steps  in  the  right  direction. 
However, as usual, the devil lies in the detail of the reforms. Here, further efforts are required 
in order to achieve the goal of a more stable and more resilient financial system. 
Thank you for your attention. 
to  strengthen 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 3
