Eric S Rosengren: Considering the routes to a policy destination 
Speech by Mr Eric S Rosengren, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston, at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, 5 May 2010. 
Accompanying figures to this speech can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s website. 
 I am happy to be with you this evening. I appreciate your warm welcome, and your invitation 
to  join  the  long  and  distinguished  line  of  individuals  who  have  addressed  the  Money 
Marketeers over the decades.1 
I have always taken some delight in Yogi Berra quotes. As a Red Sox fan, I could always 
hope that garbled metaphors by the legendary Yogi would be as confusing to the players as 
they were to the public, which might translate into opportunities when the Red Sox came to 
New York. Alas, in the early going this season it is not the Yankees that seem confused.  
Yogi  Berra  was  not  only  a  great  catcher  and manager,  but  also an  astute  observer  of  the 
obvious.  If  he  were  to  summarize  this  talk  he  might  suggest  a  title  like  “Knowing  Your 
Destination  is  a  Good  Start  in  Getting  Where  You  Are  Going”  or  some  other  derivation  of 
what I believe is his actual quote: “You’ve got to be very careful if you don’t know where you 
are going because you might not get there.”  
When setting monetary policy, it is very important to have a clear idea of where you want the 
economy  to  go.  And  fortunately,  there  is  now  much  more  transparency  about  the  Federal 
Open Market Committee’s (FOMC’s) expected destination, because the FOMC releases its 
long-term  projections  for  inflation  and  unemployment.  Unfortunately,  however,  actually 
reaching our desired destination will prove challenging and involve choices, as I will discuss 
this evening.  
At our January meeting, the central tendency of the FOMC members’ long-run projections for 
unemployment  was  5.0  to  5.2  per  cent,  and  for  inflation  (measured  by  the  personal 
consumption  expenditures  price  index  or  PCE)  was  1.7  to  2.0  per  cent.  At  present,  both 
unemployment  and  inflation  diverge  significantly  from  these  longer-term  goals,  with  the 
March  unemployment  rate  at  9.7  per  cent,  and  core  PCE  inflation  over  the  past  year  at 
1.3 per cent. In such circumstances, one might think that the current path of monetary policy 
would be particularly straightforward.  
Unfortunately, just knowing your destination doesn’t get you there. To reach your destination 
you need to know how you want to get there. If I plug a destination into my new GPS device, 
it asks whether I want the quickest route, or the geographically shortest route, or a route that 
meets  some  other  criteria.  The  quickest  route  is  likely  to  involve  highways,  but  may  cover 
more miles. The shortest route may take side roads that reduce distance and save gas, but 
take  substantially  more  time.  And,  of  course,  you  may  run  into  traffic  or  construction  that 
forces you to adapt your route.  
When  setting  monetary  policy  there  may  be  a  variety  of  paths  you  can  take  to  reach  the 
destination. For instance, aggressive pursuit of accommodative monetary policy by the Fed 
and stimulative fiscal policy by Congress and the Administration might get us more quickly to 
our desired destination – but could enlarge the deficit or risk igniting inflation expectations. 
Alternatively, aggressive pursuit of less accommodative policies – that is, removing monetary 
and  fiscal  stimulus  sooner  rather  than  later  –  could  result  in  a  more  extended  period  of 
                                                 
1   Of course, the views I express today  are  my own,  not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of 
Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (the FOMC). 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 1
underutilized  resources;  or  worse,  significantly  increase  the  length  of  the  journey  to  our 
ultimate destination.  
Right now, we are far from our destination, and the rest of my remarks will focus on selecting 
among the alternate routes to our objective.  
The  economy  is  currently  beginning  to  recover  from  what  many  are  calling  the  Great 
Recession. While real GDP began to increase in the third quarter of last year, growth so far 
has  been  insufficient  to  improve  conditions  much  in  the  labor  markets.  This  unfortunate 
reality  can be  seen  in Figure 1,  which  shows the  employment-to-population  ratio  over  the 
past 30 years with the shading representing recessions. The decline of about five percentage 
points  in  the  employment-to-population  ratio  in  this  recession  is  striking,  as  many  workers 
have either become unemployed or dropped out of the work force.  
While it is not uncommon for the employment-to-population ratio to decline in a recession, 
Figure  2  shows  how  dramatic  the  decline  has  been  in  this  recession,  compared  with 
previous  ones.2  The  loss  of  jobs  has  been  particularly  acute  in  construction  and 
manufacturing. The severity of the job losses in these male-dominated industries is one of 
the reasons that males in some age groups have experienced such a significant decline in 
their  employment-to-population  ratio,  as  shown  in  Figure  3.  For  example,  the  March 
unemployment rates for males between the ages of 20 and 24 was 18.4 per cent, more than 
5 percentage points higher than for females in the same age group.  
The  sharp  reduction  in  the  ratio  of  employment  to  population  highlights  our  challenge  – 
achieving  a  full  recovery  will  require  creating  jobs  for  those  currently  unemployed  and 
actively  seeking  work,  those  entering  the  labor  force  as  the  population  grows,  and  those 
likely  to  return  to  the  labor  force  once  jobs  become  more  available.  Employing  all  these 
workers  within  a  reasonable  period  of  time  will  require  very  strong  economic  growth.  The 
question is, how likely is that?  
Figure 4 shows the growth rate in each of the first three years of the last three recoveries, as 
well as the average rates for all three recoveries. The most recent two recoveries were quite 
slow  to  get  started,  but  picked  up  steam  over  time.  This  is  the  pattern  projected  in  most 
forecasts for this recovery.  
Over  the  past  three  quarters,  GDP  has  increased  3.7  per  cent.3  However,  some  of  the 
growth resulted from temporary rebalancing of inventories by businesses, as suggested by 
Figure 5, which shows that the per cent change in real final sales was quite a bit smaller 
than the per cent change in GDP. The gap between them would be inventory rebuilding.  
Most private forecasts expect growth in the next four quarters to be fast enough to begin to 
make more improvement in the labor market. My own expectation is consistent with this. As 
financial  headwinds  subside,  and  consumers  and  businesses  gain  more  confidence  in  the 
recovery, expenditures that have been deferred will be made – and we should begin to see 
stronger economic growth.  
Despite this forecast of an improved outlook, we will need  very strong growth if we are to 
return to 5 per cent unemployment in a reasonable time frame. Economists frequently use a 
rule of thumb, called Okun’s Law, to characterize the relationship between output growth and 
unemployment. According to Okun’s Law, if the economy grows one percentage point faster 
than  its  potential  for  one  year,  the  result  will  be  a  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  of 
approximately one-half of a per cent. Of course, I would highlight that this is a rule of thumb, 
and that the relationship is more complicated than this and, of course, subject to error.  
                                                
 
2   Of course, some of this is the result of the unusual length of this recession. 
3   Year over year, the growth is 2.5 per cent – which includes one quarter of negative growth (the second quarter 
of 2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2010
But using the simple rule of thumb implied by Okun’s Law, the left side of Figure 6 shows the 
rates  of  GDP  growth  necessary  to  return  unemployment  to  5  per  cent  over  different  time 
frames.  The  chart  highlights  that  we  need  several  years  of  very  strong  growth  to  reach 
5 per cent  unemployment.  For  example,  to  reach  5  per  cent  unemployment  by  the  end  of 
2013, real GDP growth would have to average 5 per cent per year.4 Such a growth rate has 
some historical precedent, as shown on the right side of the chart, but it is much faster than 
the growth rate in the past two recoveries. And to reach 5 per cent unemployment by 2015 
would still take growth averaging 4.2 per cent per year – considerably faster than the average 
rate of growth after the 1991 and 2001 recessions.  
Given the need for very rapid growth to get unemployment back to 5 per cent, let me pose an 
oversimplified  question  –  why  would  policymakers  not  keep  monetary  policy  very 
accommodative, and fiscal policy very stimulative, until we had a sustained growth rate that 
brought the economy much closer to full employment? At least on the monetary side, one 
reason might be concern among policymakers that rapid growth would be inflationary.  
To  explore  that,  let’s  turn  to  Figure  7,  which  shows  the  total  and  core  inflation  rates, 
measured  by  changes  in  the  CPI,  with  recession  shading.  What  the  chart  shows  is  that 
inflation  has  declined  in  each  recession,  including  this  so-called  Great  Recession.  It  also 
highlights that inflation tends to continue falling in the early stages of a recovery. Figure 8 
shows the change in the inflation rate from the business cycle peak. From the peak (shown 
at zero on the horizontal axis) the inflation rate is very restrained, and generally negative, for 
many months. With substantial excess capacity in the economy during the early stages of a 
recovery,  workers  don’t  tend  to  demand  higher  wages,  and  firms  don’t  feel  at  liberty  to 
substantially increase prices. Since the Great Recession has resulted in substantial excess 
capacity, it would be unusual to see increases in the inflation rate in the early stages of this 
recovery.  
However, while inflation does not normally increase in the early stages of a recovery, some 
economic  observers  may  be  concerned  that  this  recovery  will  be  different,  because  of  the 
unusual actions that the Federal Reserve needed to take. As you know, the Federal Reserve 
took extraordinary measures to stabilize the financial system – measures that were critical to 
setting the stage for the current recovery. Figure 9 depicts the additions to the central bank’s 
balance  sheet  from  these  temporary  operations.  As  you  can  see  in  the  chart,  the  liquidity 
facilities  that  we  set  up  to  restore  more  effective  financial  market  functioning  have  wound 
down. At the same time, however, in response to the severity of the economic recession the 
Federal  Reserve  decided  to  expand  its  purchases  of  mortgage-backed  and  agency 
securities. These purchases were undertaken to improve market functioning in the mortgage 
market, and even more importantly, as a way to reduce a key interest rate at a time when 
many short-term interest rates were close to, or at, the zero lower bound.  
The purchase program ended in March, and these balances will naturally be dropping over 
time  as  households  prepay  mortgages,  sell  their  homes,  or  refinance.  This  decline  in  our 
balance sheet will actually occur without the Fed taking any specific actions. But it will occur 
slowly, and absent any action of the Fed’s part, the balance sheet will remain elevated for 
years.  
This expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet raises concerns for some observers 
and commentators. An important side effect of our asset purchases has, necessarily, been a 
dramatic swelling of so called excess reserves in the banking system. When the central bank 
                                                 
4  
If the relationship is weaker, as some researchers suggest, even stronger growth would be required to reduce 
the unemployment rate to 5 per cent by year end 2013. For example, if the reduction in the unemployment 
rate resulting from real GDP growth of 1 per cent above potential is one-third of a per cent instead of one-half 
of a per cent, then real GDP growth of 6.25 per cent would be needed to reduce the unemployment rate to 
5 per cent by year end 2013. 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 3
purchases  assets,  it  credits  the  selling  institution  with  reserves.  Over  time,  banks  could 
choose to lend out these reserves, which would turn the reserves into broader money – and 
a rapid expansion of the broader money supply would be inflationary. However, as Figure 10 
suggests, the current problem is not a rapid expansion in lending and the money supply. In 
fact,  quite  the  opposite;  banks  have  been  reluctant  to  lend.  Many  have  taken  significant 
losses that have drained their capital; and, at the same time, the financial condition of many 
potential borrowers is worse than before the recession.5 
Were  that  situation  to  change  and  bank  lending  to  accelerate,  the  Federal  Reserve  could 
drain the excess reserves from the banking system. We have a variety of tools. We could sell 
some  of  our  long-term  assets,  thereby  increasing  longer-term  interest  rates.  We  now  pay 
interest on reserves, and that rate could be increased to discourage bank lending. The size 
of our balance sheet, the composition of the balance sheet, and our short-term interest rate 
target are all instruments that we have available to reach our destination of full employment 
with  stable  prices.  Fundamentally,  decisions  about  shrinking  our  balance  sheet  –  like 
decisions to tighten interest rates – should be conditional on economic conditions. 
Some analysts warn of rapid inflation arising from the expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet; 
but these forecasts have not been borne out. In fact, despite the buildup in excess reserves, 
the inflation rate has been falling – and I expect this trend to continue over the near term. 
The  experience  in  both  Japan  and  the  United  States  is  that  after  a  banking  crisis,  excess 
reserves  have  not  been  inflationary  in  the  short  term.  Of  course,  once  the  banks  have 
recapitalized and economic resources are more fully utilized, we would not want to have a 
large stock of excess reserves. Again, as noted, we have a variety of tools to remove excess 
reserves at a time when that becomes appropriate.  
As  a  result,  I  agree  with  many  forecasters  who  expect  disinflation  in  the  near  term.  The 
substantial  excess  capacity  in  labor  markets  that  I  mentioned  earlier  has  caused 
compensation to decline quite markedly (see Figure 11). Because employee compensation 
is  the  main  cost  component  for  most  companies,  lower  labor  costs  enable  businesses  to 
improve profit margins without substantial price increases – particularly as the demand for 
goods and services improves.  
This brings us back to Yogi Berra, who famously said, “When you come to a fork in the road, 
take  it.”  At  times,  a  fork  in  the  road  is  exactly  what  confronts  monetary  policymakers.  We 
would  face  a  fork,  for  example,  if  inflationary  pressures  were  building  despite  a  high 
unemployment  rate.  In  this  case,  the  choice  between  restraining  inflation  and  supporting 
employment is a difficult one, and the policy decision becomes more complicated. However, 
with employment well below the level of full employment, and disinflation continuing to move 
us  away  from  my  own  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent,  one  does  not  currently  need  to  make 
such trade-offs.  
Another possible complication could occur if very low interest rates were causing excessive, 
leveraged bets that were inflating the price of assets that have macroeconomic importance. 
While we need to be vigilant against the buildup of asset bubbles, there is little evidence of 
such a problem now. Many financial institutions are still deleveraging – a factor in why we are 
seeing  too  little  lending  rather  than  too  much.  Real  estate  can  be  a  very  important  asset 
because  it  serves  as  collateral  for  many  loans.  However,  in  the  current  situation  both 
residential and commercial real estate are, at best, stabilizing.  
                                                 
5   Banks must, of course, maintain their capital ratios. As some banks have taken significant losses that drained 
capital,  they  have  been  reluctant  to  expand  lending,  so  that  the  supply  of  loanable  funds  has  likely  been 
constrained. But this supply-side effect has been exacerbated by the credit condition of potential borrowers in 
the wake of the Great Recession. Even for banks that are less capital-constrained, with the balance sheets of 
many potential borrowers in much worse shape than they were before the recession, lenders making prudent 
lending decisions will be reluctant to lend to high-risk potential borrowers. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2010
Even if we were to see asset prices rising, it is not obvious that somewhat tighter interest 
rates  will  make  a  significant  difference.  A  more  targeted  approach  would  be  to  examine 
whether supervisors should require tighter lending standards, or higher capital requirements, 
in  areas  where  asset  prices  are  appreciating  rapidly.  This  would  make  sense  from  the 
perspective  of  good  risk  management  –  if  institutions  hold  assets  that  appreciate  quickly, 
they should retain sufficient capital and be vigilant in credit standards to insure that they can 
weather  a  quick  reversal  in  asset  prices.  Raising  short-term  interest  rates  because  of 
exuberance in one market is a blunt, and possibly ineffective, tool against the exuberance of 
investors  in  a  particular  asset.  As  a  result,  in  my  view,  short-term  interest  rate-setting  is 
better  suited  for  calibrating  the  growth  in  the  overall  economy,  rather  than  focusing  on  a 
particular asset class.  
Concluding observations  
In  sum,  while  the  incoming  economic  data  have  certainly  been  more  positive  of  late,  we 
remain far from our “stated” destination. Even with rapid growth in the economy, spurred by 
accommodative monetary policy and stimulative fiscal policy, it is likely to take years before 
we approach the growth and inflation rates that would really reflect achievement of the two 
elements of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.  
The economy, while in a much better place than a year ago, is still susceptible to negative 
shocks. Serious fiscal problems loom for state and local governments, the U.S. government, 
and  governments  around  the  world  –  particularly  those  that  have  expended  large  sums  of 
money to recover from this financial crisis and recession. Clearly over time we need to have 
much more sustainable levels of budget deficits, at all levels of government, here in the U.S. 
and abroad.6 However, I would just note that rapid movement to fiscal austerity, like rapid 
removal of monetary accommodation, could of course significantly delay the time it takes to 
reach full employment.  
While financial markets have improved significantly, real estate problems, bank closures, and 
significant non-performing loans on the books of many banks continue to provide financial 
headwinds to the recovery. And clearly – as the headlines of the past week have highlighted – 
financial problems abroad still have the potential to result in slower U.S. exports, and may 
hold potential further problems for global financial institutions.  
In sum, my view is that with inflation expectations stable, core PCE inflation rates declining, 
and  significant  excess  capacity  in  the  economy,  accommodative  monetary  policy  remains 
appropriate.  
Thank you. 
                                                
 
6   See for example the remarks by Chairman Ben Bernanke at the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and 
Reform on April 27, available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100427a.htm. 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 5
