John Murray: Re-examining Canada’s monetary policy framework – 
recent research and outstanding issues 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Canadian 
Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 24 August 2010. 
 forced 
to  combat 
to  use  extraordinary  policy  measures 
Introduction 
I am honoured to address members of the Canadian Association for Business Economics. 
My remarks today will focus on critical issues that the Bank of Canada has studied over the 
past four years and how this research will inform our work as we move forward post crisis. 
Central  banks  were 
the 
macroeconomic  consequences  of  the  2008–09  financial  crisis.  The  experience  also  raised 
fundamental questions about existing monetary policy frameworks, causing central banks to 
revisit issues that were long thought to be resolved. Some critical observers even suggested 
that  inflation  targeting  and  the  pursuit  of  price  stability  might  be  detrimental  to  financial 
stability and reduce economic welfare.  
The Bank of Canada, of course, like many other central banks, operates under an inflation-
targeting regime. We continue to believe that this regime has served us exceptionally well, in 
both turbulent and tranquil times. Nevertheless, we, like many of our counterparts elsewhere, 
are re-examining key features of our monetary policy framework in the light of recent events. 
However,  we  are  doing  so  as  part  of  an  ambitious  and  long-standing  research  program 
initiated  in  2006.  This  research  will  inform  the  renewal  of  the  Bank’s  inflation-targeting 
agreement with the government in 2011. 
A great deal of innovative analysis and research have deepened our understanding of how 
the  macroeconomy  operates  and  helped  us  gauge  the  potential  costs  and  benefits  of 
alternative  monetary  policy  frameworks.  Experience  during  the  crisis  and  in  the  period 
immediately  following  has  provided  many  important  and  cautionary  lessons,  and  lent  a 
greater sense of urgency and significance to the research work already under way. 
I would like to review the most important elements of this research effort with you today, and 
indicate  how  it  has  been  informed  and  shaped  by  our  recent  “battlefield  experience.” 
Towards the end of my presentation, I will try to give you a sense of where things stand in 
our search for further improvements to the monetary policy framework, as well as some of 
the major outstanding issues. While much has been learned over the past four years, a great 
deal has yet to be resolved, and few definite conclusions will be presented. This is still very 
much a work in progress.  
Where we were in 2006  
In  2006,  when  our  inflation-control  agreement  with  the  government  was  last  renewed,  the 
Bank  published  a  document  entitled  “Renewal  of  the  Inflation-Control  Target:  Background 
Information.”1  It  assessed  the  past  performance  of  the  framework,  discussed  the  various 
issues that had been examined in the run-up to the renewal, and identified a number of key 
questions that needed to be studied over the next five years.  
The two most important questions concerned the potential benefits and costs of lowering the 
target rate of inflation from 2 per cent, and the potential benefits and costs of moving from an 
                                                 
1   The document can be found at www.bankofcanada.ca/en/press/background_nov06.pdf. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 1
inflation  target  to  a  price-level  target.  The  distinguishing  feature  of  price-level  targeting  is 
that,  unlike  inflation  targeting,  bygones  are  not  bygones.  Any  past  mistakes  must  be 
corrected. If aggregate  prices overshoot the targeted price-level path in one period, prices 
must come back to the path in future periods.  
Several other issues were also identified, but were either deemed to be of lesser importance 
and  promise,  or  to  have  been  largely  resolved.  One  of  these  was  whether  central  banks 
should use their monetary policy instrument to lean against prospective asset bubbles and 
other forms of financial instability, even if this risked deviating from their inflation objective for 
an extended period.  
The  events  of  the  past  three  years  have  seriously  challenged  the  received  wisdom  that 
existed on this issue prior to the crisis. Some well-known economists have suggested that 
the pursuit of price stability is not enough, and is perhaps even dangerous to the stability of 
the financial system and the macroeconomy more generally.2  
Consequently, the Bank’s research program on the monetary policy framework now includes 
three key questions: (i) whether the inflation target should be lowered; (ii) whether we should 
adopt  a  price-level  target;  and  (iii)  whether  the  monetary  policy  framework  should  be 
modified to give greater recognition to financial-stability concerns. The state of play for each 
of these as of 2006 is outlined briefly below, and will serve as a helpful point of departure for 
the discussion that follows.  
Is 2 per cent the optimal rate of inflation?  
Achieving and maintaining a low, stable, and predictable rate of inflation promotes economic 
welfare by reducing uncertainty and preventing arbitrary redistributions of wealth. However, it 
isn’t clear that these benefits are maximized at an inflation rate of 2 per cent.  
While the benefits of targeting a lower rate of inflation were generally believed to be positive 
in 2006, three possible reasons were identified at the time for not pursuing such an ambitious 
objective: (i) measurement error; (ii) nominal wage-price rigidity; and (iii) the so-called zero 
bound  on  nominal  interest  rates.  The  first  two  of  these  were  judged  to  be  relatively 
unimportant, but the third was taken more seriously because, at very low rates of inflation, 
monetary  authorities  might  not  be  able  to  ease  policy  sufficiently  to  counter  a  sudden 
downturn in the economy, since nominal interest rates can’t technically fall below zero.3 This 
possibility,  unlike  the  other  two  concerns,  was  regarded  as  sufficiently  serious  to  preclude 
consideration of a lower target without further study.  
The Bank didn’t realize then that the real world was about to give it a natural experiment of 
almost unprecedented proportions with which to test the significance of the zero bound.  
Price-level targeting – a renewed interest  
The  second  key  question  on  the  research  agenda  was  price-level  targeting,  and the  Bank 
had already completed a great deal of work on this issue by 2006. Price-level targeting was 
seen  to  be potentially  attractive  for  three  main  reasons.  The  first  concerned  the  increased 
certainty that it would provide regarding the price level 10, 20, or 30 years in the future. The 
second concerned the enhanced stabilizing properties that price-level targeting might offer in 
terms  of  reduced  inflation  and  output  variance.  Provided  agents  were  sufficiently  forward 
                                                 
2   See  White  (2006).  Also  see  Diamond  and  Rajan  (2009);  Cagliarini,  Kent,  and  Stevens  (2010);  and  White 
(2009). 
3   Discussions of the implications for the zero bound on nominal interest rates for monetary policy can be found 
in Amano and Shukayev (2010) and Lavoie and Murchison (2007–2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2010
looking and the policy was sufficiently credible and well understood, the central bank might 
enjoy what Lars Svensson (1999) termed a “free lunch.” The third concerned the possibility 
that  it  might  facilitate  the  pursuit  of  a  lower  inflation  rate  (or  price-level  path),  if  this  were 
judged desirable.  
Unfortunately,  the  only  country  to  experiment  ever  with  price-level  targeting  was  Sweden, 
and  for  only  a  brief  period  in  the  1930s.4  While  the  experience  was  generally  viewed  as 
positive, there was no assurance that it could be extended to other countries or periods.5 
It  was  clear  that  such  a  dramatic  shift  in  regime  called  for  some  intensive  research.  This 
research  would  focus  primarily  on  how  expectations  are  formed  and  the  challenges  that  a 
small  open  economy  might  experience  when  it  was  subject  to  wide  swings  in  important 
relative prices, such as world commodity prices. Something that seemed to work well in a 
simple  rational-expectations  model  with  a  single  good  might  have  severe  negative 
consequences  in  practice.  The  research  would  also  try  to  document  in  a  more  convincing 
way the potential benefits of price-level targeting.  
Monetary stability versus financial stability  
The third issue that needs to be highlighted involves the difficult trade-offs that can at times 
exist between monetary stability and financial stability. Authors such as Claudio Borio and 
William  White  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  warned  as  early  as  1998  that  the 
single-minded pursuit of price stability could come at the expense of system-wide financial 
stability.  
However,  the  prevailing  view  in  2006  –  indeed,  right  up  to  the  crisis  and  slightly  beyond  
–  was  that  financial-stability  issues  were  best  left  to  regulators.  Central  banks  had  one 
primary monetary policy tool at their disposal – adjustment of an official short-term interest 
rate – and experience suggested that this was best directed at achieving price stability. The 
extreme version of this view rested on three basic tenets: (i) asset bubbles and other forms 
of potentially serious financial dislocation were difficult, if not impossible, to spot in real time; 
(ii) adjustment  of  the  official  interest  rate  was  a  very  blunt  and  inefficient  instrument  with 
which to counter asset bubbles, and would likely inflict considerable collateral damage on the 
rest of the economy; and (iii) a more realistic strategy was to focus simply on cleaning up as 
quickly as possible once an asset bubble had burst. This was the best a central bank could 
do.6  
The more nuanced view of most inflation targeters, including the Bank of Canada, was that 
central banks should lean against any suspected financial instability to the extent that it might 
threaten  aggregate  economic  activity  and  the  achievement  of  the  inflation  target  over  the 
medium term, even if this implied appearing to deviate from the target in the short term. In 
other words, central banks were expected to pursue inflation targeting in a flexible, forward-
looking manner, and could delay achieving their target if such an action would minimize the 
possibility  of  more  ominous  outcomes  in  the  future.  But  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability 
through monetary policy measures should not go any further.7  
                                                 
4   See Berg and Jonung (1999) for a description of the Swedish experience with price-level targeting. 
5   Eggertsson (2007) contends that the United States also successfully pursued price-level targeting during the 
1930s, but their experience has largely gone unrecognized. 
6   See Greenspan (2002) and Bernanke and Gertler (1999). 
7   See Selody and Wilkins (2007). 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 3
Where are we now?  
So how have things changed in the past four years? What have we learned from our long-
term  research  effort?  What  have  we  and  other  central  banks  learned  from  the  bitter 
experience  of  the  crisis?  Have  recent  events  dampened  or  strengthened  our  taste  for 
reform?  
The optimal rate of inflation  
Recent research on the prospective benefits of targeting a lower inflation rate have focused 
primarily on the gains that might accrue through improved pricing behaviour and increased 
incentives for holding money. This has been balanced by research that has tried to weigh 
these  benefits  against  the  additional  costs  that  might  be  incurred  through  more  frequent 
encounters with the zero bound.  
In 1969, Milton Friedman published The Optimum Quantity of Money, in which he noted how 
inflation  imposed  an  effective  tax  on  money,  causing  households  and  businesses  to 
economize on their transactions balances, thereby biasing the pattern of trade. His solution 
was to propose an optimal rate of deflation that would provide a positive rate of return on 
transactions balances.  
Bank of Canada researchers have extended this earlier work, evaluating the welfare effects 
of lowering inflation in a life-cycle, heterogeneous-agent model in which households hold a 
portfolio of real assets (housing), nominal debt, and money. The authors find that reducing 
the  targeted  rate  of  inflation  not  only  increases  aggregate  welfare,  but  also  would  directly 
benefit a significant proportion of the current population.8  
The other major strand of our research on the optimal rate of inflation has concentrated on 
the allocative inefficiencies that are likely to arise in a world with positive inflation, owing to 
pricing  distortions  that  arise  due  to  infrequent  price  adjustments  or  “sticky  prices.”  If  firms 
adjust prices infrequently, they have an incentive to set prices higher at the start of a contract 
than  would  be  warranted  by  initial  market  conditions,  knowing  that  inflation  will  gradually 
erode the real value of prices over time.  
With sticky prices, higher rates of inflation cause the price spread to widen and create larger 
differences between prices of otherwise similar products at different points in the term of their 
fixed contracts. This, in turn, increases price dispersion and leads to even larger allocative 
inefficiencies.9  
While  earlier  studies  often  found  that  the  implied  welfare  costs  associated  with  this 
behaviour,  measured  in  terms  of  lost  consumption  or  some  other  metric,  were  relatively 
small, Bank of Canada researchers have extended this work in a number of important ways 
and reported much larger effects. These extensions included: (i) incorporating more realistic 
wage  dynamics  into  New  Keynesian  models;  (ii)  adding  growth  to  standard  steady-state 
analyses;  and  (iii)  allowing  for  trend  increases  in  inflation.  The  effect,  in  almost  every 
instance, was to strengthen the case for a very low – if not slightly negative – target rate of 
inflation.10  
                                                 
8   See Cao et al (2009). 
9   See Ambler (2007–2008) for a lucid description of the costs of inflation arising from sticky prices. 
10   Amano, Ambler, and Rebei (2007) examine the implications of trend inflation in a stochastic, environment and 
Amano et al. (2009) study the effect of sticky prices and wages in the presence of exogenous growth. Amano 
and Shukayev (2010) investigate the implications of non-zero inflation for endogenous growth in a model with 
sticky prices and wages. 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2010
It is important to note, however, that much of this work is based on historical data that pre-
date the crisis and therefore assigns a very low probability of ever hitting the zero bound.11 
Higher probabilities would of course alter the cost-benefit equation, since the expected long-
term cost of choosing a target that is “too low” is a function of how often one is likely to hit the 
zero bound and the costs that are incurred once that occurs. 
Does the fact that we have recently hit the zero bound suggest that earlier estimates were 
too  small,  and  that  such  encounters  are  likely  to  be  more  frequent  in  the  future?  Will  the 
efforts that are under way to reform the financial system make it more stable and reduce the 
chances of similar occurrences in the future? Answering these questions is obviously critical 
to reaching a decision on whether lower is better.  
A  second  critical  factor  concerns  the  effectiveness  of  any  alternative  policy  tools  that 
authorities  are  likely  to  have  at  their  disposal  whenever  the  zero  bound  is  reached.  Do 
unconventional monetary policy instruments, such as quantitative easing, credit easing and 
conditional  commitments,  represent  viable  mechanisms  for  overcoming  the  zero  bound? 
How effective are other, non-monetary, policy instruments in dealing with a crisis? While it is 
still  early  days,  nothing  in  recent  experience  leads  one  to  believe  that  these  tools  can  be 
used with the same degree of confidence and effectiveness as conventional policy tools.12 All 
of these factors play a critical role in determining how much insurance might be needed in 
terms of an inflation buffer to avoid such problems.13 
Some noted economists have recommended raising the inflation target to 4 or even 6 per 
cent to provide an extra measure of protection.14 This idea has been universally rejected by 
the central banking community, however, which argues that the costs incurred through lost 
credibility as well as higher and more uncertain inflation would far outweigh any prospective 
benefits.15 Low, stable, and predictable inflation, it is generally agreed, is the most important 
contribution that central banks can make to the economic well-being of a country.  
Price-level targeting  
Interest  in  the  potential  advantages  of  price-level  targeting  has,  if  anything,  increased 
following the crisis. The automatic stabilization properties that might result from committing to 
a price-level target could reduce the probability of hitting the zero bound, thereby allowing 
central banks to aim for a lower target path, and make monetary policy more effective once it 
was reached.  
Absent any extensive real-world experience to draw on, however, central bank researchers 
have been forced to rely on model simulations to test the feasibility and desirability of such a 
bold  move.  These  simulations  assess  the  performance  of  alternative  monetary  policy 
regimes, both in the context of a representative set of shocks based on historical data and in 
more extreme examples.  
                                                 
11   Billi (2007) attempts to measure optimal inflation in a model that balances the costs of hitting the zero bound 
with the costs arising from the presence of nominal-price stickiness. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2007) argue 
that the probability of the U.S. economy hitting the zero bound is very small. 
12   This  increased  uncertainty  was  explicitly  recognized  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  in  its  press  releases  and 
Monetary Policy Reports once the target overnight interest rate had reached its effective lower bound, since 
any  additional  easing  would  necessarily  require  the  use  of  unconventional  policy  measures.  See  Bank  of 
Canada, April 2009, Monetary Policy Report. 
13   Indeed, according to some early empirical work conducted by He (2010), the Bank of Canada’s conditional 
commitment  appears  to  have  resulted  in  a  persistent  lowering  of  Canadian  interest  rates  since  April  2009, 
relative to what would have been expected without the conditional commitment. 
14   See Williams (2009) and Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010). 
15   See Weber and Hildebrand (2010) and Carney (2010). 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 5
The  results,  for  the  most  part,  have  favoured  price-level  targeting  over  inflation  targeting, 
although the differences are not always large or statistically significant. In addition, price level 
targeting was generally found to be more robust than inflation targeting to various forms of 
uncertainty, owing to its self-correcting nature.16 One of the main concerns identified in 2006 
therefore  seems  to  have  been  addressed;  on  balance,  price-level  targeting  appears  to  be 
able  to  provide  superior  performance  in  a  multi-good  world  characterized  by  large  relative 
price shocks.17  
Unfortunately, all of these encouraging results are derived from models in which agents are, 
for  the  most  part,  forward  looking,  and  fully  conversant  with  the  implications  of  price-level 
targeting;  they  also  trust  that  policy-makers  will  live  up  to  their  commitment.  Simulation 
results reported by Bank researchers suggest that if more than approximately 40 per cent of 
agents  base  their  actions  on  rules  of  thumb  or  on  backward-looking  expectations,  the 
dominance of price-level targeting no longer holds.  
Further work is clearly needed to better understand the ways in which Canadian businesses 
and households form their expectations, as well as the communication challenges that might 
arise if Canada were to move to price-level targeting. If the learning curve is too long and 
expectations  are  too  slow  to  adjust,  the  present  value  of  any  shift  to  price-level  targeting 
could  easily  turn  negative.18  The  Bank  is  currently  conducting  some  experimental  work 
designed to shed light on both issues, and hopes to report its preliminary findings later this 
year.  
Balancing monetary and financial stability  
The tension that can sometimes exist between the dual objectives of monetary and financial 
stability is an issue that has been brought to the fore by recent events.19 Central banks have 
been forced to re-examine the three tenets that I discussed earlier, and two of them have 
been  effectively  discarded.  First,  central  banks  no  longer  think  that  a  strategy  that  relies 
exclusively on mopping up quickly after a bubble has burst is tenable. The costs of not taking 
pre-emptive  action  before  a  bubble  bursts  are  potentially  too  high  and,  with  regard  to  the 
response  of  the  official  sector,  produce  a  destabilizing  asymmetry  that  only  encourages 
future misdeeds.20  
In  addition,  central  banks  are  no  longer  as  dismissive  about  the  feasibility  of  identifying 
potential sources of financial instability before their macroeconomic consequences are felt.  
The  one  remaining  complication  concerns  the  third  tenet  described  earlier  –  the  fact  that 
traditional monetary policy instruments are often a very heavy-handed means of dealing with 
financial  sector  vulnerabilities,  especially  if  the  potential  source  of  instability  is  limited  to  a 
specific sector or area of activity. Such cases call for more targeted measures and a wider 
set of instruments that are better able to deal with financial risks. Regrettably, many of these 
tools are still in the development phase.21  
                                                 
16   See Cateau (2008). 
17   Murchison (2010) provides a summary of this line of research. 
18   See Kryvtsov, Shukayev, and Ueberfeldt (2008) and Masson and Shukayev (2008) for examples of this type 
of research. 
19   Boivin, Lane, and Meh (2010) summarize the question of whether monetary policy should and could do more 
to restrain a buildup of financial imbalances. 
20   The so-called “Greenspan put.” 
21   See Bank of England (2009), Boivin, Lane, and Meh (2010), and International Monetary Fund (2009). 
6 
 BIS Review 110/2010
What can one conclude from this? First, greater attention must to be paid to financial stability 
concerns, particularly those of a system-wide nature. Second, inflation targeters need to be 
forward looking and flexible, resisting any financial-system pressures that may threaten real 
activity and inflation in the future, even if the horizon for such outcomes extends well beyond 
the normal time frame for achieving and preserving the inflation target. While most inflation-
targeting  agreements  already  allow  for  some  flexibility  in  the  time  period  over  which  the 
target is achieved, whether there is sufficient flexibility and willingness to act in situations that 
might require even greater forbearance is an open question that has yet to be tested.  
The  central  issue  that  remains  is  whether  monetary  authorities  should  be  expected  to  go 
further  than  the  prescripts  of  flexible,  forward-looking  inflation  targeting  would  suggest.22  If 
so,  what  form  would  it  take?  Should  the  inflation-targeting  agreement  itself,  or  the  central 
bank’s reaction function, give explicit recognition to asset prices and credit growth? Would 
this  prejudice  the  clarity  of  the  current  targets?  Would  central  bank  credibility  and 
accountability be sacrificed in the interest of achieving even greater policy flexibility?  
Carney  (2009)  has  suggested  that  this  problem  might  be  overcome  by  combining  flexible 
inflation targeting with price-level targeting. If monetary policy had to lean into the wind for 
financial stability purposes and deviate from target for an extended period of time, credibility 
and accountability perhaps could be preserved by announcing that these deviations would be 
offset over time, keeping the economy on a predetermined path for the price level.23  
Other important considerations relating to issues of monetary and financial stability include: 
How far should coordination between monetary authorities and regulators be taken? Would a 
clear and separate assignment of tools and targets be better? Will the introduction of new 
prudential  tools  essentially  solve  this  dilemma?  All  of  these  questions,  and  many  others, 
have been brought to the fore by the crisis.  
Conclusion  
Significant progress has been made on the research front regarding key outstanding issues 
identified  in  the  2006  document  on  the  renewal  of  inflation  targeting.  Valuable,  if  painful, 
lessons  have  been  learned  from  the  crisis,  and  old  issues  that  were  thought  to  be  largely 
resolved have resurfaced, demanding renewed attention.  
Shifting to a lower inflation target and/or moving to a price-level target are still possibilities, 
and  in  some  respects  look  even  more  promising  than  they  did  before  the  crisis,  although 
other aspects of our research results and recent experience lend an extra air of caution.  
A  wide  range  of  models  suggest  that,  all  other  things  being  equal,  economic  welfare  is 
maximized  at  inflation  rates  lower  than  2  per  cent,  but  considerable  uncertainty  still  exists 
regarding how large these gains might be. The cost-benefit of lowering the target hinges on 
weighing these uncertain benefits against the increased probability of hitting the zero bound 
and the costs that this might impose, absent other reliable corrective instruments.  
Research  on  price-level  targeting  suggests  that  the  gains  from  switching  to  a  price-level 
target are probably positive and potentially larger in the presence of the zero bound. A price-
level target might reduce the likelihood of hitting the zero bound and could shorten the length 
of time during which the economy remains there once it is reached. As a result, it might be 
possible to target a lower price-level path. In addition, there could be further benefits related 
to  greater  price-level  certainty.  Exploiting  these  advantages  rests  on  a  number  of  critical 
assumptions, however, including the credibility and commitment of policy-makers, as well as 
                                                 
22   See Carney (2008) and Svensson (2009). 
23   See Carney (2009). 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 7
the expectations-formation process of agents and the ease with which price-level targeting 
could be communicated.  
A final factor that must be considered before any decision is made is the proven track record 
of the present system, which has shown its worth in both turbulent and tranquil times. This 
represents a relatively high bar against which any future changes must be judged.  
One  thing  is  certain,  no  matter  what  is  decided.  The  most  important  contribution  that  a 
central  bank  can  make  to  the  economic  well-being  of  households  and  businesses  is  the 
achievement and maintenance of price stability. This will not be sacrificed. The only question, 
as always, is whether it can be delivered in an even more effective and reliable manner.  
Bibliography  
Optimal rate of inflation  
Amano, R., S. Ambler, and N. Rebei. 2007. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Non-Zero Trend 
Inflation.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (7): 1821–38. 
Amano,  R.,  T.  Carter,  and  K.  Moran.  2010.  “Inflation  and  Growth:  A  New  Keynesian 
Perspective.” Bank of Canada. Manuscript. 
Amano,  R.,  K.  Moran,  S.  Murchison,  and  A.  Rennison.  2009.  “Trend  Inflation,  Wage  and 
Price Rigidities, and Productivity Growth.” Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (3): 353–64. 
Amano,  R.  and  M.  Shukayev.  2010.  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Zero  Bound  on  Nominal 
Interest Rates.” Bank of Canada Review (Summer): 3–10. 
Ambler, S. 2007–2008. “The Costs of Inflation in New Keynesian Models.” Bank of Canada 
Review (Winter): 5–14. 
Bank of Canada. 2006. “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information”. 
Billi, R. M. 2007. “Optimal Inflation for the U.S. Economy.” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Working Paper No. 07–03. 
Blanchard, O., G. Dell’Ariccia, and P. Mauro. 2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy.” IMF 
Staff Position Note, 12 February. 
Cao, S., J.-V. Rios-Rull, C. Meh, and Y. Terajima. 2009. “Inflation, Nominal Debt, Housing, 
and Welfare.” Bank of Canada. Manuscript. 
Carney, M. 2010. “Fortune Favours the Bold.” Speech delivered to the Greater Charlottetown 
Area Chamber of Commerce, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, 16 June. 
Friedman, M. 1969. The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine. 
He, Z. 2010. “Evaluating the Effect of the Bank of Canada’s Conditional Commitment Policy.” 
Bank of Canada Discussion Paper. Forthcoming. 
Lavoie,  C.  and  S.  Murchison.  2007–2008.  “The  Zero  Bound  on  Nominal  Interest  Rates: 
Implications for Monetary Policy.” Bank of Canada Review (Winter): 27–34. 
Schmitt-Grohé,  S.  and  M.  Uribe.  2007.  “Optimal  Inflation  Stabilization  in  a  Medium-Scale 
Macroeconomic Model.” In Monetary Policy Under Inflation Targeting, edited by K. Schmidt-
Hebbel and R. Mishkin, 125–86. Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile. 
White,  W.  R.  2009.  “Should  Monetary  Policy  “Lean  or  Clean”?”  Working  Paper  No.  34. 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute. 
Williams,  J.  2009.  “Heeding  Daedalus:  Optimal  Inflation  and  the  Zero  Lower  Bound.” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1–37. 
8 
 BIS Review 110/2010
Price-level targeting 
Berg, C. and L. Jonung. 1999. “Pioneering Price-Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 
1931–37. Journal of Monetary Economics 43 (3): 525–51. 
Cateau, G. 2008. “Price Level versus Inflation Targeting under Model Uncertainty.” Bank of 
Canada Working Paper No. 2008–15. 
Eggertsson, G. 2007. “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression.” Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York. Manuscript. 
Gorodnichenko,  Y.  and  M.  D.  Shapiro.  2007.  “Monetary  Policy  When  Potential  Output  Is 
Uncertain: Understanding the Growth Gamble of the 1990s.” Journal of Monetary Economics 
54 (4): 1132–62. 
Kryvtsov, O., M. Shukayev, and A. Ueberfeldt. 2008. “Adopting Price-Level Targeting under 
Imperfect Credibility: An Update.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 08–37. 
Masson, P. R. and M. Shukayev. 2008. “Are Bygones not Bygones? Modeling Price Level 
Targeting  with  an  Escape  Clause  and  Lessons  from  the  Gold  Standard.”  Bank  of  Canada 
Working Paper No. 08–27. 
Murchison,  S.  2010.  “Price-Level  Targeting  and  Relative-Price  Shocks.”  Bank  of  Canada 
Review (Summer): 11–21. 
Svensson, L. E. O. 1999. “Price-Level Targeting versus Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch?” 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 31: 277–95. 
Weber, A. and P. Hildebrand. 2010. “The IMF’S Inflation Illusion”,  The Wall Street Journal 
(4 March). 
Monetary policy and financial stability 
Bank of England. 2009. “The Role of Macroprudential Policy.” Discussion Paper, November. 
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler. 1999. “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility.” Economic 
Review 84 (4): 17–51. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Boivin,  J.,  T.  Lane,  and  C.  Meh.  2010.  “Should  Monetary  Policy  Be  Used  to  Counteract 
Financial Imbalances?” Bank of Canada Review (Summer): 23–36. 
Cagliarini, A., C. Kent, and G. Stevens. 2010. “Fifty Years of Monetary Policy: What Have 
We Learned?” Conference paper, Reserve Bank of Australia. 
Carney, M. 2008. “Flexibility versus Credibility in Inflation Targeting Frameworks.” Speech to 
the 7th BIS Annual Conference, Lucerne, Switzerland, 27 June. 
Carney,  M.  2009.  “Some  Considerations  on  Using  Monetary  Policy  to  Stabilize  Economic 
Activity.”  Speech  delivered  to  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, 22 August. 
Diamond,  D.  W.  and  R.  D.  Rajan.  2009.  “Illiquidity  and  Interest  Rate  Policy.”  University  of 
Chicago and NBER. Manuscript. 
Greenspan,  A.  2002.  “Opening  Remarks.”  In  Rethinking  Stabilization  Policy,  1–10. 
Proceedings  of  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
International  Monetary  Fund.  2009.  “Lessons  for  Monetary  Policy  from  Asset  Price 
Fluctuations.” World Economic Outlook, October. 
Selody,  J.  and  C.  Wilkins.  2007.  “Asset-Price  Misalignments  and  Monetary  Policy:  How 
Flexible  Should  Inflation-Targeting  Regimes  Be?”  Bank  of  Canada  Discussion  Paper 
No. 2007–6. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 9
Svensson,  L.  E.  O.  2009.  “Flexible  Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  the  Financial  Crisis.” 
Speech to the workshop Towards a New Framework for Monetary Policy? Lessons from the 
Crisis, organized by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, 21 September. 
White, W. R. 2006. “Is Price Stability Enough?” BIS Working Paper No. 205. 
10 
 BIS Review 110/2010
