 Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur: Inauguration of the Board of Directors of 
the Central Securities Depository Ghana Limited 
Address  by  Dr  Kwesi  Bekoe  Amissah-Arthur,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  at  the 
inauguration of the Board of Directors of the Central Securities Depository Ghana Limited, 
Accra, 9 September 2010. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Deputy Governor,  
Advisors,  
Heads of Department and members of staff of the Bank of Ghana 
Members of the media 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank,  let  me  welcome  you  to  the  inauguration  of  the  Governing 
Board of the Central Securities Depository Ghana Limited. 
Over  the  past  few  years,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  launched  a  number  of  initiatives  to 
modernize  the  payments,  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  Among  them  are:  (i)  the  Real 
Time  Gross  Settlement  System,  (ii)  the  Cheque  Codeline  Clearing  (CCC)  with  truncation, 
and  (iii)  the  national  switch  and  smartcard  payment  system,  popularly  known  as  e-zwich. 
These  are  key  initiatives  in  the  Bank’s  drive  to  reduce  the  reliance  on  cash-based 
transactions and improve the efficiency of the payments system. 
Along with reforms of the banking and payment systems, the Bank of Ghana also has been 
active  in  improving  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  investments.  An  important  initiative  in  this 
regard was the establishment of the Collateral Registry which registers collaterals created by 
borrowers to secure credit facilities. 
Then there is the Central Securities Depository. 
The Central Securities Depository was established in November 2004 as part of the quest to 
make  Ghana  an  attractive  investment  destination.  For  almost  six  years  now  the  CSD  has 
been working without fanfare as a unit of the Bank of Ghana. We have decided to outdoor it 
today. We are in, effect, weaning the CSD off the mainstream Bank of Ghana coverage. 
The  CSD  has  facilitated  the  electronic  issue  and  redemption  of  Government  Securities. 
Interest  and  maturity  processing  have  been  enhanced  and  investors  are  assured  of  the 
proceeds on their investments in a cost effective and timely manner. 
The CSD helps to reduce settlement risk thus ensuring that investors have the confidence on 
the market. 
However, we recognize that the CSD is at an infant stage and will need to be complimented 
to be able to synchronize funds and securities settlements. This requires that the settlement 
systems  (the  GIS  and  the  Depository)  are  linked  for  processing  with  minimal  human 
intervention. 
In complying with the requirements of the Central Securities Depository Act 2007 (Act 733), 
the Depository has been incorporated under the name Central Securities Depository Ghana 
Limited, a fully owned subsidiary of the Bank. 
The  ability  to  operate  independently  will  depend  on  the  direction  the  Board  charts.  In 
appointing the Board therefore we have been mindful to attract the key competencies to drive 
the process to the required standard. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 1
 I am confident of the caliber of people and I hope you will pool together your various skills 
and professional experiences to support the Depository to meet its full potential and thereby 
serve the public interest. 
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Directors, let me I congratulate you on your appointment to the 
Board of the Central Securities Depository Ghana Limited. 
We  expect  you  to  deepen  the  governance  practices  of  the  Depository  to  enable  you 
effectively exercise your authority to serve the interest of the investing public and that of the 
shareholders. I do not in any way doubt your ability to do exactly that. 
The  Bank  of  Ghana  has  invested  substantial  public  resources  in  the  setting  up  of  the 
Depository. Therefore, it must achieve its purpose. 
I wish to conclude by making a commendation. In the last few days, I have been made to 
appreciate  the  work  of  a  few  people  whose  dedication  to  duty  contributed  in  bringing  the 
depository  to  its  present  status.  Let  me  to  take  this  opportunity  to  show  my  appreciation 
particularly to Mr. Kofi Adu Labi and Mr. Kwesi Debrah and the many others, in the bank and 
outside of it, who worked in the background to make the depository an operational institution. 
Mr.  Chairman,  Mr.  Deputy  Governor,  Board  Members,  Heads  of  Department,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen, I now have the honour of declaring the Board of Directors formally inaugurated. 
Thank you and God bless you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2010
