Glenn Stevens: Overview of the Australian economy and future 
challenges 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 19 February 2010.  
 Since we last met the global economy has continued an expansion that started around the 
middle of 2009. It appears that world GDP grew at an annualised pace of about 4 per cent in 
the  second  half  of  last  year.  Many  forecasters  now  expect  a  similar  result  in  2010. 
International financial markets have generally continued to thaw, with most capital markets 
functioning  again  and  the  use  by  banks  of  exceptional  support  from  central  banks  and 
government  guarantees  being  wound  down.  These  are,  needless  to  say,  very  welcome 
developments.  
Having said that, the situation is not without some challenges. I will mention just two.  
The first is the two-speed nature of the global recovery. Normally after a sharp downturn, the 
ensuing  upswing  is  correspondingly  strong.  This  has  been  the  case  among  a  number  of 
Asia-Pacific economies, which take half of Australia’s exports. The strength is not confined to 
China:  India,  Korea,  Singapore,  Taiwan  and  others  have  all  seen  a  significant  pick-up  in 
production and trade. In several of these instances the term “v-shaped recovery” would be 
apt.  Around  the  region,  secularly  rising  incomes,  generally  healthy  banking  systems  and 
relatively  low  public  debt  levels  allow  considerable  room  for  confidence  of  a  sustained 
expansion  in  demand.  In  fact  in  some  cases  the  issue  of  overheating  is  arising  and  the 
authorities in both China and India have begun to tighten their policy settings.  
In the large industrial countries, on the other hand, the rebound has been more tentative, and 
driven more by the turn in the inventory cycle and temporary policy measures than a strong 
pick-up in private demand. It is not unusual, at this point of the recovery, for the inventory 
dynamics to be playing a prominent role in pushing up output. Nonetheless, the question is 
the extent to which a durable upswing in private final demand in the various countries will 
become  established.  Most  observers  expect  this  to  be  a  fairly  gradual  process,  given  the 
lingering effect of the strain on banking systems and ongoing de-leveraging, not to mention 
the need, at some point, to begin the process of fiscal consolidation. Growth in these cases 
is therefore expected to remain modest and, as a result, these economies are likely to be 
characterised by a lot of spare capacity and ongoing high unemployment.  
So the historic shift in the centre of economic gravity to the Asian region is continuing, and if 
anything  it  has  been  highlighted  by  the  different  performances  during  the  crisis  and  initial 
recovery.  The  differences  in  speed  of  recovery  between  the  emerging  world  and  the 
advanced world, and the likely persistent differences in growth trajectories into the future, will 
increase the pressure on exchange rate arrangements in the region.  
The second challenge is the increasing focus on sovereign creditworthiness. We saw a brief 
period  of  turmoil  regarding  Dubai  late  last  year,  and  more  recently  the  public  finances  of 
Greece  have  been  under  the  spotlight,  with  some  other  European  countries  just  in  the 
background.  Going  beyond  just  these  instances,  government  balance  sheets  in  numerous 
countries  have  taken  on  considerable  burdens  as  a  result  of  the  crisis,  and  markets  are 
beginning to focus on issues of sustainability. It will be a very delicate balancing act for those 
governments  to  strengthen  their  fiscal  positions  without  undermining  the  upturn  in  their 
economies.  
Happily, in both these areas, Australia is relatively well-placed. We are located in the part of 
the  world  that  is  seeing  the  most  growth.  And  in  terms  of  fiscal  sustainability,  Australia’s 
position is, by any measure, very strong indeed.  
BIS Review 17/2010 
 1
Turning  to  Australia,  we  think  on  the  basis  of  available  data  that  real  GDP  grew  by  about 
2 per cent through 2009. We expect that it will grow by a bit over 3 per cent for 2010 and 
about 3½ per cent in 2011 and 2012.  
Notwithstanding  reports  of  patchy  retail  sales  through  the  Christmas  period,  we  judge 
consumption to have held up reasonably well after the various fiscal boosts faded. But in the 
future consumption is unlikely to be a leading driver of growth to the extent it was a few years 
ago.  Households  seem  to  be  adopting  a  more  cautious  position  regarding  saving  and 
borrowing, which is appropriate.  
A turnaround in private housing construction is under way. The effect of the temporary first-
home buyers’ boost is fading, but underlying demand is solid as a result of population growth 
and there is something of an “underhang” of earlier low construction to work off. Credit costs 
and  availability  are  adequate  for  households.  While  for  developers  credit  remains  quite 
difficult  to  access,  it  looks  like  we  have  seen  a  turning  point  in  approvals  for  multi-unit 
construction. Housing prices have been rising quite smartly over the past year.  
Government  spending  is  having  an  impact  on  demand,  holding  both  residential  and  non-
residential  construction  at  higher  levels  than  would  have  resulted  from  private  spending 
alone. This effect will gradually diminish over the next year. At the same time, a large build-
up  in  energy  and  resource  sector  investment  is  under  way,  prompted  by  optimism  about 
long-run prospects for resource demand. The terms of trade are rising after last year’s sharp 
fall,  as  the  strength  of  demand  has  pushed  up  key  commodity  prices.  In  2010  they  could 
once again reach a very high level, exceeded in modern times only by the extraordinary level 
reached in 2008.  
Inflation  has  been  falling,  in  line  with  recent  forecasts.  It  is  important  to  remember  that 
inflation reached 5 per cent in 2008, or just over 4½ per cent in underlying terms. This was 
much too high. The earlier period of tight monetary policy, and the weakening in demand in 
late 2008 associated with the escalation of the financial crisis, has seen inflation come down. 
Over  the  past  year,  it  was  about  2  per  cent  on  a  CPI  basis  and  about  3¼  per  cent  in 
underlying terms. Over the past six months, underlying inflation ran at an annualised pace of 
under 3 per cent. We think it will be about 2½ per cent in 2010. It is normal, given the lags in 
these processes, for inflation to keep declining for a while after the economy begins to firm.  
With the economy having had only quite a mild downturn, however, we start the new upswing 
with less spare capacity than would typically be the case after a recession. One measure of 
this is that the rate of unemployment peaked at less than 6 per cent, much lower than we or 
most others forecast. Only a few years ago, unemployment rates like this would have been 
seen  as  a  good  outcome  in  strong  times,  let  alone  in  times  of  economic  weakness.  The 
general flexibility in the labour market, including the ability of firms and employees to adjust 
hours of work, limited the rise in numbers unemployed. But the overall size of the downturn in 
economic activity also proved to be considerably smaller than thought likely a year ago.  
This is of course a very good outcome. But it also means that there is less scope for robust 
demand growth without inflation starting to rise again down the track. Monetary policy must 
therefore be careful not to overstay a very expansionary setting.  
This situation is quite different from those faced by the major countries. Whereas many of 
them had their worst recession since World War II, Australia probably had its smallest. As 
such, it should not be surprising that Australia was among the first countries to begin to raise 
interest rates, once it was clear that the danger of a really serious contraction in economic 
activity had passed. The Board lifted the cash rate in October, November and December.  
Most lenders raised borrowing rates by a little more than the cash rate. Allowing for these 
margin changes, borrowing rates are still below average but not by as much as the cash rate. 
We  have  taken  careful  note  also  of  non-price  credit  conditions.  For  large  firms,  access  to 
capital  market  funding,  both  debt  and  equity,  has  been  good.  For  some  other  business 
borrowers, access to credit has remained difficult, though we have some suggestions in our 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2010
liaison now that this may be starting to ease. Furthermore it appears that the rate at which 
lenders  are  having  to  make  provisions  for  bad  loans  has  slowed  noticeably,  which  is  not 
surprising given that economic conditions have been improving. Given that, it is reasonable 
to expect that lenders will become more willing to lend over the coming year.  
That said, it seems unlikely that we will return to the easy credit conditions of three years 
ago. The world has changed, for a while at least. Moreover, the likely course of international 
standards for regulation over the next few years will probably, at the margin, act to raise the 
cost of intermediation by requiring banks to hold additional capital and liquidity.  
If economic conditions evolve roughly as we expect, further adjustments to monetary policy 
will probably be needed over time to ensure that inflation remains consistent with the target 
over the medium term. This is a normal experience in an economic expansion: as economic 
activity  normalises  interest  rates  do  the  same  –  though  of  course  it  is  the  interest  rates 
borrowers actually pay, and that savers receive, that are important rather than the cash rate 
per se. The Board sets the cash rate with that in mind.  
Mr Chairman, I have previously said that Australia would come through the global crisis well 
placed  to  benefit  from  renewed  expansion.  For  a  time,  the  challenge  was  to  sustain 
confidence,  and  to  support  the  economy  and  financial  system  through  some  exceptionally 
demanding  circumstances.  By  and  large  those  efforts  were  successful.  Now  we  must  turn 
our  attention  to  the  challenges  of  managing  an  economic  expansion.  Issues  of  capacity, 
productivity,  flexibility,  adaptation  to  structural  change  and  so  on  will  once  again  come  to 
centre  stage,  as  they  should.  For  our  community  to  tackle  those  challenges  successfully, 
monetary and financial stability are important conditions. The Reserve Bank will do all that it 
can to secure them.  
I look forward to your questions. 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 3
