Nils Bernstein: Global recovery and the Danish economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 22 April 2010.  
 The  global  economy  is  on  the  mend.  The  latest  indicators  point  to  a  faster  recovery  than 
previously expected. There is considerable regional variation, and it is likely to be a bumpy 
ride. 
The emerging and developing economies show the strongest growth. Countries like China, 
India and Brazil are now less affected by the economic crisis, while growth is more subdued 
in the old OECD countries, especially Europe. 
Global  GDP  contracted  by  0.6  per  cent  in  2009,  the  strongest  fall  in  output  since  World 
War II. For comparison, global growth peaked at more than 5 per cent before the slowdown 
set in. 
The crisis originated in the USA, but Europe experienced the most severe setback. Indeed, 
the recovery now seems to be stronger in the USA than in Europe. The US business sector 
has once again demonstrated its adaptability. 
However,  the  main  driver  of  the  global  economic  recovery  is  the  very  accommodative 
economic policy. Many countries have historically low monetary-policy interest rates and very 
high budget deficits. Budget deficits of such magnitude may only exist for a relatively short 
period  of  a  few  years.  Most  countries  are  facing  a  consolidation  challenge  in  the  coming 
years, and some have to start already this year. Optimism about the global economy is only 
moderate  because  it  is  still  uncertain  whether  the  recovery  will  be  self-sustaining.  This 
means whether private demand will be able to take over when fiscal policies are tightened 
again. 
The global recovery is illustrated by the rebound in world trade after the strong drop. Before 
the  crisis,  the  limelight  was  on  international  imbalances,  especially  the  large  US  current-
account  deficit  and  China’s  equally  large  surplus.  The  crisis  has  not  eliminated  these 
imbalances,  and  the  discussion  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Chinese  currency  should  be 
viewed against that backdrop. 
The market focus has shifted to fiscal imbalances – sovereign risk has taken centre stage. 
The  IMF  expects  the  government  debt  of  the  old  OECD  countries  taken  as  one  to  reach 
110 per cent of GDP by 2014. This is an alarming figure, but it covers considerable variation 
across countries. Greece is an example of how slippery the slope can be if a country is too 
complacent  for  too  long.  But  Greece’s  tribulations  have  also  highlighted  the  Eurosystem’s 
limited scope for remedying an escalating situation when a member state is struggling to get 
through. 
Most EU member states now have budget deficits exceeding the limit of 3 per cent of GDP 
under the Stability and Growth Pact. As a result, the Commission has ordered or will order 
these member states to reduce their deficits to below 3 per cent of GDP within a short span 
of years. The Stability and Growth Pact is at the heart of the EU’s fiscal surveillance. It is no 
exaggeration to say that this surveillance has not been satisfactory when it comes to Greece. 
The outcome remains to be seen.  
It is encouraging to see that the normalisation of the international financial markets has made 
great  headway.  Since  the  autumn,  the  spread  between  collateralised  and  uncollateralised 
yields,  reflecting  uncertainty  in  the  money  markets,  has  been  back  at  pre-crisis  levels.  US 
 BIS Review 55/2010 
 1
long-term  yields  have  risen  since  the  beginning  of  2009  in  the  light  of  improved  growth 
prospects – and so have leading international stock indices. 
The euro has weakened against the dollar due to the widening yield spread in favour of the 
USA,  exacerbated  from  January  this  year  by  uncertainty  about  the  Greek  economy  and 
concerns  about  a  possible  ripple  effect  in  other  euro  area  member  states.  But  these 
fluctuations  are  still  within  normal  range.  The  current  euro/dollar  rate  is  close  to  the  level 
before the onset of the financial crisis in the summer of 2007. 
 In Denmark, the crisis caused output to drop by more than 7 per cent. Since last summer, 
growth has been back in positive territory, albeit moderate. It will remain so in the coming 
years.  We  will  probably  have  to  wait  until  2013  to  see  Danish  output  return  to  the  level 
observed immediately before the crisis. 
Private consumption in Denmark is recovering slowly. Disposable incomes are showing good 
growth this year, reflecting income-tax cuts and other factors. At the same time, household 
wealth  is  beginning  to  pick  up  again.  The  prospects  for  the  housing  market  are  also 
brightening, at least at the current level of interest rates. Moreover, consumer confidence has 
seen a marked increase over the past year. Nevertheless, the purse strings are still relatively 
tight, probably due to higher unemployment. But the overall finances of the household sector 
are quite robust. It is understandable that households are consolidating their finances. At the 
same time, there is scope for private consumption to contribute to the expected rebound in 
growth in the near term. 
Denmark’s  export  growth  is  lagging  behind  that  of  other  countries.  Industrial  production 
remains  low.  The  deterioration  in  Denmark’s  wage  competitiveness  over  a  relatively  long 
period gives cause for concern. This could prevent Danish companies from making the most 
of the budding international recovery. 
The  recently  concluded  collective  agreements  for  the  private  sector  entail  a  lower  rate  of 
wage  increase  than  what  has  been  observed  for  some  time.  But  wage  inflation  is  also 
declining  in  our  competitor  countries.  Denmark’s  wage  competitiveness  has  been  eroded 
over  a  relatively  long  period  by  excessive  wage  increases  and  weak  productivity 
development. It is a Herculean task to reverse this trend. And the results will, at best, be slow 
to emerge. But we have to make an extra effort in light of the increasing challenges in the 
international environment. 
 Employment has dived. The loss of 170,000 jobs since the peak in the 1st quarter of 2008 
has almost swallowed up the entire increase in employment observed during the boom. 
Many  people  have  lost  their  jobs,  but  registered  unemployment  has  “only”  increased  by 
70,000. 
The  flattening  of  the  unemployment  curve  in  recent  months  is  partly  due  to  the  seasonal 
adjustment methods. 
What it boils down to is that the increase in unemployment is far smaller than the drop in 
employment. This pattern is different from previous periods of economic slowdowns, where 
around  one  third  of  the  drop  in  employment  was  offset  by  a  reduction  in  the  labour  force, 
while  two  thirds  were  offset  by  rising  unemployment.  This  time,  it  is  almost  the  other  way 
around. 
The question is whether the lower-than-expected increase in unemployment reflects stronger 
cyclical development than otherwise envisaged. Regrettably, I do not think that this is so. It is 
more  likely  to  be  the  result  of  a  stronger-than-expected  reduction  of  the  labour  force  and 
continued weak productivity development. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2010
The private sector has borne the brunt of the fall in employment. In the public sector, some of 
the jobs that were difficult to fill during the boom have now been filled. Employment in the 
public sector taken as one has risen by 10,000 since the 1st quarter of 2008. 
And the people who have left the labour force, where have they gone? The number of people 
receiving  student  grants  or  under  adult  education  or  educational  activation  has  risen 
somewhat,  reflecting  that  some  people  choose  to  embark  on  an  education  or  finish  their 
education later. On the other hand, the number of people receiving permanent benefits has 
not risen to any significant extent. This indicates that many of those who have left the labour 
force are self-supporting, such as unemployed who are not members of an unemployment 
fund and who do not receive cash benefits. Others have left the country, for instance some of 
the  migrant  workers  who  came  to  Denmark  from  Eastern  Europe  during  the  boom.  In 
addition, the number of commuters, especially from Germany and Sweden, has fallen. 
On the positive side, there is a well-founded hope of spare capacity in the labour market to 
use when economic growth gains real momentum. Moreover, it is encouraging to see that 
the number of people on permanent benefits has not shown any significant increase. 
There are indications that the supply of labour is now reacting more strongly than previously 
to economic developments. This is a positive feature in so far as it reflects greater flexibility 
in the labour market. It is important that the current cyclical reduction in the labour force does 
not lead to a rise in the number of people on benefit schemes. This could produce a knock-
on  effect  in  the  form  of  a  more  permanent  increase  in  the  number  of  people  on  transfer 
payments, and Denmark is already at the upper end of that scale. 
This  development  could  mean  that  it  may  take  longer  before  registered  unemployment  is 
reduced  to  any  significant  degree.  Companies  have  not  yet  adapted  fully  to  the  drop  in 
output. This means that they can increase production without hiring more people. And there 
are more to be hired outside the registered unemployment category. 
It  is  interesting  to  observe  how  much  these  unemployed  people  outside  the  registered 
unemployment  category  will  contribute  to  dampening  wage  inflation.  If  the  contribution  is 
substantial, our previous estimate of registered structural unemployment may be on the high 
side, but it is still too early to draw any conclusions. 
 Normally,  consumer  issues  are  outside  the  scope  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  tasks, 
important and interesting as they may be. Today, however, I would like to comment on the 
latest  development  in  the  market  for  financing  of  cooperative  housing.  Some  cooperative 
housing associations seem to have resorted to very risky sources of finance in recent years. 
I’m thinking of uncallable fixed-rate loans subject to rising interest rates during the term of the 
loan.  Technically,  these  loans  are  structured  as  adjustable-rate  loans  combined  with  an 
interest-rate swap. 
These  loans  do  not  accord  with  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  opinion  on  the  par  rule  that 
provides for redemption of a loan at a price close to 100. In addition, the loans seem to be a 
far cry from the mortgage sector’s declared objective of protecting the borrower. So far, it has 
been good practice to provide housing loans on terms that give the borrowers a chance to 
get rid of their loans without being tied down by increasing debt. This is ensured by the right 
to redeem at par, and it was also a key aspect of the rules on covered bonds adopted almost 
three years ago. Adjustable-interest loans cannot be redeemed at par, but these loans are 
typically financed by short-term bonds, limiting the risk on the outstanding debt. 
Several institutes offer cooperative housing associations loans at a low initial interest rate, 
which then increases over the term of the loan. In Denmark, these are known as “stepped 
loans”, but they are the same as the teaser loans that dominated the US subprime market 
just before the financial crisis. 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 3
This combination of long-term uncallable loans at a rising interest rate over the term of the 
loan is not suitable for housing financing. Stepped loans may entice borrowers to raise larger 
loans  than  they  would  otherwise  have  done,  reinforcing  the  negative  effects  of  non-
redemption at par. 
 And  now  over  to  mortgage  credit  and  its  legal  basis.  The  proposals  from  the  Basel 
Committee and the European Commission are well-known in this forum. I mentioned them at 
the annual meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation a few weeks ago, and I have 
nothing  to  add.  The  Danish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  and  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
have jointly sent letters to Basel and Brussels pointing out a number of problems in relation 
to  the  Danish  mortgage-credit  sector.  One  particular  problem  is  that  liquid  mortgage-credit 
securities are not fully included as liquid assets. The proposals will impact on the adjustable-
rate loans currently offered by the mortgage-credit institutes, but it must be admitted that the 
current structure has inherent risks. 
Mortgage-credit institutes have recently held auctions of fixed bullets. I am pleased to see a 
more even distribution of the auctions over the year. I welcome this, while encouraging you 
to continue the process. 
 In Denmark, both the authorities and financial enterprises are tuned in to 1 October 2010. 
This  date  marks  the  end  of  the  general  government  guarantee  of  deposits  and  other 
unsecured claims in banks. It will be an important milestone in the process that will bring the 
financial sector back on its feet. 
In order to smooth the transition, Danmarks Nationalbank has prolonged the credit facilities 
for banks and mortgage-credit institutes until 26 February 2011. The temporary extension of 
the collateral base has also been prolonged. 
In Denmark, the most important initiative on the drawing board is the government’s bill on a 
winding-up  solution  for  banks,  which  is  to  replace  the  general  government  guarantee. 
Experience from the financial crisis and the management of ailing banks has shown that it is 
necessary to establish a permanent scheme to provide for controlled winding up of a bank’s 
activities. Danmarks Nationalbank has previously emphasised that the key issue is not the 
survival of the individual bank, but smooth continuation of its healthy activities. 
The bill will establish a winding-up scheme. The Financial Stability Company will be able to 
take over ailing banks. The guaranteed cover for unsecured creditors does not exceed the 
statutory  deposit  guarantee  of  kr.  750,000.  Unsecured  creditors  can  suffer  losses  on 
exposures with banks as is the case for creditors in other business enterprises. 
This  will  give  unsecured  creditors  an  incentive  to  get  out  quickly  if  a  bank  shows  signs  of 
trouble. Firstly, this entails a potential pressure that can contribute to the smooth functioning 
of  the  financial  system  of  its  own  accord  without  excessive  risk.  It  will  also  entail  market 
pressure on the individual banks to have sufficient buffers. 
Secondly, it will require the authorities to react sooner and more consistently when a bank is 
on a slippery slope. The financial system and financial stability should not be left in doubt for 
prolonged periods of a bank’s ability to continue in business. 
If we want quicker action, we have to accept that the basis for the action will not be 100 per 
cent  certain.  It  is  not  conducive  to  fast  decision-making  if  the  FSA  is  constantly  at  risk  of 
being subject to retrospective investigations of its decisions. The FSA must have a certain 
margin for action. 
The bill requires each bank to provide the necessary information on account structures, etc. 
within  24  hours  to  pave  the  way  for  quick  crisis  management.  A  quick  solution  ensuring 
continuity  in  payment  systems  also  requires  a  well-planned  process  for  changing  account 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2010
structures, etc. Danmarks Nationalbank will engage in close dialogue with other authorities 
and owners of settlement systems to ensure this once the bill has been adopted. 
Controlled  winding  up  using  the  proposed  model  increases  the  certainty  of  the  assets 
maintaining  their  value,  compared  with  a  traditional  winding-up  procedure.  And  the  bank’s 
customers will not suddenly discover that their Dankort is not working or that deposits in a 
salary  account  have  been  swallowed  up  by  a  car  loan.  There  is  no  obligation  for  the 
individual  bank  to  use  this  model.  I  understand  that  such  obligation  would  require  further 
legislation so as not to contravene the Constitutional requirement that expropriation shall be 
subject to statutory provisions. 
The financial crisis has taught us that no bank can turn a blind eye on the issue and say that 
this could never happen to it. All institutions have to accept that it could happen to them. And 
they must have an emergency action plan. That will enable the customers to navigate safely! 
Consequently, we find it important that the institutions be obliged, by a prior general meeting, 
to decide whether to join the scheme now. I hereby welcome the Minister’s consent. 
Furthermore,  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the  Danish  Bankers  Association  to  encourage  its 
members to join the scheme. 
I  hereby  thank  the  Association  of  Danish  Mortgage  Banks  for  our  successful  cooperation 
during the past year. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 55/2010 
 5
