Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The interplay of banking, financial 
intermediation and regulation 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  13th  Conference  of  the  European  Central  Bank–Center  for  Financial 
Studies (ECB–CFS) Research Network on “Macro-prudential Regulation as an Approach to 
Contain  Systemic  Risk:  Economic  Foundations,  Diagnostic  Tools  and  Policy  Instruments”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 27 September 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a real pleasure for me to speak today at the 13th Conference of the ECB–CFS Research 
Network on “Macro-prudential Regulation as an Approach to Contain Systemic Risk”. 
The Roman senator and historian Tacitus tells us that in 33 A.D. the Roman Empire suffered 
a major financial crisis. The trigger was a re-establishment of laws that Julius Caesar had 
introduced as a war measure in 49 B.C. to prevent the flight of capital abroad and the fall of 
land  values.  After  having  been  disregarded  for  a  long  time  the  re-introduction  of  the  laws, 
which forced lenders to invest a large share of their capital in domestic real estate, triggered 
a  scramble  for  money  as  many  loans  were  called  in.  The  disastrous  effect  was  a 
postponement  of  investment  and  a  fall  in  real  estate  values,  compounded  by  investors 
withholding funding in view of the prospect of finding better bargains in a falling market. The 
crisis  was  eventually  ended  when  Emperor  Tiberius  arranged  for  three-year  interest  free 
loans to investors.  
Although the global crisis of the last few years had little to do with drastic measures of war 
financing  of  the  Roman  kind,  the  involvement  of  real  estate,  elements  of  the  transmission 
and aspects of the resolution still sound familiar. These analogies are not isolated examples. 
The  long  list  of  financial  crises  in  human  history  and  their  parallels  over  time  have  been 
extensively documented.1 One of the key issues – today and in history – has been that there 
were limited means to contain the systemic dimension of crises. Hence, the recent focus on 
macro-prudential  supervision  and  the  topic  chosen  for  this  conference.  The  regulation  of 
systemic risk is very topical.  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  look  a  bit  more  at  the  issue  how  financial  regulation 
should  react  to  instances  of  widespread  or  systemic  instability.  I  shall  do  that  from  two 
angles:  First,  I  want  to  look  back  at  regulatory  reactions  in  the  past,  namely  the  Glass-
Steagall  Act  in  the  United  States  and  the  establishment  of  the  Basel  Committee  and  its 
standards at the international level, and, second, I want to consider the particular challenges 
we are facing for the current regulatory reforms. 
How has regulatory policy reacted to the occurrence of financial instabilities in the 
past?  
One prominent example is the regulatory reaction to the stock market crash in 1929, which 
resulted in the establishment of the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933. The Act was to a large extent 
motivated by concerns about the role of banks in the run up to the Great Depression and in 
particular about conflicts of interest between the lending, underwriting and proprietary trading 
                                                 
1   See, for example, Kindleberger (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, New York: 
Basic  Books,  Garber  (2000),  Famous  First  Bubbles:  The  Fundamentals  of  Early  Manias,  Cambridge:  MIT 
Press,  or  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 1
functions.  Therefore,  the  Glass  Steagall  Act  banned  commercial  banks  from  underwriting, 
holding  or  dealing  in  corporate  securities,  hence  essentially  separating  investment  from 
commercial banks. 
The  Act  not  only  had  a  major  impact  on  the  evolution  of  banking  in  the  US,  but  also 
worldwide.  For  instance,  the  emergence  of  large  US  investment  banks,  also  with 
dependencies in Europe, is a direct consequence from the implementation of this Act. The 
Act also affected the supervision of banks worldwide. Owing to their funding structure based 
on deposits by many small and relatively uninformed agents, hence the possibility of a bank 
run  and  their  involvement  in  the  payment  system,  commercial  banks  were  regulated 
relatively  heavily.  In  contrast,  investment  banks  were  regarded  to  need  less  close  public 
monitoring and regulation, as they were seen to be less important from an overall financial 
stability  perspective  and  mostly  the  domain  of  sophisticated  investors.  However,  the  crisis 
has shown that all actors in the financial system contributed to the build up of systemic risk.  
Research  on  the  pre-Glass-Steagall-era  in  the  United  States  provides  evidence  that 
securities underwritten by commercial banks’ subsidiaries did not have a higher probability of 
default than those underwritten by investment banks.2 However, whether the Glass Steagall 
Act has contributed or not to financial stability is an open question. Nonetheless, in 1999, the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  repealed  the  Glass  Steagall  Act  on  the  grounds  that  this  would 
allow banks to become more competitive, attain favorable economies of scope and diversify 
their  sources  of  income.  However,  the  recent  regulatory  reform  in  the  US  under  the 
Frank-Dodd Bill has re-introduced some restrictions on proprietary trading by deposit taking 
institutions.  
A regulatory response with a worldwide impact on regulatory standards and banks’ business 
was  the  creation  of  the  Basel  Committee.  The  failure  of  the  German  Herstatt  bank  led  to 
serious  spill-overs  to  the  US  banking  sector.  In  late  1974,  central  bankers  from  Canada, 
Japan, the US and 9 European countries founded a new body at the Bank for International 
Settlements  in  Basel,  which  became  later  known  as  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision.  
This  new  organization  was  founded  on  the  understanding  that  the  increasing  cross-border 
activities  of  banks  and  the  associated  risk  that  financial  instability  would  be  transmitted 
across borders required improvements in the quality of supervision and regulation globally as 
well  as  greater  international  cooperation  in  this  field.  Over  the  years  it  has  increasingly 
developed  into  a  standard-setting  body  and  although  its  standards  –  such  as  Basel  I  and 
Basel II – are not legally enforceable they have in fact become the worldwide benchmark.  
The list of factors that contributed to the financial crisis is long. However, irrespective of the 
multiplicity of factors, we had to realize that the provisions put in place by Basel I and Basel II 
were  not  sufficient  to  ensure  the  necessary  resilience  of  the  banking  sector  needed  to 
withstand a situation like the one we are currently facing. 
In my view, the major lessons from the current crisis for any future regulatory policy are the 
following:  
First, Basel II rested on the principle that the purpose of regulation is to ensure the safety 
and  soundness  of  individual  financial  institutions  against  the  risk  of  loss  on  their  assets. 
However ensuring the soundness of each individual institution does not necessarily ensure 
the soundness of the financial system as a whole. 
                                                 
2   Puri,  M.  (1999),  “Universal  banks  as  underwriters:  Implications  for  the  going  public  process”,  Journal  of 
Financial  Economics,  54,  133–163.  Kroszner,  R.S.  and  R.G.  Rajan  (1994),  “Is  the  Glass  Steagall  Act 
Justified? A study of the US experience with universal banking before 1933”, American Economic Review, 84, 
810–832. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2010
Second,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  that  the  main  types  of  risk,  notably  credit,  market  and 
liquidity risk are ultimately linked, and that funding liquidity of banks is an essential element 
of  determining  their  resilience.  Awareness  about  the  importance  of  regulating  liquidity  risk 
was limited until the crisis brought it to the fore. 
And  third,  part  of  banks’  risk  taking  activities  were  left  to  other,  non-bank  entities  of  the 
financial system and, thus, these activities were able to escape the regulatory web that had 
been built for banks.  
Already  from  these  three  points  we  see  how  the  lessons  learnt  lead  us  to  the  systemic 
dimension of supervision and regulation. 
The current regulatory challenge 
So let me turn to the challenges of the current regulatory reform to discuss what is needed to 
prevent or contain financial instabilities and systemic crises in the future. These challenges 
concern  three  major  fields:  (i)  classic  bank  regulation,  (ii)  market  and  infrastructure 
regulation, and (iii) systemic risk regulation. 
Regulating banks  
Concerning the bank regulation, major progress has been made. The Basel Committee has 
just  published  the  regulatory  reform  package  known  as  Basel  III.  It  addresses  the 
weaknesses brought to the fore by the crisis. The aim of the Basel III reform is to enhance 
capital  regulation  and  to  introduce  liquidity  regulation.  In  particular  the  Basel  Committee 
proposes:  first,  to  improve  the  quality  and  quantity  of  capital,  especially  Tier-1  capital  to 
improve  loss-absorption  on  a  going  concern  basis;  second,  to  introduce  a  non-risk-based 
leverage ratio as a supplementary measure to the Basel II risk control framework; third, to 
introduce capital buffers and forward-looking provisioning to ensure that the financial system 
absorbs the shocks and thus lowers the volatility of the financial and real economic cycles; 
finally,  to  elevate  resilience  of  financial  institutions  to  liquidity  stresses  by  introducing  a 
liquidity  risk  framework,  improving  liquidity  risk  management  and  harmonising  liquidity  risk 
supervision.  
The  significance  of  internationally  coordinated  oversight  and  the  cross-border  web  of 
dependencies  in  the  financial  system  are  exemplified  by  systemically  important  financial 
institutions (SIFIs) that often operate internationally. These played a major role in both the 
impact  and  the  transmission  of  the  crisis.  In  order  to  increase  long  term  financial  stability 
there  is  the  need  to  reduce  the  moral  hazard  they  exhibit.  To  address  this,  policy 
recommendations  are  being  developed  that  include:  (i)  a  framework  for  measuring  an 
institution’s  systemic  importance,  (ii)  resolution  tools  and  frameworks  for  the  effective 
resolution  of  financial  failures  without  taxpayers  ultimately  bearing  the  burden,  as  well  as 
(iii) prudential and structural policy tools to reduce the probability and impact of SIFI’s failure. 
Looking further ahead, important challenges remain to improve banking sector stability:  
First,  banks’  business  models  need  to  become  more  sustainable.  In  my  view,  banks’ 
business  strategy  should  not  be  directed  towards  increasing  short-term  profits  by  way  of 
taking on extensive risks to the detriment of the long term viability of their business. In fact, 
the level of announced profit targets and their impact on peer banks has also to be seen from 
the  perspective  that  higher  profits  mean  higher  risk  taking  and,  hence,  do  not  necessarily 
originate from efficiency gains alone.  
Second,  I  believe  that  it  is  crucial  for  banks  to  undergo  a  serious  reform  of  their 
corporate  governance  and  compensation  schemes.  In  particular,  the  incentives  of 
traders, CEOs and creditors of the bank should adequately reflect the risks involved so as to 
internalize the costs of their risk taking and potential failure. This can be achieved through 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 3
appropriate compensation schemes, more transparency vis-à-vis creditors and shareholders 
and generally improved oversight of banks’ business. Overall, the managing board of a bank 
has  to  shift  the  focus  away  from  short-term  objectives  towards  a  longer  term  corporate 
strategy. This also includes being more accountable for the risk taking of the overall business 
of  the  bank,  which  brings  me  to  the  next  challenge.  Third,  risk  management  practises 
need to be improved. Most risk management techniques – not just used by banks but also 
by  rating  agencies  –  neglected  the  correlations  of  risks  across  securities  and  did  not 
sufficiently  internalize  the  growing  systemic  (credit,  market  and  liquidity)  risks.3  Moreover, 
banks  underestimated  tail  risk.  The  existing  risk  management  techniques  worked  well  at 
predicting small day-to-day losses under normal circumstances but failed to predict severe 
losses  that  are  very  infrequent.  However,  it  is  exactly  those  severe  losses  that  matter  the 
most.  Therefore,  banks  need  to  devote  greater  attention  to  their  risk  management.  This 
means in particular that the risk management function needs to receive a more prominent 
role in the organizational structure, specifically with respect to authority and independence.  
Regulating markets and infrastructures 
Concerning the regulation of financial markets, the crisis has clearly shown that turbulences 
in one segment of financial markets can create spill-overs and contagion to other segments. 
Moreover,  we  have  seen  that  both  banks  and  other  types  of  financial  intermediaries  had 
been seriously affected by the financial crisis. Therefore, I welcome the recent agreement to 
establish  three  pan-European  micro-prudential  supervisory  authorities  –  the  European 
Banking  Authority  (EBA),  the  European  Securities  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  and  the 
European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA).  They  are  expected  to 
become operational at the beginning of next year.  
With regard to the regulation of market infrastructures, let me first say that I see it as a great 
achievement that market infrastructures have fared very well. They were able to withstand 
the shock-waves of the current crisis and continued to ensure the clearing and settlement of 
financial transactions. Thus, they contributed critically to containing the spreading of financial 
instability. 
This resilience, however, was not a “dues ex machine”. It was the outcome of well designed 
international  standards  for  market  infrastructures.  Still,  we  need  to  closely  analyse  the 
lessons  from  the  crisis  also  in  this  area  –  e.g.  in  terms  of  market  infrastructure  risk 
management and transparency and the arrangements for cross-border cooperation among 
authorities. These lessons will be incorporated in the global CPSS-IOSCO recommendations 
for financial market infrastructures to be issued early next year. 
Despite the good performance of market infrastructures, there is a need to further develop 
highly resilient market infrastructures, particularly in the field of OTC derivatives. The crisis 
showed that legislation, supervision and oversight of global derivatives market arrangements 
need to be improved – and that this needs to be done in a consistent way globally. Following 
agreement by the G20 on high-level objectives, new legislation has recently been introduced 
in the US and is in an advanced stage in the European Union. Such legislation stipulates, 
inter alia, that all OTC derivatives trades will need to be reported to trade repositories and to 
the extent possible be subject to central clearing via a central counterparty (CCP).  
Overall,  also  with  regard  to  regulating  markets  and  infrastructures,  important  challenges 
remain: 
                                                 
3   Danielsson, Jon, Paul Embrechts, Charles Goodhart, Con Keating, Felix Muennich, Olivier Renault and Hyun 
Song Shin (2001) “An Academic Response to Basel II’’ Financial Market Group special paper 130, London 
School of Economics. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2010
First, striving for more transparency in financial markets. The activities in the shadow 
banking  sector  and  the  over-the-counter  business  have  contributed  tremendously  to  the 
creation  of  uncertainties  and  opaque  transmission  channels  for  risks.  Therefore,  a  central 
goal  for  any  future  regulatory  action  should  the  improvement  of  market  transparency. 
Clearing  of  OTC  derivatives  via  CCPs,  the  reporting  of  derivative  trade  data  to  trade 
repositories and the recent proposal by the European Commission to increase transparency 
for shortselling activities are important steps in the right direction.  
Second,  dealing  with  financial  innovation.  Independently  of  the  doubtless  benefits  of 
financial innovation, it poses a constant challenge to regulators, supervisors and overseers of 
financial markets and infrastructures. The banking business is in a constant state of flux with 
new  financial  instruments  constantly  being  developed  and  traded.  New  techniques  and 
instruments  have  been  developed,  particularly  to  diversify  and  trade  credit  risk,  making 
markets more complex and sometimes less transparent. For example, the risks involved in 
the  so-called  “Originate  to  Distribute”  model  –  an  intermediation  approach  in  which  banks 
originate, repackage and then sell their loans (or other assets such as bonds or credit risk 
exposures) on to the financial market – was insufficiently recognized by market participants 
and  supervisory  authorities.  Therefore,  financial  innovation  and  growing  complexity  mean 
that  market  participants  and  authorities  need  to  constantly  build  up  in-depth  knowledge  of 
financial  innovations  and  broaden  their  analysis  across  the  whole  spectrum  of  financial 
market actions.  
Third, minimization of risk transmission between institutions and markets.  Given the 
resilience of market infrastructures in the current crisis, we need to further strengthen and 
encourage their use. Moreover, the crisis has shown that the exclusive focus on banks has 
proven  insufficient  as  contagion  has  also  occurred  across  different  types  of  financial 
intermediaries, such as insurance companies and money  market funds. Therefore, looking 
forward  it  will  be  crucial  that  the  cross  border  cooperation  between  authorities  be  further 
strengthened. In this respect the work of the newly created European Supervisory Authorities 
will be key. Looking more into the interrelation between markets from a systemic perspective 
will  be  another  key  task,  which  brings  me  to  the  third  major  field  of  regulatory  challenge, 
namely regulating systemic risk. 
Regulating systemic risk 
As indicated, traditional banking regulation was designed to limit each individual institution’s 
risk seen in isolation. It did not sufficiently focus on systemic risk, put simply, the risk of a 
simultaneous collapse of institutions. 
Institutionally, significant progress has been made in the strengthening of macro- and micro-
prudential  supervision.  In  Europe,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  –  as 
mentioned – three pan-European micro Supervisors will be established.  
The ESRB will provide a thorough analysis of systemic risks to the financial system in the 
European Union and will issue warnings if significant risks are identified. It will also provide 
policy recommendations to address these risks and prevent a renewed build-up of excessive 
risk  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  With  its  involvement  in  the  ESRB,  the  ECB  will 
continue  to  play  an  active  role  in  safeguarding  financial  stability  in  Europe.  The  ECB  Vice 
President will go into greater detail at tonight’s conference dinner on how we are preparing 
for that task.  
The main challenges that I see ahead in the area of regulating systemic risk are as follows: 
First,  determining  the  perimeter  of  regulation.  It  is  important  that  the  regulatory  web  is 
cast wide enough to ensure that all systemically important institutions, markets and products 
are captured. Caution is also necessary to avoid that tighter regulation simply shifts activities 
to  unregulated  market  segments  or  entities.  Therefore,  the  steps  taken  towards  more 
harmonised banking supervision as well as the progress made in Europe towards a Directive 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 5
on  alternative  investment  fund  managers,  which  affect  financial  markets  through  their  tight 
web of interlinkages with the financial sector, are appreciated.  
Second, ensuring the availability of information and data.  The  detection  and  the  early 
warning on systemic risk crucially depends on the quality and the availability of relevant data 
as well as on the adequate assessment of the risk bearing capacity of the system. Therefore 
it  is  important  that  information  is  made  available  that  can  feed  into  future  assessments  of 
systemic  risk,  especially  in  view  of  this  being  a  key  input  into  the  working  of  the  newly 
founded ESRB. In this regard, it will be equally important that the use of qualitative data and 
market  information  is  strengthened  and  that  this  information  will  be  fed  into  the  regular 
analysis of systemic risk in a more systematic way. 
And third, measuring systemic risk. A basic difficulty in regulating system risk relate to the 
difficulty  in  measuring  the  contribution  of  individual  institutions  to  systemic  risk.  The 
importance of an institution for systemic risk is a function of its size, interconnectedness and 
substitutability.  One  way  for  regulators  and  private  markets  to  be  able  to  monitor  financial 
institutions  and  to  assess  their  systemic  reach,  is  to  assess  the  risk  of  multiple  defaults. 
Measuring  such  risk  is  difficult,  as  measures  may  be  too  backward  looking  or  face  data 
limitations. 
I am happy that after the break we will have the chance to hear about the latest advances on 
how  to  measure  systemic  risk  in  the  keynote  speech  by  Professor  Robert  Engle  from 
New York University. He has developed a measure of systemic risk capturing the systemic 
impact  of  an  individual  institution’s  shortfall  and  which  is  published  in  the  so-called  NYU 
Stern Systemic Risk Ranking.  
The keynote speech will be followed by two outstanding papers on measuring systemic risk. 
Kim  and  Giesecke  will  present  a  paper  estimating  systemic  risk  on  the  basis  of  actual 
defaults and the timing of their occurrence. The paper by Yang and Zhou goes beyond the 
usual  focus  on  the  existence  of  contagion  and  will  present  an  analysis  of  the  pattern  of 
propagation across financial institutions.  
For an illustration showing how big the challenge to identify systemic risk is, one does not 
need  to  go  back  very  far  in  history.  In  2003,  a  young  analyst  in  New  York  stated  the 
following:  
“You  just  have  to  watch  for  the  level  at  which  a  nearly  unlimited  or  unprecedented  credit 
growth  can  no  longer  drive  housing  markets  higher.  I  am  extremely  bearish  and  feel  the 
consequence could be a 50% drop in residential real estate in the US. A large portion of the 
current [housing] demand at current prices would disappear if only people were convinced 
that prices were not rising. The collateral damage is likely to be of orders of magnitude worse 
than anyone now considers”.4 
It  took  another  4  years  that  these  risks  and,  particularly,  the  systemic  impact  and  costs 
materialized.  Analyzing  systemic  risk  means,  therefore,  mainly  going  beyond  mainstream 
thinking  and  challenging  widespread  beliefs.  We  are  in  need  of  the  type  of  analyst  I  just 
quoted.  I  am  very  much  looking  forward  to  hearing  this  conference’s  analysis  on  the 
containment of such systemic risk, the future challenges and the possible policy options we 
have going forward.  
                                                
 
4   Quote from M. Lewis, The big short, 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 123/2010
