Linah K Mohohlo: 2010 Monetary Policy Statement 
Speech by Mrs Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the launch of the 
Monetary Policy Statement for 2010, Gaborone, 25 February 2010.  
 Once again, it is my pleasure to welcome you to the launch of the Monetary Policy Statement 
for 2010. As you are aware, the Statement is the principal means through which the Bank 
informs  the  nation  and  other  stakeholders  about  the  monetary  policy  framework  and  its 
implementation.  This  is  done  in  order  to  foster  policy  credibility  and  anchor  public 
expectations  of  a  low,  predictable  and  sustainable  level  of  inflation.  The  Statement  also 
reviews  current  economic  trends;  it  evaluates  policy  implementation  in  the  past  year,  and 
attempts to foresee prospective developments that may influence the inflation outlook. In this 
way,  the  validity  of  the  policy  framework  can  be  assessed  objectively,  and  the  Bank’s 
consequent policy intentions for the coming year can be appreciated.  
You will recall that two years ago, the Bank adopted a new forward-looking monetary policy 
framework which rightly expects policy effectiveness in the medium-term. The framework is 
based  on  a  model  of  inflation  forecasting  which  incorporates  a  wider  set  of  economic 
indicators. Indeed, with the benefit of continuous technical refinements, the actual domestic 
inflation has broadly been in line with the model projections.  
Before I present the Monetary Policy Statement for 2010, I consider it useful to restate the 
other core functions of the Bank which, when taken together, provide synergies for monetary 
policy, for the promotion and maintenance of monetary stability, and for the efficiency of the 
payments system as well as the soundness of the financial sector.  
In  addition  to  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  the  regulation  and 
supervision of banks, is another critical function of the Bank.  
The  Bank  is  also  responsible  for  designing,  producing  and  issuing  currency,  which  is  a 
means  of  payment  for  transactions  and  a  store  of  value.  Towards  this  end,  you  will  recall 
that, in August last year, the Bank launched a new family of banknotes to replace those that 
had  been  in  use  for  many  years.  The  banknotes  are  more  fortified  against  counterfeiting; 
they update the country’s special characteristics and celebrate our heritage.  
Yet  another  key  function  of  the  Bank  is  the  management  and  investment  of  the  foreign 
exchange reserves, which are a major part of the nation’s wealth. Due to the global financial 
and  economic  crisis,  this  particular  area  of  the  Bank’s  responsibilities  has  recently  come 
under  close  scrutiny.  I wish  to  take  this opportunity,  therefore,  to  reassure  the  nation  that, 
despite  the  turmoil  in  major  financial  and  capital  markets,  the  Bank’s  prudent  investment 
policy and strategy have served the country well. The purchasing power of the reserves has 
been maintained and, despite very low export receipts and the high import bill, the reserves 
remain relatively sizeable at approximately USD9 billion (P59 billion), which is equivalent to 
20 months of imports of goods and services.  
The Bank is also the banker to the Government and commercial banks, for which it serves as 
the lender of last resort. In addition, as economic and financial advisor to the Government, 
the  Bank  worked  very  closely  with  the  authorities  throughout  the  year  in  addressing  the 
challenging external and domestic macroeconomic environment.  
Honoured Guests: 
I now return to the main agenda of this evening, which is the anticipated direction of the Bank’s 
monetary  policy  stance  during  2010.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy 
objective is to achieve price stability, as defined by a sustainable, low and predictable level of 
inflation.  This  objective  is  set  as  a  medium-term  inflation  objective  range  of  3–6 percent.  In 
order  to  attain  price  stability  within  this  parameter,  the  Bank  uses  interest  rates  and  open 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 1
market operations to affect demand and supply conditions in the economy and ultimately the 
rate of price changes. 
You  will  know  that  low  inflation  contributes  towards  the  broader  national  objective  of 
sustainable economic growth by making saving attractive and investment return predictable, 
while fostering international competitiveness of domestic producers. In addition, maintaining 
the  purchasing  power  of  money  by  controlling  inflation  contributes  to  the  welfare  of  all 
economic agents, particularly households.  
Apart from interest rates and credit availability, domestic demand and economic activity are 
also influenced by other factors, especially fiscal policy as well as trade and exchange rate 
developments.  Excessive  domestic  demand  in  relation  to  available  goods  and  services 
contributes  to  inflationary  pressures;  so  too  do  foreign  inflation,  changes  in  administered 
prices (such as government levies and utility tariffs) and public expectations about the future 
level and direction of inflation.  
In its application, however, monetary policy responds to a sustained deviation of the inflation 
forecast from the objective range in the medium-term. The Bank’s responses are based on 
an  assessment  of  the  factors  that  impact  on  inflation,  including  public  expectations  which 
could,  in  turn,  be  influenced  by  monetary  policy.  For  example,  interest  rates  would  be 
increased to pre-empt a potential rise in inflation and the consequent erosion of incomes and 
financial savings. Conversely, the Bank would reduce interest rates in the event of sustained 
low  or  rapidly  falling  inflation.  In  particular,  the  Bank’s  reactions  are  informed  by  the 
performance  of  the  economy  in  relation  to  potential  output.  A  sustained  level  of  economic 
performance above a production trend or potential tends to be inflationary and could suggest 
the  need  to  raise  interest  rates  to  dampen  inflationary  pressures,  while  economic 
performance  below  output  trend  could  require  a  reduction  of  interest  rates  to  stimulate 
economic activity. However, this policy response is not mechanical; it takes account of expert 
judgement and supplementary analysis in order to accommodate other factors that may not 
be fully incorporated in the forecasting model.  
At the regular meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee, economic developments and key 
indicators  of  the  inflation  outlook  are  monitored  and  reviewed,  so  that  a  timely  policy 
response  can  be  taken,  if  necessary.  After  each  Committee  meeting,  the  decisions,  the 
reasons for those decisions and the inflation outlook are disseminated to the public through 
press  releases.  This  approach  helps  to  influence  inflation  expectations  and  contributes 
towards fostering policy credibility, which is critical in achieving long-term price stability.  
Distinguished Ladies & Gentlemen:  
It will come as no surprise to you that this year’s Monetary Policy Statement is launched in a 
substantially different global and domestic macroeconomic environment than was the case 
last year. Twelve months ago, I had little good news to report. We had foreseen a difficult 
2009  due  to  the  unfolding  global  economic  downturn.  Botswana’s  diamond  mines  had 
temporarily  halted  production  as  the  full  force  of  the  global  recession  descended  on  the 
country. A substantial portion of my remarks at the time was devoted to assessing the impact 
of  the  crisis  on  the  domestic  economy.  We  saw  no  end  to  the  economic  recession,  as 
forecasts  for  global  growth  were  repeatedly  revised  downwards.  As  the  year  progressed, 
diamond exports had slowed to a trickle, and impacted negatively on government revenue, 
the Balance of Payments and the foreign exchange reserves. In the circumstances, work on 
the  tenth  National  Development  Plan  had  to  be  postponed  so  that  the  budget  could  be 
re-worked to ensure the maintenance of long-term fiscal sustainability.  
That  was  then.  As  we  meet  today,  the  picture  is  considerably  more  positive,  despite 
uncertainties  and  challenges  posed  by  the  fragile  economic  recovery  in  many  parts  of  the 
world,  particularly  in  Portugal,  Ireland,  Italy,  Greece  and  Spain  (the  so  called  PIIGS).  The 
International Monetary Fund has forecast global output to expand by 3.9 percent this year. 
This performance reflects the resilience of key emerging economies, and the impact of the 
stimulus packages that were implemented in most advanced economies.  
2 
 BIS Review 48/2010
In  fact,  the  challenge  for  monetary  policy  makers  in  major  industrial  countries  is  to  design 
and  implement  a  proper  winding  down  of  the  stimulus  packages  that  have  supported 
economic recovery, while avoiding generating inflationary pressures. This process will need 
to be gradual and internationally coordinated within a transparent framework.  
Be that as it may, it is recognised that low interest rates and large budget deficits are likely to 
be  maintained  during  the  course  of  2010  and  beyond.  This  policy  posture  is  intended  to 
sustain economic recovery that remains sluggish and fragile; it will also help to reduce the 
risk of the so-called “double dip” recession.  
Besides the improved world economic growth, global inflation decreased from 6.3 percent in 
2008  to  2.7  percent  in  2009.  In  the  four  SDR  countries  –  United  States  of  America,  Euro 
zone, Japan and United Kingdom – average inflation was zero. Low inflation was due to a fall 
in international commodity prices and subdued demand. The resulting low capacity utilisation 
and  high  unemployment  exerted  downward  pressure  on  wages  and  other  prices.  In  other 
instances, some developed economies, such as Japan, a fall in prices or deflation is once 
more a matter of major policy concern. 
The overall trade-weighted average inflation of Botswana’s trading partner countries slowed 
down from 6.1 percent in 2008 to 4.4 percent in December 2009. In South Africa, inflation 
decreased  from  9.5  percent  in  2008,  and  ended  2009  at  6.3  percent,  just  outside  the 
country’s medium term target range of 3–6 percent.  
Here at home, inflation progressively fell in 2009 and was within the 3–6 percent objective 
range by the middle of the year. In fact, largely due to base effects of earlier price shocks, 
inflation  reached  5  percent  in  November  2009,  the  lowest  in  decades.  Thereafter,  inflation 
rose largely due to the winding down of the favourable base effects arising from previous fuel 
price  reductions.  By  the  end  of  the  year,  inflation  had  risen  to  5.8  percent,  down  from 
13.7 percent  in  December  2008,  before  increasing  further  to  6.1  percent  last  month.  Both 
measures of core inflation (the 16 percent trimmed mean measure and the one derived when 
administered  prices  are  excluded)  showed  similar  sharp  declines  during  2009;  this  was 
additional evidence of the generalised easing of inflationary pressures.  
Due to the impact of the global slowdown on demand for diamonds and other minerals, the 
lower  mining  production  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  2009  resulted  in  overall  output 
decreasing by 6.7 percent. In contrast, non-mining output rose by 12.4 percent, reflecting the 
support  extended  by  the  Government’s  spending  programme,  which  also  contributed  to 
some recovery in business confidence last year.  
However, as indicated by significantly low growth rates of commercial bank credit, demand 
remained subdued for both businesses and households. Households were also affected by 
generally low wage increases, and a salary freeze for civil servants.  
Although the annual growth rate of government expenditure slowed significantly in 2009, it 
was  still  higher  than  initially  budgeted.  As  highlighted  in  the  recent  Budget  Speech, 
government  expenditure  for  fiscal  year  2009/10  is  projected  to  grow  by  15.5  percent 
compared to the original budget growth rate of 5.3 percent, which to a large extent, reflected 
the impact of the sizeable supplementary budget that was approved in December 2009.  
In order to ease expenditure constraints and finance the larger budget deficit for the fiscal 
year  2009/10  that  is  projected  at  P13.5  billion  or  15.1  percent  of  GDP,  the  Government 
borrowed from the African Development Bank and World Bank. A further deficit of a similar 
magnitude – P12.1 billion or 12.2 percent of GDP – is forecast for the fiscal year 2010/11, 
and the Government’s objective of restoring fiscal balance, through a combination of robust 
revenue growth and rigorous expenditure control, is expected in 2012/13.  
Honoured Guests:  
I wish to emphasise that, while the large deficits in the current economic environment has 
been appropriate unavoidable and, to a certain extent, affordable, it is essential that the fiscal 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 3
consolidation  required  for  long-term  budget  sustainability  is  achieved  going  forward.  It  is 
urgent  that  there  is  increased  vigilance  in  all  aspects  of  macroeconomic  management 
including  policy  reforms,  in  order  to  energise  the  country’s  performance  in  a  competitive 
global environment. This has been underscored by the sovereign credit rating agencies when 
they  recently  announced  Botswana’s  relatively  intact  sovereign  credit  ratings  for  2009  of 
“A minus” for Standard and Poor’s and “A” for Moody’s Investors Service. More importantly, 
despite the marginal downward revision by Standard and Poor’s, Botswana’s ratings remain 
firmly in the Investment Grade, and are still the highest in Africa.  
It was, however, against the background of lacklustre economic fundamentals that monetary 
policy was conducted in 2009. In light of the positive inflation outlook and low inflation, the 
Bank  loosened  monetary  policy  throughout  the  year.  The  Bank  Rate  was  reduced  on  five 
occasions by a cumulative 5 percentage points to 10 percent, and commercial bank lending 
rates  were  correspondingly  reduced.  This  policy  stance  complemented  the  economic 
stimulus provided by the Government’s expansionary fiscal policy.  
Looking  ahead,  the  global  economic  outlook  is  projected  to  improve  significantly  as  more 
economies  continue  to  emerge  from  recession.  However,  as  mentioned  earlier,  economic 
recovery in developed economies is slow and, in most cases, fragile, while concerns about 
the  build-up  of  government  debt  are  growing.  Furthermore,  high  unemployment  and  low 
growth in household incomes will contribute to weak demand.  
In  the  circumstances,  global  inflationary  pressures  are  expected  to  remain  low.  However, 
there are risks to the inflation outlook due to uncertainty about international oil and commodity 
prices  that  tend  to  accompany  an  economic  recovery.  For  this  reason,  global  inflation  is 
forecast  to  increase  from  2.7  percent  in  2009  to  3.8  percent  in  2010,  while  inflation  in 
SDR countries is expected to increase from zero in 2009 to 1.5 percent this year. In contrast, 
South Africa’s headline inflation is forecast to fall from 6.3 percent in 2009 to 5.8 percent this 
year, in which case it will move towards the inflation target range of 3–6 percent.  
In  Botswana,  expectations  are  that  the  exchange  rate  influence  on  import  prices  will  be 
minimal.  The  Bank’s  inflation  objective  range  of  3–6  percent  is  very  close  to  the  forecast 
trading partner countries’ inflation range of 3–5 percent. This means that the downward crawl 
of  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  that  is  required  for  maintaining  a  competitive  real 
effective exchange rate should be small in 2010. Overall, the effect of imported inflation on 
domestic inflation transmitted through foreign price increases is also expected to be minimal.  
Although  the  domestic  economy  is  expected  to  grow  in  2010,  total  output  is  projected  to 
remain below trend in the medium-term, due to the lingering effects of the global recession 
and the planned cuts in government expenditure. In addition, growth in household disposable 
income and, consequently, demand for domestic goods and services, is likely to be sluggish 
due to the continuing wage freeze for civil servants, the planned increase in value added tax, 
other government levies and utility tariffs. Moreover, the improvement in business confidence 
that  may  have  taken  place  so  far  due  to  the  increase  in  government  spending,  could  be 
dampened by the planned expenditure cuts.  
So  far,  on  the  basis  of  available  information,  inflation  will  rise  modestly  in  the  short-term, 
largely as a result of the increase in value added tax, but it will subsequently stabilise around 
the Bank’s medium-term objective range of 3–6 percent next year.  
Therefore, Honourable Ministers, Distinguished Ladies & Gentlemen, the outlook for inflation 
and  output  suggests  a  largely  neutral  monetary  policy  stance  in  the  medium  term.  With 
prospects  for  low  and  stable  inflation,  and  in  an  environment  in  which  the  Government’s 
contribution  to  economic  activity  is  constrained  by  limited  revenue,  it  is  of  paramount 
importance  that  coordinated  and  complementary  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  remain  the 
order of the day, in the best interest of sustainable economic growth. It should be pointed out 
that  the  projected  short-term  increase  in  inflation  implies  a  need  to  keep  inflationary 
expectations  in  check.  Needless  to  add,  uncertainties  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Accordingly, 
therefore, as events unfold during the course of the year, the Bank will respond appropriately 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2010
and timely to attain price stability and to ensure that inflation remains within the medium-term 
objective range of 3–6 percent, without undermining sustainable economic growth.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies & Gentlemen:  
This concludes my Statement, and I thank you for your attention. Please enjoy the rest of the 
evening. 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 5
