Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Relationship between financial 
institutions and export credit and investment insurance agencies 
Remarks by HE Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the  Islamic  Corporation  for  the  Insurance  of  Investment  &  Export  Credit  Workshop 
“Relationship  between  financial  institutions  and  export  credit  and  investment  insurance 
agencies”, Manama, 13 April 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen:  
On behalf of the Central Bank of Bahrain, it gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this 
Workshop on the “Relationship between financial institutions and export credit and investment 
insurance agencies”. The CBB is especially pleased to be supporting this event jointly with 
The Islamic Corporation for the Insurance of Investment & Export Credit (ICIEC), an agency 
which has pursued the objective of enlarging trade transactions and investment flows among 
the member countries of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference since it was established 
in August 1994. 
It is particularly appropriate that the Central Bank of Bahrain should be a joint sponsor of this 
programme. In the first place, Bahrain is one of the 35 member country shareholders of the 
ICIEC. As a shareholder of this organisation, the Kingdom of Bahrain is strongly supportive 
of its central mission and recognises the valuable work that it does through its provision of 
export credit insurance and foreign investment insurance, and also its work in advising and 
providing technical assistance to the investment promotion agencies of member countries. 
As a Central Bank, we also have a strong interest in promoting the work of the ICIEC. As a 
regulator of banks, and the financial sector more generally, the CBB aims to encourage the 
adoption of high standards of risk management throughout the sector. The events of recent 
years  have  served  to  reinforce  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  financial  institutions  can 
identify, monitor, and control the risks that they incur. It is also important that they make full 
use of all the various instruments of risk mitigation – which include the use of export credit 
guarantees. 
The services provided by the ICIEC can serve as important risk management tools for banks, 
financial institutions, and their clients. The trade insurance services provided by the ICIEC 
cover a range of commercial, political and other risks, including the insolvency of the buyer, 
the failure of refusal of a buyer to pay, the introduction of restrictions on currency transfers, 
and the risk of civil disturbances and war. The broad range of risks covered by the ICIEC 
enables exporters to manage their risks and also provides additional security for their lending 
banks.  
Having the additional security provided by export credit guarantees is particularly helpful for 
firms in the private sector, especially small and medium enterprises that might otherwise not 
be able to manage the risks of dealing with overseas buyers. It is an important part of the 
Kingdom’s  economic  vision  2030  that  we  develop  a  strong  and  thriving  SME  sector, 
especially  one  that  can  focus  on  export  markets.  More  widespread  use  of  export  credit 
guarantees is, therefore, an instrument which has a particularly important role to play in the 
Kingdom’s  economic  development  goals.  It  is  this  background  which  makes  the  current 
Workshop so important and timely. 
Let me conclude by wishing you success for your discussions during the rest of this morning. 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 1
