Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Forging ahead toward higher ground 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas’  2010  reception  for  the 
banking community, Manila, 14 January 2010. 
 Leaders of the Philippine banking community, fellow workers in government, special guests 
from the private sector, the diplomatic corps, the multilateral agencies, the academe and the 
media, good evening. The members of the Monetary Board thank all of you for accepting our 
invitation tonight. 
This Annual Reception hosted by the Bangko Sentral is tradition we look forward to, as it is 
an opportunity to gather thought leaders and the movers of the economy within this historic 
Fort  San  Antonio  Abad.  In  other  words,  it  is  a  fascinating  fusion  of  history  and  those  who 
make history. It is also an opportune time to reflect on the year just past, and to train our 
eyes on what lies ahead. 
Standing firm in the midst of a global downturn 
First, let us have a brief overview of 2009: the year of the worst global recession in 80 years 
and  one  of  the  most  difficult  years  for  central  banks  around  the  world.  As  a  country,  the 
Philippines  came  out  of  this  difficult  period  with  a  positive  growth.  Sure,  our  economy 
expanded by a modest 0.7 percent for the first three quarters of 2009; nevertheless, this is 
remarkable given that only a handful of economies escaped recession in 2009.  
And  while  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  implemented  liquidity  enhancing  measures  at  the 
height of the global credit crunch, these were non-inflationary. Domestic liquidity growth as of 
October last year was 12.5%. On the other hand, full-year inflation at 3.2 percent was well 
within  our  target  range  of  2.5  to  4.5  percent.  This  indicates  that  we  made  appropriate 
decisions taken 18–24 months ago, the estimated time lag for monetary policy to have full 
impact. 
Our  external  position  remained  strong,  with  a  confidence-building  balance  of  payments 
surplus of $4.1 billion for the first 11 months and record high gross international reserves at a 
preliminary $45 billion by year-end.  
Equally important, our banking system remained sound and stable. We also avoided a credit 
freeze  as  banks  continued  to  lend  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  In  addition, 
Bangko  Sentral  received  last  year  international  recognition  for  having  the  best  regulatory 
environment conducive for microfinance and for our pioneering regulations for mobile money 
transfers that promote inclusive banking.  
This is not to say that 2009 was perfect for us. But we are proud that the reforms we have 
implemented together with the banking community and other stakeholders served us in good 
stead and empowered us to stand firm in the midst of a global economic storm that crippled 
many economies. This is the broad picture of 2009 that make us hopeful moving forward into 
2010.  
Diffusing the odds in 2010 
Indeed, we have reasons for optimism. While rain clouds linger, the worst of the global storm 
is over. The consensus is that the global economy has seen the worst and is on a recovery 
phase. At the same time, the global financial markets reflect growing stability that whets the 
risk appetite of investors.  
BIS Review 5/2010 
 1
Still, questions remain. First, no one knows for certain the final shape and speed of the global 
recovery. Second, as the pace of recovery across countries varies, national authorities have 
to carefully calibrate the timing for unwinding the support and stimulus mechanisms they had 
put  in  place.  Premature  unwinding  could  put  recovery  at  risk;  on  the  other  hand,  delayed 
response could stir up inflation and create destabilizing asset bubbles.  
What I can tell you is that the exit strategy of the Bangko Sentral will be done gradually and in 
stages as we have monetary policy space. As we execute our exit, we will always be mindful of 
our underlying domestic conditions, with particular focus on the outlook for inflation. 
For the broader financial system, proper focus should be on how to avoid the financial crisis 
that  triggered  the  global  economic  shocks.  In  forum  after  forum,  we  hear  of  the  need  to 
modify  operating  standards  and  guidelines.  Only  last  month,  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  released  new  guidelines  on  international  standards  for  liquidity  while focus  on 
large exposure risks and amendments to accounting standards continues. 
Ladies  and gentlemen.  We  did  not build  our  banking system  by  chasing  one change  after 
another.  Instead,  we  made  a  collective  decision  to  effect  meaningful  and  appropriate 
structural reforms that were far from easy. This includes risk-based supervision that is central 
to our reform agenda. Together, we must continue to move forward along this path that will 
allow us to identify and manage risks to the banking system. 
Developing strong pillars for 2010 and beyond 
Ladies and gentlemen. 2010 is not only about challenges and changes; it is also about the 
chances  and  opportunities  that  lie  ahead.  Sure,  our  conditions  are  far  from  ideal,  but  our 
economic fundamentals remain firm. Inflation is expected to be manageable and is forecast 
to  fall  within  the  target  range  of  3.5  to  5.5  percent.  In  other  words,  we  do  not  see  drastic 
changes in our policy rate settings.  
At the same time, our external position will remain in surplus, with the BOP surplus expected 
to range between $3–4 billion by yearend. This means that the peso will have fundamental 
support.  Consequently,  there  will  be  occasion  for  the  BSP  to  build  up  its  international 
reserves to temper exchange rate volatilities.  
I foresee that the banking system will remain sound and will continue to intermediate credit to 
the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  This  will  create  more  opportunities  for  lending, 
particularly  to  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises  of  MSMEs.  And  as  the  economic 
recovery goes into full swing, there will be greater prospects for fee-based activities in the 
capital markets in support of infrastructure and expansion projects. 
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, we avoided the worst global recession in decades because together 
we forged the political will to implement challenging reforms long before the crisis struck.  
Moving  forward,  let  us  commit  once  again  to  move  forward  together  to  ensure  an  even 
stronger and more responsive banking system. 
Finally,  I  have  one  more  good  news  to  share.  This  year,  we  are  launching  the  Bangko 
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  Art  Competition  which  we  call  “Tanaw.”  This  is  the  first  time  we  are 
launching  a  national  painting  competition.  Our  objective  is  to  support  the  development  of 
Philippine  art  by  providing  incentives  for  excellence  to  Filipino  artists.  Bangko  Sentral  has 
one  of  the  most  extensive  collection  of  Philippine  paintings  and  pre-historic  gold  in  our 
country today. This is due principally to the vision of Dr. Jaime Laya, former governor of the 
Central Bank of the Philippines. Ladies and gentlemen, let us thank Dr. Laya for this legacy 
with  a  round  of  applause.  For  your  information,  Dr.  Laya  has  agreed  to  chair  the  BSP 
Cultural  Properties  Acquisition  Advisory  Committee  which  counts  as  members  National 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2010
Museum Director Corazon Alvina, Art Educator Deanna Ongpin-Recto, Art Critic Cid Reyes, 
BSP Deputy Governor Diwa Guinigundo, BSP Director Fe de la Cruz and Monetary Board 
Members  Raul  Boncan  and  Juanita  Amatong  as  advisers.  With  this  art  competition,  we 
broaden Bangko Sentral’s involvement in the preservation and promotion of Philippine arts 
and culture. In the process, we create more reasons to be proud as a Filipino. 
To  all  our  guests,  we  thank  you  once  again  for  your  support  to  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas  as  we  continue  to  serve  our  people  and  our  country  through  better  policies  and 
programs that keep our banking system sound and stable, in a fast-changing world. Let us 
therefore  offer  a  toast:  to  our  continuing  partnership  in  sustaining  economic  growth  and 
improving the quality of life for all Filipinos.  
Mabuhay! Thank you and do enjoy the rest of the evening. 
BIS Review 5/2010 
 3
