Stefan Ingves: Introduction on monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag Committee 
on Finance, Stockholm, 4 March 2010. 
 This figure (Figure 1) is one I showed the Committee around a year ago. At that time, acute 
crisis management still required most of our resources. I compared our means of handling 
the climax of the crisis to an ice-skater who notices that the ice has suddenly become very 
thin,  or  unexpectedly  begun  to  crack  just  in  front  of  him.  Then  there  is  only  one  sensible 
alternative – to make a sharp turn and try to return to safer ice as quickly and smoothly as 
possible. To act quickly and forcefully. This is what we did, but the ice under our feet was still 
uncertain. 
Figure 1 
On safer ice and with the acute crisis behind us  
Photo: Fredrik Edin, Cykloteket Racing Team  
 Today the situation is different. And the picture of the lovely, thick ice stretching ahead of 
the skaters in the sunshine is actually more appropriate now than it was one year ago, both 
literally  and  figuratively.  We  have  safer  and  firmer  ground  beneath  our  feet.  We  have 
entered a new phase of the economic recovery and the acute crisis is behind us. But we 
are now facing new challenges and considerations. The work on preventing future crises is 
both important and urgent. Here we must show ability to take action, and I shall return to 
this at the end of my speech here today. Some of the difficult considerations to be made 
concern  when  and  how  quickly  central  banks,  governments  and  other  public  authorities 
around  the  world  will  withdraw  the  strong  economic  stimulus  they  have  been  providing 
during the crisis. Now that the financial markets are more stable and the recovery in the 
economies has begun, it is time to move towards a more normal situation, not least with 
regard  to  monetary  policy.  We  must  make  the  transition  from  monetary  policy  during  a 
crisis  to  monetary  policy  in  an  economic  downturn.  For  the  Riksbank  and  many  other 
central banks, the question of when to begin raising the policy rate, and how quickly, is a 
fairly difficult balancing act. 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 1
I  intend  to  begin  by  talking  about  the  considerations  behind  our  most  recent  policy  rate 
decision and our forecast – the policy we consider necessary for inflation to be close to the 
target of 2 per cent, at the same time as providing support for production and employment.  
Transition from crisis interest rate to monetary policy in an economic downturn  
At the most recent monetary policy meeting three weeks ago the Executive Board decided to 
hold the repo rate unchanged at the historically-low figure of 0.25 per cent. We are on our 
way up out of the steepest downturn in the economy for decades and the low interest rate is 
necessary to provide sufficient support to the recovery. But at the same time, we are also 
approaching a situation where it is time to leave the crisis interest rate behind us and take 
steps  towards  an  interest  rate  that  is  normal  for  a  “regular”  economic  downturn.  We  are 
expecting to begin raising the repo rate with effect from the summer or the beginning of the 
autumn this year. This is slightly earlier than assumed in our earlier forecast. 
There are two main reasons why we are revising our assessment somewhat. One is that the 
situation in the financial markets has become increasingly stable over a long period of time. 
The  other  is  that  the  upturn  in  economic  activity  has  gradually  become  more  evident. 
Roughly  as  the  long,  cold  winter  has  steadily  made  the  ice  thicker  than  last  year, 
developments in the financial markets and the economy as a whole have contributed to the 
recovery being able to continue on firmer ground. But the road ahead of us is certainly not 
lacking in challenges. Before we reached agreement on our forecast we took into account a 
number of different risks and deliberations in the two areas I just mentioned. And I would now 
like to explain our reasoning to you.  
Financial markets more stable  
The  situation  in  the  financial  markets  is  becoming  increasingly  stable.  Previously  the 
uncertainty  in  the  credit  markets  around  the  world  in  particular  has  appeared  to  be  an 
obstacle  to  economic  recovery.  But  now  there  are  many  indications  that  we  are 
approaching  a  more  normal  situation  and  that  the  widespread  uncertainty  and  mistrust 
during the crisis has declined. Many measures taken by central banks and other authorities 
to  restore  confidence  in  the  financial  markets  and  to  stimulate  the  economy  are  still  in 
place.  Naturally,  this  makes  it  difficult  to  say  how  the  situation  would  look  without  this 
support. But some measures have already disappeared. This is in itself a sign of greater 
stability. In Sweden, for instance, measures such as the loans to the banks in US dollars 
and the loans  with  a  maturity of 12  months  at  a  variable interest  rate  have  more  or less 
phased  themselves  out.  The  demand  for  the  measures,  and  in  other  words  the  need  for 
them, has quite simply faded. 
We can also note that the price of risk has fallen, for instance, on the interbank market where 
the banks are lending to and borrowing from one another, and on other credit markets. This 
can also be seen in a measure called the TED spread, which I have also shown earlier to the 
Committee on Finance (Figure 2). The TED spread is the difference between an interest rate 
in the interbank market and a government bond rate, both with three-month maturities. The 
measure  provides  an  indication  of  the  confidence  between  the  banks.  The  TED  spreads 
have gradually fallen and for some time have been at around the same levels as in summer 
2007,  before  the  financial  crisis  became  acute.  Although  measures  such  as  the  central 
banks’ loans to the banks have probably played a role here, the low TED spreads indicate 
increased confidence and a more stable situation in the interbank market. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2010
Figure 2 
More stable situation in the financial markets 
The difference between interbank rates and government bond rates (TED spread), basis points 
Sources: Reuters EcoWin and the Riksbank 
 Another healthy sign is that individual problems have not spread exaggerated unease in the 
financial markets around the world. I refer here to Dubai World, for instance, which defaulted 
on its payments earlier in the winter and has since suffered new problems, and to Greece, 
which  is  struggling  with  very  poor  public  finances.  A  further  example  is  the  economic 
problems in the Baltic countries. While these events are reminders in themselves that we still 
have some way to go before we can declare this crisis completely over, if the same things 
had  happened  in  autumn  2008  the  waves  of  turbulence  would  probably  have  been  much 
higher and affected markets far from the eye of the storm. We are now on firmer ground – or 
on safer ice, if you prefer. A further positive sign is that activity in the financial markets has 
increased after being very low in some cases, particularly during the most intensive phase of 
the crisis. For example, it appears easier for companies to fund themselves directly in the 
markets. 
When will the central banks and government phase out their support measures?  
The  extensive  measures  taken  by  governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  to 
counteract the effects of the crisis have contributed strong economic stimulation. But in many 
countries some of the measures, however necessary they may have been, have led to much 
poorer  government  finances.  In  countries  such  as  the  United  Kingdom,  Ireland,  Spain, 
Greece  and  the  United  States  public  finances  are  under  great  strain,  for  various  reasons. 
This  means,  for  instance,  that  there  is  a  risk  that  the  long-term  interest  rates  in  these 
countries  will  rise  quickly,  which  to  some  extent  has  already  happened.  This  in  turn  can 
hamper the economic recovery. Sooner or later it is also necessary to do something about 
the budget deficits. This is a cause for concern and we are expecting that such measures will 
hold back GDP growth abroad somewhat at the end of the forecast period. 
Most central banks which have managed the more acute phase of the crisis with the aid of 
various support measures and very low interest rates, are now in a phase where it is time to 
think about exit strategies and to return to more normal interest rate levels. At present the 
Riksbank is lending almost SEK 370 billion to the banks, and around SEK 295 billion of this 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 3
is  in  fixed-rate  loans.  The  fact  that  the  loans  are  falling  due  is  of  course  included  in  our 
calculations when we assess how we will formulate our future monetary policy. 
Phasing  out  the  loans  is  fairly  undramatic.  The  measures  will  disappear,  as  I  mentioned 
earlier; in principle this will occur automatically as the need for the measures disappears. The 
fixed-rate  loans  that  currently  have  the  longest  maturities  mature  in  the  autumn  2010.  At 
present  we  do  not  expect  there  will  be  a  need  to  offer  new  fixed-rate  loans  at  longer 
maturities beyond this horizon. But of course we are closely following developments in the 
financial markets, and are prepared to implement new such measures if necessary. 
The  interest  rate  increases  entail  slightly  more  difficult  considerations.  For  many  central 
banks the question of timing is a difficult one. Withdrawing support measures and beginning 
to  raise  interest  rates  too  early  or  too  quickly  may  slow  down  the  economic  recovery  in  a 
sensitive  phase.  If  the  expansionary  policy  instead  continues  too  long,  there  is  a  risk  that 
inflation will be too high or that imbalances will build up, for instance, on the housing market 
or  between  different  countries.  Assets  such  as  commercial  property,  but  also  residential 
property, have often played an important role in economic crises. There are links between 
house prices and the financial markets, not least through interest rates and lending. And low 
interest  expenditure  usually  stimulates  both  credit  growth  and  house  prices,  all  else  being 
equal.  
Considerations regarding the housing market...  
The monetary policy we have needed to conduct to attain the inflation target and to provide 
sufficient support for the recovery has entailed historically-low interest rates and support to 
lending  through  fixed-rate  loans  to  the  banks.  In  Sweden  house  prices  have  risen 
substantially over several years. During the crisis, for instance, while house prices fell during 
a period of time, data from Statistics Sweden indicate that they have been rising again since 
the end of 2009 (Figure 3). 
Figure 3 
House prices 
Annual percentage change 
Source: Statistics Sweden 
 4 
 BIS Review 25/2010
There  are  many  indications  that  the  rise  in  house  prices  in  Sweden  as  a  whole  is  due  to 
fundamental factors, such as the fact that demand has increased more than the number of 
new  housing.  But  there  may  be  risks.  The  Riksbank,  like  many  other  central  banks,  must 
achieve the balance I just described – evaluate possible risks of an imbalance in the housing 
market in relation to what we believe will happen in the economy as a whole. We have done 
this when making decisions on interest rates right now and in our forecast of future monetary 
policy. 
In a way, this is nothing new. We always follow developments in the housing market very 
closely. At the same time, we see a need to develop the analysis of house prices and credit 
growth – not least with regard to the question of how the links between the housing market 
and  the  Riksbank’s  tasks  and  objectives  look.  We  have  therefore  appointed  a  special 
commission  of  inquiry  into  the  Swedish  housing  market  –  a  broader  and  more  coherent 
approach which will supplement the analysis of individual issues that we and others conduct. 
The inquiry will be based on two perspectives – financial stability and monetary policy. 
…not just the Riksbank’s field  
Having said this, I would like to point out, or rather repeat something I have mentioned on 
previous occasions. Monetary policy can probably only function as a complement to effective 
regulation  and  supervision.  Moreover,  households  have  a  responsibility  to  make  realistic 
assessments  of  what  interest  expenditure  they  can  manage  in  the  long  run.  The  current 
interest rate reflect the management of an acute crisis and not monetary policy under normal 
circumstances. And as shown in our interest rate forecast we will probably begin raising the 
repo rate within six months.  
The  banks  must  also  make  responsible  assessments  when 
lending  money.  Here 
Finansinspektionen, the Swedish financial supervisory authority, plays an important role due 
to  its  task  of  examining  banks  and  credit  institutions  from  a  consumer  perspective. 
Finansinspektionen also has the possibility to implement more targeted measures than the 
Riksbank  has.  The  repo  rate  is  a  blunt  instrument  that  affects  the  whole  economy.  In 
February Finansinspektionen warned that even moderate falls in house prices could mean 
that a number of households have mortgages that exceed the market value of their property. 
Finansinspektionen  believes  there  is  reason  to  consider  new  regulations  regarding 
household  loans  in  relation  to  collateral  to  create  better  margins.  Without  wishing  to 
anticipate this inquiry, let me just note that we should, as far as possible, manage problems 
before they arise. Finansinspektionen’s inquiry appears to be a step in this direction.  
The Baltic countries – more stable but still cause for concern  
One  risk  tied  to  the  financial  markets  and  which  is  particularly  important  to  Sweden,  is 
economic developments in the Baltic countries. Just a few weeks ago, we met here in the 
Riksdag  Committee  of  Finance  to  discuss  the  Swedish  banks’  commitments  in  Estonia, 
Latvia and Lithuania – what has happened in recent years, what we are expecting to see in 
the future and what we can learn from recent events. I do not intend to repeat what we talked 
about  then,  but  can  note  that  developments  in  the  Baltic  countries  do  appear  somewhat 
brighter now than they did a while ago, but that the future is still very uncertain. One question 
that could affect the region as a whole is, for example, Estonia’s application to join the EMU. 
Loan losses in the Baltic countries are still increasing, which in turn has a negative effect on 
the Swedish banks’ profitability. We are counting on loan losses there peaking during 2010, 
but  also  on  the  Swedish  banks  being  able  to  cope  with  the  strains  this  will  entail.  An 
important element here is that the banks have increased their capital and thus their resilience 
to increased loan losses. 
The road ahead of us is not without problems. It is lined with a number of potential worries 
and  difficult  considerations,  not  least  for  central  banks.  But  the  situation  in  the  financial 
markets is currently much more stable than it was during the crisis and the risk of setbacks 
has declined. One can say that the ice is safer.  
BIS Review 25/2010 
 5
Clearer signs of a recovery in the economic statistics  
As I have mentioned, there is a further overall reason that we are now on firmer ground. The 
economic statistics that have been coming in have been mainly positive. Confidence in the 
future  development  of  the  economy  has  also  taken  a  sharp  upturn  in  Sweden,  the  United 
States and the euro area (Figure 4). 
Our assessment is that the situation in the world economy is continuing to improve. In most 
countries  the  economy  is  growing  again  and  world  trade  is  beginning  to  pick  up  after  the 
abrupt  slowdown  in  connection  with  the  acute  crisis  (Figure  5).  New  figures  have  been 
published by Statistics Sweden since our most recent forecast was published. These show 
that GDP at the end of  last year was lower than we had  estimated. At the same time, for 
instance, confidence indicators have continued to strengthen. However, the Executive Board 
will  weigh  up  and  assess  the  new  information  at  our  next  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
19 April. 
Increasing confidence according to purchasing managers index 
Figure 4 
Note. An index over 50 indicates growth 
Sources: Institute for Supply Management, Markit Economics and Swedbank 
 In  the  Swedish  economy  domestic  demand  has  so  far  been  supported  primarily  by 
consumption  and  public  investment.  The  expansionary  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  has 
stimulated  household  consumption.  This  includes  tax  cuts,  low  interest  rates  and  other 
measures. 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2010
Figure 5 
Economies around the world are now growing 
Outcome and forecast, Monetary Policy Report, February 2010 
GDP level, index 2007 Q4 = 100 
 
Sources:  The  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis,  Eurostat,  the  OECD,  Statistics  Sweden 
and the Riksbank. 
However, the export sector has been hit hard by the fall in world trade and one can now say 
there is a divide in the economy. This can be seen, for instance, if one looks at how retail 
trade and exports have developed (Figure 6). But at the same time, export orders and world 
trade have increased, which indicates that exports will recover, albeit from a low level.  
Figure 6 
Divided economy  
Index 2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted data 
Source: Statistics Sweden  
BIS Review 25/2010 
  7
Rising domestic demand but low resource utilisation  
The  prospects  for  demand  in  the  Swedish  economy  continuing  to  increase  are  good. 
Household income has developed well and households have a high level of saving. As public 
finances  are  sound,  the  need  for  fiscal  policy  constraint  further  ahead  is  lower  in  Sweden 
than in many other countries. As growth abroad increases, exports will also rise again. All in 
all, we are expecting GDP to increase fairly strongly in 2011 and 2012, by around 3.5 per 
cent a year (Figure 7). This nevertheless means that it will take roughly three years before 
GDP is back at the same level as prior to the crisis. 
Figure 7 
Employment has fallen less than expected 
Employment and Swedish GDP, annual percentage change 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank  
 for 
for 
instance, 
the  need 
investment,  particularly 
Resource  utilisation  in  Sweden  is  at  present  very  low.  The  crisis  may  have  lowered  the 
economy’s long-term output level – it is not unusual that such radical changes will have a 
more  lasting  negative  effect  on  both  capital  and  labour.  But  one  can  probably  assume 
nevertheless that there will be ample spare capacity which can be used relatively smoothly in 
the  upturn.  This  will  entail, 
in 
manufacturing, remaining low for some time to come. It also means that there is hardly any 
reason to expect a strong growth in employment over the coming period (Figure 7). We are 
also  assuming  that  the  labour  market  will  continue  to  weaken  somewhat,  but  that  the 
downturn has begun to slow down. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  employment  has  nevertheless  been  maintained  better  than  we  had 
previously assumed. Unemployment is still expected to be high, but the situation does look 
much  brighter  now  than  in  recent  assessments  and  we  have  gradually  revised  down  our 
forecasts. During the 1990s crisis employment fell more than GDP, but during this crisis the 
situation has been the reverse. Many companies appear to have chosen to retain existing 
staff, perhaps because their assessment has been that demand will return fairly soon. 
Many wage agreements will be renegotiated this year, but we are expecting the weak labour 
market situation to contribute to holding back wage increases during the forecast period. This 
contributes  to  lower  cost  pressures  in  the  economy.  As  the  companies  have  considerable 
spare  capacity,  they  can  manage  to  meet  increased  demand  abroad  and  here  at  home 
8 
 BIS Review 25/2010
without  their  production  costs  rising  significantly.  This  has  a  strong  impact  on  productivity, 
which is now expected to increase after having fallen for three years in a row (Figure 8). 
Figure 8 
Lower cost pressures and increased productivity 
Annual percentage change 
Sources: The Riksbank and Statistics Sweden 
 The krona has been weak during the crisis. It is not unusual that small, open economies like 
the Swedish one are affected by a depreciation of their currency in times of turbulence in the 
international financial markets. The krona has strengthened considerably since its weakest 
point  and  we  are  now  assuming  that  it  will  gradually  strengthen  further,  as  we  put  the 
financial crisis behind us. This will help to reduce inflationary pressures in the period ahead. 
CPIF close to 2 per cent at the end of the forecast period  
With  regard  to  inflation  measured  in  terms  of  the  consumer  price  index,  CPI,  future 
developments  will  be  affected  by  the  rise  in  interest  rates,  or  rather  by  the  increase  in 
households’  mortgage  interest  expenditure.  This  is  clearly  visible  if  one  looks  at  the  same 
time  at  CPIF  inflation,  which  quite  simply  is  CPI  inflation  with  a  fixed  mortgage  rate.  The 
CPIF  is  thus  not  directly  affected  by  changes  in  mortgage  rates,  which  means  that  these 
measures  differ  quite  considerably  over  the  coming  years,  although  they  approach  one 
another further ahead. 
Both CPI and CPIF inflation rose in the months prior to the publication of the Monetary Policy 
Report (Figure 9). This was mainly due to rising energy prices, but also to weak productivity 
growth and to the previous year’s weaker exchange rate having a delayed impact. However, 
data published two weeks ago show that both the CPI and the CPIF fell in January. During 
2010 CPIF inflation is expected to fall, primarily as a result of companies’ costs falling and 
the krona strengthening, which is expected to make imports cheaper. The rate of increase in 
the  CPIF  will  rise  from  2012  and  onwards  as  economic  activity  improves  and  companies’ 
costs begin to rise again. At the end of the forecast period, we expect inflation measured in 
terms of the CPIF to be close to 2 per cent. However, CPI inflation is expected to continue to 
rise. This is mainly because households’ interest expenditure will stop falling and then rise as 
the repo rate is raised. 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 9
Figure 9 
Inflation measured as the CPI and the CPIF 
Annual percentage change 
Source: Statistics Sweden 
 From crisis interest rate to monetary policy in an economic downturn  
The Executive Board of the Riksbank decided at the latest monetary policy meeting to hold 
the repo rate unchanged at 0.25 per cent to attain the inflation target of 2 per cent and to give 
sufficient support to the economic recovery. We are expecting to begin raising the repo rate 
again in the summer or in early autumn 2010 (Figure 10). This is slightly earlier than in our 
last  forecast,  which  is  because  of  the  two  components  I  mentioned.  The  financial  markets 
have become increasingly stable and statistics on economic activity – such as slightly higher 
growth  abroad,  stronger  employment  and  higher  inflation  –  have  gradually  confirmed  the 
picture of the recovery being on firmer ground. 
From crisis interest rate to monetary policy in a recession 
Figure 10 
Per cent 
Source: The Riksbank 
10 
  BIS Review 25/2010
At the same time,  we  are now assuming that the increases in the repo rate can be  made 
more gradually. This means that the forecast for the repo rate in the longer term is marginally 
lower than before, just under 4 per cent at the beginning of 2013. But, of course, forecasts so 
far ahead are very uncertain. 
Even  in  the  slightly  shorter  term,  there  are  difficult  considerations  that  must  be  made  and 
risks connected to our interest rate decisions. As we often point out, the repo rate path is a 
forecast  and  hence  by  definition  uncertain;  it  is  not  a  promise.  How  we  will  conduct  our 
monetary  policy  in  practice  in  the  future  will  depend  on  how  economic  developments  in 
Sweden and abroad affect the prospects for inflation and economic activity. There is a risk 
that  the  upturn  in  inflation  during  the  winter  will  not  be  temporary,  but  will  persist  a  little 
longer. One indication of this is the fact that the rate of price increase has risen with regard to 
many goods and services. Risks that could put greater upward pressure on inflation in the 
future  are  if  the  krona  were  to  weaken  or  wage  increases  were  to  be  higher  than  the 
Riksbank has forecast. We may then need to raise the repo rate more quickly than expected. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  wages  increase  more  slowly  or  the  supply  of  labour  is  higher,  then 
monetary policy may instead need to be more expansionary than in the forecast.  
We must now begin to lay a safer foundation for the future  
With  the  monetary  policy  we  presented  a  couple  of  weeks  ago  we  expect  to  meet  the 
inflation  target  and  for  the  recovery  to  continue  from  a  more  stable  foundation.  We  will 
probably have to live with some of the repercussions of the crisis for some time to come, but 
we  expect  the  financial  markets  to  normalise.  But  it  is  necessary  to  achieve  a  balanced 
economic growth even beyond the monetary policy forecasting horizon. If we are to do so we 
must  attend  to  any  deficiencies  regarding,  for  instance,  regulation,  supervision  and  the 
allocation  of  responsibility,  deficiencies  which  have  come  to  light  rather  clearly  in  recent 
years. It is important to establish a system that covers all aspects; a system that prevents 
unnecessary risks and imbalances from building up. 
Experiences of the financial crisis in the 1990s have in many ways contributed to changes 
that  have  given  our  economy  better  resilience  during  periods  such  as  the  past  few  years. 
Merely the fact that we entered this crisis with sound public finances, a surplus on our current 
account  and  a  lower,  more  stable  inflation  rate  has  given  us  room  to  manoeuvre  that  we 
previously lacked and which many other countries lack now. Some changes have also been 
made  with  regard  to  financial  supervision  and  analysis  of  the  bank  sector.  The  banks 
themselves have also learnt from the previous crisis and have acted, at least in Sweden, in a 
much more responsible manner with regard to credit granting, for instance. 
But to some extent I think our memories were too short in the 1990s, when the acute crisis 
was  behind  us  and  crisis  management  was  no  longer  such  a  pressing  issue.  One  central 
area where I believe we should have achieved more is legislation and regulation with regard 
to how and by whom banks in distress should be managed. Following the previous crisis I 
saw important reforms in legislation being investigated over a long period of time only to be 
more or less forgotten with nothing implemented. I fervently hope this will not happen again. 
Quite simply, it must not happen again.  
Towards a cohesive and efficient financial regulatory framework  
The  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  and  the  General  Council  of  the  Riksbank  have 
presented a joint report to the Riksdag where we propose that one or several commissions of 
enquiry should be appointed to review the regulatory framework in the financial sector. We 
need  to  create  a  cohesive  and  efficient  regulatory  framework.  It  should  contribute  to 
maintaining financial stability and if a crisis nevertheless arises, it should minimise the costs 
to  consumers  and  to  society  as  a  whole.  These  are  questions  that  should  neither  be 
discussed endlessly nor allowed to come to nothing when the situation stabilises. If we are to 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 11
prevent  costly  crises  in  the  future,  we  must  together  investigate  and  implement  changes. 
Urgently! 
Around the world there is already extensive work being carried out in this field, particularly 
with  regard  to  the  international  supervision  perspective.  But  implementing  changes  at 
international level can take time. Even if some progress has been made, it is likely that no 
comprehensive measures will be implemented until we have in principle left the crisis entirely 
behind us. We should not wait for this work to be completed in all areas. In several cases we 
should  instead  remedy  deficiencies  as  quickly  as  possible  and  improve  our  own  financial 
regulatory framework. 
More tangibly, we propose, for instance that the Sveriges Riksbank Act should be reviewed. 
This is with the aim of clarifying the Riksbank’s responsibility for financial stability and what 
tools  the  Riksbank  needs  to  manage  this  task.  There  are  several  important  issues  in  this 
field.  For  example,  should  it  be  explicitly  stated  in  the  Instrument  of  Government  or  the 
Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  that  the  Riksbank  has  a  responsibility  for  financial  stability?  I  hope 
that we will fairly soon have the answer to this and other related questions.  
Another  area  concerns  investigating  how  the  allocation  of  responsibility  and  coordination 
between the Riksbank and Finansinspektionen can be improved. Moreover, the distribution 
of responsibility between the Riksbank and the Swedish National Debt Office with regard to 
loans to the foreign currency reserve should also be made clearer. A further question is the 
one I raised just now, namely that an efficient regulatory framework is needed for managing 
banks in distress.  
Concluding remarks  
Let me finish where I began. We are on safer and firmer ground now than we were a few 
months ago. The acute crisis is behind us. We have passed the worst economic trough in 
several decades and have now entered a new phase of economic recovery. Monetary policy 
will  probably  begin  to  be  adjusted  to  a  more  normal  economic  downturn  situation  in  the 
summer  or  early  autumn  this  year.  And  this  is  a  healthy  sign.  The  road  ahead  of  us  is 
certainly not an easy one. New challenges and considerations await us, but we are at the 
same time more than ready to meet them. 
The  resources  that  we  were  forced  to  use  some  time  ago  for  more  or  less  acute  crisis 
management can now be partly used for analysis, development of our methods and the work 
on preventing imbalances in the economy and future crises. No one can say that the latter is 
a simple task. There are many problems that need to be solved. But we are not alone in this 
work, which must be conducted on both a national and an international level. As long as we 
have the motivation and the will to succeed our chances are good. 
In the most acute phase of the crisis many of the countries of the world joined together and 
took action to prevent a total collapse. When it has been necessary, the authorities here in 
Sweden have showed an excellent ability to cooperate. We must make use of the drive and 
spirit of cooperation that were demonstrated in the crisis. If we do this, I believe that we will 
acquire a financial regulatory framework that can efficiently prevent unnecessary risks and 
imbalances  from  building  up,  both  nationally  and  globally.  But  we  must  act  now  while  we 
have the chance. The lessons from this crisis must not be forgotten. 
12 
 BIS Review 25/2010
