Nils Bernstein: Statistical challenges due to the economic and financial 
crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Nordic 
Statisticians Meeting, Copenhagen, 12 August 2010. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
Statistics are the basis for all empirical economic analysis and for our understanding of past 
events. Moreover, statistics are key to the formation of our expectations of what will happen 
in future. Both areas have given us considerable challenges in recent years. 
The  global  economy  is  just  recovering  from  the  most  serious  recession  since  the  war.  It 
started out as a financial crisis that escalated into an economic crisis. The period has seen 
strong fluctuations in key economic fundamentals such as asset prices, interest-rate spreads, 
gross national product and world trade, to mention but a few. 
I’m  not  saying  that  more  statistics  could  essentially  have  turned  the  tide  of  events.  More 
likely, we failed to fully understand the statistics that were on the table. A case in point is the 
interplay between the financial and real sides of the economy. The development has shown 
that we have quite a lot of work to do. 
Danmarks Nationalbank is very much involved in this work, as regards both the production of 
statistics and analysis of the data collected.  
I’ll mention four areas that have seen improvement in recent years of the statistical basis for 
analysis of the correlations between the financial and real sides of the economy.  
Since the turn of the year, Danmarks Nationalbank and Statistics Denmark have published 
coherent  quarterly  national  accounts  for  the  financial  and  non-financial  sectors.  This 
framework makes it possible to paint a consistent picture of the Danish population’s income, 
consumption,  savings,  investment  and  borrowing.  Actually,  the  nature  of  the  figures  is  not 
new.  
The novelty is that they are placed in a consistent framework to enable better analysis and, 
for  instance,  a  better  understanding  of  cyclical  developments.  Since  2007,  the  European 
Central  Bank  has  published  coherent  quarterly  national  accounts  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole.  The  Danish  national  accounts  statistics  therefore  provide  a  better  basis  for 
international comparison.  
The statistics show that until 2008, both households and companies in Denmark built up their 
financial balance sheets via increased borrowing.  
This has led to more pronounced financial exposure of households and companies alike. The 
increased  borrowing  has  financed  both  higher  financial  investment  and  a  growing  net 
financing  requirement,  reflecting  real  investment  in  excess  of  savings.  In  2008,  the  tide 
turned, and borrowing by both households and companies fell back.  
The expansion of the financial balance sheets has led to more exposure to financial market 
developments. In turn, this has increased the interplay between the financial and real sides 
of  the  economy.  Moreover,  it  influences  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real 
economy.  
My second example is Danmarks Nationalbank’s new lending survey. It saw the light of day 
in  early  2009  with  the  4th  quarter  of  2008  as  the  first  observation.  The  lending  survey 
represents  qualitative  statistics  that  provide  information  on  the  underlying  factors  and  the 
development in lending by banks and mortgage-credit institutes. The survey was launched at 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 1
just the right time. For instance, it helped us in our assessment that the crisis has not given 
rise to an outright credit crunch in Denmark.  
Many other countries, including the euro area, publish lending surveys, just as the USA has 
published them for many years. Experience shows that lending surveys are useful for many 
purposes.  
My third example of Danmarks Nationalbank statistics is unique to Denmark. It is based on 
the fact that a considerable part of the payments in the Danish retail sector are transacted 
using the Dankort – the widely used Danish debit card. Since 2005, Danmarks Nationalbank 
has used Dankort payments as the basis for a quick estimate of retail sales, which constitute 
a major element of private consumption. Dankort payments are available on a weekly basis – 
almost a month ahead of retail sales data. Despite considerable variation over the year and 
week,  experience  shows  that  our  Dankort  model  provides  important  and  quick  input  for 
estimates of retail sales. This is useful in our ongoing cyclical monitoring.  
In  addition  to  the  Dankort-model  we  are  working  on  the  use  of  taxcollection  data –  that  is 
data for VAT- and income tax revenues and employer contributions – to create indicators for 
the real economy. This is work still in progress.  
My fourth and last statistical example is a new, and hopefully improved, model for estimating 
the “direct investment income” item on the balance of payments. This item has often been 
significantly revised, which has generated uncertainty about the preliminary current-account 
balance.  Other  countries  are  struggling  with  the  same  problem.  The  novelty  is  that  the 
compilation  method  now  includes  data  on  the  expected  economic  development.  We  hope 
that this will provide for better estimates of gross movements in the balance of payments and 
make it even more useful for analysis purposes.  
Moreover, Danmarks Nationalbank’s increased statistical activity has been strengthened by 
the recent amendment  of the statutory basis that allows Danmarks Nationalbank to collect 
statistical  information  independently  for  purposes  such  as  macroprudential  work,  meaning 
the interplay between the real economy and the general health of the financial sector. It will 
further  more  be  possible  for  the  Nationalbank  to  use  the  collected  data  for  individual 
respondants in its general work and thus not only for general statistical purposes. This work 
will  be  strengthened  considerably  in  the  coming  years  in  cooperation  with  the  Danish 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority  and  international  players  such  as  the  ECB  and  the  new 
European Systemic Risk Board.  
Several  of  the  new  statistical  measures  were  too  late  to  be  of  any  essential  use  in  the 
analytical work during the crisis. Hopefully they can contribute to a better understanding of 
the crisis and perhaps to preventing similar crises in the future. Looking ahead, the point of 
interest  is  how  to  improve  the  identification  of  economic  imbalances  with  negative 
consequences  for  growth  and  employment.  This  area  is  also  in  focus  at  the  international 
level.  
The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and 
others have constructed indicators of economic imbalances. But their usefulness remains to 
be seen.  
The observation, that it is not only necessary to have more data, but certainly also to achieve 
better analysis of the data available, as illustrated by the Danish banks’ accumulation of a 
large customer funding gap – or “the deposit deficit” as we call it. The customer funding gap 
means that the banks did not have enough deposits to cover the strong expansion of lending, 
forcing them to turn to the international money and capital markets. This is no problem as 
long  as  the  markets  are  functioning  smoothly.  But  the  banks  will  be  more  exposed,  if  the 
markets are not functioning smoothly, as evidenced during the crisis. We knew the figures, 
but underestimated the risk.  
The  most  recent  figures  show  that  the  customer  funding  gap  is  widening  again.  But  this 
presents a bit of a dilemma. As we have seen, it increases the vulnerability of the financial 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2010
system. On the other hand, we are also keen to prevent tighter lending policies from resulting 
in a credit crunch.  
The  quarterly  national  accounts,  play  the  leading  role  in  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s 
assessment of cyclical developments. What is required here are timely, accurate and reliable 
compilations. The lesson we are learning at the moment is, that countries with unreliable – or 
downright incorrect – statistics will be punished by the  markets. Not necessarily gradually, 
but  often  abruptly.  The  punishment  is  downgrading  of  the  sovereign  debt,  resulting  in 
substantial widening of interest-rate spreads.  
An economic cycle is defined on the basis of real GDP. Compilation of GDP is not an easy 
task, especially not in a small, open economy like Denmark, even in calm periods. But during 
the crisis, we were way off the mark. One of the Danish government’s policy measures was 
to allow companies to postpone VAT payments in order to strengthen their financial position. 
This  had  the  unfortunate  consequence,  that  no  national  accounts  were  published  in  the 
depth of the crisis. The result was great uncertainty about Denmark’s exact cyclical position. 
Of course, we can never know the future. We can only partially know the present, thanks to 
indicators. But the situation was that even part of the past was unknown.  
This  situation  impeded  the  basis  for  economic  policy-making.  I’m  not  criticising  Statistics 
Denmark; I’m merely outlining some of our recent problems with statistical timeliness.  
It  was  also  difficult  to  obtain  a  clear  picture  of  employment,  and  to  a  lesser  extent 
unemployment.  
Employment is compiled as an integral part of the national accounts, among other methods, 
but in recent years we have seen very substantial revisions of the data releases. In a cyclical 
assessment context, this is bad news.  
Another consequence has been that it is difficult to obtain reliable data for labour productivity 
in  the  private  sector.  This  is  a  key  element  in  macroeconomic  analysis  in  general,  but 
unfortunately  it  is  also  a  rather  elusive  element.  Productivity  has  played  a  key  role  in  the 
Danish debate in recent years in view of the item’s weak development over many years. Or, 
at least, this is what the official figures show. Productivity determines a society’s affluence in 
the long term, which makes it a key concept. It is not so easy to get to the bottom of our poor 
performance. We use a lot of money on the important productivity enhancing factors, but do 
we use the money in the right way?  
Compilation  of  productivity  in  the  public  sector  presents  a  particular  problem  since  the 
sector’s output is not sold at market terms. I know that this area is being looked into. This is 
particularly  important  to  Denmark  where  public-sector  output  accounts  for  more  than  one 
quarter of the economy.  
Unemployment is compiled in a separate system outside the national accounts. There are 
two  compilations  –  an  “official”  and  a  sample-based  compilation.  They  show  very  different 
levels,  114,000  and  more  than  200,000,  and  also  different  patterns.  This  difference  is 
explicable to a large extent, but it still contributes to confusion in the public debate. However, 
a positive feature is that gross unemployment statistics are now compiled, meaning statistics 
for unemployment including people in activation schemes.  
I  think  it  is  worthwhile  to  consider  a  new  and  more  comprehensive  publication  of  our 
unemployment statistics. With the aim of giving a more nuanced picture of the unemployment 
situation and a higher degree of comparability internationally.  
Danmarks Nationalbank prepares forecasts for the Danish economy. The frequency will be 
increased from semi-annually to quarterly releases.  
Forecasting  the  future  is  a  great  challenge,  which  multiplies  many  times  if  the  point  of 
departure  is  not  even  known,  as  illustrated  by  the  revisions  of  the  supply  balance  and 
employment.  Naturally,  this  is  not  an  isolated  Danish  phenomenon,  although  the  Danish 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 3
quarterly national accounts tend to be more volatile than those of the major economies. This 
is also the case in other small, open economies.  
There is one aspect of forecasting that I haven’t mentioned yet – psychology. How can it be 
measured and modelled? Well, that is next to impossible, I think. Nevertheless, it still applies 
that psychology plays a very large role, and also did so during the most recent crisis. The 
total  freeze  of  the  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  was  strongly 
driven by psychological factors.  
This  can  also  be  said  about  consumer  behaviour  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis. 
Consumers have kept, and are still keeping, their purse strings tight, despite solid growth in 
disposable incomes. Consequently, psychological factors contributed to the crisis spreading 
from a purely financial crisis to a full-blown economic crisis.  
This mechanism can also be observed in the housing market. Regular questionnaire surveys 
are conducted in Denmark as regards household expectations of house prices in the years 
ahead.  There  is  a  high  correlation  between  household  expectations  and  the  actual 
development.  But  it  may  be  problematic  that  the  exact  present  position  is  subject  to 
uncertainty also in this area. One contributing factor is the considerable lag of house price 
statistics from Statistics Denmark.  
Over the summer, prominent economists have debated fiscal policy in the Financial Times. 
One school advocates easing of fiscal policy on the grounds that the economies are still too 
fragile  to  stand  on  their  own  two  feet.  The  other  school  advocates  fiscal  tightening  on  the 
grounds that increased indebtedness will only make the households hold back. Again, this is 
a question of psychology and expectations: will the households realise that the debt that is 
increased today has to be repaid with interest later, and will they also realise that they have 
to  start  saving  up  now  for  the  higher  future  tax  payments?  This  is  a  central  question  in 
economic policy, but we’re basically without a clue when it comes to finding out what applies.  
Constant focus on the relevance of the statistics released is a challenge for the producers of 
statistics.  There  will  always  be  demand  for  more  statistics,  but  then  reality  and  budget 
constraints kick in. Consequently, it may be necessary to cut down on some statistical areas 
in  order  to  increase  focus  on  other  and  more  relevant  statistics.  It  is  quite  a  challenge  to 
become constantly better at optimising the use of the available data sources. A case in point 
is  the  challenges  of  registering  the  growing  output  in  the  services  sector  in  a  modern 
economy and capturing Internet activity.  
Statistics  must  be  accurate  and  preferably  timely  in  order  to  be  useful.  Crises,  especially 
financial crises, often erupt suddenly and sometimes surprisingly. This is a great challenge 
for economic statistics as they are only available with a certain lag.  
Moreover,  the  crisis  we  have  just  been  through  was  way  out  on  the  periphery  of  the 
probability  distribution.  We  have  not  seen  the  financial  markets  react  as  dramatically  and 
globally  over  the  last  60  years  as  they  did  during  the  most  recent  financial  crisis.  This 
undermines  the  belief  that  we  could  have  predicted  the  crisis  if  only  we  had  had  more 
statistics.  For  an  unprecedented  situation  it  is, of  course,  no  use  analysing  historical  data, 
believing  that  you  can  predict  the  crisis.  The  problem  was  more  likely  our  failure  to 
understand fully the available data. We must become better at understanding the interplay 
between the financial and real sides of the economy. A lot of research seeks to incorporate 
the financial sector into theoretical models of the real economy. And we have a long way to 
go in this area as well.  
Consequently, there is no risk that statisticians will be out of a job right away!  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2010
