Patrick Honohan: Banks and the budget – lessons from Europe 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial  Services 
Authority of Ireland, to Renmin University, Beijing, 17 August 2010. 
 My topic today goes to the heart of the financial crisis from which we are emerging. For it is 
abundantly  clear  that  a  breathtaking  series  of  banking  failures  have,  directly  or  indirectly, 
been at the root of the budgetary problems now being faced by so many countries, and the 
impact  of  the  banking  crisis  on  national  budgets  is  set  to  colour  the  pace,  character  and 
geographical differentiation of the economic recovery generally over the coming years.  
But there are several important channels of influence between banks and the budget, some 
more obvious than others. Because of the scale and pervasiveness of banks, and the speed 
with which liquidity conditions can change, the impact of banks on the budget can be crucial. 
At the same time, budgetary decisions including tax and quasi-taxes crucially impact on the 
banks themselves as do indirect influences through the direction of credit; when banks get 
into trouble, they are more likely than almost any other sector to be rescued by a government 
whose interventions are backed up by budgetary resources.  
All of this has been dramatically illustrated in recent years, months and indeed weeks. And 
although the epicentre of the global financial crisis was the US investment banking market, 
the links between banks and the budget have arguably been recently illustrated in no region 
more than Europe and in few European countries more than in Ireland.  
Two-way channels of influence between banks and the budget – the Irish example  
The  channels  of  influence  are  present  on  the  way  up  and  the  way  down,  and  in  both 
directions between banks and the budget.  
Let me make this concrete by giving you some flavour of the Irish situation. From 2003 to 
2007 the Irish banking system imported funds equivalent to over 50 per cent of GDP to fund 
a runaway property and construction bubble. The tax revenue generated by the boom came 
in many forms: capital gains on property, stamp duty on property transactions, value added 
tax on construction materials and income tax from the extra workers – immigrants from the 
rest of Europe, from Africa, from China, flooded in as the construction sector alone swelled 
up to account for about 13 per cent of the numbers at work (about twice the current level, 
which is closer to what would be normal).  
For over a decade the budget was in surplus (averaging over 1½ per cent of GDP) almost 
every  year.  No  need,  it  seemed,  for  restraint  in  spending,  and  so,  after  years  of  relatively 
disciplined government  budgeting, there  was  a  relaxation  of  spending  controls  – one  I  will 
say  which  was  broadly  welcomed  across  most  of  the  political  spectrum.  Alas,  that  the 
apparent solidity of the public finances was all a mirage was brutally exposed when global 
financial  confidence  collapsed.  Already  the  Irish  boom  was  well  over:  house  prices  were 
falling  and  the  government  deficit  widening  from  early  2007.  The  global  recession  did  its 
damage  to  the  budget  also  through  the  direct  effect  on  world  trade  and  accordingly  on 
economic activity, given the very open nature of the Irish economy. But a more direct effect 
on the budget was yet to become manifest. The progressive tightening of short-term financial 
markets during the second half of 2007 and through 2008, peaking in those dramatic weeks 
after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, eventually exposed the fact that, not only had the 
banks  fuelled  an  unsustainable  property  bubble,  but  they  had  not  safeguarded  their  own 
solvency through adequate collateral and guarantees. The Government had little alternative 
to announcing an extensive guarantee of bank liabilities. This has proved not to be costless, 
and is imposing a net cost which will place a heavy burden on taxpayers and the users of 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 1
public services in Ireland for several years – though it is manageable and much less than 
some alarmist commentary had suggested.  
To  be  specific,  every  one  of  the  top  eight  retail  lenders  –  three  of  them  subsidiaries  or 
branches  of  well-known  international  banking  groups  –  are  recording  loan  losses  which 
would eventually eat substantially into their capital were it not for the fact that this is in the 
process  of  being  replenished.  Thus  the  entire  banking  sector  got  caught  up  in  an  unreal 
scenario. Each firm was looking over its shoulder at the others and reluctant both to miss out 
on  a  seemingly  profitable  growth  business  and  fearful  of  the  shareholders’  reaction  to 
declining market share. In an ideal world, the prudential regulator would have called a halt, 
but – as I have recently documented in my detailed report to the Minister for Finance on the 
matter – despite some misgivings about the growing exposure, the regulatory apparatus did 
not  fully  appreciate  the  scale  and  imminence  of  the  risks  whether  at  the  systemic  or 
individual bank level and acted only timidly and ineffectually to restrain the lending boom.  
Rather than see the banks limp on, crippled by non-performing loans that would both inhibit 
their  ability  to  retain  depositor  funding  and  discourage  any  new  lending,  the  government 
already stepped in at the beginning of 2009 to begin the portfolio restructuring of the system.  
The approach being adopted is comprehensive and transparent. It is designed to remove the 
overhang of large hard-to-recover property loans from the books of the banks, freeing their 
management  to  concentrate  on  providing  the  credit  and  other  services  needed  for  the 
economic  recovery.  The  banks  are  being  recapitalized  –  by  parents  in  the  case  of  the 
foreign-owned  banks,  through  market-sources,  backed-up  by  injections  of  capital  by 
government where necessary for the rest.  
An  asset  management  agency  –  called  NAMA  –  has  been  established  to  purchase  the 
largest property related loans from the banks on an ambitious scale – indeed, relative to the 
economy NAMA will be among the largest agencies of its type. There are close parallels with 
the four asset management companies (AMCs) established here in China over a decade ago 
for the four main banks. One difference, though, relative to the first tranches of purchases by 
the  Chinese  AMCs  is  that  NAMA’s  purchase  prices  are  being  set  at  a  market-related 
discount to book value with the objective of allowing NAMA to break-even over time. Despite 
the  haircuts  that  this  inevitably  entails,  all  five  of  the  main  locally-controlled  banks  have 
agreed  to  participate  in  NAMA.  The  process  of  valuing  and  transferring  the  loans  is  a 
painstaking one which is taking longer than everyone hoped, but it is well under way, and the 
discounts on the initial tranches have been large – of the order of 50 per cent on average – 
more in some cases. Of course this crystallization of losses erodes the capital of the banks, 
and gives rise to a very visible and transparent recapitalization need.  
For the main locally-owned banks, the required recapitalisation has been fixed by the Central 
Bank as financial regulator based on a rather tough stress-test exercise completed in March 
of this year. (I will speak about the more recent Europe-wide stress test a little later). In most 
cases the losses are not much more than initial capital, but one bank – the specialist property 
financier Anglo Irish, which had grown very aggressively over the past decade to become the 
third  largest  bank  in  Ireland  –  seems  set  to  experience  loan-losses  in  excess  of  an 
astonishing 40 per cent of its portfolio. This hole is in the process of being filled by the Irish 
Government, which seized control of the bank in early 2009, and which has already injected 
sums equivalent to about 10 per cent of GDP, and will inject more in the coming months – 
most of which it does not expect to recover. A far-reaching restructuring and downsizing of 
Anglo Irish is planned and will, subject to the approval of the European Commission, and the 
final decision of the Irish Government, be detailed soon.  
There has been a great focus on the budgetary cost of bank recapitalisation. Exact precision 
cannot be expected in such matters but, although each new asset purchase by NAMA adds 
some information here, the overall net figure that is in prospect has not changed by much 
since the initial calculations made in March last. Thus, Anglo may impose a net cost to the 
Government of about €22–€25 billion, to which can be added about €4 billion mainly to cover 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2010
one  small  building  society.  (While  the  two  main  banks  are  of  course  experiencing  loan 
losses, these are in effect being absorbed by the initial equity capital, and will not impose a 
net  cost  on  the  Government).  (The  funds  injected  are  a  bit  higher  in  gross  terms,  to  the 
extent  that  government  is  participating  in  the  provision  of  regulatory  capital  which  can  be 
recovered when the State’s stakes in the relevant firms are sold back into the market in due 
course).  
Much  of  this  exceptional  financial  support  for  bank  restructuring  arises  this  year,  and 
followers of budgetary statistics will see a sizable step jump in Irish government debt, and a 
sharp transient spike in government borrowing in 2010. Actually, though, these exceptional 
financial injections into banks are smaller than the rest of the government deficit in 2009–10. 
Just as expansive credit conditions filled the coffers in the good years, so the unwinding of 
an  unsustainable  domestic  boom  is  draining  the  coffers  in  much  the  same  way  and  to  a 
similar magnitude.  
As many of you will know, the Government has already taken prompt and painful steps to 
readjust its spending and tax profile, most conspicuously by effectively cutting public sector 
pay rates. It remains on target for the underlying budgetary aggregates (that is, abstracting 
from once-off payments to the banking sector) and, if economic growth is consistent with its 
projections, the announced profile will get the deficit back to 3 per cent of GDP by 2014 as 
promised to our European partners.  
Other recent European examples of banks imposing costs on the budget  
There  have  been  several  other  high  profile  cases  in  Europe  –  Iceland  and  Latvia  most 
conspicuously  –  where  we  have  seen  the  public  finances  (and  the  economy  generally) 
crippled by local banking excesses that coincided with, but were not in any close way related 
to, the contemporary excesses related to the US mortgage market.  
These  two  cases  provide  a  contrast  to  the  Irish  one  in  regard  to  the  impact  of  bank 
recapitalisation on the national budget. As Mervyn King has remarked, the current crisis has 
shown the extent to which, no matter how global banks are in life, in death – or near death 
experiences – they are local; in this context imposing on the national budget.  
As has been thoroughly documented by the report of the inquiry there, Iceland’s banks had 
made a leap for scale which was not simply based on importing funds that pumped up the 
local economy. Indeed they greatly outgrew the local economy (which after all is very small, 
with a national population of less than half a million persons) and were heavily involved in the 
financing  of  international  investment  ventures  of  some  of  their  Iceland-based  customers. 
When  these  banks  –  middle  sized  in  an  international  comparison  –  failed,  the  national 
authorities  regarded  the  burden  of  meeting  all  of  their  liabilities  as  being  too  great  to  be 
assumed, and their rescue and restructuring of these entities was partial only, with much of 
the  foreign  liabilities  not  covered,  a  matter  which  led  to  a fraught  international  negotiation, 
especially with the authorities in the UK and Netherlands.  
The Iceland case probes the limits of the impact that banking system rescues can have on 
the  budget.  Indeed  the  general  issue  of  limiting  the  scope  of  bailouts  has  come  under 
increasing  international  scrutiny  with  academics  and  policymakers  trying  to  design  viable 
ways of reducing the number of banks that can be considered too big, too complex, or too 
interrelated  with  the  rest  of  the  system,  to  be  allowed  to  fail  with  losses  to  uninsured 
creditors.  Policies  designed  to  limit  the  size,  remove  the  complexity,  and  pre-design  an 
orderly liquidation scheme (living will) are all being considered as solutions in this direction. 
There  is  much  to  be  said  for  this  line  of  policy  exploration;  especially  when  it  seems  that 
some of the institutions that got into trouble globally have become too complex to be reliably 
managed. But I have to say that I am not altogether optimistic that there will quickly be a full 
solution  that  both  preserves  the  effectiveness and  cost  efficiencies  of modern  finance  and 
genuinely removes the need for rescues in all conditions.  
BIS Review 107/2010 
 3
Latvia’s reliance on foreign-owned banks points to the opposite end of the budgetary impact 
of  financial  globalization.  Although  there  was  a  significant  local  bank  failure,  much  of  the 
actual and prospective loan losses in the Latvian downturn are being borne by the foreign-
owned banks that made the loans (the bulk of them denominated in foreign currency, a factor 
which certainly complicates the assessment of risks and narrows the range of policy options).  
These  contrasts  show  the  uneven  degree  of  financial  globalisation  in  the  European  Union 
(and the European Economic Area, which embraces Iceland). The banking system in some 
countries, mostly smaller countries in Central and Eastern Europe, is dominated by foreign-
owned banks with headquarters elsewhere in the EEA. The direct recapitalisation costs of 
banking failures in those countries are exported back to the home countries, providing a kind 
of  automatic  insurance  to  the  host  country.  (The  primary  supervisory  responsibility  also 
generally lies with the home country, though the geographical match of risk and regulation is 
certainly  not  perfect.)  Most  EEA  countries  rely  principally,  though,  on  locally-owned  and 
controlled banks. Indeed, banks that have got into trouble and required rescuing have been 
shrinking back into their home countries, partly in order to help them meet regulatory capital 
requirements  and  partly  because  the  European  Commission  has  been  taking  a  jaundiced 
view of state-aid being used to bolster geographically over-extended business models. The 
old vision of a seamless European banking market where, regardless of their home country 
within the EEA, the most cost-effective providers would deliver the financial services needed 
by  firms  and  households  may  never  have  been  wholly  realistic,  at  least  when  it  comes  to 
retail services. But this vision has certainly suffered a setback from the Iceland case, to the 
extent that the regional ambitions of any bank may in practice be limited by the perceived 
fiscal capacity of its home government.  
I  have  so  far  dwelt  on  the  problems  posed  for  government  budgets  by  failing  banks.  The 
country  examples  I  have  chosen  are  not,  of  course,  the  only  ones  affected.  Belgium, 
Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland and the United Kingdom are other European 
countries which have seen the need for public injections of funds in one form or another. In 
some cases (such as Switzerland) the main source of the problem was the participation of 
banks in the tainted securitisations coming from the US; in other cases national bubbles were 
also present.  
From budget to banks  
But there are also pressures in the opposite direction, i.e. from budget to banks, which have 
only now come to the fore for the first time in advanced economies (though this was long an 
important dimension of the banking crises suffered by many developing countries in the 70s, 
80s and 90s).  
Two  aspects  have  so  far  been  central  here,  one  of  which  relates  to  the  pressure  that  a 
fiscally weak sovereign places on the funding costs of its home banks; the other to pressures 
that  can  be  placed  on  banks  in  other  jurisdictions  who  have  or  are  thought  to  have, 
exposures to those sovereigns.  
The first problem has been affecting bank lending rates across much of Europe, and is most 
evident  in  the  euro  area,  where  these  effects  are  unrelated  to  currency  differentials.  The 
sharp  jump  in  sovereign  spreads  in  the  first  half  of  May,  2010  is  only  the  most  dramatic 
illustration  of  the  degree  to  which  these  pressures  matter.  The  tensions  were  transmitted 
immediately  and  fully  to  bank  funding  conditions  affecting  both  cost  and  availability  of 
wholesale funds in the relevant countries. With the European Council acting to put in place a 
huge commitment of public funds – some €750 billion, which is huge in relation, for example, 
to  the  outstanding  stock  of  debt  in  the  countries  affected  –  as  a  financial  back-stop 
mechanism to ensure access of governments to funding needs (conditional on compliance 
with adequate budgetary discipline – requiring quite sharp fiscal adjustment measures), the 
ECB stepped in promptly to purchase securities outright, with the aim of unblocking money 
market conditions, thereby restoring a more normal functioning of debt markets and ensuring 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2010
a  more  effective  transmission  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  which  has  been  geared  for 
many  months now to providing adequate liquidity at a low interest rate consistent with the 
overriding goal of low inflation.  
Although markets stabilised following these actions, it remains evident that spreads on the 
debt  of  several  sovereigns  is  exceptionally  high  by  historical  standards  and  this  is  still 
passing through to bank interest rates in the relevant countries. Markets still evidently need 
to  be  convinced  about  the  determination  and  ability  of  national  governments  to  deliver  on 
their fiscal consolidation programmes. The sooner the markets are convinced, the sooner the 
interest spreads will shrink to the benefit of all – including those foreign investors now holding 
debt which will then appreciate in the market. The Irish Government took prompt early steps 
in this direction not least with the two-step effective reduction in nominal public sector pay 
rates, implemented in mid-2009 and early 2010 respectively. Further details of the measures 
being  implemented  to  ensure  budgetary  consolidation  are  in  preparation.  Other  countries 
have followed with their own plans. There is, for these stressed sovereigns, no question as to 
whether  national  growth  is  best  served  by  bringing  the  public  finances  back  promptly  to  a 
convergent path: the impact on funding costs and confidence surely more than offsets any 
short-term adverse impact on domestic demand from lower net public spending.  
The  second  problem  has  been  the  emergence  of  a  market  perception  that  significant 
European banks faced a serious problem with regard to cross-border holdings of sovereign 
debt. I believe that this issue was greatly overplayed by market participants and the recent 
EU-wide stress test exercise has, I think, gone a long way to putting it into a more realistic 
perspective, especially through the extensive disclosure of the relevant exposures.  
Heightened awareness of the interaction between the budget and banks is stiffening a third 
form  of  pressure  from  budgetary  policy  to  the  banks.  This  relates  to  the  new  wave  of 
proposals to tax banks one way or another. Given what has happened, it’s a natural impulse 
to see if some revenue can be clawed back from the banking system, especially in countries 
where  most  or  all  of  the  banks  have  now  weathered  the  storm  and  are  reporting  healthy 
results. For my part, having seen and analyzed in the past some of the damaging economic 
distortions around the world caused by poorly designed bank taxation, explicit and implicit, I 
am relieved that an international consensus seems to be building around forms of taxation 
that  are  less  likely  to  add  to  damaging  economic  distortions.  Not  only  can  many  types  of 
bank tax fall disproportionately in practice on the smaller customers of the banks rather than 
on the shareholders or senior managers of the banks (who are sometimes the political target 
of such taxes), but the potential for disintermediation to undermine the revenue can mean 
both  a  disappointing  revenue  and  sometimes  an  increase  in  prudential  risks.  Fortunately, 
these  dangers  are  being  recognised,  thus,  for  example,  imposing  a  levy  on  uninsured 
liabilities of banks, or on a surrogate for the value-added of the banking system, seems more 
likely to have an acceptable ratio of deadweight cost to revenue, than other forms such as a 
tax on interest rates, or than a general tax on bank transactions as has been proposed by 
some, but which would in my view not generate as much revenue as is often supposed, and 
would not be effective in discouraging the forms of financial excess that caused the crisis. It 
may be that well-targeted corrective Pigouvian taxes can do even better, for example if they 
are  targeted  at  excessive  reliance  by  banks  and  other  financial  firms  on  short-term 
borrowing.  
Taxation is of course only one aspect of the heightened policy attention now being given to 
banks given their role in the crisis generally and not least in the damage they have, directly 
and indirectly, done to national budgets. Never more, I think, will banks be given the leeway 
to expand their intermediation activities with only a light regulatory touch to verify soundness. 
Banks  must  reconcile  themselves  to  a  heightened  and  more  sceptical  regulatory  scrutiny, 
such  as  that  which  is  being  put  in place  in  Ireland  as  in  several  other  countries. The  new 
capital and liquidity requirements being hammered out at present by the Basel Committee, 
and  the  heightened  international  surveillance  of  banking  systems,  exemplified  by  the 
proposed  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  represent  an  inevitable  recognition  of  the 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 5
interdependence of public and private finance, and the proposition that a banking license is a 
privilege, not a right, and one which needs to be exercised with greater regard to the public 
good. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2010
