Njuguna Ndung’u: The future of financial service delivery in Kenya 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya, 
during the second scenario building workshop on “The future of financial service delivery in 
Kenya”, Nairobi, 16 April 2010. 
 Chief Executives of Commercial Banks here present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Colleagues; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
I am honoured this morning to be addressing this distinguished gathering. Allow me therefore 
at the outset to thank you for accepting our invitation to attend this second scenarios building 
workshop on the future of financial service delivery in Kenya. I am deeply convinced that our 
deliberations today will go a long way in shaping the future of our financial industry as was 
the case with the first workshop held last year. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: This year, Nairobi Scenario II Workshop comes at a time when a 
number  of  countries  around  the  world  are  increasingly  pursuing  the  development  of 
branchless  banking  policy  frameworks.  This  indicates  branchless  banking  is  receiving 
increasing international attention and capturing the imagination of a wide array of players and 
international bodies. In particular, as part of its commitment to financial inclusion, the G-20 
has  established  the  Access  Through  Innovation  (ATI)  subgroup  of  the  Financial  Inclusion 
Experts Group.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Kenya’s  financial  inclusion  agenda  is  premised  on  its  current 
development blueprint, Vision 2030. Under this Vision, Kenya aspires to be a middle income 
country  by  2030  and  the  financial  sector  is  expected  to  mobilize  substantial  financial 
resources required to realize this Vision. In addition, savings rate are targeted to increase to 
32.0 percent within the period. For this to happen, financial reach, inclusion, and deepening 
to  increase  financial  instruments  will  need  to  take  place.  The  Central  Bank  on  its  part  will 
have to foster stability and accessibility of the Kenyan financial system. In this regard, we will 
continuously implement reforms to: 
 
Strengthen the banking sector through an enhanced legal and regulatory framework 
including scaling up minimum capital requirements. 
Address structural rigidities that impact adversely on the cost of financial services. 
Some of these we need to learn from you and then we can improve the environment 
for you. 
Enhance efficiency and safety of payment and settlement systems through use of 
innovative  internet  and  mobile  based  solutions.  As  it  were,  reliable  and  efficient 
payment systems increase both the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize 
payment system risks. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen: In order to accomplish the tenets of branchless banking across the 
globe, we need to unanimously come up with minimum benchmarks to guide its application 
and regulation. These may include: the need for creation of enabling environments for private 
sector initiatives to thrive; continuous private-public sector dialogue to facilitate formulation of 
innovative  policy  solutions;  and  balancing  access  with  stability  to  safeguard  integrity  and 
stability of the financial system. 
BIS Review 52/2010 
 1
Further,  today’s  scenario  building  process  will  benefit  a  lot  from  the  lessons  of  the  four 
scenarios of the Scenario Building 2020 by CGAP and DFID. These are: 
(a)  
Existence  of  untapped  opportunities  in  the  environment  that  can  be  exploited 
through innovation. 
The fact that opportunities are available everywhere including post-conflict countries 
which can potentially be exploited through branchless banking.  
Successful branchless banking regimes may be vulnerable to disruptions like court 
decisions  and  other  underlying  forces  which  make  branch-intensive  strategies 
unviable. However, data-enabled phones may present the best strategy to mitigate 
such risks. 
Successful  transition  to  a  cashless  society  may  present  a  big  challenge  to 
successful  mobile  phone  money  transfer  service  providers,  regulators,  and  the 
economy. 
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  while  the  Central  Bank  welcomes 
innovative products, it evaluates all such products to ensure safety and efficiency concerns 
are  adequately  addressed.  The  Central  Bank  has  the  necessary  capacity  to  properly 
evaluate and appraise technology driven financial services to ensure they meet international 
standards and provide comprehensive consumer protection. 
Finally, may I assure you that the Central Bank will always strive to provide an enabling legal 
and regulatory framework to encourage innovations by all players in our financial sector in 
order to enhance access to financial services. In this regard, we will continue to work with 
stakeholders as we are doing today to put in place an enabling environment for business to 
thrive.  
With  these  remarks,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  pleasant  duty  to  declare  this 
workshop open. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2010
