Vítor Constâncio: The future of euro governance – how to contain 
imbalances and preserve financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “The ECB and Its Watchers” XII, Frankfurt am Main, 9 July 2010. 
 Introduction  
1. 
It is a great pleasure to participate at this conference for the first time in my official capacity 
as  the  ECB’s  Vice-President.  The  “ECB  and  Its  Watchers”  conference  was  a  pioneering 
initiative and the fact that other central banks have chosen to emulate it is surely a powerful 
tribute to the usefulness of the event‘s format. 
In my remarks today, I want to address some of the problems that the financial crisis has 
created for the governance of the euro area.  
The euro area has responded adequately to the challenges that have arisen. Even though 
one might occasionally speak of some procrastination, which is understandable in a complex 
framework integrating several countries, important and bold decisions have been taken and 
new reform processes have been launched. 
After the Lehman failure, we responded with the necessary liquidity provision to a financial 
sector hampered by clogged monetary and financial markets; fiscal policy implemented the 
necessary  stimulus  programmes;  and  the  banking  sector  received  indispensable  and  very 
extensive government support. Furthermore, Europe participated actively in the international 
efforts to design and adopt new regulations for the financial sector and has embarked on a 
thorough  reform  of  its  own  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  The  forthcoming 
establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  three  European 
Supervisory Authorities will address both the need for truly harmonised European regulation 
and the coordination required for a more effective European supervision.  
The public sector support for demand and the stabilisation of the banking sector contributed 
to  the  avoidance  of  a  depression  and  launched  an  incipient  economic  recovery  that  was 
gaining strength in the first quarter of the year. That was the moment when financial markets 
started to test the cohesiveness of the euro area and whether the setup was more than some 
kind  of  a  vast  multilateral  currency  board.  This  new  chapter  of  the  financial  crisis,  which 
threatens to weaken – but not kill – the recovery, has been named the sovereign risk phase. 
This  has  thus  far  been  something  of  a  misnomer,  since  some  important  countries  with 
significant public finance imbalances have not been affected and only a few more vulnerable 
members of the euro area merited the attention of the markets.  
The European response made clear that our economic and monetary union was more than a 
precarious  arrangement  among  nation-states  and  stands  as  an  important  pillar  of  the 
European  integration  project.  Proof  of  this  can  be  found  in  the  package  of  loans  with 
stringent  conditionality  put  together  for  Greece,  in  the  creation  of  an  European  Financial 
Stability Facility with 500 billion euro, and in the adoption of further non-standard measures 
to defend the monetary transmission mechanism for the whole euro area by buying securities 
and  providing  liquidity.  We  did  this  in  full  consistency  with  our  mandate  to  deliver  price 
stability,  and  with  the  determination  to  overcome  the  unfounded  misunderstanding  that 
purchases of securities could in some inexplicable way be more inflationary than the use of 
the  same  securities  in  regular  repurchase  agreements.  What  counts,  of  course,  are  the 
overall  development  of  primary  liquidity  and  the  management  of  short-term  money  market 
rates.  Incidentally,  measured  in  terms  of  the  monetary  base,  provision  of  liquidity  has 
decreased  from  €1256.8  billion  on 7  May  to  the  current  level  of  €1149.8  billion  and  Eonia 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 1
went up from 0.321 to 0.398 yesterday. At the same time, market inflation expectations are 
well anchored bellow 2% up to 10 years. 
Apart  from  the  determination  shown  in  taking  appropriate  measures,  Europe  has  also 
recognised that the current episode of the crisis points to the existence of real problems with 
respect to public finance imbalances and has even exposed some institutional weaknesses 
in our framework for monetary union, which need to be corrected. Consequently, Europe has 
now embarked on the preparation of significant reforms of the euro area governance in the 
context of the Task Force created under the leadership of President Van Rompuy.  
Every good reform starts with a good understanding of the problems. The fundamental point 
relates to the issue of imbalances in euro area countries. By imbalances, I do not mean just 
fiscal  imbalances,  but  also  imbalances  stemming  from  private  sector  behaviour.  I  will 
concentrate my remarks on the issue of imbalances, starting by analysing their causes and 
the necessary policies to correct and, preferably, avoid them in the future. Finally, I will draw 
conclusions  as  to  what  the  experience  implies  for  economic  policy  and  economic 
governance. 
Imbalances and adjustments in a monetary union 
2. 
There  are  severe  fiscal  imbalances  in  euro  area  countries.  Triggered,  in  particular,  by 
developments in Greece, markets have dramatically reassessed their view of fiscal positions 
leading to sharp rises in bond yield spreads. This stands in sharp contrast to the markets’ 
assessment of sovereign risk in euro area countries prior to the financial crisis, which can 
reasonably be characterised as one of “benign neglect”. 
It is indisputable that fiscal imbalances of the kind we have seen in some euro area countries 
need to be corrected in a timely and convincing manner. This has been recognised, as fiscal 
packages have been introduced in Ireland, Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal over the last 
few  months.  Moreover,  in  order  to  give  countries  breathing  space  to  carry  out  fiscal 
adjustment, unprecedented support measures have been introduced at the European level.  
Fiscal deficits, however, are not the only macroeconomic imbalances we can see when we 
look  across  euro  area  countries.  A  number  of  indicators  provide  prima  facie  evidence  of 
private  sector  imbalances  where  high  indebtedness  and  excessive  leverage  have  also 
developed  over  the  years.  In  several  countries,  it  was  predominantly  the  increase  in  net 
private  borrowing  requirements  that  was  responsible  for  growing  current  account  deficits, 
which are large in some countries and have widened since the start of Monetary Union. In 
2008, some 8 of the 16 euro area countries had a current account deficit ratio above 5%. In 
1999, only 2 countries exceeded the 5% mark. 
In  some  (but  not  all)  of  the  countries  with  current  account  deficits,  there  were  also  sharp 
increases in domestic asset prices, particularly house prices. While house prices declined in 
Germany between 1999 and 2008, there was an average annual increase of more than 10% 
in Spain and Ireland. Other related symptoms include rapid credit growth and a build-up of 
private sector debt. 
From a methodological point of view, I have to point out that much of the current discussion 
is frequently too narrowly focused on a limited and simplistic set of indicators (e. g. relative 
prices and current account balances) in a partial equilibrium context. There are also those 
who  seem  to  think  that  the  problems  are  confined  only  to  fiscal  policy.  A  spree  of  partial 
equilibrium analysis has been contaminating the debate.  
To  give  an  example  of  the  importance  of  the  general  equilibrium  approach:  in  simplistic 
accounts,  rising  current  account  deficits  are  often  seen  as  being  “caused”  by  losses  in 
competitiveness.  But  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  co-movement  between  the  current 
account  deficit  and  measures  of  the  “real  exchange  rate”  reflect  the  joint  response  of  two 
endogenous variables to shocks.  
2 
 BIS Review 97/2010
In some cases the imbalances could be considered, up to a point, an equilibrium response of 
the economy to certain shocks, which does not necessarily warrant a policy reaction. Two 
types  of  shocks  that  could  be  associated  to  such  a  development,  could  be,  first,  the 
permanent effect on the cost of financing and capital stemming from entering a new regime 
of  low  inflation  and,  second,  the  real  convergence  expected  to  happen  in  catching-up 
countries. 
In  benign  scenarios,  the  apparent  imbalances  are  largely  self-correcting.  Eventually,  the 
inter-temporal budget constraints will induce consumers and firms to cut their expenditures, 
thereby reducing the current account imbalances. These adjustments will be accompanied 
by  movements  in  relative  prices,  as  the  economies  concerned  rebalance  domestic  and 
external demand.  
The  fact that  some  episodes  of current  account  deficits  and  rising  relative  prices  could  be 
natural economic adjustments to shocks that hit the economy does not, of course, imply that 
all such episodes are benign, equilibrium phenomena. Looking at developments in a number 
of euro area countries over the past 11 years, we have enough evidence of private sector 
imbalances that cannot be explained by reference to benign equilibrium phenomena.  
How  could  such  imbalances  come  about?  I  think  there  are  three  plausible  (and  not 
necessarily mutually exclusive) explanations: 
First,  expectations  about  growth  seem  to  have  become  detached  from  reality  and  have 
indeed  become  excessively  exuberant.  If  we  are  willing  to  depart  from  the  assumption  of 
strictly rational expectations and to allow for phenomenon such as learning, it is easy to see 
how initial booms – justified by equilibrium phenomena – induce economic agents to expect 
that  the  strong  growth  will  continue  indefinitely  (or  at  least  for  a  longer  period  than  was 
warranted). In this regard, it is worth noting that most of the bubbles we have observed in 
history started in response to changes in fundamentals. 
A second factor is the behaviour of the financial system. At the global level, the period was 
one in which financial intermediaries around the world were engaging in excessive risk-taking 
behaviour. This led to bad credit risk management and very loose credit conditions, which 
added fuel to the fire in the case of overheating economies. 
Third,  the  standard  adjustment  mechanisms  implied  by  theory  seem  not  to  have  worked 
sufficiently well or sufficiently fast. In particular, the real appreciation channel seems to have 
been  operating  very  slowly,  and  inflated  animal  spirits  seems  to  have  put  in  question  the 
existence of the fully rational inter-temporal optimisers taken as given in many models. 
In addition, the public sector itself may also have been affected by exuberant expectations. 
As  a  result,  governments  in  some  countries  increased  their  expenditure  and/or  reduced 
taxes,  expecting  that  the  gains  in  output  and  increased  revenues  seen  during  the  boom 
years  would  be  permanent.  Consequently,  when  these  countries  headed  into  a  downturn, 
fiscal positions that looked healthy on the surface turned out to be precarious, deficits rose 
sharply  and  debt  ratios  moved  along  explosive  trajectories.  The  financial  crisis  acted  as  a 
trigger  to  expose  the  fragilities  that  had  been  built  up  in  earlier  years  and  led  to  rapid 
reassessment on the part of economic agents. 
Countries that have accumulated imbalances thus now face a long (and painful) process of 
adjustment to more warranted levels of spending and debt in both the public and the private 
sectors.  A  process  of  de-leveraging  and  balance  sheet  repair  will  have  to  take  place  in 
several  cases.  These  adjustments  will  inevitably  entail  a  period  of  low  growth  in  domestic 
demand. This, in turn, will necessitate corrective adjustments in relative prices and wages in 
order to foster net exports and rebalance the economies in question.  
BIS Review 97/2010 
 3
Eliminating the imbalances 
3. 
Even in the absence of explicit policy actions, we can expect a number of standard channels 
to start working, leading to a reduction of private sector imbalances and an eventual return of 
the economies to a more sustainable equilibrium pattern.  
The  reassessment  of  future  prospects  by  households  and  firms  will  induce  them  to  adjust 
their expenditure plans downwards. The resulting lower level of domestic demand will lead to 
lower imports, and thus serve to reduce the current account deficits. This mechanism is a 
more  or  less  automatic  response  by  agents  to  the  changed  environment.  It  is  likely  to  be 
reinforced by the impact of banks’ endeavours to restore their balance sheets by, inter alia, 
curtailing  lending  and  by  government  efforts  to  rectify  fiscal  imbalances.  In  itself,  the 
contraction of domestic demand brings strong downward pressure to bear on output. In order 
to counteract this effect, net exports will need to be pushed for. 
In this respect, the so-called competitiveness channel will also play a role. Weaker demand 
will lead to lower wage and salary increases (and to reduced domestic prices) via the usual 
Phillips-curve  mechanism.  This  will  stimulate  net  exports,  offsetting  the  effects  of  lower 
domestic  demand  on  output.  In  the  long  run,  the  economy  will  be  rebalanced.  However, 
given evidence of the sluggishness of wage and, to a lesser extent, price adjustments, this 
restoration of competitiveness could be a very protracted and painful process. 
This  implies  that  policy  has  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  facilitating  and  speeding  up  the 
adjustment process. In particular, policy action is needed in four areas: 
First, measures should be taken to increase wage flexibility and the adjustment of wages to 
appropriate levels. This could be achieved through measures to improve the functioning of 
labour  markets  with  a  view  to  enhancing  wage  flexibility  and  facilitating  the  transfer  of 
workers  from  the  non-traded  to  the  traded  sectors.  In  fact,  we  have  already  seen  wage-
setting developments in some European countries that many observers would have believed 
impossible just a few years ago.  
Second, the adoption of measures to increase productivity growth is necessary to facilitate 
adjustment. Higher productivity growth will allow the affected countries to improve their gains 
in competitiveness for a given level of nominal wage growth. This benefit comes on top of the 
improvement  in  living  standards  that  increases  in  productivity  generate.  Achieving  higher 
productivity  growth  requires  comprehensive  structural  reforms  aimed,  in  particular,  at 
sheltered sectors of the economy where there is insufficient competition.  
Third, convincing fiscal consolidation to redress the fiscal imbalances is essential. Given the 
impairment  of  the  credibility  of  fiscal  policy  in  many  countries,  postponing  adjustment  is 
simply no longer an option. Markets need to be convinced right now. This message is now 
well  understood  and,  in  recent  months,  we  have  seen  sizeable  fiscal  adjustments  in  a 
number of euro area countries. This is a very encouraging development, but it is essential to 
maintain the momentum and ensure that the new targets are met in the years ahead. 
Fourth, repairing the balance sheets of banks and making banks more resilient are crucial 
prerequisites  for  the  resumption  of  growth  and  for  financing  the  reallocation  of  resources 
from the non-traded to the traded sectors. Many policy initiatives have already been taken in 
this  respect,  ranging  from  the  establishment  of  “bad  banks”  to  injections  of  capital  and 
government guarantees’ for bank debt. Of course, the liquidity policy of the Eurosystem has 
played a crucial role in supporting the financing of the overall economy since August 2007. At 
the same time, viewed from a longer-term perspective, effective regulation has a key role to 
play in strengthening the financial system. Currently envisaged changes in the regulation of 
banks aim at making banks better internalise the cost of their risk-taking and impose heavier 
capital charges on their riskier positions. This will reduce the danger of excessive credit flows 
such as those seen in the pre-crisis period, which were – in hindsight – not sustainable. It will 
also  increase  banks’  loss  absorption  capabilities  by  increasing  the  level  and  the  quality  of 
their capital buffers.  
4 
 BIS Review 97/2010
The four points I have just mentioned relate to policy action to be taken in “deficit” countries 
in the euro area. A natural question to ask at this point is what policy action could be taken to 
help eliminate imbalances in “surplus” countries. 
There is a debate underway on this issue. Some commentators argue that surplus countries 
should pursue policies that are symmetric to those of the deficit countries. If deficit countries 
have to restrict their domestic demand through fiscal contraction or wage containment, then 
surplus countries should increase their domestic expenditure by engaging in fiscal expansion 
or  wage  increases.  This  type  of  arguments  can  go  too  far.  In  some  cases,  there  may  be 
some  room  for  manoeuvre,  but  even  if  it  is  ignored  that  the  euro  area  is  not  a  closed 
economy, so that all members have other markets to support their growth, it would not be 
right to ask countries to compromise unreasonably on their international competitiveness or 
to put the sustainability of their public finances at significant risk.  
Still, it is true that a reduction of the current account deficits of some countries may, through 
the mechanics of the operation of a monetary union, imply a reduction of surpluses in other 
countries. From a euro area-wide point of view, wage moderation in the deficit countries is a 
negative inflationary shock to the area as whole. The ECB’s monetary policy, which focuses 
on price stability in the euro area as a whole, would take that development into account. The 
resulting stance of monetary policy will affect wage and price developments in the surplus 
countries, aiding the adjustment in competitiveness. Similarly, the stance will affect demand 
in the surplus countries, again fostering adjustment.  
That  said,  there  is  scope  for  some  supply  side  policy  measures  in  surplus  countries  to 
facilitate  adjustment.  In  cases  where  the  current  account  surpluses  reflect  structurally  low 
consumption  or  limited  domestic  investment  opportunities,  structural  reforms  should  be 
implemented.  The  range  of  possibilities  includes  structural  measures  in  the  non-traded 
sectors,  such  as  the  deregulation  of  the  services  sector,  for  instance,  thereby  increasing 
productivity and growth, as well as changes in taxation to change incentives to spend.  
Avoiding imbalances in the future 
4. 
The experience of imbalances in the euro area in recent years is a convincing reminder that 
“prevention is better than cure”. 
Looking  ahead,  the  key  question  is  what  can  be  done  to  prevent  the  emergence  of 
imbalances in the future. After the current crisis experience, the markets can be expected to 
better assess the differences in the risks to Monetary Union members and to increase both 
the spreads and the cost of capital when those risks start to rise. Market discipline as a result 
of  proper  credit  risk  management  can  be  an  important  mechanism  for  preventing  the 
emergence of imbalances. 
Policy measures are nevertheless required and are of the same nature of those that I have 
already  mentioned  with  respect  to  the  correction  of  the  existing  imbalances,  in  particular 
those  with  regard  to  fiscal  policy  and  unit  labour  costs.  After  all,  viewed  from  a 
macroeconomic perspective, the successful participation in a monetary union implies an anti-
cyclical fiscal policy and an appropriate evolution of wage costs in line with the development 
of relative productivity.  
I believe that two other policy points also deserve to be mentioned.  
First, I think that macro-prudential policy has an important role to play in preventing and/or 
mitigating the effects of imbalances in the financial system. The whole panoply of well-known 
analytical  tools  has  to  be  used:  sets  of  financial  indicators,  early-warning  systems,  stress 
tests,  contagion  models,  macro-models  that  include  the  proper  feedback  between  the 
financial  sector  and  the  real  economy.  Careful  attention  in  this  process  must  be  paid  to 
leverage indicators of the different types of economic agents: households, firms, banks and 
the state. Ensuring financial stability implies avoiding excessive debt and credit growth. The 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 5
in 
the  participation 
issuing  warnings  and  recommendations, 
idea  of  macro-prudential  policy  is  not  new.  Rather,  what  has  changed  is  the  institutional 
framework in which these policies can be set in place. In Europe, the establishment of the 
ESRB will provide the mechanism for identifying imbalances that endanger financial stability 
and create systemic risks at the level of the European Union. The ESRB membership reflects 
the composition of the 27 members of the General Council of the ECB and, although limited 
to 
the  Board  of  one 
representative of the Commission and the three Chairs of the future European Supervisory 
Authorities ensures that proper action will follow the decisions of the ESRB. It is, in fact, the 
whole  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  that  will  be  responsible  for  guaranteeing 
that the functioning of both the financial sector and asset markets is not impaired to an extent 
that creates fundamental risks to the financing of the economy. 
The second point with respect to policies appropriate for avoiding future imbalances relates 
to  structural  policies  that  are  essential  to  promote  productivity  growth  and  to  enhance  the 
flexibility and competitiveness of the economies in question. In many cases, the restoration 
of competitiveness does not depend only on correcting relative costs and prices. In view of 
the structural shock of the import penetration emanating from very low-cost producers, what 
is necessary is to increase productivity and to change the productive structure.  
To  ensure  a  smooth  functioning  of  Monetary  Union,  the  whole  set  of  necessary  policies 
should be employed in a consistent manner, both across individual policy areas and across 
countries. This has clearly not been the case in the past. Hence, there is an urgent need to 
improve policy-making at both the national and the area-wide level. With respect to the latter, 
there  is  now  a  consensus  on  the  need  to  reinforce  economic  governance  within  the  euro 
area.  
In this context, I would like to highlight the very ambitious proposals presented by the ECB, in 
the  context  of  the  Van  Rompuy  Task  Force,  for  reinforcing  the  economic  governance 
framework in the euro area. 
The  proposals  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  point  towards  an  overhaul  of  the 
institutional  and  rules-based  framework  for  the  surveillance  of  fiscal  policies.  On  the 
institutional side,  the  Eurogroup  should  essentially  be  recognised  as  the  guardian  of  fiscal 
sustainability,  gaining  new  tasks  and  powers,  including  the  review  of  national  budgetary 
plans  and  the  definition  of  ex  ante  fiscal  policy  guidelines  for  euro  area  countries.  This 
enhanced role of the Eurogroup should be coupled with an increase of the quasi-automaticity 
of the Excessive Deficit Procedure, reducing the use of discretion.  
Furthermore, one of the most important lessons that can be learned from the experience so 
far  is  that  the  implementation  of  the  fiscal  framework  requires  an  effective  regime  of 
sanctions.  This  can  be  achieved  by  applying  the  following  principles:  first,  initiating  the 
imposition of sanctions at an early stage; second, increasing the scale of the sanctions over 
time and in relation to the severity of the fiscal imbalance; and, third, applying a broader and 
more  stringent  range  of  sanctions,  including  financial,  non-financial  and  procedural 
sanctions, which would deepen the degree of EU intervention in national fiscal policies. 
The  overall  framework  would  also  be  strengthened  at  the  EU  level  by  creating  an 
independent  fiscal  agency  within  the  Commission,  which  would  act  as  a  watchdog  for  the 
Eurogroup  and  the  Council  in  the  monitoring  and  assessment  of  national  budgetary 
developments.  At  the  national  level,  compliance  would  also  be  reinforced  through  the 
introduction in national legislation of fiscal rules and institutions that are consistent with the 
EU fiscal framework.  
Another area for urgent reform relates to the establishment of an explicit and clear framework 
for the surveillance of competitiveness and the correction of economic imbalances. The ECB 
advocates in particular the introduction of targeted surveillance. On the basis of a clear and 
simple criterion, or a limited set of criteria, on key aspects of competitiveness linked to the 
functioning of EMU – based on measures of nominal competitiveness and other supporting 
indicators  relating  to  the  private  and  public  sectors  –  countries  would  be  categorised 
6 
 BIS Review 97/2010
according  to  a  colour-coded  scheme  of  surveillance,  which  would  be  linked  to  increasing 
degrees of intrusiveness. 
Finally, the ECB also put forward proposals regarding the establishment of a euro area crisis 
management institution, which would have many of the features of the European Financial 
Stability  Facility.  From  the  ECB’s  perspective,  it  is  crucial  to  minimize  the  risk  of  moral 
hazard, which is always implicit in any ex ante rescue mechanism. Institutional safeguards 
would include strong conditionality – reproducing the EU/IMF financial support to Greece – 
and graded sanctions in case of non-compliance with conditionality, escalating to a de facto 
loss of fiscal autonomy as the extreme form of sanction. 
Some  of  the  ideas  set  out  in  the  Commission’s  recent  Communication  on  enhancing 
economic policy coordination for growth and jobs (30 June) are close to the ECB’s proposals. 
However, I think that that our proposals are somewhat more ambitious because we feel that 
the situation requires a quantum leap forward in strengthening the foundations of EMU and 
moving towards a deeper economic union.  
Conclusion  
5. 
We are now experiencing the full effects of the imbalances – both public and private sector – 
that have accumulated in euro area countries over past years.  
The euro area now faces two key challenges. The first is to take the necessary and difficult 
measures  to  restore  fiscal  positions  and  eliminate  private  sector  imbalances.  So  far,  this 
challenge  seems  to  have  been  met.  This  can  be  seen,  for  example,  in  the  decisive  fiscal 
adjustment measures that have been adopted in the countries concerned and in the rapid 
adjustment of the private sector to the changed environment. It is essential to maintain the 
momentum and to restore sound and sustainable financial positions in both the private and 
the public sector.  
The second challenge is to make sure that the lessons learned from this experience are well 
understood.  We  should  put  in  place  a  framework  of  economic  governance  and  a  set  of 
policies to prevent a recurrence. Here too, there is evidence of significant progress having 
been made in recent months.  
Some  commentators  argue  that  the  imbalances  that  we  have  seen  in  the  euro  area  have 
seriously  weakened  Monetary  Union,  even  posing  a  threat  to  its  survival.  I  think  that  the 
opposite will turn out to be true. When both challenges are met, the result will be a euro area 
that will be far more robust, with a more resilient financial system, and with sounder fiscal 
positions and a more balanced development across countries.  
Once again, I would like to thank the organisers for their invitation to participate in this event. 
I look forward to fruitful interaction with you over the next eight years. 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 7
