Zdeněk Tůma: Forecasting at the Czech National Bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  Bank’s 
Forecasting Dinner, Prague, 18 February 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
Over the last seven years I have had the privilege to welcome you here at the premises of 
the  CNB  and  open  the  Forecasting  Dinner  with  my  thoughts  on  forecasting  and  related 
issues. Unsurprisingly tonight it won’t be any different. However, as it is almost certain that 
this is my last chance to speak to such distinguished audience still as the governor of the 
Czech National Bank, I would like to use this opportunity and discuss the forecasting process 
in  the  Czech  National  Bank  from  a  little  bit  broader  perspective.  Those  of  you  who  were 
expecting  exact  inflation  and  GDP  growth  numbers  I  will  kindly  ask  to  refer  to  our  latest 
Inflation Report that was published last Friday. 
As  many  of  you  well  know  it  is  generally  recognised  that  central  bank  policies  must  be 
forward-looking.  As  emphasised  by  Milton  Friedman,  for  example,  there  are  long  lags 
between  monetary  policy  actions  and  their  impact  on  the  economy.  In  this  tradition  Alan 
Greenspan when being the chairman of the US Federal Reserve System pointed out that: 
“Too often in the past, policymakers responded late to unfolding economic developments and 
found they were behind the curve .... Those who wish for us ... to await clearly visible signs of 
emerging inflation before acting are recommending we return to a failed regime of monetary 
policy that cost jobs and living standards. I wish it were otherwise, but there is no alternative 
to basing policy on what are unavoidably, uncertain forecasts”. 
Forecast is a keystone for our monetary policy framework, i.e. inflation targeting, yet practical 
forecasting is pretty far from being an easy job. The rule number one in this business is that 
whereas a failure in the stochastic part of the forecast is still something you can live with, a 
failure  in  forecasting  trend  changes  can  cause  enormous  inaccuracy  of  the  forecast. 
Consequently,  forecasting  techniques  do  not  necessarily  have  to  match  for  any  short-run 
movement;  however,  they  should  not  fail  when  break  points  in  the  economy  are  under 
consideration. 
As  a  good  example  of  the  above  point  serves  our,  i.e.  Bank  Board  of  the  Czech  National 
Bank, decision to cut the interest rate in August 2008 when there was no visible sign of any 
recession among the European countries, inflation was above our inflation target because of 
oil and food prices and the European Central bank raised its interest rate only month before. 
Although it is certain that the, at that time actual, forecast did not match the data perfectly, 
with no doubt it identified the break point and by that served very well its purpose. 
Naturally,  the  forecast  accuracy,  i.e.  the  ability  to  identify  breaking  points  reasonably  well, 
has not come out of the blue sky. The actual way in which forecasts are produced and used 
in central banks has changed substantially over the past two decades. These changes have 
reflected  developments  both  in  the  economic  (and  econometric)  theory  and  in  monetary 
policy regimes. Bearing in mind the failure of large-scale models in 1970s, the profession has 
started  to  prefer  smaller-scale  models  with  a  sounder  microeconomic  background,  built  in 
recent decades usually along the lines of New Keynesian Economics. 
Well, maybe we are still not able to match all the statistical numbers perfectly, but I hope that 
we  are  more  skilled  in recognising important  breaks  in  the development  of  our  economies 
than we were 10 years ago. Indeed, the use of general equilibrium models forces us to think 
about the economy in a consistent way and the use of multivariate filters has improved our 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 1
knowledge about the current position of the economy in the business cycle. You probably all 
remember that inflation targeting was in our case introduced in a challenging situation, after a 
period  of  currency  turmoil  in  May  1997,  which  ended  the  fixed  exchange  rate  period  and 
resulted  in  higher  inflation  and  rising  inflation  expectations.  The  economy  needed  a  new 
nominal anchor in order to return to a disinflation path. Inflation targeting was chosen as “the 
best of all bad” alternatives at the time. 
Such  a  sudden  switch  from  a  fixed  exchange  rate  system  to  inflation  targeting  required  a 
radical  and  fast  change  in  the  central  bank’s  mentality.  This  was  perhaps  the  biggest 
challenge that the CNB had to face. Over the past five years it has involved much work on 
improving our forecasting tools, leading to substantial development in our internal analytical 
processes. 
At  the  beginning  of  2002,  the  CNB  settled  on  a  new  forecasting  process.  This  integrates 
expert  judgment  and  short-term  analyses  –  which  were  the  key  pillars  of  the  CNB’s 
forecasting tool-kit in the first years of inflation targeting – with a macroeconomic model that 
provides  a  consistent  framework  for  the  policy  analysis.  An  important  element  of  this  step 
was  a  switch  from  a  forecast  with  a  fixed-interest-rate  assumption  to  an  unconditional 
forecast that includes a reaction function of the central bank. 
The initially established quarterly projection model was a small-scale model belonging to the 
second generation of such models. It was thus relatively simple and arguably missed many 
important links in the economy. Nevertheless, it was already quite close to the state-of-the-
art among the inflation-targeting central banks around the world, and intense work has been 
in progress to build a higher-generation model. As a result from July 2008 the CNB’s forecast 
is  based  on  latest  generation  general  equilibrium  model,  which  is  fully  based  on  micro 
specifications.  Of  course,  expert  judgment  and  short-term  analyses  still  play  an  important 
supplementary role in the design of the final forecast. 
It is worth mentioning that the development of our forecasting system has been part of the 
wider evolutionary process that the Czech inflation targeting regime has gone through. The 
first years of the new regime were not easy, and included frequent numerical target misses. 
Nevertheless, the Czech Republic enjoys low inflation, and inflation expectations seem to be 
firmly anchored at low levels at present. Monetary policy decision-making is rule-based and 
transparent, thereby enhancing the credibility of the CNB. 
Let  me  conclude  with  the  statement  that  a  “forecast  based”  monetary  policy  framework 
seems to fully allow an independent central bank to commit credibly to its long-term goal of 
price stability and this certainly means a lot. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2010
