Deepak Mohanty: Inflation dynamics in India – issues and concerns 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  to  the 
Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Mumbai, 4 March 2010. 
 The assistance of Dr. O.P. Mall is acknowledged. 
I  thank  the  Bombay  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to 
speak on inflation which is of immediate concern for our economy. I will begin with the trends 
in inflation, then briefly touch upon the costs of inflation, followed by an analysis of current 
inflation dynamics. I will conclude by flagging the areas of policy concern. 
Trends in inflation 
There are expectations that the high levels of slack in resource utilisation and stable inflation 
expectations  will  contain  global  inflationary  pressures  in  20101.  The  IMF  projected  the 
headline  inflation  in  advanced  economies  at  1.3  per  cent  in  2010  and  in  emerging  and 
developing  economies  at  6.2  per  cent.  In  divergence  with  the  global  trend,  India  has 
witnessed a sharp increase in WPI inflation from a negative terrain during June–August 2009 
to 9.9 per cent by February 2010. The increase in consumer prices are even higher in the 
range of 14.9–16.9 per cent (Table 1). 
                                                 
1   January 2010 update of the World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
 BIS Review 48/2010 
 1
While there is this issue of divergence between wholesale price and consumer price based 
inflation measures, I do not propose to delve into that in this lecture2. I will, however, make 
two points. First, though the inflation indices have shown divergence in the past, the annual 
inflation  based  on  the  wholesale  price  index  (WPI),  consumer  price  index  for  industrial 
workers  (CPI-IW),  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  deflator,  and  private  final  consumption 
expenditure  (PFCE)  deflator  have,  on  an  average,  followed  a  similar  path  over  long  time 
spans  (Table  2).  Second,  the  current  divergence  could  largely  be  attributed  to  different 
weightage of food in WPI and CPIs. 
 Costs of inflation  
It is, however, important to recognise that by any measure the current inflation rate in India is 
high. Why is inflation a concern? It is a cause of concern for public policy because of the 
associated  costs,  especially  when  a  large  part  of  the  population  has  no  hedge  against 
inflation.  
 
First,  inflation  erodes  the  purchasing  power  of  money.  Fixed-income  earners  and 
pensioners see a decline in their disposable income and standard of living.  
Second,  there  is  diminution  of  real  value  of  savings  as  real  interest  rates  turn 
negative and return on savings does not fully compensate for price rise.  
Third, economic agents base their consumption and investment decisions on their 
current and expected future income as well as their expectations on future inflation 
rates.  Persistent  high  inflation  alters  inflationary  expectations  and  apprehension 
arising  from  price  uncertainty  does  lead  to  cut  in  spending  by  individuals  and 
slowdown in investment by corporates which hurts economic growth in the long run. 
Fourth,  if  the  inflation  rate  is  increasing  faster  than  those  in  other  countries  then 
domestic products become less competitive which has adverse impact on growth, 
employment and the balance of payments.  
Fifth, high inflation worsens inequality due to arbitrary redistribution of income where 
the poor suffer the most as the rich can hedge against inflation.  
                                                     
2   For a detailed analysis of this, please see Deepak Mohanty (2010): “Measures of Inflation in India: Issues and 
Perspectives”, speech delivered at the Conference of Indian Association for Research in National Income and 
Wealth at the Centre for Development Studies (CDS), Thiruvanthapuram, on January 9. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2010
 Finally,  the  policy  measures  for  reducing  inflation  have  their  externalities  and 
associated costs in terms of reduction in aggregate demand in the short to medium 
run.  
famously  said,  “inflation 
Inflation dynamics 
Milton  Friedman 
is  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary 
phenomenon”.3  It  is  believed  that  short-run  inflation  dynamics  is  largely  dependent  on 
supply-demand  conditions  and  monetary  expansion  influences  inflationary  condition  in  the 
long-run. Monetary expansion could be caused by persistence of high fiscal deficit and the 
need to finance the same by monetisation. Consequently, high monetary growth could lead 
to continued excess demand for a prolonged period without matching increase in output and 
productivity.  On  the  other  hand,  supply  conditions  have  strong  influence  on  the  inflation 
dynamics in the short run.  
In a rapidly growing developing economy like ours, both structural and idiosyncratic factors 
could play a significant role in the determination of inflation. In the recent years, the inward 
looking nature of Indian economy has been changing. Activities in almost all the sectors in 
varying  degrees  are  influenced  by  global  factors,  be  it  trade  in  commodities,  provision  of 
services, financing conditions, or consumer taste. Now domestic prices are more influenced 
by changes in global commodity prices for a wide range of goods – a sea change from the 
1970s and 1980s when crude prices were major global influencing factors. 
Taking into account the influence of global and domestic factors, the overall WPI basket can 
be divided into four commodity groups which have differential behaviour (Chart 1).  
 
First, food items excluding oilseed products (weight in WPI: 24.2 per cent): Prices of 
this  group  of  commodities  are  largely  determined  by  domestic  factors  and,  in  the 
event of supply shortage, imports influences international prices too. 
Second, oilseeds and products (weight in WPI: 6.8 per cent): This relatively small 
commodity  group  has  often  induced  sudden  surge  in  headline  WPI  as  there  is  a 
structural shortage and nearly a third of domestic consumption of edible oils is met 
from imports.  
Third, mineral oils and metals (weight in WPI: 15.3 per cent): Prices of this group of 
commodities  are  largely  determined  by  international  prices  and  the  volatility  in 
headline WPI inflation in recent years can largely be attributed to fluctuations in the 
international prices. 
Fourth,  other  commodities  (weight  in  WPI:  53.7  per  cent):  These  remaining 
commodities, largely manufactured products, constitute more than half of the WPI 
basket and their prices have been more stable than the other three groups. 
   Empirical  evidence  suggests  that  among  the  above  four  groups,  there  is  transmission  of 
prices from mineral oils and metals to the other commodities group within a quarter. The full 
transmissions of food prices to other commodities takes longer, almost a year. 
A comparison of domestic and global commodity price movement reveal the following. First, 
the  direction  of  price  movements  has  been  similar,  but  the  overall  global  commodity  price 
movements have been more volatile, with a pronounced spike in 2007 and 2008 (Chart 2). 
Second,  the  increase  in  metal  prices  have  been  closely  followed  the  global  prices.  Third, 
domestic  prices  of  petroleum  products  have  been  less  volatile  than  the  corresponding 
international prices reflecting administered prices in this group. Fourth, increase in domestic 
                                                 
3   Milton Friedman (1963): Inflation: Causes and Consequences , Asia Publishing House, New York. 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 3
food prices, excepting the global spike in 2007 and 2008 has been higher reflecting structural 
and domestic factors (Table 3). 
   4 
 BIS Review 48/2010
  Food  prices  in  India  are  primarily  determined  by  domestic  demand  supply  factors  and 
domestic  price  policy.  India  meets  the  bulk  of  its  large  food  demand  through  domestic 
production, barring few commodities like edible oils and pulses where the import dependence 
is about 35 per cent and 15 per cent, respectively. In occasional shortage years, the country 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 5
has also resorted to imports for wheat and sugar though it is generally an exporter in these 
commodities (Table 4). India’s occasional imports of such commodities translate into higher 
global food prices as the import demand is large. Hence, imports do not necessarily lead to 
domestic prices moving lower. 
One important determinant of prices of agricultural production in India has been the minimum 
support price (MSP) announced by the Government for procurement of various commodities. 
The  high  increase  in  MSP  since  2007–08  has  given  an  upward  bias  to  agricultural  prices 
(Table 5).  
 Reduced availability of foodgrains also tends to keep food prices high. As per the Economic 
Survey  2009–10,  per  capita  net  availability  per  day  of  cereals  and  pulses  has  been  lower 
than  that  observed  in  the  previous  four  decades.  The  per  capita  daily  availability  of 
foodgrains  was  447  grams  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  which  successively  increased  to 
459 grams in the 1980s and 478 grams in the 1990s but came down to 446 grams during 
 6 
 BIS Review 48/2010
2000–08 and stood still lower at 436 grams in 2008. Severe drought in major parts of the 
country  during  the  current  year  has  perceptibly  worsened  food  availability  further.  In 
particular, the situation is far more worrisome for pulses: its per capita net availability per day 
has gone down from around 60–70 grams during the 1950s to around 30 grams currently.  
On the demand side, a major economic transformation in India in the recent years has been the 
surge in rural demand which has now lower dependence on the farm sector. As per the National 
Sample Survey (NSS) data, the share of rural consumption in overall consumption was about 
58 per cent in 2006–07. The non-farm sector consumption accounts for about 55–60 per cent of 
the total rural consumption. While farm sector demand is more prone to the vagaries of weather, 
non-farm rural sector has imparted more stability in the recent years due to increased focus on 
the rural development, particularly through enhanced outlays under various public schemes. 
Given the stage of our economic development,  the demand for food items would increase 
with  economic  growth  and  rise  in  income  levels.  Demographic  dividend  which  has  been 
contributing towards India’s growth and productivity, has also raised consumption demand, 
particularly  on  food.  As  per  the  United  Nations  projection,  high-consumption  cohort  in  the 
age-group of 15–59 individuals comprising around 65 per cent of India’s total population will 
continue dominate demand till 2040. 
Thus,  lower  per  capita  availability  of  foodgrains  and  structural  shortage  of  key  agricultural 
commodities like oilseeds and pulses combined with the rising demand have kept food price 
inflation high. This process has got further accentuated by spikes in global food prices. 
Conclusions 
Recent  surge  in  inflation  has  raised  the  concern  whether  the  supply-driven  increase  could 
spillover to the generalised inflation process. Prolonged high inflation even if originating from 
supply  side  would  give  rise  to  increase  inflation  expectations  and  cause  general  prices  to 
rise.  Poorly  anchored  in  inflation  expectations  makes  long-term  financial  planning  more 
complex with potential adverse effects on investment and growth. It is, therefore, important to 
keep  inflation  expectations  anchored  so  that  consumers  do  not  mark  up  their  long-run 
inflation expectations by reacting to a short period of higher-than-expected inflation. 
The higher the inflation rate, the longer it takes for the inflation to revert to its trend. Slow 
return  of  inflation  rate  to  its  equilibrium  level  after  a  supply  shock  is  known  as  “inflation 
persistence”,  which  is  important  in  the  determination  of  the  pace  of  monetary  policy 
adjustment  to  achieve  the  desired  target.  In  our  context,  empirical  analysis  shows  a  high 
degree  of  persistence,  especially  in  the  case  of  food  and  edible  oil  groups.  This  hinders 
supply responses to work in a timely fashion. 
Even though the supply side factors dominate the current inflationary pressures, given the 
risks  of  spillover  into  a  wider  inflationary  process,  there  is  need  for  policy  response. 
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank began its exit from expansionary monetary policy in October 
2009 by reducing the potential liquidity. This process was carried forward in January 2010 
with an increase in cash reserve ratio (CRR) of banks by 75 basis points and then increase 
in policy reverse repo and repo rates by 25 basis points each in March 2010. While monetary 
policy action will anchor inflation expectations, there is an urgent need to address the issue 
of  structural  supply  constraints,  particularly  in  agriculture,  so  that  these  do  not  become  a 
binding constraint in the long run making the task of inflation management more difficult. 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 7
