Svante Öberg: The financial crisis and wage formation 
Speech  by  Mr  Svante  Öberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
National Mediation Office, Stockholm, 29 January 2010. 
 Why is the Riksbank interested in wage formation?  
Wage  formation  and  monetary  policy  are  interrelated.  The  development  of  wages  affects 
inflation and inflation affects the development of wages. The target for monetary policy is to 
maintain a low and stable level of inflation. This job is made easier if wage formation works 
well. Consequently, it is important for the Riksbank to follow this year’s comprehensive wage 
bargaining rounds.  
I  will  not  make  any  recommendations  to  the  social  partners  regarding  the  outcome  of  this 
year’s  collective  bargaining.  Instead,  I  will  describe  the  economic  setting  for  this  collective 
bargaining. This may seem to be an extremely subtle distinction, but it is an important one, 
nevertheless.  We  make  no  normative  pronouncements  regarding  which  rate  of  wage 
increase  may  be  most  appropriate.  However,  considering  the  drawn-out  recovery  and  the 
weak labour market, the scope for wage increases seems to be highly restricted.  
I would also like to make two points during this introduction. Firstly: I will not be reporting any 
new view of economic developments beyond that presented in the monetary policy update of 
16 December, although a few figures will be updated with the latest statistics. Secondly: The 
assessments and valuations I make here are not necessarily shared by all of my colleagues 
on the Executive Board of the Riksbank.  
I  will  start  with  the  financial  markets  and  international  developments,  before  turning  to 
economic developments and monetary policy in Sweden, with particular attention paid to the 
development of prices and wages.  
The functioning of the financial markets continues to improve, but they have not 
recovered completely  
The  functioning  of  the  financial  markets  is  continuing  to  improve,  both  in  Sweden  and 
abroad.  One  sign  of  this  is  that  various  risk  premia  in  the  money  and  credit  markets 
continued to decrease during the second half of 2009. The levels of a number of risk premia 
now  seem  to  have  stabilised  within  a  historically  normal  interval.  Possibilities  for  various 
market participants to acquire funding at longer durations through the securities market have 
improved.  Moreover,  the  Riksbank’s  risk  survey  shows  that  access  to  funding  without 
government  support  has  increased.  The  developments  on  the  financial  markets  can  be 
illustrated  by  the  so-called  TED  spread,  the  difference  between  the  three-month  interbank 
rate and treasury bill rates (Figure 1).  
However,  despite  this,  the  situation  has  still  not  completely  normalised.  There  are  still 
markets that have not recovered. There also exists some uncertainty regarding the extent of 
as-yet  unrealised  loan  losses,  particularly  in  European  banks,  leading  to  negative 
consequences for confidence among financial market agents. Furthermore, it must also be 
expected  that  bank  lending  in  the  United  States  and  a  number  of  other  countries  will  be 
restrained for some time to come. As far as Sweden is concerned, it can also be added that 
developments in the Baltic countries represent an ongoing problem for the Swedish banks.  
In addition, the financial markets are still dependent upon the measures adopted by central 
banks  and  authorities  to  deal  with  the  crisis  (Figure  2).  However,  these  extraordinary 
measures will be successively phased out when central banks and governments deem that 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 1
the  time  is  right.  For  example,  we  have  ceased  to  issue  dollar  loans  and  have  started  to 
increase margins on variable interest rate lending in Swedish kronor.  
The lowest point of the international recession has now been passed, but uncertainty 
remains regarding the strength of the recovery  
The lowest point of the international recession has now been passed. World trade has made 
a partial recovery following the steep decline of almost 20 per cent from the summer of 2008 
to the start of 2009. The total trade volume, measured in terms of the World Trade Monitor 
Index, rose by almost 9 per cent between January and October 2009 (Figure 3). GDP has 
started to increase in both the United States and the euro area after a number of quarters 
with negative growth.  
In  our  December  forecast,  we  expect  the  world  economy  to  have  declined  by  around 
1 per cent  during  2009,  followed  by  an  annual  average  growth  rate  of  approximately 
4 per cent for the next three years (Figure 4).  
For the United States, we predict a relatively good growth rate (for a developed country), this 
year  and  in  the  following  years  (Figure  5).  GDP  is  expected  to  increase  by  an  average 
annual  rate  of  just  below  3  per  cent  for  the  years  2010–2012.  Growth  is  expected  to  be 
slower for the euro area. The annual growth rate in the euro area is expected to amount to 
just below 2 per cent for the years 2010–2012.  
Although  GDP  growth  is  now  underway  and  is  expected  to  continue  during  the  forecast 
period in both the United States and the euro area, it will be a long time until GDP returns to 
pre-recession levels. This means that resource utilisation will be low for an extended period 
of  time.  This  applies  not  least  to  the  labour  market,  which  normally  lags  behind  the 
development of GDP. In turn, this will restrain price and wage developments abroad for the 
next few years. I will return to this issue later on.  
There is also considerable uncertainty about the strength of the recovery. The upturn in the 
period  immediately  ahead  will  partly  be  driven  by  temporary  factors  such  as  the  effects  of 
highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies and an inventory cycle. There is therefore a 
risk  that  growth  will  be  dampened  again  when  the  stimulating  effect  of  these  temporary 
factors  declines.  Experiences  from  previous  financial  crises,  as  reported  by  Reinhart  and 
Rogoff,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  others,  also  indicate  that  the  recovery 
following a financial crisis will be drawn out.1 The differences between various forecasters’ 
views of future GDP growth are now unusually wide. This can be illustrated by the range of 
their GDP forecasts (Figure 6).  
Asia, however, is a part of the world experiencing strong growth. China and India have also 
been  impacted  by  the  financial  crisis,  but  to  nowhere  near  the  same  extent  as  the  more 
developed countries. GDP growth declined somewhat in Asia in 2009, but was still high by 
western  standards  (Figure  7).  It  is  first  and  foremost  China’s  increasing  domestic  demand 
and imports that are stimulating growth in the region. The OECD’s indicators also show that 
GDP in Brazil and Russia has bottomed out and is now on the way up.  
Low resource utilisation is restraining international price and wage development  
Even  if  the  international  recession’s  lowest  point  has  now  been  passed  and  the  world 
economy is improving, price and wage developments are being restrained by low resource 
utilisation. Inflation is unusually low in both the United States and the euro area. In the United 
                                                 
1   See Carmen M. Reinhart & Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009. “The Aftermath of Financial Crises”, American Economic 
Review, American Economic Association, vol. 99(2), pages 466–72, May. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2010
States, inflation measured as annual percentage change has been negative since last spring 
(Figure  8).  In  the  euro  area,  inflation  was  negative  during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  last 
year, but rose to 0.6 per cent in November (Figure 9). Underlying inflation has fallen in both 
geographical areas since the middle of 2008.  
One  contributing  cause  of  this  low  and,  for  a  period,  negative  inflation  is  the  weak 
development of the labour market. In the United States, employment levels have continued 
to  decline  during  the  autumn,  with  unemployment  rising  to  approximately  10  per  cent. 
Likewise, in the euro area, the situation in the labour market has continued to deteriorate and 
unemployment  has  increased  to  approximately  10  per  cent.  An  expected  weak  growth  in 
wages together with low inflation expectations is contributing towards dampening inflation.  
Falling  market  expectations  for  the  policy  rate  during  the  autumn  may  also  be  compatible 
with  lower  expected  inflationary  pressure.  Both  survey  results  and  implied  forward  rate 
curves  indicate  that  market  participants’  monetary  policy  expectations in  the  United  States 
and euro area have fallen somewhat during the autumn.  
Sweden also experiences recovery but low resource utilisation  
Developments  in  the  rest  of  the  world  have  impacted  small,  open,  export-dependent 
countries such as Sweden hard. However, even in Sweden, the lowest point of the recession 
has been passed and recovery has started. GDP increased slightly during both the second 
and third quarters of 2009, after having previously fallen four quarters in a row. The National 
Institute of Economic Research’s Economic Tendency Survey and Swedbank’s Purchasing 
Managers’  Index  have  also  reached  levels  indicating  growth  in  the  Swedish  economy 
(Figure 10).  
In the most recent monetary policy update, from December, we saw ahead of us fairly strong 
GDP growth for this year and the next two years (Figure 11). GDP is expected to increase by 
an average of just over 3 per cent per year during the years 2010–2012. Swedish exports will 
also  increase  at  the  same  rate  as  economic  conditions  in  the  rest  of  the  world  improve. 
Despite the weak development of incomes, private consumption is expected to continue to 
rise over the forecast period, due to increased optimism regarding the future. Investment is 
also expected to contribute towards GDP growth during the forecast period – first housing 
investment and public investment, and then also investment in the business sector.  
However, despite this growth in GDP, the economy will take a long time to recover. GDP is 
not  expected  to  return  to  its  pre-crisis  level  until  2011  (Figure  12).  As  a  consequence, 
resource utilisation will be low during the forecast period. The labour market will also remain 
weak during the entire forecast period. Employment is expected to continue to fall this year, 
but  to  increase  again  next  year  (Figure  13).  Unemployment  will  amount  to  approximately 
10 per  cent  by  the  end  of  the  year,  but  will  then  decrease  over  the  following  two  years 
(Figure  14).  The  most  recent  Labour  Force  Surveys  indicate  a  slightly  better  development 
than  we  expected  in  December.  The  manner  in  which  this  may  affect  the  forecasts  is  a 
matter we will return to at our next monetary policy meeting on 10 February.  
Two factors give Sweden an advantage: the surplus in the public finances and the current 
account before the start of the crisis (Figure 15). The public surplus has made it possible to 
conduct  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy  during  the  crisis  without  jeopardising  the  long-term 
sustainable development of central government finances, which has mitigated the decline of 
economic  activity.  Even  in  the  period  ahead,  the  basically  strong  public  finances  will 
contribute  towards  a  situation  in  which  Sweden  will  not  need  to  increase  taxes  and/or 
decrease  expenditure  to  the  same  extent  as,  for  example,  the  United  States  and  United 
Kingdom in order to achieve the long-term sustainable development of public finances.  
BIS Review 11/2010 
 3
Significant uncertainty also as regards the strength of the recovery in Sweden  
There also exists significant uncertainty as regards the strength of the recovery in Sweden. 
The  lowest  point  of  the  recession  has  undoubtedly  been  passed,  but  there  is,  as  yet,  no 
strength in the recovery. Following a decline of over 6 per cent between the first quarters of 
2008 and 2009, GDP has only increased by a total of 0.5 per cent during the second and 
third quarters of 2009. Production in industry and the private service sector has not started to 
increase as yet (Figure 16).  
We expect to see fairly strong growth in GDP in the coming years. However, this expectation 
may turn out to be overly optimistic – the risk of weaker development is also present. As in 
the  rest  of  the  world,  the  upturn  in  Sweden  in  the  period  ahead  will  partly  be  driven  by 
temporary factors such as highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies and an inventory 
cycle.  The  forecast  assumes  that  the  world  market  will  grow  strongly,  that  private 
consumption will increase at a good rate despite the fact that the development of household 
incomes  will  be  weak,  that  public  consumption  will  increase  and  that  investments  will 
increase despite a low level of capacity utilisation and weak profitability.  
Naturally,  there  also  exists  the  possibility  that  GDP  growth  will  be  stronger  than  we  have 
estimated. However, even with a higher rate of GDP growth, resource utilisation will be low – 
and  it  is  resource  utilisation  that  is  significant  for  inflation,  not  GDP  growth.  Resource 
utilisation  can  be  measured  in  different  ways,  but  I  will  not  address  this  issue  today.  I  will 
restrict myself to stating that resource utilisation can be measured by the GDP gap – that is 
to say, the difference between the GDP level and what can be considered a normal level. 
Even with a higher rate of GDP growth, the GDP gap will be negative and resource utilisation 
low for an extended period (Figure 17).  
The low resource utilisation does not only signify that inflationary pressures are low, but is 
also a reason in itself to conduct a looser monetary policy. Through our monetary policy, we 
are  attempting  not  only  to  keep  inflation  at  a  low  and  stable  level,  but  also  to  support 
production and employment in the current recession.  
A divided economy  
The  Swedish  economy  is  divided,  with  a  significantly  worse  situation  in  export-dependent 
industries than in the private service sector. Even though the lowest point of the recession 
has passed, we are still experiencing the effects of the crisis on world trade. The Swedish 
export  market  has  experienced  a  significant  decline.  At  the  same  time,  the  expansionary 
fiscal and monetary policies have enabled the activity level of those areas of the economy 
focused  on  the  domestic  market  to  be  maintained.  This  is  clearly  reflected  in  the 
development of different sectors during the economic downturn. While industrial production 
fell  by  over  20  per  cent  during  the  year  leading  up  to  the  start  of  2009,  the  production  of 
private services only declined by approximately 5 per cent during this period.  
This divided economy has also been visible in the labour market. The labour market in export 
industry  dependent  areas  outside  the  major  cities  is  far  bleaker  than  it  is  in  the  service-
dominated  major  cities.  While  industrial  employment  decreased  by  approximately  100  000 
between the autumn of 2008 and the autumn of 2009, employment within the service sector 
remained largely unchanged (Figure 18).  
Low inflation during the forecast period  
We  expect  low  inflation  during  the  forecast  period  (Figure  19).  The  underlying  inflation 
measured as the CPIF (CPI with a fixed mortgage interest rate) is expected to be just below 
2 per cent during the greater part of the forecast period. CPI inflation, on the other hand, will 
vary significantly, as CPI also considers changes in interest rates on mortgages, which are 
affected by the decisions we take regarding the repo rate.  
4 
 BIS Review 11/2010
Inflation measured in terms of the EU harmonised index, the HICP, has recently been higher 
in  Sweden  than  in  the  euro  area  (Figure  20).  During  the  autumn,  this  was  just  below 
2 per cent in Sweden, while it was negative in the euro area. HICP does not include prices of 
owner-occupied housing, and thus inflation measured in terms of HICP and CPIF are largely 
the same.  
The relatively high HICP inflation in Sweden is primarily  due to the  heavy increase of unit 
labour  costs  in  Sweden  over  the  last  three  years,  averaging  approximately  5  per  cent  per 
year (Figure 21). In addition, the Swedish krona weakened during the financial crisis, pushing 
up import prices. In turn, the rapid increase of unit labour costs over the last three years is 
primarily  due  to  the  fact  that  productivity  fell  for  three  years  in  a  row,  in  addition  to  which 
hourly  wages  increased  more  during  that  three-year  period  than  during  the  immediately 
preceding three-year period.  
This development will be reversed during the forecast period. We expect largely unchanged 
unit labour costs over the next three years due to low wage increases and rising productivity. 
We also expect the Swedish krona to continue to strengthen (Figure 22). This will mean that 
inflationary pressure will be low during the forecast period.  
Repo rate at all-time low  
At the monetary policy meeting in December, the Riksbank decided to maintain the repo rate 
at the all-time low of 0.25 per cent, standing fast by its previous assessment that it will not be 
necessary to raise the repo rate until the autumn of 2010 (Figure 23).  
The background to this decision is that a low level of resource utilisation, together with a slow 
development of prices and wages, is expected over the next three years. In order to meet the 
inflation target and to support economic recovery, the repo rate must remain low for a long 
time. This is the same repo rate path that we adopted as long ago as July. Since then, the 
forecasts  for  GDP  growth  and  employment  have  certainly  been  revised  upwards.  The 
forecast for resource utilisation has accordingly been revised upwards. However, at the same 
time,  the  forecasts  for  inflation  have  been  revised  downwards.  These  two  changes  largely 
cancel each other out as regards their effect on monetary policy.  
Wage formation has functioned well for more than a decade  
Wage formation has functioned well over the last ten to fifteen years. The development of 
wages  has  been  compatible  with  low  and  stable  inflation.  Since  the  inflation  target  was 
adopted in 1995, CPIF inflation has averaged 1.7 per cent per year, seldom dropping below 
1 per cent or rising above 3 per cent. This is a significant change when compared with the 
high and sharply fluctuating inflation we experienced in the 1970s and 1980s.  
The changes made to the frameworks for wage formation are an important factor behind the 
lower  and  more  stable  inflation  we  see  today.  I  am  primarily  thinking  of  the  Industrial 
Agreement  implemented  in  1997,  but  also  of  similar  but  less  far-reaching  agreements  in 
other areas of the labour market. I am also thinking of certain changes to the legislation and 
the establishment of the National Mediation Office. Another factor should be that resource 
utilisation has been kept at a lower level than previously, a level that is compatible with low 
and stable inflation. The increased credibility of monetary policy in terms of keeping inflation 
close to the inflation target of 2 per cent has probably also contributed. Inflation expectations 
over the longer term now lie close to the inflation target (Figure 24).  
Low wage increases during the forecast period  
This  year,  social  partners  will  negotiate  just  over  550  collective  agreements  covering  just 
over  3.3  million  employees.  The  results  of  these  negotiations  will  affect  the  wages  of  the 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 5
majority  of  the  country’s  wage-earners,  thereby  being  of  great  significance  for  economic 
development.  
The developments we see ahead of us, with a drawn-out recovery and weak labour market, 
make it difficult to imagine anything other than that there will be low wage increases in the 
period ahead. In December’s monetary policy update, we expect wages to increase by an 
average  of  approximately  2.5  per  cent  per  year  during  the  period  2010–2012,  this  figure 
being  slightly  lower  towards  the  start  or  the  period  and  slightly  higher  towards  the  end 
(Figure 25). However, this should not be interpreted as a recommendation, but rather as a 
forecast based on developments in the economy and other available information. Naturally, 
developments in this area may take a course deviating from our expectations, just as in other 
areas. Wage increases include not just contractual wage increases but also wage increases 
over and above central wage agreements.  
Wage development forecasts form a part of the overall forecast for the Swedish economy. 
We  base  our  wage  forecasts  on  the  short-term  wage  statistics  of  the  National  Mediation 
Office,  with  adjustments  made  to  the  preliminary  statistics  for  estimated  retroactive  wage 
payments. Following this, a forecast is made in two stages. The first stage covers the next 
six  months,  considering  previously  agreed  wage  increases,  the  situation  on  the  labour 
market and inflation expectations. The second stage covers the next two to three years and 
considers  unemployment,  corporate  profits  and  inflation  expectations.  As  in  other  forecast 
areas, a final assessment of wage developments is made in consideration of model results 
and other information not included in the models.  
The financial crisis and wage formation  
The  financial  crisis  has  affected  the  Swedish  economy  in  two  ways.  Firstly,  the  financial 
markets and the financial sector have been impacted negatively. However, in principle, this 
problem has now been addressed. Central banks and authorities have adopted extraordinary 
measures  which  have  succeeded  in  getting  the  financial  markets  to  function  better  again. 
The  remaining  areas  to  be  addressed  are  that  the  financial  sector  is  still  dependent  upon 
government  support,  that  there  exists  a  risk  that  new  problems  will  arise  and  that  a  new 
regulatory framework is needed for the financial sector.  
Secondly, the financial crisis has led to a decline in world GDP and world trade. As regards 
Sweden,  this  has  primarily  impacted  the  Swedish  export  industry  and  has  led  to  a  deep 
recession  from  which  it  will  take  the  country  a  long  time  to  emerge.  Other  parts  of  the 
economy that are focused on the domestic market have coped better, due to the expansive 
fiscal and monetary policies being conducted, among other factors. This has led to a clear 
division of the Swedish economy.  
This  is  the  economic  background  against  which  the  social  partners  are  to  conclude  wage 
agreements  during  the  year.  This  will  not  be  an  easy  task.  It  will  require  a  variety  of 
deliberations to be undertaken.  
As I have previously stated, against the background of the drawn-out recovery and the weak 
labour  market,  we  at  the  Riksbank  expect  a  wage  increase  rate  for  2010–2012  of 
approximately  2.5  per  cent  per  year,  lower  at  the  start  and  higher  towards  the  end  of  the 
period.  This  is  a  very  low  rate  of  increase,  historically.  Our  forecast  will  no  doubt  be 
considered to be too high by many on the employer side and, likewise, too low for many on 
the union side.  
The  wage  development  we  expect  is  consistent  with  an  underlying  inflation  rate  reaching 
2 per  cent  by  the  end  of  the  forecast  period.  All  other  factors  being  equal,  higher  wage 
increases in this situation tend to lead to higher inflation, higher interest rates and a weaker 
development of production and employment. Similarly, lower wage increases tend to lead to 
lower  inflation,  an  ability  to  maintain  low  interest  rates  for  a  longer  period  of  time  and  a 
stronger development of production and employment.  
6 
 BIS Review 11/2010
One  factor  that  will  undoubtedly  play  a  major  role  in  the  approaching  rounds  of  wage 
bargaining is the division of the Swedish economy. The differences in the ability of various 
industries and companies to bear a certain rate of wage increases are currently unusually 
great. The development of wages along similar lines in different parts of the economy would 
lead  to  smaller  pay  differences,  but  also  to  a  faster  transformation  of  the  economy.  This 
would hit the regions impacted by the crisis hardest and the number of industrial jobs would 
decline more rapidly.  
Another important question concerns the implications of the division of the economy for the 
Industrial  Agreement’s  normative  role  in  wage  bargaining,  a  role  which  has  been  very 
important during the most recent agreement periods. The Industrial Agreement has been a 
restraining  force,  contributing  towards  retaining  the  competitiveness  of  that  part  of  the 
Swedish  economy  exposed  to  international  competition  and  keeping  inflation  at  a  low  and 
stable level at the same time as real wages have risen and growth in the Swedish economy 
has been strong – until the financial crisis.  
In  the  period  ahead,  a  drawn-out  recovery,  weak  labour  markets  and  low  price  and  wage 
increases are also expected internationally. The sector exposed to international competition 
is  the  area  of  the  Swedish  economy  to  be  most  tangibly  and  directly  affected  by  these 
external  conditions  for  wage  developments  within  Sweden.  This  suggests  that  this  sector 
should also play a normative role in this year’s collective bargaining. The service sector is not 
as sensitive to cost increases, but finds it easier to pass these on to prices. If the service 
sector  plays  a  normative  role  in  this  year’s  collective  bargaining,  it  is  likely  that  wage 
increases, and thereby inflation, will be greater than would be the case if the sector exposed 
to competition were to be normative.  
Another issue that may play a major role is uncertainty concerning the future. Under normal 
circumstances,  agreements  covering  several  years  are  an  advantage,  as  these  reduce 
uncertainty regarding future price and wage developments. However, the current situation is 
not normal. This means that making contractual commitments in respect of agreements for 
longer periods of time may be difficult.  
As  I  mentioned  in  my  introduction,  I  have  no  advice  regarding  the  outcome  of  this  year’s 
collective bargaining. Instead, I have tried to describe the economic setting for this collective 
bargaining. The necessary deliberations must be undertaken by the social partners together.  
Concluding remarks  
Wage formation has functioned well over the last ten to fifteen years. It has contributed to our 
success in maintaining inflation on a low and stable level, at the same time as real wages 
and growth have developed strongly. My hopes are that this year’s collective bargaining will 
contribute towards Sweden’s continued positive economic development, once the effects of 
the financial crisis have ebbed away. 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 7
Figures 
     8 
 BIS Review 11/2010
     BIS Review 11/2010 
 9
     10 
 BIS Review 11/2010
     BIS Review 11/2010 
 11
     12 
 BIS Review 11/2010
     BIS Review 11/2010 
 13
     14 
 BIS Review 11/2010
     BIS Review 11/2010 
 15
  16 
 BIS Review 11/2010
