Syed Salim Raza: Need for alternative delivery channels in promoting 
access to finance 
Speech  by  Mr  Syed  Salim  Raza,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Pakistan 
Branchless Banking Conference 2010, Karachi, 17 April 2010. 
 Dr. Muhammad Yasin, Chairman Pakistan Telecommunication Authority, 
Mr. Ali Arshad Hakeem, Chairman NADRA, 
Mr. Haroon Sharif, Regional Advisor DFID, 
Distinguished Speakers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
On  behalf  of  SBP,  may  I  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  all,  to  Pakistan’s 
Branchless  Banking  Conference  2010.  Today’s  forum  has  participants  from  diverse 
backgrounds,  from  the  banking,  microfinance,  and  telecommunication  sectors,  as  well  as 
donors  and  government  agencies,  setting  the  stage  for  a  creative  and  fruitful  working 
session. 
There are about 4 billion unbanked people1 in the world, which is more than two-
2. 
thirds of the population of low and middle-income countries. In Pakistan, the ratio of financial 
exclusion is even higher. In spite of the availability of an enabling policy environment, and 
government and donors-supported incentives, the existing outreach is about 12%. It is in our 
greatest  self  interest  to  develop  inclusive  financial  systems  which  provide  low  income  and 
marginalized  communities  with  increased  access  to  viable  financial  services,  thus  allowing 
them  to  become  a  critical  component  in,  and  contribute  to,  the  country’s  economic 
development. 
Alternative delivery channels 
3. 
Traditionally, the provision of financial services to the low income population is often 
based  on  personal,  one-to-one  relationships,  making  it  human  resource  intensive.  Thus, 
financial  institutions  have  to  incur  high  costs  for  building  and  maintaining  branch  networks 
and developing trained personnel. Alternative delivery channels can reduce these costs and 
offer a balance between personalized services and emerging transactional services, such as 
mobile banking. Research conducted by the CGAP Technology Program in 2008 found that 
using  third-party  agents  costs  on  average  30  times  less  globally  and  76  times  less  in 
Pakistan  and  replacing  them  with  a  mobile  phone  further  cuts  costs  in  half.2  The  most 
common  of  these  delivery  channels  include  mobile  phones,  third  party  agents,  and  use  of 
PoS terminals. 
4. 
In  addition  to  significant  cost  reduction,  alternative  delivery  channels  expand 
outreach to areas in which the traditional bricks and mortar approach is unfeasible, and also 
increases  product  diversification  by  making  savings  and  remittance  products  convenient, 
efficient  and  profitable.  On  the  client  side,  such  delivery  channels  provide  unprecedented 
convenience through remote payments. Here, I would like to mention that SBP is facilitating 
the microfinance sector in rationalizing current high cost structures. GoP has granted certain 
                                                 
1   M. Pickens, D. Porteous, and Sarah Rotman, “Scenarios for Branchless Banking in 2020”, Focus Note No. 57, 
CGAP and DFID, Oct 2009. 
2   G.  Ivatury  and  I.  Mas,  “The  Early  Experience  with  Branchless  Banking”,  Focus  Note  No.  46,  CGAP,  April 
2008. 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 1
tax  incentives  to  the  sector.  We  expect  that  NADRA  would  also  favorably  consider  its  fee 
structure for clients’ verification for MFBs. 
Branchless Banking – international experience 
5. 
Ladies & Gentlemen, mobile banking has come out globally as the most innovative 
alternate  delivery  channel  in  recent  years.  Mobile  banking  has  successfully  accelerated 
financial inclusion and changed the financial landscape in many developing countries. Mobile 
phones are compensating for inadequate infrastructure, slow postal services, and the limited 
coverage of banking systems in these countries. 
6. 
Take  for  example,  Kenya  where  the  largest  mobile  service  provider,  Safaricom 
launched  M-PESA  in  2007.  It  now  has  nearly  7  million  clients  in  a  country  of  38  million 
people.  It  records  an  average  of  10,000  new  registrations  per  day.  M-PESA  offers  mobile 
phone-based services to clients across the country through a network of more than 10,000 
agents for account opening, handling of deposits and withdrawals into the customer’s virtual 
“wallet,”  and  customer  support  services.  These  agents  can  take  cash  from  customers  and 
credit it to their mobile account, and transfer money to other registered users. M-PESA has 
significantly  reduced  many  of  the  spatial  and  temporal  barriers  to  money  transfer.  The 
important outcome of M-PESA is the penetration of money flows to rural and hard-to-reach 
areas.  According  to  a  recent  study,  the  income  of  Kenyan  household  using  M-PESA  has 
increased by up to 30% since they started mobile banking. 
7. 
In Asia, Philippines was an early user of mobile banking initiatives. The central bank 
of Philippines (BSP) has played an active role in the emergence of mobile banking. The BSP 
allowed  two  models  for  mobile  banking.  In  first  model  i.e.  bank-based  model,  the  BSP 
allowed banks to outsource functions to one mobile operator i.e. Smart Money in 2001. In the 
second model i.e. nonbank-based model, BSP registered G-Xchange (a subsidiary of a giant 
telecom,  Globe)  as  a  remittance  agent  in  2004.  Under  both  the  models,  merchants  were 
allowed to conduct KYC. 
8. 
Most  mobile  phone  based  banking  in  Philippines  has  been  supported  by  the  two 
giant  mobile  network  operators  –  Globe  and  Smart.  Out  of  39  million  “Smart”  subscribers, 
2.5 million are using “Smart Money”; and out of 23 million Globe subscribers, 1.2 million are 
using GCash services. According to the BSP, the average home remittance costs the sender 
between 2.5% to 5% in the conventional system whereas the same routed through GCash or 
Smart  Money  would  cost  less  than  2%.  Low-income  Filipinos  now  use  “mobile  money”  to 
send and receive domestic remittances – on average US$50. They use “mobile money” to 
purchase airtime and make purchases remotely. Moreover, the policy makers are currently 
focusing on “savings” as a future service for mobile banking. 
Branchless Banking – Pakistan 
9. 
Ladies  &  Gentlemen,  now  let  us  look  at  Pakistan.  Our  financial  sector  is  going 
through a dynamic transition, led by increasing uptake of technology solutions. This transition 
can be seen in recent e-banking data, with a transactional volume of 46.4 million e-payments 
valuing Rs. 4.1 trillion during a single quarter of October–December 2009. These volumes 
are  expected  to  grow  substantially  as  Pakistan  has  currently  95  million  mobile  users 
compared to 26 million bank accounts, highlighting the inherent potential for mobile banking 
in Pakistan. 
10. 
Pakistan  is  the  first  country  in  South-Asia  to  have  issued  Branchless  Banking 
Regulations,  providing  commercial  and  microfinance  banks  a  supportive  regulatory 
environment  for  developing  partnerships  and  innovative  delivery  channels.  Our  regulations 
support  the bank-led  model,  in  which  the  entire  control  & responsibility  of  the  product  and 
program rests with the authorized financial institution. Due to inherent risks and existing legal 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2010
framework, the telco-led model has not been permitted at the moment. These actions were 
reinforced  by  the  Ministry  of  Information  Technology  and  Pakistan  Telecommunication 
Authority, which issued policy directives to provide technical support for the implementation 
of Branchless Banking in Pakistan. 
11. 
With  an  enabling  regulatory  structure  and  growing  technology  sector,  Pakistani 
banks and microfinance players can now utilize international best practices and models to 
diversify their financial services and develop partnerships for managing special initiatives. 
As a result of Branchless Banking regulations, at present three models are operating 
12. 
in Pakistan. The first is MFB’s kiosks at retailer’s premises. Under this model, the First Micro 
Finance  Bank  (FMFB)  developed  partnership  with  Pakistan  Post  to  expand  its  delivery 
channels.  Under  this  model,  more  than  40,000  borrowers  have  been  reached  out  through 
68 offices of Pakistan Post. 
13. 
The second model is “Retailers” acting as MFB’s agents. In October 2009, Telenor 
and Tameer launched the largest Branchless Banking initiative in Pakistan, Easy Paisa. This 
allows individuals to use services such as utility bills payment, domestic remittances, and a 
deposit  account  (M-wallet)  by  visiting  their  nearest  EasyPaisa  authorized  shop,  Telenor 
Franchise, Telenor Sales & Service Center or Tameer Bank branch. Tameer has utility bills 
payment  arrangement  with  nine  utility  companies.  Tameer  has  opened  over 
25,000 Branchless  Banking  customers  accounts.  Cumulative  volume  of  transactions  of 
Branchless  Banking  services  till  the  end  of  March  2010  is  over  Rs.  4  billion  with  over 
1.3 million 
inward 
remittances. 
14. 
The third model is led by commercial banks. MCB Bank is currently providing both 
transactional  and  non-transactional  services  through  mobile  phones  to  its  registered 
customers. MCB Bank has registered over 60,000 customers with 200–300 new customers 
signing  up  each  on  MCB  Mobile.  MCB  Bank  has  transacted  over  Rs.  1  billion  with  over 
175,000  transactions.  In  addition,  another  commercial  bank,  UBL  is  also  providing 
Branchless Banking. UBL’s model is different from Tameer’s since it is based on selection of 
individual  agents  that  will  work  as  “Direct  Agents”.  UBL  has  also  successfully  worked  for 
IDPs for dispersal of government fund and multilateral donor funds through their Branchless 
Banking  infrastructure.  In  addition,  SBP  has  recently  allowed  Dubai  Islamic  Bank  to  offer 
Branchless Banking at convenient public locations like Shopping Malls, Clubs, Societies and 
Schools where potential customers exist. The Branchless Banking services shall be provided 
by creating a Branchless Banking Desk at these public locations where Dubai Islamic Bank’s 
staff shall serve the customers’ banking needs. 
15. 
In  addition,  a  new  model  is  emerging  in  which  a  retailer  or  a  telco  establishes  its 
own microfinance bank. I am happy that a few large retail organizations and mobile network 
operators  are  currently  in  the  process  of  establishing  their  own  Microfinance  banks  to 
leverage  their  retail  networks  and  mobile  phone  technology  to  extend  the  distribution  of 
financial services throughout Pakistan. This new model has a great potential to expand the 
frontiers  of  financial  access  especially  in  the  far-flung  areas.  At  present,  State  Bank  is 
reviewing their applications for the grant of microfinance bank license.  
forward,  Tameer  will  also 
transactions.  Going 
introduce 
foreign 
Concluding remarks 
16. 
As Branchless Banking channels become increasingly available, the speed at which 
financial services reach the un-served population will depend on the actions and decisions of 
both  the  public  and  private  sectors.  State  Bank  has  developed  a  regulatory  environment 
which extends the frontiers of Branchless Banking. SBP will continue to actively engage with 
financial  as  well  as  non-financial  players  to  stimulate  the  adoption  of  innovative  delivery 
channels for expanding the frontiers of financial access. 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 3
17. 
Supported with the necessary regulatory environment, the private sector has to take 
the  necessary  steps  for  rapid  uptake  of  Branchless  Banking.  The  providers  should  set 
realistic  expectations  of  their  time  horizons  and  potential  returns.  Those  institutions  which 
build their competence to manage potential risks early, will have more robust results. 
18. 
The  increasing  use  of  Branchless  Banking  will  help  lift  the  trajectory  of  financial 
inclusion in the country. Critical to this trajectory are the decisions that we take and it is our 
joint responsibility to build a healthy and proactive financial sector in the country. 
I  wish  for  vigorous  and  productive  discussions  at  today’s  Conference  and  look  forward  to 
have  your  valuable  insights  and  recommendations  for  our  current  as  well  as  future 
Branchless Banking development initiatives. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2010
