David Miles: Monetary policy and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Miles,  Member  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of 
England, at the Bristol Business Forum, Bristol, 14 July 2010. 
 I would like to thank Conall MacCoille and Gilberto Marcheggiano for research assistance and I am also grateful 
for  helpful  comments  from  other  colleagues.  The  views  expressed  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect 
those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Monetary  Policy  in  the  UK  has  never  been  as  expansionary  as  it  is  today.  Just  over 
15 months ago the level of Bank Rate was reduced to what is – to all intents and purposes – 
its  floor.  As  Chart  1  rather  starkly  shows,  this  is  the  lowest  level  to  which  Bank  Rate  has 
fallen  since  the  Bank  of  England  was  established  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century. 
Bank Rate has not been changed for 16 consecutive meetings of the MPC. That is not so 
unusual. In fact, as the Chart reveals, between 1720 and 1820 Bank Rate did not move from 
5%. Had a Monetary Policy Committee then met each month, as it does now, it would have 
decided at 1200 consecutive meetings not to change the level of interest rates. So it is far 
from unusual for the interest rate set by the Bank to remain constant for over a year. And for 
much  of  the  period  since  rates  fell  to  the  floor,  policy  has  been  actively  changed  –  asset 
purchases have built up to now stand at around £200 billion.  
Chart 1 
Bank rate from 1694 
 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1700
1800
1900
2000
  
So it is the  level to which interest rates have fallen that is unprecedented. I believe it has 
been right to loosen aggressively the stance of monetary policy because of the scale of the 
deflationary  and  recessionary  forces  unleashed  by  the  remarkably  rapid  downturn  that 
followed the crisis in the banking sector. This crisis intensified dramatically in the autumn of 
2008  when  the  banking  system  came  close  to  total  collapse.  That  would  have  been  an 
outcome comparable in its impact to the failure of the system for electricity supply. Many now 
argue that monetary policy should be set in a different way so as to reduce the chances of 
this sort of banking crisis. That is one of the issues I want to discuss today. The argument 
that the aims of monetary policy need to be broadened beyond a focus on inflation is one 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 1
that deserves to be taken seriously because the damage done by extreme financial instability 
is great. If there were no tools better suited to help preserve financial stability than varying 
interest rates then the case for broadening the goals of monetary policy would be strong. But 
I believe there are tools better suited to make the financial system more robust and I want to 
consider  one  of  them  –  capital  requirements  –  and  how  they  might  in  future  interact  with 
monetary policy.  
More immediately, problems and fragilities in the banking sector remain and pose risks that 
the recovery in demand and activity we have seen across Europe – including in the UK – 
falters. But in the UK we have also seen CPI inflation rise to a level that is significantly above 
the inflation target. In recent months CPI inflation has begun to fall, but remains well above 
the 2% target level and that makes setting monetary policy difficult. We continue to face the 
problem of balancing risks: risks that inflation of 1.0pp–1.5pp above target lasts long enough 
to become ingrained in expectations and affect behaviour  so that it is hard to bring down, 
versus  risks  that  the  recovery  in  output  becomes  weaker  and  then  disappears,  leaving 
inflation pressures lower than is consistent with the target further ahead.  
Since the financial crisis towards the end of 2008 economic policy has been unusually hard 
to  manage.  Both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  have  been  exceptionally  expansionary.  There 
has been an extremely large fiscal deficit. Fiscal policy is now being tightened. I look forward 
to  the  day  when  it  will  be  appropriate  to  tighten  monetary  policy  since  a  return  to  more 
normal levels of interest rates would be a welcome sign that economic conditions were also 
more normal. But I do not think that is where we are today. 
So since I joined the MPC just over a year ago I have not voted to increase interest rates – 
despite the fact that inflation has more often than not been above the target. But even though 
price  rises  over  the  past  year  have  been  running  at  relatively  high  levels,  the  underlying 
domestic inflationary pressures are not strong. Wage rises – despite a move up in household 
inflation expectations – remain low. Without a pick up in wage inflation I find it hard to think it 
at  all  likely  that  inflation  being  significantly  above  target  is  sustainable.  Of  course  wage 
pressures may build significantly over the next year or so, though I do not believe this is the 
most likely outcome. And risks of an extended period of low growth – which would further 
weaken those pressures – are real.  
In talking about the possibility of an extended period of low, or no, growth I may sound blasé 
about inflation risks. But the point about risks is that more than one can exist. There are risks 
that  inflation  stays  well  above  the  target  level;  there  are  also  risks  that  demand  in  the 
economy falls even more below supply capacity so that inflation further ahead drifts below 
the target. In considering how to balance these risks there is a need to look through short run 
and potentially transitory factors. Reacting to today’s inflation rate (which reflects where the 
level of prices is now relative to 12 months ago), rather than where inflation will be looking 
ahead, is not the right thing to do. The inflation rate can move a lot in a short period. Inflation 
was barely 1% less than a year ago. 
But this is a difficult situation to have to deal with. I dislike clichés so will resist the temptation to 
talk  about  the  ship  having  being  blown  near  to  the  rocks  and  now  having  to  steer  a  difficult 
course in treacherous waters with rather out of date maps that have not been updated since no-
one expected we would be in such a place. But it is a temptation since it is not a bad analogy. 
How we came to be in this difficult situation is something on which many books have already 
been  written.  At  the  heart  of  the  problems  has  been  a  banking  system  which  proved 
catastrophically  fragile.  That  fragility  reflected  the  fact  that  many  banks  had  come  to  have 
very  high  leverage  –  a  lot  of  debt  relative  to  capital  –  which  made  them  vulnerable  to 
concerns about losses on their assets.  
This poses a big and obvious question: how do we reduce the fragility of the banking system 
in a way that does not come at too high price – a price may come in the form of a lower level 
of overall economic activity? And should we change the goal of monetary policy to include a 
wider range of objectives that include maintaining the stability of the banking sector?  
2 
 BIS Review 100/2010
Why were banks so fragile? 
On  the  eve  of  the crisis  we  had come  to  be  in  a  situation where  the  capital  of  UK  banks, 
relative  to  their  assets,  was  around  half  the  level  that  was  typical  fifty  years  earlier  and 
probably around one third the level that was usual one hundred years ago (Chart 2). In the 
US the decline in bank capital over the past one hundred years is quite probably even larger.  
Chart 2 
Capital levels relative to total  
holdings for UK banks 
Chart 3 
Liquidity ratio of the UK banking sector 
Per cent 
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1921 1931 1941 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 2001
Sources:  Bank  of  England,  Financial  Stability  Report 
June  2009  and  “The  British  Economy,  Key  Statistics 
1900–1970”,  published  for  the  London  &  Cambridge 
Economic  Service.  From  1968  the  liquidity  ratio  is: 
Cash  +  Bank  of  England  balances  +  money  at  call  + 
eligible bills + UK gilts as a percentage of banks’ total 
asset holdings. Prior to 1968 the ratio is calculated as 
the  liquid  assets  of  the  London  Clearing  Banks  as  a 
percentage  of  gross  deposits,  as  defined  in  “The 
British Economy, Key Statistics 1900–1970”.  
Sources:  United  Kingdom:  Sheppard,  D  (1971),  The 
growth and role of UK financial institutions 1880–1962, 
Methuen,  London;  Billings,  M  and  Capie,  F  (2007), 
“Capital  in  British  banking”,  1920–1970,  Business 
History,  Vol  49(2),  pages  139–162;  BBA,  published 
accounts  and  Bank  calculations.  (a)  US  data  show 
equity  as  a  percentage  of  assets  (ratio  of  aggregate 
dollar  value  of  bank  book  equity  to  aggregate  dollar 
value of bank book assets). (b) UK data on the capital 
ratio show equity and reserves over total assets on a 
time-varying  sample  of  banks, 
the 
majority of the UK banking system, in terms of assets. 
Prior to 1970 published accounts understated the true 
level  of  banks’  capital  because  they  did  not  include 
hidden  reserves.  The  solid  line  adjusts  for  this.  2009 
observation is  from H1. (c) Change  in  UK accounting 
standards. 
International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards  (IFRS)  were  adopted  for  the  end-2005 
accounts.  The  end-2004  accounts  were  also  restated 
on an IFRS basis. The switch from UK GAAP to IFRS 
reduced the capital ratio of the UK banks in the sample 
by approximately 1 percentage point in 2004. 
representing 
(d) 
Furthermore, in recent years the quality of banks’ capital deteriorated as banks exploited the 
availability of new hybrid capital instruments which often had the tax advantages of debt. In 
practice  hybrid  capital  did  not  absorb  banks’  losses  despite  being  treated  for  regulatory 
purposes as if it was like equity.  
The  liquidity  of  banks,  as  measured  by  the  ratio  of  their  most  liquid  assets  (central  bank 
reserves, gilts and Treasury bills) relative to total assets, was a fraction of what had been 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 3
normal twenty years earlier and a tiny fraction of what had been normal before the 1970’s 
(Chart  3).  And  banks  had  also  become  larger.  Their  assets,  relative  to  the  size  of  the 
economy,  had  grown  very  sharply.  Relative  to  GDP,  they  had  roughly  doubled  in  the 
10 years up to 2007 (Chart 4). 
The UK banking sector had low capital, illiquid assets and was very large when fears about 
the value of its assets increased. The combination of those things accounts for the scale of 
the damage that ensued.  
Chart 4 
UK monetary and financial institutions,  
assets as % of nominal GDP 
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
 1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
Note:  Monetary  and  financial  institutions  do  not  include  insurance  companies, 
pension funds and other financial intermediaries. 
Source: Bank of England, Monetary and Financial Statistics. 
There  are  many  different  proposals  to  build  a  more  robust  banking sector.  Some  of  these 
involve  using  conventional  monetary  policy,  that  is  interest  rates.  But  most  proposals  are 
about  changes  to the way  banks do  business.  These  range  from  those  requiring  banks  to 
hold  somewhat  higher  capital  and  liquidity  ratios  to  much  stricter  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements; but they also include more fundamental changes to the financial architecture 
that  would  preclude  banks  from  undertaking  many  types  of  business.  It  may  seem 
inappropriate  to  present  these  alternative  proposals  on  a  continuous  spectrum.  Some  are 
about altering balance sheet structure (capital and liquidity requirements) and others focus 
on limits on the activities banks can pursue. But in practice I think many of the proposals can 
be seen to lie on a continuous spectrum. This is because stopping a bank from undertaking 
an activity and insisting that it be (in the limit) completely equity financed are quite close. One 
can think of a bank as an entity that finances its acquisition of assets with substantial use of 
debt finance. By setting capital standards on a type of business high enough one prevents it 
being financed with much debt; that comes close to making it an activity banks cannot do.  
Amongst the most radical proposals for creating a less fragile financial structure are those of 
Laurence Kotlikoff1. The Kotlikoff proposal is – in essence – to turn the funding of the vast 
majority of what are now assets on bank balance sheets (largely loans) into equity claims. 
This could be seen as equivalent to imposing 100% capital ratios. It would mean that banks 
                                                 
1  Kotlikoff, L. (2010) “Jimmy Stuart is Dead: Ending the World’s Ongoing Financial Plague with Limited Purpose 
Banking”, Wiley Press. 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2010
would, to the extent they continued to hold the loans that they make, be more like unit trusts 
with an origination arm rather than banks. 
So many – in fact almost all – of the proposals to make banks less fragile will mean they 
would  come  to  hold  more  equity  capital.  I  think  this  is  right.  And  I  believe  it  is  the  most 
fundamental response to banking fragility because it directly deals with solvency problems – 
risks that people who have lent money don’t get it back. I believe that those risks – real or 
perceived  –  have  been  the  fundamental  drivers  of  the  financial  disasters  of  the  past  few 
years.  Other  problems,  which  are  sometimes  described  as  funding  or  liquidity  problems, 
often arise because of fears about solvency.  
I  do  not  want  to  imply  that  other  measures  to  make  the  financial  sector  more  stable  
–  including  liquidity  requirements  and  changes  to  the  way  asset  values  are  assessed  and 
reported  –  are  not  important.  But  I  want  to  consider  whether  changes  in  capital  are  a 
powerful tool to make the banking sector robust and whether it is right to see them, rather 
than monetary policy, as a more natural means to that end. 
Some are sceptical that higher capital requirements can work because banks may be able to 
avoid (or evade) them. If capital requirements are increased significantly, but only on some 
activities, banks may re-classify assets to switch their business into forms where the capital 
requirements are no higher than today. To me that is an argument for thinking about very 
substantial rises in required bank capital pretty much across the full range of their activities. 
Of course if this is very costly it will create two problems: it would create big incentives to 
avoid  them  and  potentially  big  costs  to  the  wider  economy,  because  of  the  impact  on  the 
price and availability of bank loans.  
Two issues are important. First, the scale of the impact on bank funding costs from higher 
capital  requirements.  Higher  funding  costs  would  push  up  on  the  cost  of  bank  loans  to 
households  and  non-financial  companies  and  affect  lending  and  investment,  which  in  turn 
could require a monetary policy response; those costs will also affect the incentives to avoid 
(or  evade)  capital  requirements.  The  second  issue  is  how  much  more  robust  the  financial 
sector, and banks in particular, become with different amounts of extra capital. 
Several  estimates  of  the  cost  of  higher  bank  capital  exist.  The  Institute  for  International 
Finance  (IIF)  suggest  that  proposed  regulatory  reform  which  could  be  part  of  the  Basle  III 
system  could  reduce  the  path  of  average  annual  GDP  growth  in  the  US,  euro  area  and 
Japan by 0.3pp for the next ten years2. This implies that the level of GDP would ultimately be 
around  3%  lower.  If  we  use  a  real  discount  rate  of  2.5%  a  year,  the  present  value  of  a 
permanent fall in output of 3% is in excess of 100% of current annual GDP. This is at the 
high  end  of  estimates  of  the  cost  of  higher  capital  requirements.  Recent  analysis  by 
economists  from  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  and  Social  Research  (NIESR), 
commissioned by the FSA, puts the present value of the costs of permanently raising capital 
requirements by 1% at approximately 2.7% of current GDP3. And illustrative estimates in the 
most  recent  Bank  of  England  Financial  Stability  Report  (FSR)  indicate,  under  certain 
conservative  assumptions,  that  the  long  run  costs  could  amount  to  4%  of  current  annual 
                                                 
2 
“Interim  Report  on  the  Cumulative  Impact  on  the  Global  Economy  of  Proposed  Changes  in  Banking 
Regulatory Framework”, Institute for International Finance, 2010. The report assumes: a three-fold increase in 
the risk weights assigned to trading book assets; a 2pp increase in the minimum Tier 1 and overall regulatory 
capital  ratios,  to  6%  and  10%,  respectively,  to  take  place  at  the  end  of  2012;  capital  redefinition  effects 
including exclusion of minority interest from Tier 1; higher holdings of liquid assets as a result of the minimum 
Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  being  increased;  a  greater  reliance  on  longer-term  over  short-term  wholesale 
funding, as a result of the Net Stable Funding Ratio at 100%. 
3  See Barrell, R, Davis, E, Fic, T, Holland, D, Kirby, S, and Liadze, I (2009), “Optimal regulation of bank capital 
and liquidity: how to calibrate new international standards”, FSA Occasional Paper 38. The paper indicates 
that a 1% rise in capital requirements could reduce output by 0.08% of GDP in the long run. Discounted at a 
rate of 3% this would imply a 2.7% reduction in current GDP. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 5
GDP  in  present  value  terms,  though  it  also  finds  that  the  GDP  benefits  from  increasing 
capital requirements from their current level substantially outweigh these costs4.  
The NIESR and FSR estimates look much lower than the IIF figure. But the IIF estimate is for 
the  impact  of  a  range  of  adjustments  which  include  a  more  than  1%  rise  in  bank  capital. 
Nonetheless that estimate looks likely to be higher than the illustrative calculation in the FSR. 
But rather than seeing the FSR calculations as generating a very low estimate of the cost of 
higher capital requirements, I think they are more likely to be a conservative assessment that 
reflects the care taken not to underestimate the cost of higher bank capital.  
The costs of extra bank capital 
Many  assessments  from  commentators  and  practitioners,  though  often  not  precisely 
quantified, suggest that the costs of significantly higher capital requirements for banks are 
very  substantial.  I  am  rather  sceptical  about  the  claims  that  substantially  higher  capital 
requirements must mean significantly higher costs of funds for those who borrow to invest 
and that total investment and output in the economy will be significantly lower. 
There are two reasons for my scepticism. 
First,  a  simple  historical  point.  In  the  UK  and  in  the  USA  economic  performance  was  not 
obviously far worse when banks held very much higher levels of capital. Investment – relative 
to GDP – was not lower. This is prime facie evidence that much higher levels of bank capital 
do  not  cripple  development,  and  the  financing  of  investment.  Conversely,  there  is  little 
evidence that investment or the average (or potential) growth rate of the UK economy picked 
up  as  spreads  on  bank  lending  narrowed  over  the  past  decade,  and  the  volume  of  bank 
credit expanded sharply (Chart 5).  
Chart 5 
UK GDP growth 
GDP Growth
10 Year Rolling Average
 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
 Source: Bank of England, Monetary and Financial Statistics. 
 
Second,  the  most  straightforward  and  logically  consistent  model  of  the  overall  impact  of 
higher equity capital (and less debt) on the total cost of finance of a company implies that the 
effect  is  zero.  The  Modigliani  Miller  (MM)  theorem  implies  that  as  more  equity  capital  is 
                                                 
4  See Box 7 in chapter 5 of Bank of England, Financial Stability Report, June 2010. The 4% cost is for a 1% rise 
in banks’ capital as a proportion of risk-weighted assets. 
6 
 BIS Review 100/2010
raised the volatility of the return on that equity falls, and the safety of the debt rises, so that 
the required rate of return on both sources of funds falls. It does so in such a way that the 
weighted  average  cost  of  finance  is  unchanged5.  It  is  absolutely  NOT  self-evident  that 
requiring banks to hold more capital has to substantially increase their costs and must mean 
that they need to charge substantially more on loans to service the providers of their funds.  
There are certainly reasons why the Modigliani Miller result is unlikely to hold exactly. The 
Modigliani-Miller  theorem  may  not  hold  for  banks  because  of  asymmetric  information 
problems in financial markets. But I will argue that one of the most obvious reasons why it 
does  not  hold  (differential  tax  treatment  of  debt  and  equity)  need  not  imply  that  there  is  a 
wider economic cost to be paid for higher capital requirements on banks.  
Indeed,  recent  research  suggests  that  the  Modigliani-Miller  theorem  might  not  be  a  bad 
approximation even for banks. Kashyap et al find that the long-run steady state impact on 
bank loan rates from increases in external equity finance is modest, in the range of 25–45 
basis points for a ten percentage point increase in capital requirements6. They also find that 
the costs of capital requirements are greater if they are phased in very quickly.  
I want to briefly describe some ways of trying to calibrate the costs and benefits of higher 
capital  requirements  –  which  do  not  assume  the  MM  theorem  holds.  The  method  I  use 
follows that outlined in the recent Bank of England FSR7. The methodology followed in the 
FSR seems to me very sensible. The idea is to calculate the impact of a given change in 
equity  capital  –  that  is  an  equity  for  debt  swap  –  on  a  typical  bank’s  cost  of  funding.  I 
assume, as in the FSR, the higher cost of bank funding is passed on in the form of a higher 
cost of bank loans. To assess what effect that has on the wider economy we then make an 
educated guess at the effect of a rise in the cost of bank loans on the overall required return 
on investment. That in turn will affect the stock of capital and economic activity. This impact 
on economic activity is the cost of higher capital requirements. 
The illustrative estimates in the FSR indicate that conservative assumptions about effects of 
higher  bank  capital  on  the  costs  of  bank  funding  and  lending  generate  a  marginal  cost  of 
about 4% of annual GDP, in present value terms, for a 1% of risk-weighted assets rise in 
capital. The FSR notes that by relaxing these assumptions the cost may be lower, so that the 
estimates are probably an upper bound8.  
The starting point for my calculations is the case presented in the FSR. This is that the cost 
of a 1% rise in banks’ capital relative to their risk weighted assets would reduce annual GDP 
by about 0.1%. At a discount rate of 2.5% this implies that the present value of this loss in 
output  over  all  future  periods  is  4.25%  of  current  annual  GDP9.  I  illustrate  that  less 
conservative  assumptions  imply  a  much  smaller  estimated  cost  of  higher  bank  capital 
requirements. Specifically, I sequentially take account of: 
                                                 
5 
 See  Modigliani,  F.;  Miller,  M.  (1958).  “The  Cost  of  Capital,  Corporation  Finance  and  the  Theory  of 
Investment”. American Economic Review 48 (3): 261–297. 
6  See Kashyap, K., Stein, J. and Hanson, S. “An Analysis of the Impact of “Substantially Heightened” Capital 
Requirements on Large Financial Institutions”, Working Paper. 
7  See in particular box 7 in chapter 5 of Bank of England, Financial Stability Report, June 2010. 
8 
In  particular,  it  notes  that  the  costs  may  be  over-estimated  because  the  calculations  assume  that  the 
Modigliani-Miller  theorem  does  not  hold  and  because  they  use  a  Cobb-Douglas  production  function  to 
compute the reaction of output to changes in firms’ cost of capital. 
9  Underlying these calculations are assumptions that the cost of equity and debt are 10% and 5% respectively 
and  remain  fixed.  Our  baseline  calculations  are  similar,  but  slightly  higher  than  those  in  the  June  2010 
Financial Stability Report. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 7
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
the  possibility  that  if  a  bank  has  more  equity  capital  the  return  on  equity  is  less 
variable  lowering  the  required  rate  of  return.  (This  is  a  partial  allowance  for  the 
mechanism underlying the Modigliani-Miller result.) 
the likelihood that the extra tax revenue that accrues to the government as banks 
are  forced  to  switch  to  equity  that  is  less  favourably  treated  is  used  to  offset  any 
resultant rise in the cost of finance for companies using bank debt. (For example the 
government could use the extra revenue to increase capital allowances so that the 
negative impact on investment from a higher cost of bank debt is neutralised.) 
the  likelihood  that  the  relative  importance  of  bank  funding  for  investment  is  lower 
than the baseline conservative estimate that banks account for 1/3 of private, non-
financial companies (PNFCs) external finance. 
the likelihood that the sensitivity of investment and the capital stock to a rise in the 
cost of funds to non-financial firms is lower than the value assumed in the baseline 
(where an assumption of a unit elasticity of substitution between capital and labour 
is used). 
Suppose we first allow the cost of equity to fall as more capital reduces its volatility. I only 
allow  for  a  partial  offset  relative  to  what  the  Modigliani  Miller  theorem  implies  –  in  fact  I 
assume the offset is only 30% as great, which means that the weighted average cost of cost 
of  capital  rises  by  70%  of  the  baseline10.  Making  this  adjustment  reduces  the  estimated 
present value of the cost of permanently higher bank capital by about 1% of annual GDP – 
from just over 4% to 3%. 
The major part of this remaining cost reflects that fact that we assume that all interest paid by 
banks on debt they raise is tax deductible at the corporation tax rate (of 28%) while equity 
capital has to earn the required rate of return out of post tax profits. But in thinking about the 
wider economic impact of a switch to less tax sheltered funding for banks we need to take 
account of the extra revenue generated for the government. The government could use the 
extra tax revenue it gets from banks to shelter the users of bank loans from any knock on 
impact  on  their  cost  of  raising  finance.  This  seems  a  natural  assumption  to  make.  And  it 
would  mean  that  we  should  reduce  the  estimated  negative  impact  on  economic  activity. 
When we allow for this the cost – in terms of the lost output of a permanent change to bank 
capital of +1% of assets – almost halves from just over 3% of annual GDP to about 1.7% 
Next I allow for less than 30% of investment in the economy to be financed by bank lending. 
PNFCs’ liabilities with banks are made up of direct loans from banks’, but also banks’ holding 
of corporate bonds and equities, issued by PNFCs. I assume that only PNFCs’ bank loans 
are  affected  by  the  increase  in  banks’  funding  costs.  Chart  5  illustrates  that  over  the  past 
year the share of bank loans in PNFCs financial liabilities has declined from close to 20% to 
close to its average over the past two decades of 16%.  
Allowing  for  this  halves  again  the  estimated  cost  of  higher  bank  capital  –  which  falls  from 
around 1.7% to 0.8% of annual GDP. This estimate is based on the impact of higher cost of 
bank  lending  feeding  through  to  a  (Cobb-Douglas)  production  function,  and  that  implies  a 
high  sensitivity  of  investment  to  the  cost  of  funds  (a  unit  elasticity  of  substitution  between 
capital  and  labour).  Bank  of  England  research11  suggests  that  this  elasticity  is  probably 
substantially lower. If that elasticity is 0.4, which looks a central estimate, then the cost of 
higher bank capital (of 1% of assets) falls from 0.8% of GDP to around 0.3%. Table 1 shows 
the estimated costs of higher bank capital under various assumptions about the economic 
environment. 
                                                 
10  This means that the required return on equity falls from 10% to 8.9%. 
11  See  Barnes  et  al  (2008)  “The  elasticity  of  substitution:  evidence  from  a  UK  firm-level  data  set”,  Bank  of 
England Working Paper. No. 348. 
8 
 BIS Review 100/2010
Chart 6 
Share of MFIs in UK PNFCs financial liabilities12 
 25
20
15
10
5
0
 1987
1992
1997
2002
2007
Note:  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  do  not  include  insurance  companies, 
pension funds and other financial intermediaries. Here, PNFCs financial liabilities are 
measured at current market value. This measure excludes PNFCs financial liabilities 
secured  on  dwellings  which  are  predominately  liabilities  with  MFIs  and  account  for 
around 1% of PNFCs total financial liabilities. 
Source: Office for National Statistics, UK Economic Accounts. 
 Table 1  
The costs of higher capital requirements 
Benefits
Costs 
Required Marginal 
Probability
Extra Months in the Average
Gap between Crises from 25 years
present value, 
% of GDP
present value, 
% of GDP
of 1% rise in risk weighted 
capital ratio
(1) Baseline
(2) 30% Modigliani-Miller effect
(3) Tax offset
(4) More Substitutes to Bank Finance
(5) Less Sensitive Investment
Temporary Impact on GDP from Crises
55%
55%
55%
55%
55%
20%
4.25
3.25
1.67
0.80
0.32
0.32
0.077%
0.059%
0.030%
0.015%
0.006%
0.016%
5.9
4.5
2.3
1.1
0.4
1.2
  
How  do  these  costs  measure  against  the  benefits  of  a  more  robust  banking  sector  and  a 
lower frequency of banking crises? I will make the same assumptions as in the FSR, namely 
that  if  a  bank  crisis  occurs  the  initial  impact  is  to  reduce  output  by  10%  of  GDP.  That  is 
almost exactly the amount by which UK GDP is now below the level it would have reached 
had it continued on the trajectory it was on up to 2007. I assume that three quarters of this 
reduction lasts for just five years, but that the other 2.5% of lost GDP is gone forever. Under 
these assumptions, and using the same discount rate of 2.5%, the present value of reducing 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 9
the likelihood of a systematic crisis in any one year by one percentage point is around 55% 
of current annual GDP. If we instead assumed that there are no permanent effects on GDP 
from financial crises the benefits of reducing the chance of a crisis happening in a year are 
lower at around 20% of GDP (Table 1, column 2). 
The  third  column  in  the  table  shows  by  how  much  the  chances  of  a  banking  crisis  would 
need to fall given a rise in capital of 1% of bank assets so that the benefits of that would 
match  the  estimated  cost.  (Whereas  before  both  benefit  and  cost  are  expressed  as  the 
present  value  of  lost  or  gained  GDP.)  This  is  the  reduction  in  the  probability  of  a  banking 
crisis  required  to  justify  a  1%  increase  in  banks’  risk-weighted  capital  –  given  the 
assumptions made on tax, Modigliani Miller offsets and so on corresponding to that row in 
the Table. Chart 7 illustrates this calculation for multiples of a 1% increase in banks’ capital. 
For  example,  on  the  least  favourable  assumptions  about  the  cost  of  extra  bank  capital 
(corresponding to row 1 in the table) the Chart shows that a 10% increase in banks’ capital 
ratios would require a minimum reduction in the probability of financial crises of 0.8 (the red 
line) for it to pass a cost-benefit test. If we assume that financial crises would otherwise occur 
once in every 25 years (an annual frequency of 4%) then a rise in banks capital by 10 of risk-
weighted assets would be justified if it reduced the probability of financial crises so that they 
occurred with an annual probability of 3.2%, or once every 31 years. Alternatively, taking the 
most favourable assumptions on cost (full tax offsets, partial Modigliani Miller offsets, a lower 
use of bank debt and lower sensitivity of investment spending) the blue line indicates a 10% 
rise  in  capital  relative  to  assets  would  be  justified  if  it  reduced  the  probability  of  financial 
crises from 4% a year to 3.9%, or from once every 25 years to once every 25.4 years. (The 
final column in the table shows that calculation for each case). Such a small decline in the 
likelihood of a financial crisis would not appear to be overly ambitious for such a sharp rise in 
the capital ratio. For typical banks the capital ratio starts out from a level under 10%, so that 
a rise in capital of 10% of risk assets is more than a doubling in the amount of bank capital.  
Chart 7 
Banks capital and the break-even impact  
on probability of financial crises 
reduction in the probability of a financial 
crisis per year, % 
Baseline
30% Modigliani-Miller Effect 
Tax offset
More Substitutes to Bank Finance
Less Sensitive Investment
0
1
2
3
4 
additional capital as % of banks’ risk-weighted assets
 5
6
7
8
9
10
 
That  said,  initial  increases  in  banks’  capital  will  probably  have  a  much  more  pronounced 
impact  on  the  likelihood  of  financial  crises  than  successive  increases.  For  example,  a 
5 percentage point increase in banks capital from 15% to 20% would likely have considerably 
less impact on the probability of banks’ failing than raising capital from 10% to 15%. So it is 
10 
 BIS Review 100/2010
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
 important to consider the rate at which the marginal benefits of banks holding more capital 
will  diminish.  The  June  2010  Financial  Stability  Report  provides  illustrative  estimates  that 
indicate the benefits of additional capital fall to close to zero once a threshold of around 15% 
of risk-weighted assets is reached.  
It  is  difficult  to  predict  the  likely  volatility  of  banks’  assets  values  and  the  probability  of 
extreme events that could lead to a financial crisis. A natural starting point is to assume that 
the  shocks  hitting  the  economy  and  banks’  asset  values  follow  a  normal  distribution. 
However, a distribution with “fatter tails” would imply a greater likelihood of extreme events 
and hence potentially larger benefits from higher capital requirements. 
It seems pretty unlikely to me that the distribution of risks that affects banks follows a normal 
distribution. A much better way to match the distribution of risks that end up affecting GDP is 
to assume that most of the time risks – or shocks – follow a normal distribution but that once 
every few decades a shock comes that is very large. The frequency of such large shocks is 
very much greater than would be implied by an estimated normal distribution that most of the 
time matches the GDP data well. This assumption is one made by Robert Barro in a series of 
important studies of rare events that hit economies12.  
A  few  years  ago  I  calibrated  a  version  of  the  Barro  model  so  as  to  match  historical 
experience13. I used a very large sample of countries and data going back some 200 years. 
Using  data  on  the  annual  change  in  GDP  for  this  sample  of  countries  gave  over  4000 
observations of historical economic growth. The best fit of the data I could find – and it did fit 
the  data  extremely  well  (Chart  8  see  below)  –  implied  that  95%  of  the  time  the  shock  to 
annual  GDP  was  well  behaved  and  came  from  a  normal  distribution  with  a  fairly  small 
volatility (a standard deviation of about 3%).  
About  once  every  20  years,  on  average,  a  shock  came  along  which  could  be  either  very 
good  or  very  bad;  it  either  increased  or  decreased  GDP  by  around  12%.  Much  less 
frequently there came a very much larger – and always negative – hit to GDP. On average 
this very bad shock came along about once a century; reducing GDP by over 30%. In this 
type of model first developed by Barro, the shocks to GDP are permanent and so could be 
expected to affect asset values by comparable magnitudes. So once we allow for rare – but 
very big – shocks that do not follow a normal distribution then there will be larger benefits 
from banks having much more capital. And without allowing for such shocks it is not possible 
to explain the historical variability of economic activity across countries.  
In summary, even taking a conservative view of the cost of extra bank capital the net benefits 
of  stricter  capital  requirements  are  potentially  large.  But  relaxing  these  conservative 
assumptions  implies  the  costs  of  higher  capital  requirements  are  likely  to  be  much  lower. 
Furthermore, the benefits of capital requirements are likely to be considerable, especially if 
one does not assume that the shocks to economic output and banks’ asset values follow a 
normal distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
12  See  for  example  “Rare  Disasters  and  Asset  Markets  in  the  Twentieth  Century”  by  Robert  Barro,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 2006, 121, no. 3. 
13  “What should  equities and  bonds  be  worth in a risky  world”, by David  Miles, Vladimir Pillonca  and Melanie 
Baker, Morgan Stanley research paper, September 2005. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 11
Chart 8 
Comparing the economic model with actual data (1821–2001) 
Annual GDP growth:  
       probability
Frequency distribution of changes
in GDP  - Actual data
Predicted by the model (base
case)
0.125
0.1
0.075
0.05
0.025
0
-40
-35
-30
-25
 -10
-15
-20
100 times annual change in log GDP
-5
0
4
9
14
19
24
29
34
39
 The implications for monetary policy 
I conclude from this that there are likely to be substantial benefits in having banks hold much 
more  capital.  Under  plausible  assumptions  that  would  have  a  relatively  low  impact  on  the 
overall  cost  of  debt  in  the  economy  but  a  big  impact  on  the  robustness  of  the  banking 
system. In all the calculations described above I have been focussing on steady states and 
looking  at  the  long  run  impacts  of banks  coming  to  have much  more  capital. I  think  those 
results  mean  that  it  would  be  desirable  that  banks  come  to  hold  much  more  capital.  It  is 
conceivable that raising large amounts of additional capital in a short period may be more 
costly. So the transition to higher levels of capital should probably be relatively long. 
Clearly  more  stringent  capital  requirements  on  banks  will  be  part  of  any  new  regulatory 
framework. I believe that moving capital requirements on banks is a very useful tool to work 
alongside monetary policy in achieving a stable economic environment. But there are other 
tools  such  as  time-varying  liquidity  standards  or  limits  on  loan-to-value  ratios  on  secured 
lending that could be used to limit the growth of credit over the cycle. However, it is not my 
role  as  a  member  of  the  MPC  to  comment  on  the  exact  design  of  macro-prudential 
instruments. 
But I do believe there is a strong case for having monetary policy tools – which for most of 
the  time  means  the  level  of  interest  rates  –  set  to  achieve  stability  in  nominal  conditions; 
which means that they are focused on inflation. Using the interest rate as a tool to maintain 
the  stability  of  the  banking  system  strikes  me  as  a  strange  assignment  of  policy  tools  to 
targets.  Changes  in  interest  rates  have  an  uncertain  impact  on  financial  stability;  often  it 
would be unclear in which direction to move interest rates to help make the banking sector 
more  robust.  But  in  the  UK  changes  in  interest  rates  have  a  powerful  –  and  relatively 
predictable – impact on the wider economy.  
In  contrast  capital  requirements  may  have  a  powerful  and  relatively  clear  impact  on  bank 
robustness  and  an  uncertain  –  but  quite  likely  relatively  small  –  impact  on  the  wider 
12 
 BIS Review 100/2010
economy.  So  it  seems  to  me  natural  to  use  interest  rates  as  the  active  tool  to  affect  the 
balance between demand and supply in the economy – and so control inflation pressures – 
and  use  capital  requirements  to  maintain  stability  in  the  banking  sector.  Regulating  bank 
capital is a natural means for achieving a stable financial system because it directly affects 
the fragility of the banking sector. 
If  banks  do  come  to  hold  much  more  capital  this  would  make  the  job  of  setting  monetary 
policy easier. It would do so by reducing the chances of banking crises. We have had to live 
with the effects of such a crisis over the past few years; they have included great variability in 
output and unusual (by the standards of the previous ten years) volatility in inflation. But it is 
a non sequitur that because monetary policy would be much more effective if banking crises 
were much less common then monetary policy is the right tool to make the financial system 
more robust. Capital requirements are a better means to that end. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 13
