Jean-Claude Trichet: Euro Star Event to raise public awareness and 
facilitate changeover to the euro in Estonia 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Euro 
Star Event at the Bank of Estonia, Tallinn, 19 September 2010. 
 Dear Governor Lipstok, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The introduction of the euro is a historic moment for any EU Member  State, and the euro 
itself is also a historic achievement for Europe. Indeed, the euro is one of the most tangible 
signs of the cohesion and mutual trust, among Europe’s citizens. Since its introduction back 
in  1999,  the  depth  of  feeling  generated  by  the  euro  has  been  remarkable.  A  lot  of  the 
attention gained by the euro has been directed not only at the currency itself, but rather at 
the  underlying  strategic  vision,  of  which  it  has  become  the  symbol.  The  forthcoming 
enlargement  of  the  euro  area  to  include  Estonia  demonstrates  that  the  euro  area  is  not  a 
“closed  shop”.  Its  doors  are  open  to  the  EU  Member  State  that  fulfils  the  necessary 
preconditions in a sustainable manner. 
1  January  2011  will  become  a  landmark  in  the  history  of  Estonia,  reflecting  the  long  and 
challenging process of economic and monetary integration that has enabled Estonia to join 
the euro area.  
The euro banknotes and coins are now an important and natural part of our daily lives. And 
this will soon be the case for the people of Estonia.  
In preparing for the changeover, we have enjoyed excellent cooperation with Eesti Pank and 
the  Estonian  Government,  working  very  closely  also  with  the  European  Commission.  And 
this, I am sure, will make the introduction of the euro in Estonia a success.  
Today, Eesti Pank and the European Central Bank are launching the Euro Campaign Estonia 
2011, an extensive media campaign to help the people of Estonia to become acquainted with 
the  euro  banknotes  and  coins, the  security  features  of  the  banknotes  and  the  changeover 
modalities. The campaign comprises TV advertisements, print publications, public relations 
activities, interactive applications for the internet and special support for the media.  
In total, we have four TV spots that will be aired from November 2010 to mid-January 2011, 
and these form the backbone of our communications activities for the general public.  
The  first  TV  spot  sets  the  mood  of  the  campaign  and  familiarises  viewers  with  the 
appearance  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  shows  the  gates  and  bridges  featured  on  the 
banknotes.  The  gates  symbolise  the  spirit  of  openness  and  cooperation  in  Europe.  The 
bridges represent the very close relationship and cooperation between the people of Europe 
and between Europe and the rest of the world.  
The other three spots are shorter and focus on the security features of the euro banknotes, in 
particular, the “feel-look-tilt” technique that people can easily use to check the authenticity of 
our banknotes.  
And I am pleased to be able to show you the four TV spots for the first time. Action! 
Dear Governor Lipstok, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  be  here  tonight  to  present  you  with  the  Euro  Star.  Since  the 
inception of the Euro notes and coins, this unique memento has been a gift signifying a warm 
welcome to the “Eurosystem family”. In a way, the very idea of the Euro Star reminds me of 
BIS Review 119/2010 
 1
your Kõpu Lighthouse, the world’s oldest functioning lighthouse built in 1531. Like a bright 
star,  this  lighthouse  has  safely  guided  the  merchant  fleets  bringing  prosperity  to  Estonia. 
I believe that, in its own way, the euro will serve as a similar beacon. It, therefore, gives me 
great  pleasure  to  present  the  Euro  Star  to  Governor  Lipstok  as  a  symbol  of  Eesti  Pank 
joining the Eurosystem on 1 January 2011. 
We all very much look forward to welcoming Estonia to the euro area. Tere tulemast, Eesti! 
[Welcome Estonia!] 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2010
