Tarisa Watanagase: Enhancing Thailand’s resiliency against economic 
turbulence 
Address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  4th  Annual 
Euromoney Thailand Investment Forum: The Economic Perspective, Bangkok, 6 July 2010. 
 Prime Minister, 
Distinguished Speakers and Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank Euromoney for the invitation to speak to this gathering of 
prominent members of public and business sectors. I welcome this opportunity to share with 
you  some  thoughts  on  Thailand’s  economic  and  policy  issues  at  this  very  challenging 
juncture. 
As we all know, the Thai economy has been through one of the most turbulent periods due to 
the  global  impact  from  the  US  sub-prime  crisis  and  the  European  debt  crisis.  Despite  the 
difficult  external  environment  compounded  by  political  problem  and  weak  sentiments  at 
home, it is clear that the Thai economy has been able to cope with shocks quite well. Thus 
far, what the economy experienced has been a mere cyclical downturn, in tandem with the 
contraction of global demand. 
The  good  news  is  that  nothing  about  our  economy  amplified  the  impact  of  these 
external  and  domestic  shocks  and  I  call  that  economic  resiliency.  Unfortunately,  the 
less good news is that a small open economy like Thailand will be prone to more shocks, 
especially through international trade and financial market linkages. So, we need to accept 
this fact and make ourselves as resilient as possible to ride the waves. 
Against this background, my talk today will focus on three parts. First, I wish to discuss the 
progress  of  Thailand’s  economic  recovery  and 
importance  of  starting  policy 
normalization.  Second,  I  will  highlight  the  four  key  strengths  underlying  our  economic 
resiliency  –  the  strengths  which  we  can  continue  to  improve.  Third,  I  will  focus  on  the 
medium-term issues that we must work to enhance so that the economy will become more 
resilient to external developments and increasing volatility. 
This time last year, we were highly uncertain as to when the global economy would bottom 
out, and whether there was danger of a double dip in the recovery. Today, we have already 
witnessed  robust  growth  rates  in  Thailand  and  other  Asian  economies,  starting  the  fourth 
quarter  of  2009.  This  has  been  achieved  notwithstanding  the  gradual  recovery  of  the 
G3 economies, and financial market volatility following the European debt problem. 
Looking back at the downturn, fiscal spending played a very important role in cushioning and 
boosting up the economy. While external demand was still weak, we saw the surge in public 
sector spending to jump start the economy and avoid a potential downward spiral in domestic 
demand. But, once global economy is back on a recovery track, our exports have started to 
grow  strongly,  in  particular,  in  electronics,  electrical  appliances,  and  vehicles.  In  fact,  our 
export sector has already recovered to the pre-crisis level. 
As the growth momentum gained strength, domestic consumption started to pick up. Overall, 
the conditions for recovery look favorable enough and there is general optimism that the Thai 
economy looks set on a continuous growth path. That said, a key weak pocket in the current 
recovery  process  appears  to  be  the  domestic investment  climate  but even  that  should  get 
better as the external environment is improving. 
the 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 1
Unfortunately,  the  political  unrest  during  April–May  had  somewhat  set  back  the  recovery 
process. Most activities slowed down during May on a month on month basis. The tourism 
sector, in particular, was hit hard. In May, the number of foreign tourist arrivals in Thailand 
declined  by  11.8  percent  year-on-year.  Correspondingly,  hotel  occupancy  rate  fell  to 
34.9 percent, mainly from a significant drop in Bangkok and the central region. Nevertheless, 
the impact was rather confined. The occupancy rate in the southern region remained intact at 
45.5 percent, higher than the last 5-year average of 42.9 percent. 
On the whole, we expect that the second quarter GDP growth would be less buoyant than 
that of the first quarter. Nevertheless, economic data during April–May came out better than 
expected, reflecting the ongoing momentum of the Thai economic recovery led by exports. In 
fact, the export value in May continued to expand by 42.5 percent year-on-year in line with 
favorable expansions in all export categories and markets. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Despite headwind from both external and domestic factors, it is now important to embark on 
policy  normalization,  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  As  the  Thai  economy  is  getting 
stronger, returning fiscal and monetary policies gradually to pre-crisis normal levels 
will  not  obstruct  the  recovery  path.  Rather,  it  is  essential  to  enhance  our  economic 
resiliency and save the policy space for the medium term. 
For our monetary policy, it has been extra-eased for quite some time and there is less need 
now. Although the domestic inflationary pressure has been kept in check and we have not 
observed  asset  price  bubbles  at  this  time,  the  central  bank  is  well  aware  of  the  risks 
associated with the interest rates that are kept too low for too long. The crisis in the United 
States was a clear demonstration of how this can lead to a build up of bubbles. And, once 
bubbles burst, the cost to the economy is devastating. Central banks always face a tough 
decision, whether and when to take away the punch bowl before the party gets going. That 
said, we will put our best effort in considering the timing of interest rate increase carefully. 
On the fiscal policy, normalization is also important. As the economic recovery strengthens, 
actual  revenue  collection  has  already  surpassed  the  target  by  as  much  as  2.9  percent  of 
GDP,  and  fiscal  deficit  has  started  to  shrink.  However,  as  several  new  spending  plans  to 
enhance social distribution and build new infrastructure appear to be in the pipeline, the fiscal 
policy challenge is how best to preserve adequate fiscal policy space for future cyclical and 
structural spending needs. The financial market turmoil due to weak confidence following the 
European debt problem is a costly lesson learnt on the importance of fiscal sustainability, an 
issue which will be closely watched by the investor. 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  second  part  of  my  talk.  As  economic  turbulence  would  be  more 
prevalent  going  forward,  we  need  to  maintain  the  strengths  that  have  thus  far  helped 
make Thailand’s economy resilient. These are prudent risk management by key sectors of 
the economy as well as prudent policies. 
First of all, the Thai economy has an overall moderate risk exposure. Our government 
and private sector were right not to build up too much risk exposure. This did not happen by 
chance  but  out  of  everyone’s  recognition  of  risks  associated  with  high  debt  burden.  Over 
time,  private  sector’s  debt-to-equity  ratio  has  come  down  significantly,  now  at  0.7,  from 
around 3 folds during the 1997 crisis. Our banking sector, despite ample liquidity, was very 
cautious  and  had  a  minimal  exposure  to  CDO-related  assets  at  the  onset  of  the 
US sub-prime  crisis.  The  banks  were  wise  not  to  follow  the  bandwagon  in  search  for  high 
yields abroad, which in turn helped protect their balance sheet strengths. 
Second,  the  key  economic  sectors  have  sufficient  insurance  against  risks.  Our 
household  sector  was  not  excessively  leveraged  while  the  corporate  sector  has  always 
maintained  healthy  retained  earnings,  although  in  part  reflecting  unfavorable  domestic 
investment climate. 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2010
As for the banking system, we have built up sufficient bank capital, partly benefited from our 
prudent risk management. Our supervision developments have also come a long way. With 
intensive  and  continuous  legal  and  regulatory  reforms  since  the  1997  Asian  crisis,  our 
financial system is now resilient and in a good position to support growth. On this note, let 
me also say that the Bank of Thailand holds regular meetings with representatives from both 
Thai  and  Foreign  Banks  Associations,  as  well  as  meetings  with  their  top  management  to 
discuss  current  issues  and  policy  implications.  This  dialogue  helps  us  to  continuously 
strengthen risk management such that the financial system will remain in a strong position to 
serve the real economy efficiently. 
Third,  thanks  partly  to  export  diversification  over  the  years,  Thai  export  is  now 
recovering  strongly  despite  a  considerable  shock  to  trades.  A  decade  ago,  Thailand 
relied mostly on G3 countries as our export market, but now, ASEAN market as well as BRIC 
(i.e., Brazil, Russia, India, and China) and other new destinations are emerging strongly and 
help diversify risk from the G3 countries. We also did not get much impact from the European 
debt  crisis  since  our  exports  to  PIIGS  countries  (i.e.,  Portugal,  Ireland,  Italy,  Greece,  and 
Spain) account for only 1.8 percent of total exports. 
Despite an impressive export growth now, Thailand needs to become more resilient against 
greater competition by an increasing number of emerging markets. Thailand is somewhat in 
an  awkward  position  currently,  being  left  behind  by  the  NICs,  and  being  caught  up  by 
countries  like  China  and  Vietnam,  to  name  a  few.  It  is  therefore  important  to  extend 
efforts beyond market diversification to promoting higher value along the production 
chain,  a  task  that  both  the  private  sector  and  the  Government  have  a  role  to  play. 
Especially with the rising FTAs as well as other regional integration and cooperation, 
notably among ASEAN, we must work to make sure that Thai producers and exporters 
can fully utilize the benefits from these arrangements. 
Fourth,  prudent  policy  has  obviously  shielded  us  from  the  contagion  of  external 
developments so far. In addition to the importance of fiscal discipline and debt sustainability 
which I have already highlighted, I would like to stress that monetary policy has not and 
should not be used as an instrument to boost short-term growth. However, it can help 
cushion  the  economy  against  growth  contraction  in  the  short  run,  while  ensuring 
stability  in  the  long  run.  In  this  past  crisis,  the  adverse  effect  led  us  to  a  series  of 
aggressive  rate  cuts  during  December  2008  to  April  2009  in  order  to  help  shore  up  the 
economy. The rate cuts were timely and turned out to be effective, in view of the momentum 
of economic recovery achieved. 
Regarding  the  framework  of  monetary  policy,  I  should  stress  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s 
policy  framework  has  always  emphasized,  not  only  monetary  stability,  but  also  financial 
stability.  We  have  also developed  over  the  years  and  have  been  equipped  with  a  broader 
and more in-depth surveillance that now covers household, financial, and real estate sectors. 
This is important for early detection of imbalances and enables preemptive policy action to 
prevent costly bursting of bubbles. Importantly, the process of monetary policy decision itself 
has  been  institutionalized,  and  independent  from  political  influence.  I  therefore  have  no 
concern today whether who will become the next governor since a good system for policy 
decision making is already in place. 
Going forward, one of the important policy challenges facing us is the sizeable and volatile 
capital  that  flows  to  emerging  economies,  including  Thailand.  This  is  due  to  their  better 
growth prospect and earlier policy normalization vis-à-vis G3 countries. Apart from the policy 
measure to try to shield ourselves from the adverse impact, the private sector also needs to 
remain vigilant about risk by not building up excessive risk exposure and by employing more 
risk protection tools as well. 
I  turn  now  to  the  third  part  of  my  presentation  that  is  what  we  can  possibly  do  more  to 
enhance Thailand’s resiliency over the medium term. On this issue, I would like to reiterate 
briefly what I said earlier in my annual statement regarding the urgency to elevate Thailand’s 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 3
the 
fundamental strength to cope with the changing structure of the global economy. Specifically, 
there are three issues that should be considered priorities. 
First,  in  light  of  the  changing  global  financial  landscape  and  regulatory  environment, 
continuing to strengthen the financial system is an important agenda for both the authorities 
financial  sector.  The  financial  system  must  remain  focused  on  risk 
and 
management,  as  well  as  be  competitive  and  responsive  to  customers’  demand  for 
access, and more variety of products and services. Such a financial system is necessary 
to efficiently support and grow with the economy. 
Second,  given  the  changing  structure  of  the  Thai  population,  fiscal  reform  is  vital  to 
address the ageing society. At the moment, only one-sixth of the labor force is in the 
tax base. Tax revenue thus accounts for only 16 percent of GDP, half of that of developed 
countries.  So  improving  the  tax  restructure  is  one  of  the  priorities  to  be  addressed  to 
enhance fiscal sustainability as well as overall social welfare of the country. 
Third,  we  need  to  continue  to  elevate  Thailand’s  competitiveness  by  enhancing  our 
productivity,  both  in  industries  and  agriculture.  Productivity  gain  in  agriculture,  which 
accounts for the majority of population, in particular, will also help increase farm income and 
reduce  poverty.  Improvement  in  productivity,  of  course,  involves  a  whole  range  of  issues 
from  more  effective  training,  education,  investment  in  research  and  development,  to 
infrastructure investment – all of which require long-term commitment of both the public and 
private sectors. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  pleased  to  say  that  these  medium-term  priorities  are  well-recognized  by  both  the 
authorities  and  the  private  sector.  The  Second  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  and  the  First 
Capital Market Master Plan have already been announced. The Government is working on 
tax  reforms  and  a  few  infrastructure  projects  have  been  decided  upon,  some  of  which 
already launched. Although at an early stage, and it may take some time before these tasks 
of longer-term nature will start to bear fruits, I believe that Thailand is set on the right course 
of economic progress. 
Indeed, the private sector continues to see favorable investment opportunities in Thailand. 
Despite  current  uncertainties,  the  expected  Business  Sentiment  Index  (BSI)  has 
improved  in  recent  months,  boding  well  for  further  investment  going  forward.  Our 
discussions with several domestic and foreign chambers of commerce also confirmed 
similar  positive  sentiment  and  confidence  in  Thailand’s  strength  by  long-term 
investors. This positive opinion has also been evidenced by a stable level of BOI investment 
privilege applications similar to last year’s. For our part, the Bank of Thailand has recently 
amended our regulations (effective June 11, 2010) to allow multinational corporations to set 
up  treasury-center  operations  to  facilitate  more  efficient  financing  flows  in  Thai  baht  and 
foreign currencies. 
To  conclude  my  remark  today,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that,  with  resilient  economic 
fundamentals,  the  prospect  of  the  Thai  economy  remains  robust  in  the  medium  term.  I 
believe  that  going  forward  gradual  policy  normalization  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  will 
enhance our economic resiliency and provide more policy space for the future. 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  wish  all  of  you  successful  and  fruitful  discussions  during  this 
two-day conference. I hope that the speakers and participants will reflect upon what Thailand 
has done right and what we can do more for the Thai economy. In particular, I believe it is 
equally  important  for  the  private  sector,  as  much  as  the  public  sector,  to  play  the  role  in 
strengthening  Thailand’s  long-term  economic  fundamentals,  especially  the  priority  areas  I 
mentioned. Having done some of the right things does not mean that we can be complacent, 
since  the  economic  challenges  will  not  get  any  easier  in  the  current  and  future  global 
environment. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2010
