Christian Noyer: G20 roadmap – how finance can help rebalance the 
world economy  
Introductory speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace 
Financial Forum, Paris, 6 July 2010. 
 Before  I  start  let  me  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  this  conference:  they  have 
managed  to  put  together  an  outstanding  program  and  it  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to 
exchange views with the other participants in this round table. 
I  was  asked  to  introduce  the  discussion  on  “G20  Roadmap:  How  Finance  Can  Help 
Rebalance  the  World  Economy”.  The  title  of  this  session  contains  some  of  the  most 
important concepts on the current policy agenda: “finance”, “rebalancing the world economy” 
and “the G20 Roadmap”. Let me take them in turn. 
“Finance”, first. Since 2008, the world is going through the deepest financial crisis since the 
second  World  War,  and  hence  never  before  has  the  word  finance  been  so  crucial  in  the 
policy  agenda.  This  financial  crisis  has  had  very  high  real  costs:  real  output,  industrial 
production, trade flows, to name just a few key variables, have contracted markedly during 
the crisis. In addition, the fiscal positions and the public debt of many countries have also 
deteriorated markedly in the past two years. Yet, it is important to recall that these real and 
fiscal problems largely stem from the financial issues that plagued our economies in the past 
decade. Indeed the financial sector, with the help of financial innovation and loose regulation 
fostered  unsustainable  growth  and  asset  price  bubbles,  and  if  trade  linkages  have 
contributed  to  spread  the  crisis  across  countries,  financial  integration  has  fostered  the 
contagion. So, yes finance matters and is the heart of the real economy. 
“Rebalancing the world economy”, next. In the years leading to the crisis, the global economy 
was growing at unprecedented speed: above 5% per annum in 2006 and 2007, far above the 
average  recorded  in  the  decade  from  1992  to  2001,  at  3.1%.  Yet,  this  growth  was 
unbalanced,  both  internally  and  across  countries,  such  that  it  was,  as  it  turned  out, 
unsustainable. In fact, the global policy agenda in the mid- to late 2000s was dominated by 
the  issue  of  global  imbalances:  current  account  positions  widened  to  unprecedented 
amounts (at least by modern standards), reflecting strong saving-investment gaps: to many 
observers,  household  saving  was  strikingly  low  in  the  United  States,  while  emerging  Asia 
was  characterized  by  a  “global  saving  glut”,  in  the  words  of  Chairman  Bernanke.  These 
global  imbalances  have  adjusted  markedly  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  but  this 
rebalancing has been mostly cyclical and the issue remains. 
Let me now turn to the third important keyword of this session, the G20 Road map. 
With  the  intensification  of  the  crisis,  it  has  become  obvious  that  the  G20  was  the  right,  – 
because the most legitimate – forum to prepare the policy response. And the G20 fulfilled the 
most optimistic anticipations as it reacted promptly and strongly to the crisis. Beyond this, the 
G20  has  also  agreed  on  an  ambitious  policy  agenda,  aiming  for  the  long  run.  The 
G20 Roadmap does not only aim at one particular aspect of the global economy; it is very 
encompassing. One aspect of it is macrorebalancing, another is on financial regulation and 
global financial safety nets. The G20 agenda is focused on crisis prevention by coordination 
in order to avoid, or at least dampen overheating and boom/bust cycles. 
How  are  these  issues  related?  First  I  will  briefly  tackle  the  important  question  of  the  link 
between  the  financial  crisis  and  global  imbalances.  Second,  I  will  go  through  the  main 
implications of this link and outline the key features of the policy agenda of the G20. In this 
second part I will mostly focus on the so-called “G20 Framework for a Strong, Sustainable 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 1
and Balanced Growth” and on financial safety nets. In the last section I will focus on financial 
regulation issues more specifically. 
Why and how do the financial crisis and global imbalances interact? 
An  overwhelming  body  of  research  has  established  the  clear  relation  between  global 
imbalances  and  financial  issues,  some  of  which  were  behind  the  financial  crisis.  Indeed, 
global  imbalances  were  not  just  the  result  of  cyclical  factors,  such  as  business  cycle 
fluctuations, changes in oil and other commodity prices, etc. They were also, and to a large 
extent,  the  result  of  deeper,  structural  factors,  as  illustrated  by  the  link  between  global 
imbalances  and  asymmetries  in  financial  development.  Ricardo  Caballero  focuses  for 
instance on the notion of asset shortage: as safe financial assets were not readily available 
in some regions of the world (emerging Asia noticeably), net savings in these regions were 
channeled to the United States, which, in lowering financial constraints, amplified the current 
account deficit of this country. One may actually wonder whether this also partly contributed 
to the development of a financial bubble in the United States. The key idea I would like to 
take from this literature is that finance most certainly played a key role in the emergence of 
global imbalances. 
the 
is  enhanced  by 
How and why may the G20 Roadmap help financial soundness and global rebalancing 
As the global economy is recovering from the crisis, the G20 roadmap aims first at ensuring 
the transition to a strong, sustainable and balanced growth. By “strong”, we mean that growth 
should converge to the growth rate of potential output over the medium term whereas that 
potential 
implementation  of  more  effective  structural  policies. 
“Sustainable”  growth  should  be  consistent  with  public  finance  sustainability,  price  and 
financial stability, along with social and environmental policy goals. Finally, “balanced” growth 
implies a growth that is broadly based across all G20 countries and all regions in the world, 
and as I said earlier, that should not generate persistent and destabilizing internal or external 
imbalances.  “Balanced”  growth  also  implies  to  facilitate  the  catching  up  of  developing 
countries  (and  the  taking  off  of  the  poorest).  Drawing  the  lessons  from  the  crisis,  growth 
cannot be strong without being sustainable and cannot be sustainable if it is not balanced. 
The  so-called  “Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and  Balanced  Growth”  is  the  key 
mechanism by which G20 countries work together to achieve these objectives. With support 
from the IMF, G20 countries are going through a mutual assessment process by sharing their 
policy  frameworks,  programs  and  projections  and  assessing  their  consistency  with  the 
common  objectives.  This  process  will  lead  the  G20  to  recommend  policy  options  to  its 
members.  Policy  options  obviously  depend  on  national  circumstances.  Countries  facing 
serious  fiscal  challenges  need  in  particular  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  fiscal  consolidation, 
while countries that have the capacity should expand domestic sources of growth and help 
cushion  a  decline  in  demand  from  other  countries.  Reforms  of  social  safety  nets  will  be 
essential in both cases and structural reforms of the product and labor markets will be key to 
foster stronger growth in the medium and long run. Policy options may also entail exchange 
rate adjustments consistent with smooth rebalancing. 
In search of global financial safety nets 
There is another side to rebalancing where finance matters. 
Starting with the Asian crisis of 1997–1998 and up until the global shortage of liquidity that 
took  place  in  2008,  many  emerging  countries  have  experienced  sudden  stops  of  capital 
inflows on a recurrent basis. The international financial architecture as it was before the crisis 
lacked  appropriate  tools  to  deal  with  volatility  in  global  capital  flows  and  to  prevent  crisis 
contagion. This was an incentive for emerging countries to self-insure against global liquidity 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2010
shocks  by  accumulating  international  reserves  or  protect  themselves  through  capital  flows 
control, both distortive types of protection. 
Reserve accumulation is costly to emerging economies as they have to restrain consumption 
and  forego  profitable  investment  opportunities  in  order  to  buy  the  low-yield  assets  that 
usually  constitute  reserves.  It  also  has  global  consequences.  For  those  emerging  market 
economies  that  ran  a  current  account  surplus  to  accumulate  reserves,  the  process  has 
contributed to current account imbalances. This is why finance has an important role to play 
to help these economies effectively deal with capital volatility. A lot has already been done by 
G20 countries and international institutions since the beginning of the crisis. Central banks of 
large  advanced  countries  have  set  up  swap  arrangements  with  some  emerging  countries. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  has  created  a  precautionary  lending  facility:  the  Flexible 
Credit Line. A general SDR allocation of USD 250 bn has been agreed in the London summit 
of April 2009 and out in place. 
However,  there  is  still  scope  for  improvement  and  further  work  is  currently  being  done  to 
improve  global  financial  safety  nets.  In  their  meeting  in  Busan  earlier  this  month,  Finance 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the G20 have “acknowledged a need for national, 
regional and multilateral efforts to deal with capital volatility”. A Financial Safety Net Experts 
Group has been set up to work on the issue. 
that 
the  systemic 
to  make  sure 
The reform of financial regulation 
The financial crisis as taught us some very hard lessons. While there are many causes to the 
crisis, it is clear that it forces us to reconsider the way we regulate and supervise the financial 
system. That is what we have been doing since the November 2008 G20 meeting. 
We  entered  this  crisis  with  many  unregulated  entities  playing  a  major  role  in  the  financial 
system. There were, therefore, huge “black holes”, including what has been called a “shadow 
banking  system”  where  most  of  the  excesses  of  securitisation  took  place.  The  G20  has 
fostered  coordinated  efforts  by  industrialized  and  emerging  countries  alike  to  bring  most 
important financial actors under the umbrella of supervision, with rating agencies and hedge 
funds receiving a larger degree of attention. Beyond these actors, the G20 and the Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) in particular have been instrumental in efforts aimed at enlarging the 
scope  of  financial  regulation 
importance  and 
interconnectedness  of  institutions,  markets,  instruments  no  longer  escape  our  vigilance. 
Naturally,  the  necessary  reform  of  OTC  derivatives  markets  has  gained  traction  and  the 
G20 has  set  a  very  clear  roadmap  on  these  matters.  Efforts  aimed  at  integrating  these 
markets into regulated and supervised market infrastructures are indeed an essential policy 
response to risks accumulated in these markets. 
However, the crisis has not just shown us that we should expand the scope of regulation and 
supervision. In fact, two clear trends have emerged and are greatly affecting the very nature 
of regulation. The first observable trend is that we must complement micro-supervision with 
macrofinancial  supervision:  this  macroprudential  approach  has  in  fact  developed  in  many 
countries. The second trend is that regulation needs to become more global in response to 
the  globalization  of  finance.  In  that  respect,  the  commitment  by  all  G20  jurisdictions  to 
implement Basel II by 2011 and to finalize this year a new package aimed at strengthening 
bank capital and liquidity standards is a great achievement. 
We  are  confident  that  making  tangible  progress  on  each  of  these  fronts  is  an  essential 
response from policy makers to the roots of the global financial crisis. To some extent, the 
ultimate  aim  of  financial  regulation  has  to  do  with  financing  the  real  economy.  Sound 
regulation  should  enable  the  stable  provision  of  financial  services  to  economic  agents  as 
they strive to finance their productive investments and consumption, which constitute the fuel 
for  growth.  Banks  are  central  to  the  financing  of  economic  activity  because  they  perform 
maturity  and  liquidity  transformation  as  well  as  a  credit  risk  screening  function.  This  is 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 3
especially  true  in  continental  Europe,  where  they  are  responsible  for  more  than  80%  of 
financial  intermediation.  This  is  why  the  current  focus  on  enhancing  banking  regulation  is 
right and progress on key reforms to strengthen bank capital and liquidity standards remains 
a top priority. The recent reform package of the Basel Committee will lead to a much more 
robust  and  resilient  banking  system  in  the  future,  with  both  a  stronger  capital  and liquidity 
base  than  before  the  crisis.  The  challenge,  now,  is  to  calibrate  and  phase  in  the  new 
framework  in  a  way  that  does  not  impede  the  recovery  and  does  not  contradict  our 
macroeconomic  objectives.  The  macroeconomic  assessment  of  the  reforms  underway  will 
help us strike the optimal balance. 
We  must  also  reduce  procyclicality.  Some  of  the  procyclicality  can  be  trimmed  through 
prudential regulation but I strongly believe that our first line of defense against procyclicality 
should be the accounting framework. I therefore support the current focus on reducing the 
scope  of  the  mark-to-market  approach  and  moving  from  an  incurred  loss  model  to  a  
forward-looking model for provisioning. 
Conclusions 
To conclude, the main challenge ahead of us is to find the right balance between all these 
measures and the short-run effects of the rebalancing. If the rebalancing process happens 
too fast, it might weaken the recovery; but if reforms are delayed too much, the longer-run 
growth  prospects  will  be  affected  negatively.  One  very  important  issue  to  focus  on  while 
analyzing  this  trade-off  is  that  policy  decisions  need  to  be  perfectly  coordinated  across 
countries. The crisis has demonstrated that it was necessary, and that it was possible. I am 
confident that the G20 Roadmap is the right approach to this coordination problem. We will, 
under  the  French  leadership  of  the  2011  G20,  pay  due  attention  to  the  smooth 
implementation of this process. 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2010
