European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
5 August 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  views  the 
current  key  ECB  interest  rates  as  appropriate.  It  therefore  decided  to  leave  them 
unchanged.  Considering  all  the  new  information  which  has  become  available  since  our 
meeting on 8 July 2010, we continue to expect price developments to remain moderate over 
the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, benefiting from low domestic price pressures. The 
available economic data and survey-based indicators suggest a strengthening in economic 
activity in the second quarter of 2010, and the available data for the third quarter are better 
than  expected.  Looking  further  ahead,  and  taking  into  account  a  number  of  temporary 
factors, we continue to expect the euro area economy to grow at a moderate and still uneven 
pace,  in  an  environment  of  uncertainty.  Our  monetary  analysis  confirms  that  inflationary 
pressures over the medium term remain contained, as suggested by weak money and credit 
growth.  Overall,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  Inflation  expectations  remain 
firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations remains of the essence.  
Monetary policy will do all that is needed to maintain price stability in the euro area over the 
medium term. This is the necessary and central contribution that monetary policy makes to 
fostering  sustainable  economic  growth,  job  creation  and  financial  stability.  All  the  non-
standard measures taken during the period of acute financial market tensions, referred to as 
“enhanced credit support” and the Securities Markets Programme, are fully consistent with 
our mandate and, by construction, temporary in nature. We remain firmly committed to price 
stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  The  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  overall 
provision of liquidity will be adjusted as appropriate. Accordingly, the Governing Council will 
continue to monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
After a period of sharp decline, euro area economic activity has been expanding since mid-
2009.  Euro  area  real  GDP  increased,  on  a  quarterly  basis,  by  0.2%  in  the  first  quarter  of 
2010. The available economic data and survey-based indicators suggest a strengthening in 
economic activity in the second quarter of 2010 and the available data for the third quarter 
are better than expected. Looking further ahead, and taking into account temporary effects, 
the Governing Council continues to expect real GDP to grow at a moderate and still uneven 
pace over time and across economies and sectors of the euro area. Ongoing growth at the 
global  level  and  its  impact  on  the  demand  for  euro  area  exports,  together  with  the 
accommodative monetary policy stance and the measures adopted to restore the functioning 
of  the  financial  system,  should  continue  to  support  the  euro  area  economy.  However,  the 
recovery in activity is expected to be dampened by the process of balance sheet adjustment 
in various sectors and labour market prospects.  
In  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment,  the  risks  to  the  economic  outlook  are  broadly 
balanced in an environment of uncertainty. On the upside, the global economy and foreign 
trade may recover more strongly than is now projected, thereby further supporting euro area 
exports. On the downside, concerns remain relating to the emergence of renewed tensions in 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 1
financial  markets,  renewed  increases  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  and  protectionist 
pressures, as well as the possibility of a disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  increased  to  1.7%  in 
July, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, from 1.4% in June, most likely owing to upward 
base  effects  in  the  energy  and  food  components.  In  the  next  few  months  annual  HICP 
inflation rates are expected to display some further volatility around the current level. Looking 
further  ahead,  in  2011  inflation  rates  should  remain  moderate  overall,  benefiting  from  low 
domestic price pressures. Inflation expectations over the medium to longer term continue to 
be firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, 
but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments  are  broadly  balanced.  Upside  risks  over  the 
medium  term  relate,  in  particular,  to  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered  prices  may  be  greater  than  currently 
expected, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. At the same time, 
risks to domestic price and cost developments are contained. Overall, the Governing Council 
will monitor closely the future evolution of all available price indicators. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  turned  positive  and  was 
0.2% in June 2010, after –0.1% in May. The annual growth rate of loans to the private sector 
increased  slightly  further  but,  at  0.3%,  remained  weak.  Together,  these  data  continue  to 
support  the  assessment  that  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  is  moderate  and 
that inflationary pressures over the medium term are contained. Shorter-term developments 
in M3 and some of its components and counterparts have remained volatile, and this volatility 
may well persist. 
The previously strong impact of the interest rate constellation on monetary dynamics, while 
still  affecting  the  pace  of  underlying  money  growth,  appears  to  be  gradually  waning.  This 
implies  a  gradual  reduction  in  the  effect  on  actual  M3  growth  arising  from  the  downward 
impact  of  the  steep  yield  curve  and  the  associated  allocation  of  funds  into  longer-term 
deposits  and  securities  outside  M3.  At  the  same  time,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M1  has 
continued  to  moderate,  although  it  remained  strong  at  9.2%  in  June  2010.  In  part,  this 
reflects  somewhat  higher  opportunity  costs  of  holding  overnight  deposits  relative  to  other 
short-term deposits.  
The still weak annual growth rate of bank loans to the private sector continues to conceal 
countervailing  developments,  with  increasingly  positive  growth  in  loans  to  households  and 
stabilised negative annual growth in loans to non-financial corporations. A lagged response 
of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  to  developments  in  economic  activity  is  a  normal 
feature of the business cycle.  
The data up to June indicate that, after expanding for a few months earlier in the year, the 
size of banks’ overall balance sheets has not increased further. The challenge remains for 
banks to expand the availability of credit to the non-financial sector when demand picks up. 
Where necessary, to address this challenge, banks should retain earnings, turn to the market 
to  strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  or  take  full  advantage  of  government  support 
measures for recapitalisation.  
In  this  respect,  we  welcome the EU-wide stress-testing exercise, which was prepared and 
conducted  by  the  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS)  and  national 
supervisory authorities, in close cooperation with the ECB. This stress-testing exercise was 
comprehensive  and  rigorous,  and  the  results  confirm  the  resilience  of  EU  and  euro  area 
banking systems as a whole to severe economic and financial shocks. The stress test has 
also significantly enhanced transparency regarding the current financial conditions and risk 
exposures  of  the  91  institutions  that  participated  in  the  exercise.  Hence,  the  exercise 
represents an important step forward in restoring market confidence. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2010
We also welcome the commitment made by national authorities with regard to the provision 
of  support  facilities  for  banks  where  private  sector  means  are  insufficient.  Sound  balance 
sheets,  effective  risk  management  and  transparent,  robust  business  models  are  key  to 
strengthening  banks’  resilience  to  shocks  and  to  ensuring  adequate  access  to  finance, 
thereby laying the foundations for sustainable growth, job creation and financial stability.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Considering all the new 
information which has become available since our meeting on 8 July 2010, we continue to 
expect  price  developments  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term 
horizon,  benefiting  from  low  domestic  price  pressures.  The  available  economic  data  and 
survey-based indicators suggest a strengthening in economic activity in the second quarter 
of 2010, and the available data for the third quarter are better than expected. Looking further 
ahead,  and  taking  into  account  a  number  of  temporary  factors,  we  continue  to  expect  the 
euro  area  economy  to  grow  at  a  moderate  and  still  uneven  pace,  in  an  environment  of 
uncertainty.  A  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  our  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary  analysis  confirms  that  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term  remain 
contained, as suggested by weak money and credit growth. Overall, we expect price stability 
to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro 
area  households.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of 
inflation expectations remains of the essence.  
Turning  to  fiscal  policies,  it  is  essential  that  budget  plans  for  2011  and  beyond  reflect  a 
strong  commitment  to  returning  to  sound  public  finances.  Given  the  exceptional  fiscal 
deterioration over the past two years, there is an urgent need to implement credible medium-
term  consolidation  strategies  aimed  at  restoring  fiscal  sustainability  and  creating  room  for 
budgetary  manoeuvre.  As  a  minimum,  countries’  budgetary  targets  must  comply  with  the 
fiscal consolidation requirements foreseen under the respective excessive deficit procedures. 
More  ambitious  targets,  as  already  adopted  by  a  number  of  euro  area  countries,  may 
become necessary where current plans fall short of meeting the main objective of halting and 
reversing  the  increase  in  the  government  debt  ratio.  Moreover,  all  countries  must  specify 
credible fiscal adjustment measures, focusing on the expenditure side, while being prepared 
to implement additional measures, where needed, over the coming years. 
In order to support the process of fiscal consolidation, to underpin the proper functioning of 
the euro area and to strengthen the prospects for higher sustainable growth, the pursuit of 
far-reaching structural reforms is essential. Major reforms are particularly needed in those 
countries that have experienced competitiveness losses in the past or that are suffering from 
high  fiscal  and  external  deficits.  Measures  should  ensure  a  wage  bargaining  process  that 
allows wages to adjust flexibly to the unemployment situation and losses in competitiveness. 
Reforms to strengthen productivity growth would further support the adjustment process of 
these economies.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 3
