Grant Spencer: The impact of the global financial crisis on financial policy 
Summary  of  remarks  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
New Zealand, at the Symposium on Financial Sector Governance, Auckland, 20 September 
2010. 
 In this presentation, I would like to discuss New Zealand’s financial policy response to the 
Global Financial Crisis. My focus here will be on permanent changes to policy following the 
crisis rather than the initial short term “emergency” responses. I will cover financial policies 
overseen  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  namely  monetary  policy,  liquidity  management  and  the 
prudential supervision of banks and non-banks. 
Monetary policy 
In New Zealand, monetary policy focuses on the maintenance of price stability. This alone 
provides no guarantee of economic stability or financial stability. However, the experience in 
New Zealand and overseas suggests that maintaining price stability over the medium term is 
the best and most worthwhile contribution monetary policy can make to achieving broader 
economic and financial stability.  
Our inflation targeting framework served us well during the financial crisis and helped guide 
sensible policy responses. Immediately prior to the crisis, monetary policy in New Zealand 
had been relatively restrictive with the Reserve Bank increasing the Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
between  2004  and  2007  in  response  to  elevated  inflation  pressures  associated  with  a 
booming  housing  market.  As  the  global  crisis  emerged  and  deepened,  we  responded  by 
reducing the OCR aggressively. The OCR was cut during 2008 and early 2009 from a high of 
8.25 percent to just 2.5 percent. These reductions were appropriate, despite high headline 
rates of inflation at the time due to record high oil prices. The policy easing was consistent 
with  an  outlook  for  rapidly  diminishing  inflation  pressures  as  the  global  and  domestic 
economies turned sharply downwards.  
Going  forward,  medium  term  price  stability  will  remain  the  primary  objective  of  monetary 
policy. However, we expect that monetary policy will have more bite over the next few years 
than it has had for many years; for a number of reasons: 
First, following the crisis our banks now face a higher cost of funds. It is now more expensive 
for  them  to  borrow  offshore,  which  in  turn  has  seen  them  compete  more  aggressively  for 
funds raised in the domestic retail deposit market. We currently estimate that the spread of 
the banks’ average cost of funds over the OCR is some 150 basis points higher than prior to 
the crisis. This state of affairs is likely to persist for some time. It means that, for any given 
OCR, the rates the banks charge their customers for lending will be higher than before. 
Second,  the  evidence  to  date  suggests  that,  following  the  global  crisis,  households  and 
businesses  are  considerably  less  willing  to  take  on  new  debt.  Credit  growth  remains  very 
subdued.  We  believe  that  this  diminished  appetite  for  debt  will  remain  for  some  time  as 
people and companies work to gradually strengthen their financial positions. 
Third, unlike the situation over much of the past twenty years, New Zealand is now facing an 
upward sloping yield curve – longer term interest rates are higher than short-term rates. This 
means  that  fixed  rate  mortgages  are  now  more  expensive  than  floating  or  very  short-term 
fixed rate mortgages. This has seen many borrowers shift back to floating rates over the past 
two years. As a result, as we move the OCR higher it is likely to have more “bite” than it did 
previously.  
BIS Review 119/2010 
 1
Liquidity management 
As the global financial crisis broke, a key policy response from the Reserve Bank was the 
expansion  of  liquidity  facilities  that  we  provide  to  banks  and  other  financial  institutions, 
including a broadening of acceptable collateral instruments. This expansion of facilities was 
needed  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  remained  liquid  and  that  institutions  could 
continue  to  make  payments  as  required  without  creating  undue  stress  in  the  interbank 
market. In particular, as the banks’ access to global markets became very restricted in late 
2008–early 2009, the Reserve Bank provided access to term funding secured over mortgage 
backed securities. The banks also increased their use of parent funding during this period.  
With the crisis behind us, we have been reconsidering the appropriate role and scope of the 
Reserve Bank’s liquidity facilities. The crisis has demonstrated the value of liquidity support 
for  fundamentally  sound  institutions  in  the  face  of  systemic  market  disruptions.  While  it  is 
important  that  institutions  provide  for  their  own  liquidity  in  the  first  instance,  it  is  clear  that 
central bank liquidity facilities are an essential backstop at times when shocks to confidence 
cause  market  liquidity  to  dry  up.  Key  requirements  for central  bank  facilities  are  that:  their 
pricing encourages a return to normal market trading; they are targeted at system liquidity, 
not individual institutions; and they are fully collateralised.  
In light of the GFC experience and the Bank’s broader mandate to promote the efficiency of 
the  financial  system,  we  intend  in  the  future  to  adopt  a  somewhat  broader  approach  to 
liquidity management than was the case prior to the crisis. The range of securities that we 
accept as collateral will be wider than in the past in order to help support liquidity in a number 
of  key  financial  markets.  Such  markets  include:  the  NZ  dollar,  Bank  bills,  NZ  Government 
securities, and local authority/SOE stock. In addition, access to the Bank’s overnight facility 
will be extended to major NZ dollar settlement systems.  
Prudential policy: banks 
Turning to prudential policy, the global financial crisis has prompted a major review of policy 
internationally.  In  New  Zealand,  the  financial  crisis  highlighted  shortcomings  in  the  banks’ 
management of funding and liquidity rather than credit losses of the sort seen in the major 
economies. A heavy reliance on short-term foreign borrowing by the NZ banks meant they 
were vulnerable to the sort of liquidity shock experienced in late 2008–early 09. While the 
banks’ funding shortfall was met through parent funding and the Reserve Bank’s expanded 
liquidity facilities, the experience underlined the need for banks to lengthen the maturity of 
their liabilities relative to assets, in order to reduce their vulnerability to such shocks.  
To address these issues, the Reserve Bank introduced a new prudential liquidity policy for 
banks in April 2010. This policy requires that the banks hold sufficient eligible liquid assets to 
meet one-week and one-month liquidity mismatch ratio requirements. In addition, the banks 
must meet a Core Funding Ratio requirement of at least 65 percent. Core funding consists of 
customer deposits (weighted by size) and market funding of one year or greater to maturity. 
The Core Funding Ratio requirement will rise to 75 percent by mid 2012. The banks have 
already made good progress in lifting their Core Funding Ratios to be well in excess of the 
65 percent minimum requirement.  
Internationally,  the  moves  to  strengthen  banking  regulation  are  being  led  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), made up of banking supervisors from the major 
economies  and  convened  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  The  BCBS  has 
developed a number of proposals under the broad “Basel 3” label which are expected to be 
agreed  at  the  upcoming  G-20  meeting  in  November.  The  proposals  are  focussed  on 
strengthening banks’ minimum capital and liquidity requirements. These include higher Tier 1 
capital requirements, a greater emphasis on common equity in Tier 1 capital, and a leverage 
ratio to act as a backstop to the risk weighted capital regime. Other proposals include more 
explicit  liquidity  requirements  (similar  to  those  described  above  for  New  Zealand), 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2010
for  greater 
international  coordination  of  supervision  and  revisions 
to 
arrangements 
international  financial  accounting  standards.  The  crisis  has  shown  that  existing  accounting 
standards  are  problematic  for  financial  institutions  in  a  number  of  areas  such  as  mark-to-
market asset valuations and provisioning rules for loan losses.  
Another area to receive attention under Basel 3 is the possible use of macro-prudential policy 
adjustments  to  help  counter  pro-cyclical  behaviour  in  financial  systems.  The  BCBS  has 
proposed that banks be required to build up additional capital buffers at times of rapid credit 
growth  that  could  then  be  drawn  down  in  times  of  stress.  The  intention  of  the  instrument 
would  be  to  lessen  the  impact  on  the  economy  when  the  boom  turns  to  bust  as  well  as 
possibly  constraining  excessive  credit  growth.  A  number  of  central  banks,  including  the 
RBNZ, are also looking at other macro-prudential tools that could possibly be used to help 
limit  the  extremities  of  the  credit  cycle.  The  challenge  here  is  to  find  instruments  that  will 
actually work without imposing major efficiency costs on the financial system. 
Prudential policy: non banks 
New Zealand’s non-bank deposit taking sector comprises a number of different institutional 
types. The savings institutions (building societies, credit unions and the PSIS) have generally 
weathered  the  crisis  well.  The  finance  company  sector,  on  the  other  hand,  has  faced 
considerable upheaval over the period since 2006, with only about a third of the companies 
in early 2006 now remaining active. While the Global Financial Crisis added to the difficulties 
faced  by  the  finance  companies,  the  sector’s  issues  have  been  largely  home-grown  as  a 
result  of  poor  lending  decisions,  particularly  with  respect  to  property  development  lending, 
and  inadequate  capital  support.  While  the  Crown  retail  deposit  guarantee  scheme  has 
provided some liquidity protection for the sector, allowing time for the sounder institutions to 
rebuild  investor  confidence,  the  companies  that  have  been  unable  to  recapitalise  or 
restructure have ultimately been forced to exit the industry. 
An amendment to the Reserve Bank Act in late 2008 saw the Reserve Bank become the new 
prudential regulator of the non-bank deposit taking sector; with trustees remaining the front 
line  supervisors.  Since  then  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  developing  a  new  regulatory 
framework and phasing in the new prudential requirements. Key elements include mandatory 
credit  ratings,  connected  lending  limits,  an  8  percent  minimum  capital  requirement,  and  fit 
and proper tests for senior managers and directors. While these reforms are clearly too late 
to avert the negative consequences of earlier finance company practices, the overall aim is 
to  raise  safety  standards  in  the  sector  so  that  the  remaining  players  are  more  resilient  to 
future business cycles. 
Conclusion 
The  Global Financial  Crisis  had  major  effects  on  the  NZ  financial system  and  economy.  It 
prompted  responses  across  the  full  range  of  Reserve  Bank  policies,  including  monetary 
policy,  liquidity  management  and  prudential  policies.  Many  of  these  responses  were  short 
term in nature but there have also been important long term policy consequences. Indeed, in 
the  prudential  policy  area,  there  is  significant  policy  change  still  yet  to  come  from  the 
strengthening of international standards under the “Basel 3” initiative. Most of the permanent 
policy changes undertaken by the Reserve Bank have related to liquidity: requiring banks to 
better protect themselves against liquidity shocks; and recognising a somewhat broader role 
for the Reserve Bank in supporting financial system liquidity in times of stress. This should 
not be surprising given that the dominant transmission channel for the Global financial Crisis 
was an unprecedented reduction in global financial system liquidity. 
BIS Review 119/2010 
 3
