Daniel Mminele: The South African Reserve Bank’s activities in financial 
markets 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Financial Market Department’s Annual Cocktail function, Pretoria, 3 June 2010. 
 Introduction 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen and welcome to the fourth annual cocktail function of 
the Financial Markets Department (FMD). It is our privilege to host this event. Thank you for 
accepting our invitation. 
You  are  all  familiar  with  recent  economic  and  financial  market  developments,  but  please 
allow me to just briefly touch on these events from the perspective of the central bank. I will 
then discuss the Bank’s activities in the financial markets given that, in some form or another 
you  are  all  counterparties  to  our  operations  and  activities  in  the  financial  markets,  or  are 
affected by what we do. 
International developments 
Since  the  previous  FMD  Cocktail  at  the  end  of  July  2009,  there  have  been  a  number  of 
economic  developments,  which  have  had  a  significant  impact  on  global  risk  appetite  and 
trends in financial markets. For much of 2009, the EUR was relatively strong, appreciating to 
USD 1,51  in  early  December  2009.  Speculative  currency  positioning,  as  represented  by 
weekly  data  from  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  (CFTC),  showed  aversion 
towards  the  USD  in  this  period.  The  USD  showed  a  net  short  position  of  over  280 000 
contracts. The VIX index, a popular measure of expected volatility, and often referred to as 
the “fear index”, hovered around its long-term average of  20 index points, while advanced 
and emerging market equity markets were recording double digit gains. In developed bond 
markets,  short  dated  yields  were  declining  owing  to  the  still  lax  monetary  policy,  while  
long-term  yields  were  rising  in  reaction  to  increased  government  debt  issuance.  Emerging 
market bond spreads as measured by the Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) plus spread, 
had come off their high levels of almost 900 basis points in October 2008 to 280 basis points 
in December 2009. Credit Default Swap (CDS) spreads for the advanced economies and for 
certain  European  countries  recently  in  the  spotlight  were  also  stable  over  this  period, 
indicating  little  concern  about  sovereign  default  risks.  Money  markets  were  also  relatively 
stress-free, as reflected by the continued narrowing in Overnight Index Swap (OIS) spreads 
at the time.  
The global economy emerged from recession in the latter half of 2009, much sooner-than-
expected  and  at  a  pace  that  was  stronger  than  even  the  most  optimistic  forecasts.  This 
development  proved  to  be  the  catalyst  for  the  rally  in  financial  markets.  Furthermore,  the 
pace and speed of the recovery, differed vastly across countries and regions, with emerging 
markets proving to be the engine for global growth. Together with record-low interest rates in 
advanced  economies,  risk  aversion  having  dissipated  and  abundant  liquidity,  emerging 
market countries started to attract significant capital inflows.  
However,  towards  the  end  of  2009,  some  headwinds  emerged,  which  more  recently 
intensified  with  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  southern  Europe  and  with  markets  becoming 
particularly concerned about a possible default by Greece and the contagion effects thereof. 
Was this to be the start of a new crisis? Was the nascent global economic recovery now at 
risk? Was the confidence we saw in financial markets misplaced and needed to be replaced 
by renewed risk aversion? The initial comfort provided by the EUR750 billion rescue package 
announced  in  early  May  by  the  European  Union  (EU),  IMF  and  European  Central  Bank 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 1
(ECB), soon gave way to concerns and uncertainty as to whether the measures taken would 
be  sufficient  to  resolve  the  underlying  solvency  problems  and  whether  the  required  fiscal 
consolidations would be politically and socially feasible.  
Budget  cuts  imposed  across  the  euro  zone  spurred  debate  about  the  sustainability  of  the 
euro, the ramifications of fiscal tightening on European economic growth and the impact of a 
slowdown  in  the  euro  zone  demand  on  the  overall  global  recovery.  Speculative  currency 
positioning  now  showed  aversion  towards  the  EUR  instead  of  the  USD.  The  net  long 
EUR contracts changed to net short positions of almost 120 000 contracts. Over the same 
period, the EUR depreciated to USD1,21 in mid-May. Risk aversion subsequently increased 
and  the  VIX  index  spiked  to  over  40  points  in  May  2010.  Equity  markets  lost  ground  and 
CDS spreads, most particularly for Portugal, Ireland, Greece and Spain, increased. Strains in 
the money market came to the fore once more and the US OIS spread ticked up from around 
10  basis  points  to  approximately  30  basis  points.  Central  banks  that  had  been  slowly  and 
carefully  embarking  on  exit  strategies  from  unconventional  policies,  found  themselves 
pondering about and indeed implementing re-entry strategies.  
It is clear that there is an urgent need for countries to consolidate their fiscal positions and 
bring their public debt ratios and fiscal deficits back to within more sustainable parameters.  
Domestic financial markets 
These developments are important for South Africa, being a small and open economy with 
deep and liquid financial markets. Against the backdrop of the stronger global and domestic 
economic environment, domestic financial markets also rallied in the latter part of 2009. The 
ZAR appreciated by almost 23% per cent on a trade-weighted basis in 2009, reversing the 
23.5%  decline  recorded  in  2008.  This  appreciating  trend  continued  until  mid-May  2010, 
supported  by  stronger  commodity  prices,  the  search  for  yield,  liquid  domestic  markets,  a 
relatively favourable economic and fiscal backdrop and the reduction in risk aversion. The All 
share  index,  as  well  as  the  Morgan  Stanley  Capital  International  index  (MSCI)  for  South 
Africa,  registered  double  digit  gains,  P/E  ratios  improved  and  domestic  government  bond 
yields  declined.  The  fixed  income  market  was  supported  by  the  easing  in  monetary  policy 
and  healthy  appetite  for  domestic  bonds  by  non-residents.  Non-residents  purchased  a  net 
R24  billion  worth  of  domestic  bonds  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2009  and  purchased  over 
R 30 billion  in  the  first  four  months  of  2010.  The  international  bond  issues  of  the  South 
African Government in 2009 and 2010 were also well received, as confirmed by the latest 
USD 2,0 billion issue in March 2010, which realised the lowest coupon ever achieved on a 
USD bond issue. 
Nonetheless, the recent bout of risk aversion caused the rally in domestic financial markets 
to also run out of steam, while the appreciation in the ZAR dissipated and volatility increased 
from 13 per cent in April to almost 18 per cent in May. 
Market development initiatives 
An important milestone was reached in February 2010, when South Africa’s multibillion rand 
money market industry officially commenced the electronic issuing, trading and settlement of 
securities in place of the manual paper based system. 
As  the  largest  issuer  of  money  market  securities  (on  our  own  behalf  and  on  behalf  of 
Government),  the  Bank  welcomed  the  implementation  of  a  fully-dematerialised  money 
market.  All  SARB  debentures  and  Treasury  bills  are  now  being  processed  in  the  new 
electronic format, representing not only a milestone for the South African financial markets, 
but also being the very first fully automated dematerialised settlement environment globally. 
Many of the people here tonight were involved in this project, and I want to sincerely thank 
you for your contributions to this very important project.  
2 
 BIS Review 78/2010
As part of the FMD’s own contribution to market development and to enhance our exchange 
of information with market participants, a platform known as the Money Market Liaison Group 
(MMLG)  was  initiated  in  2005,  mainly  to  consult  with  banks  on  the  modifications  to  the 
Bank’s refinancing system at the time. Earlier discussions were dominated by issues such as 
the  extension  of  the  pool  of  eligible  collateral  for  the  Bank’s  refinancing  operations  and 
improvements to the benchmark overnight interbank rate. More recently, the need to reform 
this body to make its scope wider became apparent. A review of the MMLG was undertaken, 
resulting in the reconfiguration of its membership to cover the broader spectrum of financial 
markets, and the change of its name to the Financial Markets Liaison Group (FMLG). 
To meet the objectives of this consultative body, the FMLG will have four subcommittees that 
are in the process of being finalised. The Money Market subcommittee will focus on issues 
impacting  the  functioning  of  the  money  market,  the  Financial  Market  Infrastructure 
subcommittee  replaces  the  former  Money  Market  Association  and  will  discuss  ways  of 
strengthening  and  improving  market  infrastructure.  The  FMLG  will  also  have  a  Foreign 
Exchange and Fixed Income and Derivative Market subcommittee, which will engage on the 
safe  and  efficient  functioning  of  these  underlying  markets,  as  well  as  derivative-related 
developments. 
Open market operations 
Managing  the  overall  liquidity  in  the  money  market  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
successful  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Having  not  had  any  difficulties  previously, 
since  December  2009  the  Bank  began  to  encounter  some  challenges  in  conducting  its  
open-market  operations  in  order  to  manage  overall  liquidity.  In  the  process,  the  money 
market  shortage  at  times  declined  to  quite  low  levels.  This  was  mainly  due  to  dwindling 
demand for SARB debentures, owing to a slowdown in the growth of banks’ balance sheets, 
which  resulted  in  lower  demand  for  liquid  assets  that  banks  have  to  hold  for  prudential 
purposes.  The  National  Treasury’s  increased  funding  in  Treasury  bills  and  government 
bonds  similarly  impacted  demand,  while  the  longer-term  reverse  repos  (LTRRs)  were 
constrained  by  the  ample  availability  of  government  bonds  in  the  secondary  market,  in 
addition to traditionally limited participation in this instrument.  
The Bank consulted market participants not only to obtain a better understanding of reduced 
participation in the debenture auctions , but also to explain why the participation of banks in 
central  bank  open-market  operations  is  essential  for  the  effective  implementation  of 
monetary policy. An effective monetary policy implementation framework contributes towards 
financial stability, which is in the interest of all banks and the system as a whole.  
In light of the aforementioned challenges, we are considering some changes to the way in 
which  the  Bank  conducts  its  open-market  operations  and we  will  be  in  a  position  to  make 
announcements soon. For example, the measures being considered relate to modifications 
in the operation of standing facilities offered by the Bank as well as the use of longer-term 
foreign exchange swaps. The Bank conducts money market swaps in foreign exchange as a 
fine-tuning tool to manage money market liquidity.  
Foreign exchange market 
The size of the South African foreign exchange market, measured in terms of average daily 
turnover in USD, has fluctuated between USD10bn and USD15.2 since the time of the last 
FMD  cocktail,  with  the  composition  in  terms  of  spot,  forward  and  swap  transactions 
remaining relatively unchanged. Very much like in other parts of the world, conditions in the 
foreign exchange market continued to be volatile. 
The Bank has continued its involvement in the foreign exchange market mainly for reserves 
accumulation purposes. As a result of the appreciation in the rand exchange rate in 2009 and 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 3
earlier  this year,  there  were  heightened  calls  for  the  Bank  to  intervene  aggressively  in  the 
foreign exchange market or to even peg the rand to the US dollar. As indicated before, the 
Bank  remains  committed  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  with  the  exchange  rate 
determined primarily by the market.  
The commitment to a flexible exchange rate should, however, not be misunderstood as an 
indifference towards the exchange rate. The rand is one of the most volatile currencies and 
the  Bank  is  cognisant  of  the  impact  that  this  can  have  on  business,  and  the  uncertain 
operating  environment  it  creates.  Extended  periods  of  misalignment  can  lead  to  a 
misallocation of resources between sectors within the economy and lead to an uneven and 
unbalanced economic recovery.  
Having acknowledged that certain sectors of the economy have been affected by what may 
be perceived to be a relatively strong exchange rate, it is also crucial to again highlight the 
importance  of  inflation  management.  One  must  bear  in  mind  that  a  depreciation  in  the 
nominal  exchange  rate  together  with  an  increase  in  inflation  would  not  lead  to  an 
improvement  in  the  level  of  competitiveness  of  the  rand.  Any  consideration  for  more 
aggressive  participation  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  would  also  have  to  be  carefully 
assessed  against,  among  others,  the  prospects  of  success  given  the  factors  that  may  be 
driving the exchange rate in any particular direction at any given point in time.  
More  aggressive  intervention  or  pegging  the  rand  to  the  US  dollar  would  be  a  very  costly 
exercise. Firstly, how much foreign exchange reserves would be required to artificially peg 
the rand to the US dollar and to maintain this peg in the event of pressure to depreciate? 
South Africa’s reserves, at just over USD42 billion, are relatively low for that type of exercise. 
Furthermore, pegging the rand to the US dollar would not imply an automatic peg to other 
currencies,  such  as  the  EUR,  which  is  the  currency  of  our  biggest  trading  partner  bloc. 
Pegging  also  has  the  problem  that  if  prices  and  wages  are  increasing,  any  competitive 
advantage  will  soon  be  eroded  and  there  will  be  calls  for  changing  the  peg.  Aggressive 
reserves accumulation either in the context of a peg or to prevent or moderate appreciation 
also  carries  significant  costs,  given  the  wide  interest  rate  differential  between  the  interest 
paid on sterilization and the interest earned on reserves. This results in a negative cost of 
carry  and  places  the  Bank’s  income  position  at  risk.  The  Bank  recorded  a  loss  of 
approximately R1,0 billion during the 2009/10 financial year. It is however important to point 
out  that  this  loss  was  incurred  as  a  direct  result  of  the  bank  executing  its  public  policy 
responsibilities rather than owing to any inappropriate risk taking or wasteful expenditure. 
Over the past year, the Bank continued to purchase foreign exchange as part of its strategy 
to  steadily  increase  the  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Gross  reserves  increased  by 
approximately  USD8,0  billion  from  April  2009  to  USD42,3  billion  in  April  2010.  The 
international liquidity position increased by USD5,0 billion to USD38,5 billion over the same 
period. Apart from foreign exchange purchases by the Bank, this increase in official reserves 
was  also  due  to  foreign  currency  deposits  from  government,  the  allocation  by  the  IMF  of 
SDRs to South Africa and valuation adjustments. Although valuation adjustments contributed 
positively to reported USD official reserves over the financial year, there were periods where 
the  Bank  published  substantial  declines  in  the  level  of  reserves  due  to  valuation  losses 
stemming from the diversified nature of reserves in terms of currencies.  
The Financial Markets Department continued to enhance reserves management policies in 
order to adjust and streamline our investment strategies.  
The  Investment  Policy,  which  provides  a  strategic  and  operational  framework  for  reserves 
management,  was  reviewed  during  2009/2010.  The  Investment  Policy  is  reviewed  every 
three years for governance purposes and also to ensure that it is responsive to and keeps 
pace  with  changes  in  the  reserves  management  activities  of  the  Bank  and  the  external 
environment. The recent global financial crisis provided an ideal opportunity to incorporate 
into  the  policy  the  lessons  learned,  while  also  aligning  the  policy  with  refinements  to 
international best practice.  
4 
 BIS Review 78/2010
Conclusion 
The turmoil experienced in the euro zone with regard to sovereign debt risks highlights the 
importance  of  fiscal  sustainability.  Markets  have  become  increasingly  sensitive  towards 
sovereign  risks  and  therefore  policymakers  need  to  recognise  the  urgency  of  reducing 
excessive  public  debt.  Fortunately,  in  this  regard  South  Africa  is  on  a  solid  footing  when 
compared to challenges faced elsewhere.  
South African financial markets are an integral part of global markets and will continue to be 
subjected to global developments. As one of my colleagues recently said: “the best defence 
is to stick to sensible policies”. 
But  we  must  now  turn  our  focus  to  successfully  hosting  the  2010  FIFA  Soccer  World  cup 
starting in about a week’s time, for the first time ever on the African continent. South Africa 
has  again  shown  its  mettle,  and  has  overcome  all  scepticism,  and  we  are  now  ready  to 
welcome the world!  
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  convey  my  appreciation  to  the  management  and  staff  of  the 
Financial Markets Department, not only for paying the bill tonight, but for the sterling work 
that  they  do  for  the  Bank  and  our  markets.  Thank  you  also  to  the  staff  of  the 
SARB Conference Centre for taking care of us tonight. 
Thank you and enjoy the evening. 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 5
