Usha Thorat: Indian perspective on banking regulation 
Address  by  Mrs  Usha  Thorat,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
International  Conference  on  “Financial  Sector  Regulation  and  Reforms  in  Asian  Emerging 
Markets”, jointly organised by the Asian Development Bank Institute, Cornell University and 
the UK Foreign Services Office, Mumbai, 8 February 2010. 
 the 
International  Center 
for  Financial  Regulation, 
Assistance provided by Mr P R Ravi Mohan, Mr A K Misra and Mr Tulasi Gopinath is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
I am delighted to participate in this Conference on “Financial Sector Regulation and 
Reform  in  Asian  Emerging  Markets”  jointly  organised  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank 
Institute, 
the  UK  Foreign  and 
Commonwealth Office and the Brookings Institution. In the session that just concluded, we 
heard about financial sector developments in emerging markets. In this session, I will like to 
present the Indian perspective on banking regulation.  
2. 
I have structured my presentation in four parts. To start with, I would like to quickly 
recapitulate the key factors that contributed to the current global financial crisis and follow it 
with  a  brief  account  of  the  international  regulatory  response.  Thereafter,  I  will  take  up  the 
Indian  banking  and  regulatory  scenario  –  both  pre-  and  post-crisis,  including  the  recent 
regulatory initiatives. Finally, I hope to place before you the emerging challenges in banking 
regulation as India aspires for higher growth.  
The current financial crisis has led to the worst global economic downturn in over 
3. 
60 years. Though the epicentre of the crisis lay in the sub-prime mortgage market in the US, 
it was transmitted rapidly throughout the globe, destabilizing financial markets and banking 
systems.  The  crisis  eventually  impacted  the  broader  macro-economy,  affecting  economic 
growth  and  employment  throughout  the  world.  The  magnitude  of  this  crisis  has  clearly 
signaled the need for major overhaul of the global financial regulatory architecture. The G-20 
leaders have mandated the international regulatory agencies and standard-setters, including 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and 
International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  to  take  active  part  in  this  process. 
Responding  to  the  unfolding  situation,  international  regulatory  agencies  are  working  on 
strengthening  the  resilience  of  financial  system,  especially  on  bridging  the  gaps  in  the 
regulatory framework revealed by the current crisis.  
Key factors in global financial crisis  
4. 
The genesis of the recent global financial crisis can be traced back to an extended 
period of global imbalances, easy monetary policy, low real interest rates and under-pricing 
of risk as liquidity chased yields. It was also the period of low inflation and robust growth – an 
almost “nirvana” like situation. This benign environment prompted investors to extend their 
search for yield further down the credit quality curve, reflecting overly optimistic assessments 
and  lack  of  due  diligence  in  assessing  credit  risk.  Partly  in  response  to  this  demand,  the 
financial  system  developed  new  structures  and  created  new  instruments,  with  embedded 
leverage, that seemed to offer higher risk-adjusted yields, but were in fact more risky than 
they appeared to be. In this setting, more-than-warranted faith began to be placed on market 
discipline reflecting the prevailing optimism with increasing reliance on the assessments of 
credit rating agencies. The financial sector compensation system based on short-term profits 
facilitated reinforcing the momentum for risk taking. A constellation of regulatory practices, 
accounting  rules  and  incentives  magnified  the  credit  boom  ahead  of  the  crisis.  The  same 
factors  accelerated  the  downturn  in  markets  and  intensified  the  crisis.  Macroeconomic 
stability  and  financial  stability  were  generally  treated  as  separate  and unrelated  constructs 
with the former focusing on preserving low and stable inflation, while the latter dealing with 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 1
the  firm-level  supervision  of  the  formal  banking  sector.  In  this  process,  not  only  was  the 
growing shadow financial sector ignored, but also the factors such as the interconnectedness 
within the complex financial system, the systemic risk arising out of too-big-to-fail entities and 
system-wide liquidity needs.  
Blueprint for regulatory reforms – international agenda  
5. 
The  broad  contours  of  the  international  initiatives  on  regulatory  reforms  envisage 
strengthening  the  quality  of  capital  and  risk  coverage,  introducing  minimum  liquidity 
standards  and  leverage  ratio,  countercyclical  measures  in  the  form  of  capital  buffers  and 
forward  looking  provisioning,  developing  a  framework  for  systemically  important  entities 
including  cross-border  resolution  arrangements,  extending  the  regulatory  perimeter  to 
unregulated  pools  of  money,  de-risking  the  OTC  derivatives  trading  through  central 
counterparties and new framework for regulating employee compensation within the financial 
sector. The impact assessment of the new proposals made by the BCBS will be completed 
this year and a consensus on fully calibrated measures is expected to be evolved by the end 
of the year.  
The Indian scenario  
6. 
India’s  financial  system,  like  most  emerging  market  economies,  was  not  seriously 
affected by the financial turmoil in the developed economies mainly because of the relatively 
lower integration of the domestic financial sector with the global financial system and limited 
exposure of overseas branches of the Indian banks to the synthetic and complex structured 
products. The adverse effects on the economy were mainly due to sudden reversal of capital 
flows,  tightening  of  credit  availability  from  the  overseas  and  domestic  markets  impacting 
respectively  the  domestic  forex  market  and  liquidity  conditions.  This  resulted  in  increased 
pressure  on  banks  to  provide  credit  at  a  time  when  their  financial  resources  were  already 
quite  strained  pursuant  to  the  rapid  credit  expansion  in  the  previous  three  years.  In  the 
circumstances, the thrust of the various policy initiatives by the Reserve Bank has been on 
providing  ample  rupee  liquidity,  ensuring  comfortable  dollar  liquidity  and  maintaining  a 
market environment conducive for the continued flow of credit to productive sectors.  
7. 
What  saved  the  day  for  the  Indian  financial  system  was  our  policy  approach  of 
gradual and calibrated integration of the domestic financial system with overseas markets, 
especially  the  debt  markets  –  through  capital controls  –  as  also  well-modulated  regulatory 
policies  to  contain  bank  exposure  to  sensitive  sectors,  which  are  more  prone  to  asset 
bubbles, such as real estate and capital markets. Further, ensuring that banks maintained 
adequate capital and liquidity while containing undue volatility in the forex and debt markets 
helped in preserving financial stability, while promoting growth. In understanding the Indian 
perspective on banking regulation, it would be useful to look at the regulatory framework prior 
to the crisis and the measures initiated to strengthen it in the wake of the crisis.  
Regulatory framework – prior to the crisis  
8. 
In  devising  the  regulatory  framework  for  banks,  RBI  has  always  kept  in  focus  the 
financial stability objective. A number of counter-cyclical regulatory measures that are now 
attracting attention world-wide, were already in place in India even before the onset of the 
crisis  
Capital requirements  
9. 
The minimum capital adequacy ratio (CRAR) for banks in India at nine per cent is 
higher than the Basel norm of eight per cent. Banks are also required to ensure minimum 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2010
Tier  I  capital  ratio  of  six  per  cent  from  April  1,  2010.  The  current  average  CRAR  for  the 
scheduled  commercial  banks  is  over  13  per  cent  while  Tier  I  ratio  is  about  nine  per  cent. 
Importantly, Tier I capital does not include items such as intangible assets and deferred tax 
assets that are now sought to be deducted internationally.  
Liquidity buffers  
10. 
Indian  banks  have  a  significant  holding  of  liquid  assets  as  they  are  required  to 
maintain cash reserve ratio – CRR, currently 5.75 per cent – and statutory liquidity ratio – 
SLR,  currently  25  per  cent  –  both,  as  a  proportion  to  their  “net”  liabilities.  Central  bank 
liquidity  support  for  managing  day-to-day  liquidity  needs  of  the  banks  is  available  only 
against SLR securities held over and above the statutory minimum of 25 per cent. Thus, the 
excess  SLR  maintained  is  always  available  as  a  source  of  liquidity  buffer.  Besides,  the 
Reserve Bank can also lower the SLR requirement in a distress scenario, to make liquidity 
available  to  the  banks  against  their  resulting  excess  SLR.  Measures  are  also  in  place  to 
mitigate  liquidity  risks  at  the  very  short  end,  at  the  systemic  level  by  limiting  inter-
connectedness, especially in the uncollateralised money market, and at the institutional level. 
More than a decade ago the RBI had issued asset-liability management (ALM) guidelines to 
banks, covering liquidity risk measurement, reporting framework and prudential limits. Banks 
are  required  to  monitor  their  cumulative  mismatches  across  all  time  buckets  and establish 
internal prudential limits with the approval of the Board. The ALM guidelines were updated in 
Oct 2007, inter alia, making the liquidity risk management more granular.  
Management of concentration risk  
11. 
Recognising that risk concentrations could be a very important cause for problems 
in banks, RBI advised banks in India way back in 1989 to fix internal, Board-approved limits 
on their exposures to specific industries or sectors and also prescribed prudential regulatory 
limits on banks’ exposure to single and group borrowers.  
12. 
There  are  prudential  limits  on  single  and  group  borrower  exposures  as  per  which 
banks are allowed as on date, to lend up to 15 per cent of capital funds to a single borrower 
and  up  to  40  per  cent  of  capital  funds  to  a  borrower  group.  This  can  be  increased  by  an 
additional 5 per cent and 10 per cent, respectively for lending to infrastructure. In addition, 
banks have been allowed to consider enhancements in exposures to a borrower (single as 
well as group), in exceptional circumstances, up to a further 5 per cent of capital funds, with 
the  approval  of  their  Boards.  In  2003,  prudential  limits  on  single  and  group  borrower 
exposures and capital market exposures were extended to the consolidated level also for the 
entire banking group.  
Capital Market Exposure (CME)  
13. 
With  a  view  to  insulating  banks  from  exposure  to  asset-price  volatility,  prudential 
norms were prescribed for their exposure to capital market, acquired through both, funded 
and non-funded facilities. The exposure ceiling was initially set at five per cent of the total 
outstanding advances of a bank as on 31st
March of the previous year. However, with effect 
from April 2007, the aggregate exposure of a bank to capital markets has been restricted to 
40  per  cent  its  net  worth.  Within  this  overall  ceiling,  a  bank’s  direct  investment  in  shares, 
convertible  bonds/debentures,  units  of  equity-oriented  mutual  funds  and  all  exposures  to 
Venture  Capital  Funds  should  not  exceed  20  per  cent  of  its  net  worth.  Similarly,  the 
aggregate  exposure  of  a  consolidated  bank  to  capital  market  and  its  direct  investment  in 
capital markets have been capped at 40 per cent and 20 per cent of the consolidated net 
worth respectively.  
 BIS Review 25/2010 
 3
Real estate exposure  
14. 
Banks are expected to monitor their exposure to commercial real estate (which 
has been defined in detail) so as to limit the risk of any downturn in this sector. Although 
no regulatory limit is specified in this regard, RBI keeps a close watch on each bank’s 
exposure to the CRE sector through off-site surveillance and initiates corrective actions 
as necessary.  
Investment portfolio  
15. 
In the year 2000, the RBI conducted a stress test of the banks’ investment portfolio 
in  an  increasing  interest  rate  scenario,  when  the  general  trend  then  was  of  decreasing 
interest  rates.  At  that  time,  banks  in  India  were  maintaining  a  surrogate  capital  charge  for 
market risk, which was at a variance from the Basel norms. On the basis of the findings, in 
order  to  equip  the  banking  system  to  be  better  positioned  to  meet  the  adverse  impact  of 
interest rate risk, banks were advised in January 2002 to build up an Investment Fluctuation 
Reserve  (IFR)  within  a period  of  five  years.  The  prudential  target  for  the  IFR  was  five  per 
cent  of  their  investments  in  “Held  for  Trading”  (HFT)  and  “Available  for  Sale”  (AFS) 
categories. Banks were encouraged to build up a higher percentage of IFR up to 10 per cent 
of  their  AFS  and  HFT  investments.  This  counter-cyclical  prudential  requirement  enabled 
banks  to  absorb  some  of  the  adverse  impact  when  interest  rates  began  moving  in  the 
opposite  direction in  late  2004.  In stages,  IFR  was  gradually  phased  out  by  October  2005 
with  the  outstanding  holdings  therein  being  treated  as  Tier  1  capital.  Banks  have  been 
maintaining capital charge for market risk as envisaged under the Basel norms since end-
March 2006.  
16. 
With the change in the direction of the movement of interest rates in 2004, the cap 
on  the  “Held  to  Maturity”  (HTM)  category  (at  25  per  cent  of  the  total  investments)  was 
reviewed  in  light  of  the  statutory  prescriptions  requiring  banks  to  mandatorily  invest  up  to 
25 per cent of their Demand and Time Liabilities (DTL) in eligible government securities. In 
view of the statutory pre-emption and the long duration of the government securities, banks 
were permitted to exceed the limit of 25 per cent of total investments under HTM category 
provided the excess comprised only the SLR securities and the total SLR securities held in 
the HTM category was not more than 25 per cent of their DTL. One-time shifting of securities 
to HTM category was allowed at acquisition cost or book value or market value on the date of 
transfer, whichever was the least, and the depreciation, if any, on such transfer was required 
to  be  fully  provided  for.  These  changes  recognised  the  dynamic  interface  of  the  banks’ 
investment portfolio with the interest rate cycles and were counter-cyclical.  
Accounting policies – unrealised gains and gains on securitised deals  
17. 
Recognising  the  merit  of  a  conservative  approach  to  valuation  of  investments  by 
banks,  the  extant  prescription  requires  banks  to  recognise  the  losses  (depreciation)  but 
ignore the appreciation (gains). Banks are required to mark to market the each scrip in the 
HFT  and  AFS  categories  at  prescribed  periodicity,  following  the  principle  of  scrip-wise 
valuation and category-wise aggregation. Investments in a particular classification (as per the 
classifications required for balance sheet purposes), may be aggregated for arriving at net 
depreciation/appreciation of investments under that category. While net depreciation, if any, 
needs  to  be  provided  for,  net  appreciation,  if  any,  has  to  be  ignored.  Also,  the  net 
depreciation  required  to  be  provided  for  in  any  one  classification  cannot  be  reduced  on 
account  of  net  appreciation  in  any  other  classification.  There  is  thus  an  in-built  cushion  in 
banks’ balance sheet in the form of unrealised gains in the value of the financial instruments.  
18. 
The RBI’s guidelines on securitisation do not allow upfront booking of profit by the 
originator  in  securitisation  of  standard  assets,  but  stipulate  that  any  profit/premium  or 
loss/discount  arising  on  account  of  asset  sale  should  be  amortised  over  the  life  of  the 
securities issued or to be issued by the SPV, and reflected in the Profit & Loss account. This 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2010
measure ensured that profit booking was not the prime mover of securitization transactions 
of banks.  
Measure of leverage  
19. 
Absolute  and  incremental  credit  aggregates  (including  credit  deposit  ratio)  are 
amongst  the  host  of  variables,  forming  an  integral  part  of  macro-economic  and  prudential 
policy  formulation.  In  the  Indian  context  an  incremental  credit-deposit  ratio  of  more  than 
100 per  cent,  when  the  system  itself  has  a  high  overall  absolute  credit  deposit  ratio  (say 
beyond 70 per cent) is taken as a sign of overheating. A prudential focus on credit deposit 
ratio also encourages the banks to raise deposits for funding credit flow and minimizes the 
use  of  purchased  funds.  As  the  requirement  for  SLR  is  to  hold  unencumbered  securities, 
banks cannot leverage the minimum SLR portfolio to take on more assets. Thus, the focus 
on  credit  deposit  ratio  and  the  SLR  prescription  have  both  served  to  limit  the  degree  of 
leverage in the Indian banking system. The level of leverage is also regulated in India for the 
non-banking financial entities. The Development Financial Institutions (DFIs), which are also 
regulated  by  the  RBI,  are  required  to  comply  with  a  leverage  ratio  defined  in  terms  of  the 
multiples  of  their  net  owned  funds.  The  non-deposit  taking  systemically  important  non-
banking  financial  companies,  even  though  they  do  not  accept  public  deposits,  are  also 
subject to a capital adequacy regime. This was done since these companies were found to 
be raising public funds from banks and capital market to grow their balance sheets.  
Investment in non-government securities  
20. 
Prudential  management  of  investment  in  non-Government  securities  (non-SLR 
securities) by the banks has been another area of regulatory focus primarily with a view to 
enhancing  transparency  of  their  investment  portfolio.  The  need  for  such  management  was 
first articulated in the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2001–02 
and detailed guidelines to banks followed in November 2003 to address the risks arising out 
of investment in non-SLR securities. The prudential measures included confining the short-
term (less than one-year) investments of banks, only to CPs and CDs, insistence on credit 
rating for all such non-SLR investments, limiting the investment in unlisted non-government 
securities  at  10  per  cent  of  the  overall  non-SLR  investment  portfolio  and  comprehensive 
disclosure requirements.  
Securitisation  
21. 
The  RBI  issued  guidelines  on  securitisation  of  standard  assets  in  February  2006. 
These guidelines, as alluded to earlier, prohibit originators from booking profits upfront at the 
time  of  securitisation.  Two  other  features  relate  to  maintenance  of  capital  at  the  required 
minimum of 9% on any credit enhancements provided, and disallowing the release of credit 
enhancement during the life of the credit-enhanced transaction. Thus, banks in India did not 
have incentive to resort to unbridled securitisation as observed in “originate-to-distribute” and 
“acquire and arbitrage” models of securitisation in many other countries. It is our perception 
that  these  guidelines  have  served  the  system  well  and  going  forward  the  intention  is  to 
further strengthen these by stipulating minimum lock-in period of one year for originators and 
a minimum retention of 10 per cent of the pool of assets being securitised.  
Derivatives  
22. 
In December 2002, the banks’ exposure to derivatives was brought under the capital 
adequacy regime by prescribing credit conversion factors linked to the maturities of interest 
rate  contracts  and  exchange  rate  contracts.  Accordingly,  since  April  1,  2003  banks  were 
advised  to  adopt,  either  original  exposure  method  based  on  original  maturity  or  current 
exposure  method  based  on  residual  maturity,  consistently  for  all  derivative  products,  in 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 5
determining individual/group borrower exposure. After the banks gained sufficient expertise 
in the area, the option of original exposure method was withdrawn and since August 2008 
banks  are  required  to  compute  their  credit  exposures,  arising  from  the  interest  rate  and 
foreign exchange derivative transactions using the current exposure method. The conversion 
factors were increased and doubled for certain residual maturities with a view to improve the 
capital cushion available for such derivative products.  
23. 
The amendments to Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 in 2006 conferred on the RBI 
explicit  powers  to  regulate  the  derivative  products  which  have  the  exchange  rate,  interest 
rate or credit rating as the underlying. Comprehensive guidelines on derivatives were issued 
in April 2007. The guidelines, intended to safeguard the interests of the system as well as the 
players in the market, lay down eligibility criteria, broad principles for undertaking derivative 
transactions, permissible derivative instruments, risk management and corporate governance 
aspects  as  also  aspects  relating  to  both  suitability  and  appropriateness  of  a  derivative 
product for a client.  
Collateralised money market  
24. 
A  number  of  structural  measures  were  initiated  by  the  RBI  to  restrict  non-
collateralised borrowing and lending in the money markets. In 2002, limits were placed on 
call  money  borrowing  and  lending.  Simultaneously,  measures  were  taken  to  develop  the 
market repos and the Collateralised Borrowing and Lending Obligations (CBLO) markets with 
the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd acting as a central counter party. By August 2005, the 
non-bank players were phased out of the uncollateralised call money markets, which is now 
a pure inter-bank market. The share of the (collateralized) market repo and CBLO segments 
in the total money market is significant at nearly 90% in recent months.  
Limit on inter-bank exposures  
25. 
Recognising the possible impact of excessive interconnectedness within the banking 
system, in March 2007, RBI limited a bank’s inter-bank liabilities (IBL) to twice its net worth. 
A higher IBL limit up to 300 per cent of the net worth was allowed for banks whose CRAR 
was at least 25 per cent more than the minimum CRAR (nine per cent) i.e., 11.25 per cent.  
Corporate governance  
26. 
Reckoning the importance of having diversified ownership of banks to ensure that 
there is no dominance by any shareholder or group of shareholders, directly or indirectly, as 
also  to  ensure  that  significant  owners  of  banks  are  “fit  and  proper”,  RBI  issued 
comprehensive  guidelines  of  ownership  and  governance  in  2003  as  also  “fit  and  proper” 
requirements  for  directors.  Under  the  extant  guidelines,  any  transfer  of  a  bank’s  shares 
amounting  to  five  per  cent  or  more  of  its  total  paid  up  equity  capital  is  required  to  be 
approved by RBI before the bank can register the transfer. For holdings beyond 10 per cent 
prior approval is required. Large industrial houses cannot have ownership of a bank beyond 
10 per cent.  
27. 
The  RBI  has  taken  various  steps  to  improve  corporate  governance  standards  in 
banks. The private sector banks are required to set up Nomination Committees to oversee 
“fit  and  proper”  status  of  board  of  directors  through  appropriate  due  diligence  and  obtain 
periodical  deed  of  covenants  from  the  directors.  To  facilitate  induction  of  fresh  minds  and 
ideas, an upper age limit has been prescribed for non-executive directors in private sector 
banks. Further, the post of the Chairman and Managing Director in private sector banks has 
been split into a part time Chairman, who would provide strategic vision for the banks and a 
Managing  Director,  who,  as  the  Chief  Executive,  would  be  responsible  for  the  day-to-day 
management of the bank.  
6 
 BIS Review 25/2010
The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  mandated  by  statute 
Compensation of CEOs  
28. 
to  regulate  executive 
compensation in private sector banks. It is the statutory responsibility of RBI to ensure that 
the  remunerations  of  bank  CEOs  and  whole  time  directors  are  not  excessive.  In  terms  of 
Section 35 B of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the banks in the private sector and foreign 
banks  in  India  are  required  to  obtain  the  approval  of  the  Reserve  Bank  for  remuneration 
payable  to  their  CEOs  while  the  remuneration  of  public  sector  bank  CEOs  is  fixed  by  the 
Government of India.  
29. 
The RBI ensures that executive compensation, whether it is in the form of cash or 
stock,  is  appropriate,  taking  into  account  the  financial  position  of  the  concerned  bank  and 
also the industry practice. The RBI has instructed the boards of the private sector banks to fix 
remuneration  package  of  CEOs  at  a  reasonable  level  in  light  of  industry  practice  in  India. 
Further,  the  annual  bonuses  of  CEOs  of  private  sector  banks  are  capped  at  a  certain 
percentage  of  their  base  salary.  The  Remuneration  Committees  of  banks,  consisting  of 
independent directors, are made responsible for implementation of compensation structure in 
banks.  
Restrictions on external debt intermediation by banks and FIs  
30. 
As  a  measure  of  capital  account  management,  banking  system’s  access  to 
overseas markets has been regulated. Some liberalisation was allowed in 2004, when banks 
in India were permitted to raise overseas funds not exceeding 25 per cent of their unimpaired 
Tier I capital or equivalent of USD 10 million, whichever was higher. With a view to providing 
greater  flexibility  to  Authorised  Dealer  Category  –  I  banks  in  seeking  access  to  overseas 
funds, this facility was further liberalised in October 2008 and the aforesaid limit was raised 
to 50 per cent of their unimpaired Tier I capital. Apart from this window, banks in India also 
have  access  to  global  financial  markets  to  raise  regulatory  capital  instruments,  including 
capital  funds  raised/augmented  by  the  issue  of  innovative  perpetual  debt  instruments  and 
debt  capital  instruments  in  foreign  currency  and  any  other  overseas  borrowings  with  the 
specific  approval  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Similarly,  there  are  restrictions  on  the  borrowing 
abroad  by  financial institutions.  These  measures  have  ensured  that  overseas  lenders  take 
risk on companies directly and do not leverage on the comfort of intermediation by a bank or 
a financial intermediary.  
Market infrastructure  
31. 
An  institutional  mechanism  initiated  by  RBI  for  minimising  settlement  risk  was  the 
setting up the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd (CCIL) in 2001 as a central counter party. It 
provides an institutional structure for the clearing and settlement of transactions undertaken 
in  Government  securities,  money  market  instruments  and  foreign  exchange  products.  In 
October 2007, CCIL has become a member of the CCP 12, an international organisation of 
the  central  counterparty  clearing  organisations.  Apart  from  this,  there  are  also  systems  in 
place for reporting trades in corporate bonds for ensuring greater transparency.  
Supervision of financial conglomerates  
32. 
In  order  to  address  the  limitations  of  the  segmental  approach  to  supervision  of 
bigger  financial  groups,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  in  consultation  with  the  Securities  and 
Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  and  Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority 
(IRDA),  put 
for  Financial 
Conglomerates  (FCs).  Under  the  framework,  certain  key/critical  information/data  are  being 
collected  from  identified  FCs  by  their  respective  principal  regulators.  The  data/information, 
among others, relate to intra-group transactions and exposures of the identified groups. The 
review  of  the  intra-group  transactions  is  conducted  with  a  view  to  track  build-up  of  large 
in  June  2004  a  special  monitoring 
framework 
in  place 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 7
exposures to entities within the Group, to ensure that the transactions are conducted in an 
arm’s-length  relationship,  to  identify  cases  of  migration/  transfer  of  “losses”  and  detect 
situations of regulatory/supervisory arbitrage. The build-up of exposures of the Group on a 
collective basis to outside counterparties and to various financial market segments (equity, 
debt, money market, derivatives market etc.) are also assessed in course of the analysis of 
data. The monitoring mechanism, thus, seeks to capture the “contagion risk” within the group 
as  also  its  cumulative  exposure  to  specific  outside  entities,  sectors  and  market  segments, 
from the point of view of various concentration risks facing the Group.  
Regulation of NBFCs  
33. 
The systemic significance of non-banking financial institutions and hence, the need 
for their regulation, which is now engaging the attention of policy makers globally, had been 
recognised by India more than a decade ago when in the RBI Act was amended to bring the 
non-banking financial institutions within the regulatory domain of the Reserve Bank.  
34. 
The initial policy stance was focused on the objective of depositor protection and all 
regulations  were  formulated  to  address  this  objective.  Accordingly,  Non-deposit  taking 
NBFCs (NBFCs-ND) were subject to minimal regulation. However, recognising the systemic 
significance of certain entities, RBI classified, in December 2006, non-deposit taking NBFCs 
having  asset  size  of  Rs  100  crore  and  more  as  systemically  important.  To  strengthen  the 
capital  base  of  such  companies  and  reduce  the  possibility  of  excessive  leverage,  capital 
adequacy  requirements  were  introduced  besides  the  credit  concentration  norms.  A  capital 
adequacy  ratio  of  10  per  cent,  which  is  higher  than  that  for  banks,  was  prescribed  for 
NBFCs-ND-SI with effect from April 01, 2007.  
35. 
from  capital  adequacy  norms,  single  and  group  credit/investment 
concentration norms were also introduced with effect from April 01, 2007 for NBFCs-ND-SI in 
as much as they could not lend to or invest in shares of any single entity exceeding 15 per 
cent of their owned fund; and to any single group of borrowers exceeding 25 per cent of their 
owned fund; or lend and invest (loans/investments taken together) more than 25 per cent of 
owned fund to a single party; and 40 per cent of owned fund to a single group of parties.  
Apart 
Countercyclical prudential measures  
36. 
From  2004  through  2007,  in  conjunction  with  monetary  policy,  the  RBI  used  pre-
emptive countercyclical provisioning and differential risk weights to contain excessive credit 
growth to sectors that showed signs of risk building up. These include sectors where asset 
prices were increasing rapidly (such as real estate and capital markets) and retail or personal 
loan sectors where underwriting standards, were perceived to have been diluted during the 
phase of very high credit growth. For instance, in 2004, a higher risk weight of 125 per cent 
(earlier 100 per cent) was prescribed for consumer credit, including personal loans and credit 
cards  receivables.  Similarly,  in  July  2005,  the  continued  rapid  expansion  in  credit  to  the 
capital market and commercial real estate sector prompted the Reserve Bank to increase the 
risk weights on banks’ exposure to these sectors to 125 per cent. About a year later in May 
2006, the risk weight on commercial real estate exposure was further increased from 125 per 
cent to 150 per cent. In January 2007, the risk weight for bank’s exposure to NBFC-ND-SI 
was increased from 100 per cent to 125 per cent. The higher risk weight applicable to these 
sectors were found to be an effective tool for moderating credit growth, besides serving the 
prudential  purpose.  Anticipating  the  deterioration  in  credit  quality  that  is  expected  in  the 
context of high credit growth, the general provisioning requirement on standard advances in 
certain  sensitive  sectors,  viz.,  capital  market  exposure,  residential  housing  loans  beyond 
Rs.20  lakh,  commercial  real  estate  loans  and  loans/advances  to  NBFCs-NDSI  was  raised 
from 0.4 per cent to one per cent in May 2006, and subsequently to two per cent in January 
2007.  
8 
 BIS Review 25/2010
These  prescriptions  were  reviewed  in  the  context  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in 
37. 
November 2008. The risk weights to the sensitive sectors were restored to 100 per cent from 
the higher levels. The provisioning requirements for all types of standard assets was reduced 
to a uniform level of 0.40 per cent except in the case of direct advances to agricultural and 
SME sectors, which continued to attract a provisioning of 0.25 per cent, as hitherto. As the 
economy  stabilised,  it  was  found  that  credit  to  CRE  again  started  showing  signs  of  rapid 
growth  while  there  was  evidence  of  lack  of  demand  in  the  sector;  the  provisioning 
requirement for CRE was increased to one per cent in October 2009 to deal with the likely 
rise  in  NPAs.  Thus,  RBI  deviated  from  the  Greenspan  Orthodoxy,  and  used  prudential 
measures to safeguard the banking system from any fallout of asset price bubbles and busts.  
Development of institutional framework for ensuring financial stability  
38. 
Apart from being the banking regulator, the RBI has responsibility for regulating non-
banking  financial  companies  –  both  deposit  taking  and  non-deposit  taking.  In  addition  it 
regulates  the  forex,  money  and  government  bond  markets.  It  can  also  impose  or  remove 
capital  controls  under  the  Foreign  Exchange  Management  Act.  Further,  the  RBI  is  the 
regulatory authority for the payments and settlements system under the relevant Act passed 
in 2007. These powers have made it possible for the RBI to be a key systemic regulator for 
ensuring  financial  stability.  The  institutional  framework  developed  to  achieve  this  objective 
included  the  Board  for  Financial  Supervision  (BFS),  which  was  established  in  1994  as  a 
committee of the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank of India for oversight of the 
supervision 
financial  companies, 
specialised financial institutions, urban cooperative bank and primary dealers. As part of the 
process  of  ensuring  a  coordinated  approach  to  regulation,  a  High  Level  Co-ordination 
Committee on Financial and Capital Markets (HLCCFCM) was constituted in 1999 with the 
Governor,  RBI  as  Chairman,  and  the  heads  of  the  securities  market  and  insurance 
regulators, and the Secretary in the Finance Ministry as members. A Board for Regulation 
and  Supervision  of  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (BPSS),  was  constituted  in  March 
2005,  also  as  a  Committee  of  the  Central  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  has  been 
entrusted with the responsibility for the smooth development and functioning of the payment 
and settlement systems in India.  
function  covering  commercial  banks,  non-banking 
Regulatory response – post crisis  
39. 
The RBI responded to the crisis by providing ample rupee liquidity and comfortable 
forex  liquidity  to  ensure  that  credit  and  financial  markets  functioned  normally.  It  also  gave 
regulatory guidance for restructuring of viable loan accounts for ensuring continued flow of 
credit to productive sectors of the economy with a view to arresting growth deceleration.  
Liquidity measures  
40. 
Policy  interest  rates  were  reduced  aggressively  and  rapidly,  the  quantum  of  bank 
reserves kept with the central bank was reduced significantly. Refinance facilities for specific 
sectors  like  SME/housing  and  exports  were  provided  or  increased.  Measures  aimed  at 
managing  forex  liquidity  included  an  upward  adjustment  of  the  interest  rate  ceiling  on  the 
foreign  currency  deposits  by  non-resident  Indians,  relaxing  the  external  commercial 
borrowings (ECB) regime for corporates, and allowing non-banking financial companies and 
housing finance companies access to foreign borrowing, as also rupee-dollar swap facility for 
Indian banks’ overseas branches. An exclusive refinance window as also a special purpose 
vehicle  for  supporting  non-banking  financial  companies  was  introduced.  Specific  refinance 
was  provided  for  export  housing  and  SME  sectors  through  EXIM  Bank,  National  Housing 
Bank and Small Industries Bank of India.  
BIS Review 25/2010 
 9
Counter cyclical measures  
41. 
In  November  2008,  as  a  countercyclical  measure,  the  additional  risk  weights  and 
provisions  were  withdrawn  and  restored  to  previous  levels.  The  prudential  regulations  for 
restructured  accounts  were  modified,  and  banks  were  allowed  to  treat  the  restructured 
accounts as “standard” asset subject to certain safeguards such as meeting the conditions of 
viability,  adequate  provisioning  and  full  disclosure.  This  was  a  one-time  measure  in  the 
context  of  the  need  to  preserve  the  economic  and  productive  value  of  assets  which  were 
otherwise  viable.  The  modified  regulations  were  in  operation  for  applications  for  re-
structuring  received  up  to  March  31,  2009  and  restructured  packages  implemented  within 
120 days of receipt of application or by June 30, 2009, whichever was earlier.  
CRAR hike for NBFCs deferred  
42. 
In the case of NBFCs, having regard to their need to raise capital, they were allowed 
to issue perpetual debt instruments qualifying for regulatory capital. They were also allowed 
further time of one more year to comply with the increased Capital to Risk-Weighted Asset 
Ratio (CRAR) stipulation of 15 per cent as against the existing requirement of 12 per cent.  
Provisioning coverage ratio  
Recognising  the  impact  that  restructuring  and  slower  growth  could  have  on  the 
43. 
credit quality of banks and taking into account the need to build up provisions when banks’ 
earnings are good, banks were advised in December 2009 that their total provision coverage 
ratio, including floating provisions, should not be below 70 per cent by September 2010.  
Strengthening of securitisation guidelines  
44. 
To  ensure  that  the  originators  do  not  compromise  on  due  diligence  of  assets 
generated  for  the  purpose  of  securitisation,  it  has  been  recently  decided  to  stipulate  a 
minimum lock-in period of one year for bank loans before these are securitised. It has also 
been proposed to lay down minimum retention criteria for the originators at 10 per cent of the 
pool of assets being securitised as another measure to achieve the same objective.  
Addressing regulatory gaps: NCDs and private pools of capital  
45. 
An  area  of  regulatory  gap  identified  was  issuance  of  Non  Convertible  Debentures 
(NCDs) of maturity of less than one year. While banks were not permitted to invest in such 
instruments,  the  mutual  funds  could  do  so  and  in  the  context  of  large  flow  of  funds  from 
banks to mutual funds, there were concerns that reliance of corporates on NCDs of less than 
one year maturity had increased, but it did not come under the regulatory purview of either by 
the SEBI or the Govt. of India. HLCCFM had taken the view that these instruments need to 
be regulated as money market instruments by the Reserve Bank. Draft guidelines formulated 
by an Internal Working Group, formed for the purpose, have been placed on the RBI website 
for comments.  
46. 
Of late, banks in India have shown increasing interest in sponsoring and managing 
private  pools  of  capital  like  venture  capital  funds  and  infrastructure  funds.  With  a  view  to 
strengthening the regulatory framework in this regard, it was felt necessary to put in place an 
appropriate  prudential 
for  regulating  banks’  off-balance  sheet  activities. 
Accordingly,  a  draft  discussion  paper  has  been  put  out  by  Reserve  Bank  for  soliciting 
comments.  
framework 
Strengthening of disclosure norms for NBFCs  
47. 
The  disclosure  norms  in  respect  of  NBFCs-ND-SI  were  also  reviewed  and 
Systemically  Important  NBFCs-ND  were  advised  to  make  additional  disclosures  in  their 
10 
 BIS Review 25/2010
Balance Sheet from the year ending March 31, 2009 relating to Capital to Risk Assets Ratio 
(CRAR),  exposure  to  real  estate  sector,  both  direct  and  indirect,  and  maturity  pattern  of 
assets and liabilities.  
Repos in corporate bonds  
48. 
In  order  to  help  develop  the  corporate  bond  market  and  after  putting  in  place  a 
robust  system  to  ensure  settlement  of  trades  in  corporate  bonds  on  a  DvP  1  basis  (on  a 
trade-by-trade basis) and Straight-Through-Processing (STP), the Reserve Bank of India has 
formulated, in consultation with the market participants, draft guidelines on repo transactions 
in corporate debt securities.  
Currency and interest rate futures  
49. 
An  internal  Working  Group  was  set  up  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  study  the 
international experience and suggest a suitable framework to operationalise the proposal to 
introduce  exchange-traded  currency  futures  in  India.  The  Group  recommended  allowing 
banks  to  become  direct  trading-cum-clearing  members  of  the  currency  futures  exchanges 
subject to prudential criteria such as minimum net worth, CRAR, profitability, etc. Accepting 
these  recommendations  and  in  order  to  enable  the  market  participants  to  manage  their 
currency risk better, currency futures have been introduced in August 2008. Initially, only US 
dollar-Indian  rupee  contracts  were  allowed.  As  part  of  developing  the  market  for  currency 
futures further, currency futures contracts in currency pairs of Euro-INR, Japanese Yen-INR 
and Pound Sterling-INR, have also been introduced in January 2010.  
50. 
In order to enable management of interest rate risk better, interest rate futures have 
been  introduced  in  August  2009.  The  standardised  Interest  rate  futures  contracts  are  on 
10-year  notional  coupon-bearing  Government  of  India  security  with  a  notional  coupon  of 
seven per cent per annum with semi-annual compounding.  
Single name credit default swaps  
51. 
As  part  of  the  gradual  process  of  financial  sector  liberalisation  in  India,  it  is 
considered  appropriate  to  introduce  credit  derivatives  in  a  calibrated  manner.  In  2007,  the 
Reserve Bank had issued draft guidelines for introduction of credit default swaps (CDS) in 
India. However, the issuance of final guidelines was kept in abeyance keeping in view the 
role of credit derivatives in the recent financial crisis. It was essential that we proceed with 
caution reflecting the lessons from the financial crisis in this regard. In order to align with the 
international work already conducted/ underway in the area of credit derivatives, and keeping 
in  view  the  specifics  of  the  Indian  markets,  it  is  proposed:  to  introduce  plain  vanilla  OTC 
single-name CDS for corporate bonds for resident entities subject to appropriate safeguards. 
A working Group has been constituted for the purpose.  
Setting up of Financial Stability Unit  
52. 
Financial stability has come to occupy centre-stage of policy concerns. As has been 
done in many jurisdictions, an exclusive Financial Stability Unit (FSU) was set up within the 
Reserve  Bank.  The  mandate  of  the  Unit,  inter  alia,  includes  conducting  macro-prudential 
surveillance and stress tests.  
53. 
Thus it is obvious that the global events have not stalled the reform agenda: rather, 
a  number  of  measures  have  been  taken  for  development  of  the  financial  markets  drawing 
upon the lessons learnt from the crisis.  
BIS Review 25/2010 
 11
Commencement of calibrated exit  
54. 
As the growth momentum gathers pace, RBI is conscious of the growing need for a 
calibrated exit from the accommodative monetary policy stance, put in place as part of the 
strategy  to  manage  the  impact  of  the  crisis.  However,  the  policy  dilemma  facing  India  is 
qualitatively different from that faced by the advanced economies. The pace of recovery of 
the  Indian  economy  is  widely  expected  to  be  faster  than  the  developed  nations.  Further, 
unlike developed nations, India is confronted with a situation of high inflation, which currently 
appears to be more supply driven in contrast to economies which are demand starved. As 
part of this evolving strategy, the reserve requirements were hiked in January 2010, (SLR by 
100 bps and CRR by 75 bps), unconventional facilities for providing liquidity – refinance and 
special term repo – for  scheduled commercial banks rolled back and access to short-term 
foreign currency borrowing by NBFCs and housing finance companies (HFCs) withdrawn.  
Emerging challenges/issues that need focused attention  
55. 
An  important  challenge that  confronts  us  as  we  go  forward  is  how  to balance  the 
needs of growth with financial stability. The overarching objective of RBI has been to ensure 
adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy,  while  endeavouring  to 
preserve  price  and  financial  stability.  The  critical  challenge  in  this  context  is  whether  the 
emerging regulatory responses internationally will constrain growth in India.  
Leverage ratio  
As  a  leverage  ratio  does  not  require  any  complex  modelling  assumptions  and 
56. 
calibration  procedures,  having  it  in  addition  to  risk-weighted  capital  requirements  is 
conceptually  advantageous.  However,  India  being  primarily  a  bank-dominated  financial 
system,  with  banks  providing  working  capital  as  well  as  long-term  finance,  the  impact  of 
introduction of leverage ratio on growth may have to be looked into. Also various off balance 
sheet transactions such as letters of credit and guarantees are very important for supporting 
the real sector but would likely have 100 per cent credit equivalence for calculation of the 
proposed leverage ratio. The SLR in India is a statutory requirement for banks and including 
the SLR securities in computing the leverage ratio is an issue that is engaging our attention, 
especially as these securities can not be used for borrowing.  
Capital buffers: size  
57. 
In the context of building capital buffers for mitigating pro-cyclicality, the use of credit 
aggregates  for  assessing  banking  sector  conditions  for  determining  buffers  may  have 
different implications for India, as contrasted with those for advanced economies. Growth in 
bank  credit  in  India  could  be  due  to  factors  such  as  financial  deepening  from  a  relatively 
lower  base,  structural  shifts  in  supply  elasticities,  rising  efficiency  of  credit  markets  and 
perhaps  policy  initiatives  to  improve  flow  of  credit  to  sectors  like  the  agriculture  and  small 
enterprises apart from the credit demand arising out of higher growth in GDP itself.  
Asset liability management  
58. 
India has a bank-dominated financial system and the Indian economy, being supply-
constrained, needs financial resources of long-term nature. Given this, the increased funding 
of growth and development by banks, whose liabilities are typically short-term, would lead to 
asset liability mismatch, and there is a need for products for managing liquidity and interest 
rate risk arising out such mismatches.  
12 
 BIS Review 25/2010
Know Your Customer (KYC) guidelines  
59. 
KYC  guidelines/norms  are  very  relevant  in  the  context  of  money  laundering  and 
suspicious activities. However, the rigour of their application to low-value low-risk customers 
may need to be suitably modified to facilitate access to the formal financial system for such 
customers.  
Credit information  
60. 
Achieving financial inclusion in India is one of the policy objectives of the Reserve 
Bank. In this context, availability of credit information could facilitate flow of credit to credit-
worthy borrowers. While a few credit information companies are in the process of setting up 
business in India, there is a need for up scaling availability of credit information.  
Credit rating  
61. 
There  is  an  urgent  need  to  ensure  robustness  and  reliability  of  credit  ratings 
assigned  by  the  rating  agencies.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  completed  a  detailed 
process of review of the accredited CRAs for their continued accreditation under Basel II. We 
are  also  liaising  with  Securities  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  with  regard  to  CRAs’ 
adherence  to  the  IOSCO  Code  of  Conduct  Fundamentals.  The  issue  of  strengthening  the 
regulation of CRAs is under the consideration of the HLCCFM and the report since submitted 
to the HLCCFM has been placed in the public domain.  
Risk management capabilities: HR and IT issues  
62. 
In  the  years  ahead,  banks  would  need  to  upgrade  their  infrastructure,  including 
human resources, to face the growing complexity of risk management. Apart from traditional 
risks  such  as  credit  risk,  market  risk  and  operational  risk,  new  genre  of  risks  including 
reputation  risk,  liquidity  risk,  counterparty  credit  risk,  and  model  risk  have  emerged  on  the 
horizon, management of which obviously requires skills of a higher order. These issues are 
engaging the attention of the stakeholders of the Indian banking industry.  
Implementation of Basel II – advanced approaches  
63. 
We  have  announced  a  timetable  for  the  gradual  and  calibrated  adoption  of 
advanced  approaches of  the  Basel  II  Accord  by  the  banks  in  India.  The  challenges  for  us 
include  the  absence  of  long-enough  history  of  economic/business  cycles.  Also,  using  past 
data  may  not  be  appropriate  in  cases  where  the  sector  has  undergone  structural 
transformation.  Another  issue  with  regard  to  adoption  of  the  advanced  approaches  is  the 
possibility  that  the  risk  weights  assigned  to  employment-intensive  retail  and  SME  sectors 
may increase in certain circumstances, which may hamper the credit flow to these sectors or 
make  it  costlier.  We  may  need  to  develop  appropriate  risk  mitigants  for  the  borrowers  of 
these sectors on the basis of which lower risk weights could be assigned in order to ensure 
continued flow of credit to them.  
Infrastructure funding  
64. 
It  has  been  estimated  that  the  infrastructure  lending  requirements  during  the 
11th Five year plan period (2007–08 to 2011–12) would be approximately Rs. 20 lakh crore 
(USD 450 billion). Even though banks’ lending to infrastructure has been steadily showing an 
increasing  trend  over  the  years  and  amounted  to  9.73  per  cent  of  bank  credit  as  at  end 
March 2009, there is an ever increasing demand on banks to finance infrastructure.  
65. 
While  measures  like  take-out  financing  arrangement  with  IIFCL/other  financial 
institutions,  issue  of  long-term  bonds  by  banks  to  the  extent  of  their  exposure  to  the 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 13
infrastructure sector and certain relaxations in single/group borrower limits for infrastructure 
financing  are  already  in  place,  banks  face  difficulty  in  meeting  the  increasing  demand  for 
infrastructure finance. Activating the corporate bond market, tapping long-term savings such 
as insurance and pension funds could potentially open up an alternative source of funds for 
infrastructure financing. There is also a need to look for credit mitigants to facilitate enhanced 
bank finance for infrastructure.  
Micro and Small Enterprise (MSE) funding  
66. 
From  the  banker’s  point  of  view,  the  critical  factors  affecting  credit  delivery  to  the 
MSEs  are  low  equity  base,  absence  of  marketing  tie  up,  diversion  of  funds,  poor 
management  and  book  keeping,  higher  NPAs,  mounting  of  receivables  due  to  delay  in 
payment of bills especially during downturn. Effective involvement of banks in MSE funding 
warrants addressing issues associated with credit information and credit guarantee. Further, 
banks  need  portfolio  approach 
Innovative,  decentralised  and 
customised  credit  delivery  mechanisms  would  need  to  be  thought  of,  leveraging  on 
technology for better risk management while reducing transaction costs.  
to  risk  management. 
Financial inclusion  
67. 
In  response  to  the  recent  crisis,  financial  sector  regulation  is  being  strengthened 
across the jurisdictions, India being no exception. Higher capital and liquidity requirements 
are being considered which could potentially increase the cost of banking business, which 
could ultimately be reflected in higher lending costs. As these measures may have adverse 
implications for financial inclusion, policy makers may need to look to tweaking regulations to 
facilitate financial inclusion.  
68. 
Further,  up-scaling  financial  inclusion  entails  bringing  informationally  opaque 
borrowers into the fold of mainstream banking. We have introduced the branchless banking 
or  agency  model  through  business  correspondents  to  take  banking  to  the  unbanked  and 
under-banked  areas.  This  model,  inter  alia,  involves  reputational  risks  and  agency  risks. 
Hence, there is a need to adopt innovative risk management approaches using IT, including 
a portfolio approach to retail credit risk management.  
69. 
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI),  an initiative by the  Government of 
India, is in the process of issuing unique identity (UID) numbers to Indian residents. Use of 
UID could go a long way in bringing the financially excluded under the fold of mainstream 
banking as it would assist KYC, credit information and credit profiling.  
Concluding observations  
70. 
Financial  sector  regulation  in  India,  as  it  evolved  over  the  years,  has  focused  on 
prudential regulation for individual institutions while simultaneously putting in place measures 
to deal with systemic risk, arbitrage and capital account management. When credit to certain 
risk-prone  sectors  was  found  to  be  growing  at  a  very  high  rate,  countercyclical  measures 
through additional capital and standard assets provisioning were introduced. Going forward, 
the  challenge  for  us  is  to  calibrate  financial  sector  development  to  meet  the  needs  of  a 
rapidly growing and globalising economy while adhering to the best practices in micro- and 
macro-prudential regulation for ensuring financial stability.  
Thank you. 
14 
 BIS Review 25/2010
