Bojan Marković: Desirable capital inflows in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Bojan Marković, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, to dealers at 
the Bloomberg conference, Belgrade, 27 April 2010. 
 Deliberating  consequences  and  policies  of  capital  inflows  seems  perhaps  inappropriate 
against the backdrop of recession and depreciation pressure on dinar. Yet, the situation may 
change  rapidly,  as  the  recent  experience  of the  emerging Europe  attests. Just  a year  ago 
Poland, Czech Republic and Romania were concerned about capital outflows and weakening 
exchange  rate  –  as  was  Serbia.  Now  there  are  increasing  signs  that  capital  starts  flowing 
again into the emerging Europe and these countries are finding it difficult to cope with the 
consequences. 
A similar turnaround in capital flows can happen in Serbia anytime soon too – we are not 
doing  worse  than  these  countries  as  regards  the  macroeconomic  performance  or  financial 
system stability. One such trigger could be the planned issue of medium-term T-bonds that 
are likely to attract much attention of international investors. 
It is perhaps wise to use this occasion and review the thinking about capital flows from the 
perspective  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia.  We  feel  it  is  important  for  traders  and  other 
players in the financial markets to understand the central bank’s attitudes so that they could 
anticipate our policies and feel comfortable in their activities. 
Capital inflows are welcome! They have been a necessary backbone of our growth model, 
helping  the  Serbian  economy  to  realize  its  catch-up  potential  in  the  absence  of  domestic 
savings. Before the crisis foreign savings financed most of our investments (the investment 
share  was  28%  of  GDP  and  domestic  savings  around  8%).  Hand  in  hand  went  large 
productivity  gains  and  terms  of  trade  improvements,  which  were  mostly  associated  with 
foreign  direct  investments  (share  in  GDP  of  7%  was  relatively  high).  Capital  flows  also 
contributed  to  improving  financial  sector  infrastructure,  increasing  the  resilience  of  the 
financial system to shocks, and allowing for a smoother and efficient allocation of resources. 
However,  by  drawing  on  foreign  savings  capital  inflows  also  allowed  our  consumers  and 
government  keeping  high  consumption  levels.  Practically  the  entire  Serbian  income  was 
consumed  in  the  period  before  the  crisis.  Such  a  model  of  growth  was  therefore  socially 
attractive, but economically unsustainable. The prospects of repaying the ballooning external 
debts were dim against the backdrop of low competitiveness and exports of our economy. 
And  although  the  investment  ratios  looked  high,  even  higher  were  necessary,  especially 
given that the investment structure did not support stronger growth in our competitiveness. 
Regardless of their structure, capital inflows have complicated the life of a policy maker in 
many  ways.  On  a  macroeconomic  level,  the  reliance  on  foreign  savings,  especially  when 
channeled into consumption, manifested in large current account deficits. They reached as 
much as 18% of GDP before the crisis and their long-term viability was rightly questioned. 
The influx of capital into nascent financial markets with a low absorption capacity has led to 
periods of sharp appreciation and contributed to unnecessary large exchange rate volatility. 
Such  appreciation  spells  –  such  as  the  one  in  2006  –  also  encouraged  excessive  foreign 
currency borrowing. 
But  these  macroeconomic  phenomena  were  not  the  major  problems  per  se.  After  all, 
exchange  rate  volatility  is  a  key  element  of  the  Inflation  Targeting  regime,  it  prompts  the 
development  of  hedging  instruments,  and  facilitates  de-euroization  of  the  financial  system. 
The moderate current account deficits could be partly just a flip side of high investment ratios 
that are needed for our catch-up process. There is no doubt large capital inflows are needed 
for  growth  to  resume  in  the  coming  period.  If  the  inflows  are  used  wisely  to  increase  the 
productive capacity – and especially so in manufacturing, the current account deficits should 
BIS Review 58/2010 
 1
be self-corrective over long horizons, as many examples – also from the Eastern Europe – 
attest. Investments in infrastructure are an example of how capital inflows can help increase 
the productivity capacity and raise long-term growth prospects. 
Before the crisis, the major problem with capital inflows in Serbia was the unbalanced risk 
sharing  and  mismatches  involved,  potentially  jeopardizing  the  stability  of  our  financial 
system.  The  catch-up  potential  is a  long-term  process  requiring  long-term  financing.  But  a 
part of the financing was short-term, requiring a regular roll-over. Furthermore, most of the 
financing  came  in  a  foreign  currency,  while  most  revenues  are  denominated  in  the  local 
currency.  
Unlike the popular wisdom, it is not a reckless risk behavior of foreign investors that put our 
economy at risk – it is the lack of it. 
The  risks  involved  in  the  currency  and  maturity  mismatches  were  not  born  by  foreign 
investors,  but  by  domestic  businesses  and  partly  by  households.  They  suffered  the  most, 
when the capital flows dried up and the currency depreciated. Many blame the fragility of the 
financial systems in emerging Europe on the “so called” speculation or carry traders. But who 
was the most important carry trader in Serbia? A large number of households – not a shrewd 
financier from London. And who bore most of the currency and maturity risk? Again domestic 
entrepreneurs and partly households – not the foreign investors. 
It  is  because  of  this  unbalanced  risk  sharing  that  policy  makers  have  to  remain  cautious 
about capital inflows. Our macroeconomic and financial stability was put in danger during the 
crisis  not  because  we  had  been  borrowing  abroad  to  finance  growth,  but  because  foreign 
investors  did  not  carry  adequate  share  of  the  risks  involved  in  these  activities.  Those 
businesses that were financed by foreign direct investment did not suffer so much from the 
lack of financing during the crisis, nor did those who borrowed in dinars, when the currency 
depreciated. In both these cases the foreign investors ventured into the future prospects of 
our economy – hoping to enjoy benefits but also sharing the risks. Those foreign investors 
who  bought  into  dinar  denominated  financial  instruments  took  the  fair  burden  on  their 
shoulders, while those who had a stop-loss deposit with a local bank left the damage here.  
This discussion gives a background for our thinking about capital inflows in the future. We 
welcome all kinds of inflows, but as long as the financing risks involved rest fairly with the 
investor and not only with the local economy. That of course favors long-term flows to short-
term,  because  most  investment  projects  require  long-term  financing.  Foreign  direct 
investments  or  joint  ventures  are  the  most  preferred  examples  here  –  also  because  they 
bring other positive externalities in terms of know-how and technology. Such investors clearly 
demonstrate their long-term commitment to the prospects of Serbian economy. 
But  we  also  encourage  pure  financial  flows  –  even  short-term,  if  they  match  the  financing 
needs. For many reasons explained earlier, they contribute to financial market development 
and help risk diversification.  
In  particular,  we  are  hoping  the  issue  of  dinar-denominated  T-bonds  will  attract  much 
attention  of  foreign  investors,  and  the  program  will  be  success,  eventually  allowing  the 
government to reduce the FX part of its debt. We are also hoping that higher volumes will 
help spur secondary trading and develop a dinar yield curve for benchmarking of other dinar-
based instruments. 
For all these reasons we encourage foreign investors’ involvement in local currency T-bonds 
– but we have clear preferences as regards specific forms of such an involvement. We prefer 
the forms in which the foreign investors take most of the credit and FX risks, such as direct 
purchases  into  buy&hold  or  trading  portfolios.  On  the  other  hand,  participation  in  T-bonds 
through deposits and/or swaps with local banks is less welcome, because a substantial part 
of the market, credit or FX risk remains with the local banking sector. An example of a least 
favored involvement is a deposit with a local bank combined with a stop-loss that keeps all 
the risks in the domestic financial system. Such involvements we would like to discourage. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2010
As regards practical policy consequences, we believe that what is good for the stability of the 
economy is also good for the market participants individually in the long term. We therefore 
prefer corrective self-regulation to regulatory action. We understand that it may be difficult for 
individual players to internalize all consequences for the entire financial system, but we are 
here to provide enough guidance through speeches and regular discussions.  
That  being  said,  we  stand  ready  to  act  swiftly,  should  we  see  that  the  imbalances  from 
unequal  risk  sharing  accumulate  in  a  way  dangerous  to  the  financial  system.  We  have 
enough  tools  for  that  purpose,  including  punitive  reserve  requirement  and  remuneration 
policies, as well as prudential measures aimed at liquidity, capital or open positions. 
In  summarizing,  by  no  means  we  would  like  to  see  lower  volumes  of  capital  inflows.  We 
would  only  prefer  to  see  a  different  structure  than  in  the  past.  Structure,  in  which  foreign 
investors adequately share the risks involved in investing into the local economy. This does 
not  imply  only  foreign  direct  investments  and  joint  ventures  –  we  also  encourage  pure 
financial  flows  as  long  as  the  credit,  maturity  and  FX  risks  are  not  left  entirely  with  the 
domestic financial system. 
The upcoming dinar T-bonds issues are going to be a good occasion for a renewed foreign 
investors’  interest  in  the  local  financial  market.  We  are  hoping  to  see  more  trading,  larger 
volumes, more market development, and more risk taking. It will also be a good occasion to 
test how the financial market players understand our preferences about risk needed for the 
balance of our financial system. 
BIS Review 58/2010 
 3
