DeLisle Worrell: What’s wrong with economics 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Barbados 
Economic Society (BES) AGM, Bridgetown, 30 June 2010. 
 the  stability  of  significance 
freedom  unacceptably  small, 
Introduction 
Back  in  the  sixties,  when  I  began  my  career  in  economics,  we  were  all  too  aware  of  the 
limitations  of  the  discipline:  it  was  static  where  the  world  was  dynamic,  it  assumed 
competitive  markets  where  few  existed,  it  assumed  rationality  when  we  knew  full  well  that 
economic agents were not rational (at least not by the definition economists use), the choice 
of first principles was always arbitrary and culture bound, economics had no way of dealing 
with  changing  tastes  and  technology,  and  much  else  besides.  Econometrics  was  equally 
plagued  with  intractable  problems:  economic  observations  are  never  randomly  drawn  and 
seldom independent, the number of excluded variables is always unmanageably large, the 
degrees  of 
tests  seldom 
unequivocably established, the errors in measurement too large to yield meaningful results 
(when we could estimate their magnitude at all, that is), the proxies we always have to use 
instead of the theoretical variables unacceptably distant from the variables they are meant to 
represent.  
So we understood that we could not rely entirely – or even mainly – on theory and tests to 
say anything useful about the real world. I love numbers, and it is obvious that to gain any 
insight about how an economy works you need to start with a theory, so theory and tests are 
part  of  the  armoury  I  would  expect  to  use.  However,  the  writers  who  attracted  me  to 
economics – Arthur Lewis was a prime example – understood that theory was more than a 
set  of  equations  and  some  algebraic  manipulation,  and  that  empirical  economics  was  not 
about “proving” a theory, but rather about using data to enrich one’s intuition about how the 
economy works. Also, they understood that most of what explains economic processes and 
interactions cannot  be  captured  by  the  algebra and  calculus  that  economists  have  at  their 
disposal. 
Over  the  past  4  decades  I  have  become  increasingly  dismayed  as  I  have  observed  the 
economics profession being taken over by a generation of economists who have lost sight of 
the limitations of what they can know, with the help of the tools and techniques available to 
us. We write as though anything that we can set down in a theoretically “correct” specification 
of  an  equation  has  to  be  true,  even  when  the  evidence  to  the  contrary  is  right  before  our 
eyes, and obvious to everybody who is not an economist. When our empirical tests fail to 
yield expected results we do not take our theory back to the drawing board, but we fudge 
some explanation that we think might be plausible.  
These are not trivial matters. They lead economists to incorrect interpretations of economic 
motivations,  transactions  and  processes,  and,  as  a  result,  to  policy  recommendations  that 
can be guaranteed to fail. I offer two examples.  
The exchange rate is not a price of anything 
Economists cannot understand how the exchange rate of small resource poor countries like 
Barbados,  Cayman,  the  Bahamas  and  the  OECS  can  remain  unchanged  in  terms  of  their 
numeraire (the US dollar) indefinitely, because they deceive themselves into thinking that the 
exchange rate is a price. Economists believe that prices are arrived at by demand and supply 
in a market, and since the demand and supply will change over time, then the price has to 
change as well, otherwise the market will not clear. So they have to invent some artifice to 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 1
explain  long  term  exchange  rate  pegs,  especially  in  countries  like  the OECS  that have  no 
exchange controls. 
But in fact the mistake is to believe that the exchange rate is the price of foreign exchange. 
You can’t eat, drink, smoke or wear foreign exchange; foreign exchange is not a commodity. 
Rather, the exchange rate is what it says on the tin, a statement about the relation between 
one measure of value and another. The value of the shirt I bought at Havana Nines in Miami 
airport for US$50 is twice that amount in BDS$, because the exchange rate of the US$:BDS$ 
is 1:2. In exactly the same way that a 10 mile walk is equivalent to a walk of 16 kilometers, 
because the “exchange rate” of miles to kilometers is 1.6:1. It makes as much sense to keep 
changing the exchange rates between currencies as it would to keep changing the value of a 
mile  in  terms  of  a  kilometer.  The  only  outcome  of  flexible  exchange  rates  is  increased 
uncertainty, with no benefit whatsoever. 
This is obvious to ordinary people, but to modern economists it is preposterous. No matter 
that it is confirmed by observation the world over. Not just in the Caribbean, but in regions 
scattered  across  the  globe,  there  is  a  tendency  for  currencies  to  cluster  around  large 
attractors  in  their  neighbourhood;  in  Europe  it  is  the  euro,  in  the  Americas  the  dollar,  in 
Southern  Africa  the  rand,  in  the  Indian  Sub-continent  the  rupee.  It  is  the  notion  of  flexible 
exchange rates that is ridiculous, not the acceptance of the superiority of pegged exchange 
arrangements.  We  should  remember  that  the  notion  that  flexible  exchange  rates  are  an 
acceptable way to  manage the international  economy has  risen to ascendency only in the 
last 3 decades or so, a period I believe will be seen by history as a dark age of economics. 
Prices have not been set by markets since the end of the agrarian economy 
A second example of economists’ misrepresentation of the world is the notion that prices are 
determined  by  an  equilibrium  of  supply  and  demand  in  a  market.  This  notion  is  so 
fundamental to economics that it is accepted without question, and not only by economists. A 
visitor  from  Mars  would  find  this  quite  strange,  because  when  he  looked  around  him,  he 
would  be  hard  pressed  to  find  anything  resembling  a  market  in  which  buyers  and  sellers 
negotiate  the  price  of  things  bought  and  sold.  In  real  life  retail  prices  are  always 
predetermined  by  the  seller,  and  wholesale,  producer  and  other  prices  are  determined  by 
contract. 
This was not always the case. Economic history is not my specialty, but my understanding is 
that  in  the  agrarian  economy  economic  transactions  typically  took  place  via  markets.  The 
farmer would till his fields and raise his livestock five days a week, and on the sixth day he 
would  load  his  produce  on  some  form  of  transportation  and  take  it  to  the  nearest  market 
town, where he would trade it with artisans, fishermen and other farmers who had products 
that he needed and that his household did not produce. In many African societies, I am told, 
the  marketing  is  done  by  women.  The  seventh  day  was  often  the  day  of  rest  and 
recuperation,  at  least  in  the  Western  societies  from  whom  we  draw  our  traditions.  In  this 
economy, sellers will adjust their prices over the course of the market day to ensure that they 
dispose of the entire supply that they have brought to market. 
This was the world in which the early economists like Adam Smith grew up, and these were 
the arrangements which they reflected in their models of the economy. It was a quite literal 
description of the behaviour they experienced every day. The overwhelming proportion of the 
populations lived in villages in the countryside, their daily activity for most of the week was 
production  and  consumption.  Trading,  that  is,  economic  exchange,  took  place  only  on  a 
single day, in a discrete space, for a specified time. It made sense to think of economics as 
the business of trading in markets. 
Unfortunately, the timing was all wrong. Economics was born at the sunset of the agrarian 
age, and at the birth of an industrial age in which the nature of economic transactions was 
completely transformed. The founding fathers of our discipline invented theories for a world 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2010
which  was  about  to  vanish  from  history.  In  the  industrial  society,  a  category  to  which 
Barbados  and  most  of  the  Caribbean  rightly  belong,  the  overwhelming  proportion  of  the 
population  lives  in  conurbations,  where  people  live,  work,  produce,  consume  and  conduct 
economic exchange in the same space, and contemporaneously. In the agrarian economy 
the  worker  tends  his  farm  during  the  week,  and  goes  to  market  on  market  day;  in  the 
industrial economy the hotel worker travels from home to workplace every day, and he or she 
may  go  supermarket  shopping  any  day.  In  the  agrarian  economy  the  farmer  takes  his 
produce  to  market  on  market  day,  in  the  industrial  economy  he  sells  it  on  contract  to  the 
supermarket. In the agrarian economy goods and services are exchanged in the market on 
market  day;  in  the  industrial  economy  shops  and  businesses  are  open  every  day.  In  the 
agrarian  economy  each  market  is  clearly  defined  in  time  and  space;  in  the  industrial 
economy there is no spatial restriction – commodities are exchanged right across the world – 
and there is no single defined period over which all transactions must be completed. Buyers 
and sellers make contracts for whatever period is mutually agreeable. 
I have come to believe that economists have built a discipline for a world which has largely 
vanished, and that is why we have nothing sensible to say about the challenges that face the 
world economy today. Economics does not give you a straight answer about the price of oil 
or any other commodity, about the exchange rate of the euro to the dollar, about the impact 
of deficit reduction in EU countries, about the effects of interest rate changes by the Federal 
Reserve,  about  the  motivation  for  stock  market  fluctuations,  or  about  any  other  economic 
question of interest. It is true that there is a dominant position in the economics profession on 
each of these issues, but that dominant view has proved badly wrong, and persistently so. 
I  now  believe  that  we  need  a  new paradigm  in  economics,  one  that is  appropriate  to  how 
individuals  and  societies  conduct  economic  exchanges  in  an  industrial  society.  I  am  not 
alone  in  this  view.  Some  of  you  will  be  familiar  with  the  Real  World  Review,  and  online 
journal which was born of a graduate student revolution against the absurdity of conventional 
neoclassical  economic  explanations  of  the  world.  Just  recently  I  have  read  a  provocative 
book entitled The Origin of Wealth, which challenges what its author, Eric Beinhocker calls 
“Traditional economics”, and proposes that it be replaced by a new paradigm, “Complexity 
economics”.  His  argument  is  fascinating,  and  I  now  propose  to  spend  a  little  time  talking 
about some of the things I have gleaned from it. 
Economics uses the laws of physics as they were known in the nineteenth century 
“As I write this, the field of economics is going through its most profound change in over a 
hundred years. I believe that this change represents a major shift in the intellectual currents 
of  the  world  that  will  have  substantial  effects  on  our  lives  and  the  lives  of  generations  to 
come.  …just  as  biology  became  a  true  science  in  the  twentieth  century,  so  too  will 
economics come into its own as a science in the twenty first century”. This is how Beinhocker 
opens  his  preface.  His  book  makes  a  first  stab  at  establishing  the  scientific  foundation  of 
economics, arguing that economies evolve by the same laws as those that govern biological 
evolution. 
Early  in  the  book  Beinhocker  describes  a  cross-disciplinary  workshop  on  economics, 
arranged  by  Citicorp’s  CEO  John  Reed,  that  brought  together  ten  leading  economists 
(including  Nobel  Laureate  Kenneth  Arrow)  and  ten  physicists,  biologists  and  computer 
scientists.  The  physical  scientists  were  “really  shocked”  to  find  that  “economics  was  a 
throwback to another era” (page 47). Economists’ mathematics [seemed] “like a blast from 
the  past”,  and  physical  scientists  were  surprised  by  economists’  assumptions,  objecting 
particularly to the assumption of perfect rationality. Physical scientists craft their assumptions 
to  ensure  that  they  do  not  contradict  reality,  though  they  are  designed  to  simplify  it.  The 
assumption of perfect rationality contradicts reality, and economists know that, but they still 
use the assumption, however modified. 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 3
Beinhocker argues that what he calls Traditional Economics (TE) remains trapped in a time 
warp defined by the concepts that Leon Walras borrowed from the physics he knew at the 
time of the development of the marginalist theory of market economics which underpins the 
classical, keynesian, neoclassical and new keynesian views of the world. At that time only 
the  first  law  of  thermodynamics  –  the  conservation  of  energy  –  was  known.  The  notion  of 
equilibrium  is  a  form  of  expression  of  the  first  law.  Physics  subsequently  discovered  the 
second law – that entropy (disorder or randomness) is always increasing. The implication of 
the second law is that if the system were ever to reach equilibrium it would be dead. In effect, 
TE classifies economy as a closed equilibrium system, which violates the laws of physics, as 
they are now known to exist. 
Beinhocker proposes an alternative to TE, which he terms complexity economics, CE. The 
complex  economy  evolves  according  to  the  same  laws  as  does  biological  evolution. 
Evolution  is  an  algorithm  for  finding  “fit”  designs  in  enormous  design  spaces.  It  has  been 
described as “creating design without a designer”. Three elements feature in the evolutionary 
process:  variation  within  the  population,  selection  of  the  fittest,  and  replication  of  the 
successful  design.  In  Beinhocker’s  schema,  business  plans  are  the  selection  process  by 
which  the  fittest  physical  technologies  (PTs)  and  the  fittest  social  technologies  (STs)  are 
selected and replicated. 
PTs are methods and designs for transforming matter, energy and information from one state 
into another in pursuit of a goal or goals. In the case of the economy, business goals are to 
be profitable and to have the resources to grow and cope with change. The evolution of PTs 
combines induction (learning from experience) with deduction (drawing inference from theory 
and observation). Technology evolution is the result of humans’ deductive tinkering search 
through  the  near  infinite  possibilities  of  PT  space.  The  invention  of  science,  which  derives 
laws  from  theories  which  are  tested  repeatedly  under  controlled  conditions,  dramatically 
increased the hit rate of deductive insights. 
STs are methods and designs for organising people in pursuit of goal or goals. They may 
include institutions, structures, roles, processes, and cultural norms. Fit ST designs are those 
which enable people to play non-zero-sum games, and to capture the gains. Such designs 
require  1)  that  there  be  the  potential  for  non-zero-sum  games;  2)  that  payoff  schemes 
provide  incentives  to  play  the  game;  and  3)  that  techniques  are  in  place  for  sanctioning 
anyone who thinks of defecting. 
Beinhocker concludes that viewing the economy as a complex adaptive system provides us 
with a new set of tools, techniques and theories for explaining economic phenomena. These 
include the concepts of design spaces, the processes of evolution just mentioned, and the 
notion of “fit order” which makes for successful PTs and STs. The author gives examples of 
how  deductive  and  intuitive  processes  can  be  employed  to  improve  the  success  rate  in 
selecting the fittest PTs and STs. He admits that his is not the definitive statement of the new 
paradigm,  but  he  hopes  to  have  established  the  foundation  of  an  economics  which,  in 
contrast to what we have at the moment, has a legitimate claim to be viewed as scientific. 
Learning to observe the world as it really is 
Whether  complexity  economics  will  survive  the  assault  that  the  practitioners  of  TE  may 
launch,  and  emerge  as  the  paradigm  shift  we  need  remains  to  be  seen.  In  the  meantime 
there  is  much  that  economists  can  do  to  make  ourselves  and  our  discipline  a  little  more 
useful. One thing we can do is pay close attention, especially to data. Economists now have 
access to enormous amounts of data on countries across the world, from the IMF, the World 
Bank, the UNDP and other institutions that provide data online, much of it free of cost. We 
have regional comparative data from the CCMF, UN-ECLAC and others. And we have a rich 
data mine on Barbados, in the form of statistics compiled and published by the Central Bank 
of Barbados over 35 years or more. We have data on every aspect of the economy, often at 
a  quite  disaggregated  level,  particularly  for  the  financial  sector.  We  have  annual  series, 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2010
quarterly series, monthly series, even daily data series. Yet you would never guess that this 
rich data mine exists, judging from the papers you see published in journals, which invariably 
use the same handful of variables for study after study. 
One  of  the  great  tragedies  of  the  past  few  decades  is  the  neglect  of  the  huge  and  very 
complex  structural  macroeconomic  models  which  were  built  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  in 
university  research  institutes  and  at  central  banks.  These  models  were  so  interconnected 
that it was difficult to pinpoint what was causing what, and the variables and equations did 
not have nice statistical properties, so they were shut down on the orders of the high priests 
of econometric rigour. Or if not shut down, they remained undeveloped and neglected. With a 
few exceptions, among them, thankfully, the forecasting model used by the Central Bank of 
Barbados. Although even that model has not received the attention it deserves, to develop its 
rich possibilities. 
My admonition to all of us is to maximize the use of data: use the highest frequency you can 
find, the longest series you can source, the most precise specification of variables. Don’t let’s 
stay on the surface, confining ourselves to aggregates; let’s drill down to the components, 
the sectors and subsectors. Let us observe carefully, and respect what the data appears to 
be  telling  us.  If  the  data  is  saying  the  opposite  of  what  we  expected,  we  need  to  take 
everything back to the drawing board – our theory, our choice of variable, how we measure 
variables,  our  choice  of  proxies,  and  the  most  likely  candidates  for  inclusion  among  the 
excluded variables. We have to start with a hypothesis, in order to make a selection of data 
to  examine,  but  we  must  be  very  careful  not  to  maintain  our  hypothesis  in  spite  of  the 
evidence. 
Replacing the GDP with the HDI 
When we are comparing among countries we should always use the HDI instead of GDP. 
We all repeat the mantra that the GDP by itself is not a reliable indicator of the quality of life 
in any society. Up until a couple decades ago, we could add “but we have no other indicator 
that is available for a range of countries”, and go on blithely to draw confident conclusions on 
the basis of an admittedly faulty number. With the annual publication of the HDI we no longer 
have  an  excuse,  and  the  failure  to  employ  the  HDI  universally  in  comparisons  among 
countries is inexcusable. It is admittedly a flawed indicator, but it is enormously superior to 
GDP, in representing the real world. It compensates for differences in the purchasing power 
of  the  same  value  of  domestic  product  in  different  countries,  and  it  incorporates  two  vital 
social indicators, health and educational status.  
Discarding unscientific practices 
There are no laws in economics. A law in the physical sciences, as Beinhocker reminds us is 
a universal regularity with no known exceptions. There is nothing in economics which meets 
that  standard.  What  we  have  are  theories:  explanations  for  why  regularities  exist  and 
explanations of how they work. We need to desist from writing papers that “prove” theories; 
they  always  turn  out  to  be  mathematical  exercises  of  no  practical  relevance,  yielding  no 
insight about how the economy really works. In our empirical work we must accept the reality 
that the limitations of model specification, measurement error, choice of proxy variable, etc 
are  so  formidable  that  we  can  never  “prove”  anything  in  economics  by  appealing  to  the 
numbers. 
Replacing slavish reverence for maths with methodological eclecticism  
Human behavior is simply too complex and nuanced to be fully represented mathematically, 
at  least  with  the  maths  known  to  modern  man.  Maths  can  help  us  to  gain  insight  into 
economic  processes,  but  it  is  not  the  only  way  to  gain  such  insight,  nor  even  the  most 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 5
productive.  I  have  recently  spent  time  thinking  about  price  formation,  the  subject  of  an 
ongoing  project,  coordinated  by  Professor  Roland  Craigwell  for  the  CCMF,  in  which  I  am 
involved. Two sources from which I have gained rich insight about the formation of prices are 
the unintended inflationary consequences of the imposition of the VAT in Barbados, and a 
short story by the brilliant Jamaican author Anthony Winkler, entitled “The man who knew the 
price of fish”. 
Concluding remark 
You will all have heard the story of the madman under the street lamp. I first heard Trevor 
Eastmond with it, many years ago. Late one Friday night he was going down Broad Street 
and  he  saw  this  respectably  dressed  young  man  searching  around  under  a  street  light. 
Curious, Trevor asked what was the problem. The fellow said that a Sir Grantley had slipped 
out of his wallet, and he was trying to find it. After a further minute or so of futile searching, 
Trevor said to the young man: “Let’s do this thing logically; exactly where were you standing 
when  the  $100  bill  fell?”  The  young  man  pointed  off  into  the  darkness,  20  metres  away. 
Dumbfounded, Trevor asked the obvious: “But if the money dropped over there, why are you 
searching  here?”  “Because  this  is  where  the  light  is”.  This,  I  submit,  is  how  we  often  do 
economics. Our theories can’t deal with reality, so we ignore the real world and spend our 
time “testing” our theories. If economics is to have any advice to offer which is useful for the 
management of real economies, we must speak to the reality in all its rich complexity, using 
all the data we have, all the methodologies we can devise, and all the sources of insight we 
can  borrow.  We  must  dig  as  deeply  as  we  can,  and  become  sleuths  in  pursuit  of  deeper 
understanding of our economies, even if our search leads us into paths that are dark and 
uncertain. 
6 
 BIS Review 94/2010
