Thomas M Hoenig: The financial foundation for Main Street 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at 
the Capital Markets Summit: “Getting Main Street Back to Work”, US Chamber of Commerce 
Center for Capital Markets Competitiveness, Washington DC, 24 March 2010. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System, its governors, 
officers or representatives.  
History tells us that for a country to succeed and endure economically it must adhere to a 
simple set of principles. No matter the market’s complexity, these principles anchor both its 
financial  system  and  overall  economy.  And  the  most  fundamental  of  these  principles  is  a 
commitment  to  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  institutions  within  the  system.  This 
commitment provides a culture of sound business ethics, a confidence in the rule of law, the 
reliability of contracts, and a culture of fair play on a level field.  
How  the  individual  firms  compete  on  this  field  is  up  to  them.  There  is  almost  always  a 
diversity of firms within a highly competitive and appropriately regulated commercial system. 
Some firms are large, many are small and all are dynamic. Those who relax, resist change, 
or cheat know that such lapses result in failure, which is determined by the market.  
If we stray from our core principles of fairness or ignore the rule of law, we distort the playing 
field  and  inevitably  cultivate  a  crisis.  When  the  markets  are  no  longer  competitive,  firms 
become a monopoly or an oligopoly and it matters more who you know than what you know. 
Then, the economy loses its ability to innovate and succeed. When the market perceives an 
unfair  advantage  of  some  over  others,  the  very  foundation  of  the  economic  system  is 
compromised.  
In  these  instances,  for  example,  bonuses  will  far  exceed  the  economic  value  provided, 
because the bonus is what we economists call an economic rent. It is not earned, it is only 
received.  The  protected  will  act  as  if  they  are  protected,  they  will  retain  their  status 
independent of performance, and the public will suffer. I like to say, “If you give someone a 
monopoly, they will act like a monopolist every time.”  
I open with these comments because our nation today is reacting to a financial crisis and an 
interruption in the flow of capital. It is also now in the process of addressing its causes in an 
effort to prevent its recurrence. While calling for action myself, I have been uneasy with what 
I have seen so far. The attempts to address capital markets and their role as the “Financial 
Foundation  for  Main  Street,”  appear  to  place  a  much  higher  value  on  rhetoric  than  on 
substance and necessary reform.  
As a nation, we have violated the central tenants of any successful system. We have seen 
the  formation  of  a  powerful  group  of  financial  firms.  We  have  inadvertently  granted  them 
implied guarantees and favors, and we have suffered the consequences. We must correct 
these  violations.  We  must  reinvigorate  fair  competition  within  our  system  in  a  culture  of 
business ethics that operates under the rule of law. When we do this, we will not eliminate 
the small businesses’ need for capital, but we will make access to capital once again earned, 
as it should be.  
The inevitable crisis  
The banking system has gone through an unprecedented era of change starting in the 1980s 
when  lawmakers  began  removing  the  roadblocks  to  interstate  banking.  This  evolution 
continued to pick up speed in the years that followed through a number of legislative moves 
that  validated  the  creation  of  ever  larger  banks.  The  scope  of  activities  continued  to  grow 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 1
through the 1990s and by the end of the decade we saw the merger between Citicorp and 
Travelers Group. That merger required the divestiture of certain activities, but this became 
unnecessary  with  the  passage  of  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act.  The  legislation  allowed  a 
single financial company to engage in commercial banking, investment banking, insurance 
underwriting and brokerage.  
This  expansion  of  activities,  some  argued,  created  a  stronger  system  overall  because  the 
institutions were more diversified. For example, rather than being entirely reliant on a single 
community or industry, such as real estate, a stronger system was being created because 
banks  were  serving  a  broader  nationwide  base.  A  downturn  in  a  single  market  would  be 
offset by stability in other areas.  
Although this new era of finance was widely supported, a critical ingredient was missing on 
the road to expansion and innovation: a framework that would limit dangerous excesses or 
the  development  of  perverse  incentives.  Undoubtedly,  the  most  important  omission  was  a 
way to deal with the larger firms that were using the new growth opportunities to become “too 
big to fail (TBTF).”  
Although banking legislation in 1991 specifically tried to limit the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation’s (FDIC) ability to protect failing banks and their creditors, regulators could make 
an  exception  for  large  institutions  whose  failure  might  pose  a  threat  to  the  economy  or  to 
financial stability. As a result, TBTF was embedded in our legal framework.  
The growth of large institutions has distorted the framework of the financial system in ways 
other  than  just  TBTF.  Larger  and  more  complex  institutions  have  become  more  difficult  to 
regulate and supervise. In some cases, regulators did not have the resources or authority to 
keep  up  with  a  growing  and  innovative  financial  system,  particularly  during  a  period  when 
some  regulatory  rules  were  being  replaced  with  a  risk-focused  supervisory  system.  It  has 
been  very  difficult  for  examiners  to  get  large  banks  to  tighten  their  operations,  especially 
when the banks were generating tremendous profits.  
These large institutions wield considerable influence. An obvious example of this is the way 
that  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  were  both  able  to  game  the  political  system  after  their 
accounting problems and avoid tighter regulation and more realistic leverage constraints.  
Looking back, one sees that the crisis was inevitable, if for no other reason than that these 
TBTF firms would push the boundaries until there was a crisis.  
In  a  1999  speech  on  financial  megamergers,  I  concluded  that  “To  the  extent  these 
institutions  become  “too  big  to  fail,”  and  …  uninsured  depositors  and  other  creditors  are 
protected  by  implicit  government  guarantees,  the  consequences  can  be  quite  serious. 
Indeed, the result may be a less stable and a less efficient financial system.”  
More  than  a  decade  later,  the  only  thing  I  can  change  about  this  statement  is  that  the 
government  guarantees  are  no  longer  just  implicit.  Actions  during  the  financial  crisis  have 
made this protection quite explicit.  
The results  
So, what does this protection mean?  
TBTF  status  provides  a  direct  cost  advantage  to  these  firms.  Without  the  fear  of  loss  to 
creditors, these large firms can use higher leverage, which allows them to fund more assets 
with lower cost debt instead of more expensive equity. As of year-end, the top 20 banking 
firms held Tier 1 common equity equal to only 5.1 percent of their assets. In contrast, other 
banking institutions held 6.7 percent equity. If the top 20 firms held the same equity capital 
levels as other smaller banking institutions, they would require $210 billion in new equity or 
reduced assets of over $3 trillion, or some combination of both. (See attached charts.) Stated 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2010
another way, almost one-quarter of the assets held by these large institutions are supported 
by less equity capital.  
Furthermore, TBTF reduces the cost of the debt that these firms issue. Due to their implied 
government  support,  ratings  agencies  explicitly  increase  the  debt  ratings  of  the  largest 
banking organizations above the intrinsic rating that would be assigned based on the bank’s 
condition and the amount of leverage. Not only do these firms get to use more debt, but the 
debt is cheaper.  
This framework has failed to serve us well. During the recent financial crisis, losses quickly 
depleted  the  capital  of  these  large,  over-leveraged  companies.  As  expected,  these  firms 
were rescued using government funds from the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). The 
result was an immediate reduction in lending to Main Street, as the financial institutions tried 
to  rebuild  their  capital. Although  these  institutions  have  raised  substantial  amounts  of  new 
capital,  much  of  it  has  been  used  to  repay  the  TARP  funds  instead  of  supporting  new 
lending.  
In  other  words,  I  suggest  that  our  economy  would  be  better  served  by  a  more  diverse 
financial system. Certainly community and regional banking organizations were hurt by the 
financial crisis and recession and many of these firms are facing large losses associated with 
problems  in  commercial  real  estate  and  other  lending  areas.  But  despite  these  problems, 
many smaller banks have continued to lend. In 2009, 45 percent of banks with assets under 
$1 billion increased their business lending.  
Policy changes  
All of these events bring us to where we are today, talking about the lack of credit availability 
for  Main  Street.  The  good  news,  such  as  it  is,  is  that  the  market  is  slowly  correcting,  and 
credit  growth  is  or  will  begin  flowing  to  Main  Street,  providing  job  growth  and  economic 
recovery. However, it will not be rapid or easy.  
The fact is that Main Street will not prosper without a healthy financial system. We will not 
have a healthy financial system now or in the future without making fundamental changes 
that reverse the wrong-headed incentives, change behavior and reinforce the structure of our 
financial system. These changes must be made so that the largest firms no longer have the 
incentive to take too much risk and gain a competitive funding advantage over smaller ones. 
Credit  must  be  allocated  efficiently  and  equitably  based  on  prospective  economic  value. 
Without these changes, this crisis will be remembered only in textbooks and then we will go 
through it all again.  
As steps toward avoiding this outcome and to assure a more consistent allocation to Main 
Street, I have three recommendations.  
First,  we  must  enable  capitalism  to  work  and  reduce  the  incentive  of  our  largest  financial 
institutions to take on too much risk by allowing them to fail in an orderly manner. This can be 
accomplished,  but  to  do  so,  we  must  have  a  credible  resolution  process  that  forces 
shareholders,  responsible  senior  management,  and  creditors  to  incur  loss  if  the  company 
takes on excessive risk and becomes insolvent. To be credible, the resolution regime must 
be independent of the political process and based on the rule of law. Only then, will creditors 
force  these  firms  to  operate  with  lower  leverage.  The  current  legislation  in  both  houses  of 
Congress begins to address this issue. Unfortunately, both still leave considerable room for 
exception in the hands of the Treasury. This needs more attention. You can find my specific 
recommendations  on  how  this  can  be  accomplished  on  the  Kansas  City  Fed’s  website. 
(www.KansasCityFed.org)  
An often heard statement by many policymakers and financial market experts over the past 
couple years has been that if a financial firm is too big to fail, then it is too big. I couldn’t 
agree  more.  Requiring  that  the  largest  financial  firms  be  allowed  to  fail  when  they  are 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 3
insolvent and that they must meet at least the same equity capital levels as smaller firms will 
create a natural limit on the size of firms. It will also do the most for returning our financial 
system to one that is more efficient and equitable.  
Second, we must strengthen our supervision of financial firms by returning to simple, well-
established rules, such as maximum leverage and loan-to-value ratios. In an age of “markets 
know best” and “growth must be accommodated,” such rules were weakened in statutes and 
regulations.  Today,  we  are  paying  the  price.  Leverage  also  tends  to  rise  during  economic 
expansions as investors, lenders, and borrowers forget past mistakes or come to believe that 
“this  time  it’s  different.”  We  saw  this  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  current  crisis.  The 
acceleration  of 
loan-to-value  ratios  reflected  a  massive 
miscalculation that risks were low and easily manageable.  
Third, we must improve the regulatory framework, which may involve reversing some of the 
deregulation  that  occurred  in  the  1990s.  Specifically,  adopting  a  version  of  the  proposed 
Volcker rule would be healthy for long-term stability. It should (1) focus on banning financial 
holding companies from proprietary trading and investing in or sponsoring hedge funds, and 
(2)  require  trading  and  private  equity  investment  to  be  housed  in  separately  capitalized 
subsidiaries  subject  to  strict  leverage  and  concentration  limitations.  In  addition,  I  strongly 
support increasing the transparency in financial markets by requiring standardized derivative 
transactions  to  be  cleared  through  centralized  counterparties,  and  to  the  extent  feasible, 
traded on exchanges.  
leverage  and 
increase 
in 
Conclusion  
These reforms will encourage and serve to maintain a diverse and efficient banking system. 
This means a banking system that includes a healthy mix of community, regional, and large 
banking  companies.  The  banking  system’s  diversity  allows  the  United  States  to  have  the 
world’s most innovative and entrepreneurial economy, in large part, because both small and 
large  firms  are  able  to  obtain  the  funding  they  need.  The  reforms  I  propose  will  promote 
fairness  in  our  banking  system.  Fundamental  principles  are  not  anti-business.  On  the 
contrary,  my  recommendations  are  more  pro-business 
the  current  regulatory 
framework.  
A  credible  resolution  process,  simple  rules  for  leverage  and  loan-to-value  limits,  and  the 
Volcker  rule  reforms  will  allow  all  banks  to  compete  on  an  equitable  basis.  In  the  end, 
reinstating these fundamental principles will enhance consumer, business, and Main Street 
access to that most essential resource – capital. 
than 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2010
