Su Ning: China’s inter-bank payment and clearing service  
Address  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  press 
conference  on  the  launch  of  the  Electronic  Commercial  Draft  System,  Beijing,  28  October 
2009. 
 Dear guests,  
Friends from the media,  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. 
On  October  28,  2009,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC)  launched  the  Electronic 
Commercial  Draft  System  (ECDS).  The  ECDS  is  an  important  system  built  by  the  PBC  to 
provide  inter-bank  payment  and  clearing  service.  The  operation  of  this  system  marks  a 
significant milestone in the application of information technology in China’s financial sector. It 
will have a long-term impact on the future development of the draft business in China.  
The PBC is committed to improving the financial infrastructure, and has made much progress 
in recent years. With our efforts, a modern fund transfer network is taking shape. We initiated 
the  Large  Value  Payment  System  (LVPS)  in  2005,  and  introduced  the  Bulk  Electronic 
Payment  System  (BEPS)  in  2006.  In  the  following  two  years,  we  built  the  Check  Imaging 
System, which makes nationwide use of checks possible, and the Foreign Currency Payment 
System, which allows real-time transfer of foreign currency denominated funds across banks. 
Together  with  the  recently  completed  intra-bank  fund  transfer  system  and  the  inter-bank 
bankcard  payment  system,  these  important  networks  greatly  facilitate  the  activities  of 
enterprises and households, and help to enhance the security and efficiency of the financial 
system. These systems also lead to a surge in non-cash payments. In 2008, cash payments 
dropped below 1 percent of the total payment. 
Building  the  ECDS  and  promoting  the  use  of  commercial  drafts  also  pose  challenges  to 
enterprises, financial institutions, and to the central bank itself. To ensure smooth operation 
of the system and to prevent risks, the PBC decided to launch the system step by step. On 
October  28,  a  first  group  of  20  financial  institutions  were  covered  as  the  system  began  to 
operate, including 11 national banks, 2 local banks, 3 rural financial operations and 4 finance 
companies. 
Commercial  draft  is  an  important  non-cash  payment  instrument.  It  is  also  one  of  the  most 
frequently  used  short-term  financing  tools  for  banks  and  enterprises,  and  a  major  form  of 
credit. From 2001 to 2008, total commercial draft acceptance expanded from 1.2 trillion yuan 
to 7.1 trillion yuan, and commercial draft discount jumped from 1.4 trillion yuan to 13.5 trillion. 
In the first half of 2009, bill financing, i.e., financing based on commercial drafts, recorded 
12.8  trillion  yuan,  which  amounts  to  57.7  percent  of  the  stock  exchange  turnover,  or 
162 percent of the turnover on the interbank borrowing market during the same period.  
Despite the rapid development and growing importance, commercial drafts face a number of 
problems.  These  include  irregularities  in  draft  acceptance  and  discount,  dishonor  by  non-
payments, fake drafts, and unregulated innovation. Other aspects of the weaknesses include 
the  decentralized  markets  and  inadequate  use  of  information  technology.  These  problems 
could lead to financial risks, threaten fund security, and hamper the development of the draft 
market.  
Electronic drafts provide an effective solution to these problems. With the legal foundation 
and technological support in place, the PBC decided in January 2008to introduce electronic 
drafts and set up an electronic draft system The system was completed after over one year’s 
preparation. The new system has three major functions. It is designed to receive and process 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
data of electronic drafts and provide relevant payment and clearing services. It serves as a 
platform  where  paper  drafts  are  registered.  Moreover,  the  system  provides  quotations  for 
interbank discount, a service that will be offered later.  
The  development  of  electronic  drafts  needs  institutional  support.  To  ensure  the  secure, 
stable,  and  efficient  performance  of  the  system,  as  we  started  the  new  system,  we  also 
released 9 regulations in an effort to regulate the behaviors of participants. 
The  launch  of  electronic  drafts  and  the  new  system  is  of  great  significance.  It  helps  to 
reduce, or even eliminate operational risks, lower trading costs, improve trading efficiency, 
and  foster  the  development  of  a  single  national  draft  market.  It  will  encourage  the 
development  of  commercial  acceptance  drafts.  With  the  introduction  of  electronic  drafts, 
short-term  interest  rates  will  better  reflect  the  supply  and  demand  in  the  market.  The  new 
system will provide statistics of higher quality to support policy making. Electronic drafts will 
provide a convenient and low-cost financing channel for enterprises, particularly small- and 
medium-sized enterprises. It will also shape the way financial institutions manage their draft 
businesses. 
Electronic  drafts  and  the  new  system  have  brought  a  number  of  changes.  With  the  latest 
technology integrated in the new system, the traditional manual mode of draft business will 
be  replaced  by  an  advanced  one  that  is  based  on  computer  networks.  Moreover,  finance 
companies can directly access the draft market through the new system, and the maximum 
period  for  draft  payment  is  extended  from  6  months  to  12  months.  Trading  rules  are  also 
specified  and  updated  in  relevant  regulations,  and  the  deliver-versus-payment  (DVP) 
approach is introduced in settling draft transactions to reduce risks.  
Going  forward,  the  PBC  and  financial  institutions  should  strengthen  communication  and 
training, and focus on innovation and risk prevention. In particular, it is important that merits 
of  electronic  drafts  are  effectively  communicated  to  their  major  user,  i.e.,  the  enterprises. 
Financial  institutions  should  leverage  the  new  system  to  consolidate  their  businesses  and 
create  better  products.  It  is  also  critical  that  we  make  efforts  to  address  potential  security 
risks facing the system. 
The  development  of  the  Electronic  Commercial  Draft  System  received  support  from  many 
financial  institutions.  A  number  of  banks  and  finance  companies,  including  the  China 
Merchants Bank, China CITIC Bank, China Minsheng Bank, and Industrial and Commercial 
Bank of China contributed to the discussions, drafting of regulations, and system testing that 
eventually  lead  to  the  creation  of  the  system.  On  behalf  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  I 
would  like  to  thank  these  banks,  and  other  banks,  finance  companies,  and  the  clearing 
center for rural credit banks for your contribution.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
