Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Basel III and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  
Central Bank, at the International Banking Conference “Matching Stability and Performance: 
the 
Intermediary  Management”,  Milan, 
29 September 2010. 
Impact  of  New  Regulations  on  Financial 
 I  wish  to  thank  Cornelia  Holthausen,  Jeroen  Lamoot  and  Roberto  Motto  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech.  
I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
In  the  past  three  years,  researchers  have  made  considerable  progress  in  explaining  the 
causes  of  the  recent  financial  turbulence  and  the  mechanisms  by  which  instability  spread 
through the financial system. The events have spurred thinking on banks’ risk management 
practices,  on  the  incentives  for  excessive  risk-taking,  and on  the  reasons  for  the failure  of 
regulation and supervision of the financial sector to prevent such events. Numerous national 
and  international  bodies  have  proposed  new  regulations.  This  conference  provides  an 
excellent opportunity to reflect on the impact of the new banking regulations.  
In my remarks today I will focus on the one aspect of the proposed regulation put forward by 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  which  has  received  less  attention  from  the 
international media, but which is very relevant for monetary policy, i.e. liquidity standards.1 
The  implementation  of  those  standards  will  cause  banks  to  change  their  investment 
behaviour  and  may  change  the  structure  of  some  financial  market  segments,  thereby 
affecting  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  very  important  that  any  such 
changes are well understood if they are to be factored into monetary policy decisions.  
After  briefly  describing  the  proposed  measures,  I  will  first  focus  on  the  impact  of  the 
regulation on financial markets, then analyse the implications for economic activity and the 
financial  system,  and  finally,  turn  to  the  implications  for  monetary  policy,  including  the 
possible interactions with the central bank’s operational framework. 
The proposed liquidity regulation 
1. 
One of the key problems that financial institutions faced when the financial turbulence started 
in  mid-2007  was  the  urgent  funding  need  that  resulted  from  a  high  degree  of  maturity 
mismatch.  While  assets  tended  to  have  a  rather  long-term  horizon,  funding  of  these 
investments was often done at the very short end of the yield curve in the wholesale markets 
for liquidity. This implied a need to rely continuously on the roll-over of short-term liabilities in 
the wholesale money market. Prior to the crisis, this posed no problem. The financial system 
had  ample  liquidity,  as  measured,  for  instance,  by  compressed  spreads  and  low  volatility. 
Financial innovation, in particular asset securitisation, and the rapid growth of the so-called 
shadow banking system were the main drivers. However, they also became the main cause 
of  banks’  fragilities.  The  financial  crisis  has  exposed  the  inadequacy  of  banks’  liquidity 
                                                 
1   See  “International  framework  for  liquidity  risk  measurement,  standards  and  monitoring  –  consultative 
document”,  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  17  December  2009,  and  annex  to  “The  Group  of 
Governors and Heads of Supervision reach broad agreement on Basel Committee capital and liquidity reform 
package”, 26 July 2010. 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 1
risk-management  practices.  It  has  shown  that  the  build-up  of  contingent  liquidity  claims, 
arising  for  instance  from  off-balance  sheet  financing  vehicles,  and  excessive  reliance  on 
financial markets for providing funding are conditions doomed to generate financial instability.  
When the markets for liquidity dried up suddenly and unexpectedly – most markedly at the 
beginning  of  the  crisis,  and  after  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  –  many  institutions 
faced  difficulties  in  refinancing  the  large  amounts  to  be  rolled  over.  The  resulting  funding 
problems spilled over to other segments of the financial market. The state-dependent nature 
of  market  liquidity  took  many  by  surprise.  Markets  that  seemed  to  be  working  smoothly 
suddenly dried up. Indeed, many securities that were regarded as highly liquid in pre-crisis 
times  suddenly  became  illiquid.  The  underlying  characteristics  of  the assets,  such  as  their 
complexity, turned out to be crucial for their liquidity under stress. This points to the fact that 
the  concept  of  liquidity  itself  is  not  straightforward.  What  seems  liquid  today  may  be  less 
liquid tomorrow or under specific circumstances. We witnessed this phenomenon also in the 
market for some sovereign signatures in Europe, which abruptly became illiquid. 
The  causes  and  consequences  of  this  sudden  drying-up  of  liquidity  have  been  discussed 
extensively  in  the  academic  literature  of  the  past  two  years.2  New  regulations  have  been 
proposed. I will consider the liquidity regulation proposed by the Basel Committee of Banking 
Supervision. 
The Basel proposal is centred on two new standards to establish minimum levels of liquidity 
for  internationally  active  banks.  The  standards  aim  to  promote  the  resilience  of  banks’ 
liquidity risk profiles. The first standard aims to raise the buffer of high-quality liquid assets so 
that the banks can withstand stress scenarios. This standard, called the liquidity coverage 
ratio , measures whether banks hold an adequate level of unencumbered, high-quality liquid 
assets to meet net cash outflows under a well-defined stress scenario persisting for a period 
of one month.  
The  second  standard  is  of  a  more  structural  and  longer-term  nature.  It  tries  to  ensure  a 
closer alignment of the funding of longer-term assets or activities with more stable medium or 
longer-term liability and equity financing. The standard, called net stable funding ratio , sets a 
minimum  amount  of  funding  that  is  expected  to  be  stable  under  conditions  of  extended 
stress. This minimum amount depends on the liquidity characteristics of various assets that 
the institutions hold over a one-year horizon.  
The  two  standards  are  complemented  by  a  set  of  tools  for  monitoring  the  liquidity  risk 
exposures and for exchanges of information among supervisors. The two standards aim to 
make  banks  more  resilient  to  liquidity  shocks  by  matching  the  maturity  profile  of  in-  and 
outflows more closely, and by setting aside a buffer of high-quality liquid assets. The overall 
goal is to strengthen the resilience of the individual financial institutions and, more broadly, 
markets,  and  to  avoid  illiquidity  spillovers  to  other  institutions  or  market  segments,  which 
could  lead  to  a  systemic  crisis.  Their  implementation  should  be  seen  in  the  context  of 
broader regulatory reforms, in particular those agreed upon by the Group of Governors and 
Heads of Supervision earlier this month.  
An  issue  to  be  considered  is  whether  the  intended  changes  in  banks’  behaviour  resulting 
from  the  new  regulation  may  have  some  unintended  consequences.  Since  market 
participants  will  adjust  to  the  new  regulation,  it  is  possible  that  the  changes  affect  market 
structures,  perhaps  fundamentally  so,  and  not  necessarily  in  ways  that  are  foreseen  or 
desired by the regulators. Therefore, it is necessary to think carefully how banks may change 
their behaviour and to make sure that the new regulation will achieve its goal. From a central 
                                                 
2   For instance, G. Gorton (2009) “Information, Liquidity, and the Panic of 2007”, American Economic Review, 
Papers  and  Proceedings, 
forthcoming;  R.  Rajan  (2010),  Fault  Lines,  Princeton  University  Press; 
M. Brunnermeier  (2009):  “Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch  2007–2008”;  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, 23(1), 77–100. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2010
bank perspective, it is also important to assess the implications for the conduct of monetary 
policy. In particular, the new rules are likely to impact on the markets for liquidity and on the 
demand  for  central  bank  refinancing,  thereby  affecting  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy. 
Below, I will mainly focus on the impact of the liquidity coverage ratio, as its implementation 
is likely to have the most relevant effects for central banking, and its formulation is currently 
more advanced than the one for the other liquidity standard. 
Implications for financial markets 
2. 
Markets will be affected by the new regulation in several ways. One way is the categorisation 
of assets into liquid and illiquid assets for the numerator of the liquidity coverage ratio. The 
currently  foreseen  regulation  includes  cash,  central  bank  deposits,  and  high-quality 
government  securities  in  the  “liquid  assets”  category.  Corporate  and  covered  bonds  are 
included with a haircut. The choice of the assets to be considered as liquid is consistent with 
the  evidence  during  the  recent  crisis,  which  has  confirmed  that  the  degree  of  liquidity  can 
vary enormously across markets in periods of stress.  
The implementation of the new liquidity standard is intended (and expected) to favour those 
assets that are counted as liquid, and at the same time reduce incentives to hold assets that 
are  considered  less  liquid.  This  will  affect  the  functioning  of  the  underlying  markets.  In 
particular  the  yields  of  liquid  securities  are  expected  to  decline  relative  to  those  of  illiquid 
ones, so that yield spreads between liquid and illiquid assets would become wider.  
At the moment, it is difficult to quantify the impact on the different market segments, or to 
judge  whether  the  adjustment  will  take  time  or  be  abrupt.  But  it  can  be  expected  that  the 
categorisation of assets into certain classes of liquidity will lead to a “cliff effect”, by which the 
regulatory categorisation of assets as either liquid or illiquid plays a crucial role for the future 
of their market. Moreover, it implies that changes in market conditions, such as a downgrade, 
can  move  assets  from  one  category  into  the  other,  leading  to  sudden  changes  in  banks’ 
fulfilment  of  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio.  This  could  make  their  fulfilment  somewhat 
unpredictable. The cliff effect could also imply sudden changes in the market conditions for 
the  asset  in  question,  which  could  suffer  from  a  sudden  drying-up  of  market  activity  or 
liquidity. In the latest revision of the proposal of the liquidity coverage ratio, some attempts 
were made to introduce intermediate categories of liquidity. This somewhat reduces the cliff 
effect, but it still remains significant.3 
Another  way  in  which  different  segments  of  financial  markets  will  be  affected  in  an 
asymmetric manner by the regulation is the maturity profile, which is key for the denominator 
of  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio.  Since  the  denominator  consists  of  expected  outflows  in  a 
stress  situation  over  the  following  30  days,  shorter-term  funding  that  needs  to  be  repaid 
within that period will be penalised relative to long-term funding. This is an intended effect. 
The implication is that the relative size of wholesale funding markets for different maturities 
will  change.  Ultimately,  the  interaction  of  demand  and  supply  effects  will  determine  the 
overall impact on the volume and liquidity of the different segments of the money market. At 
this stage it is difficult to draw clear conclusions, but it may well be the case that activity at 
the  short  end  of  the  money  market  will  decline.  As  regards  interest  rates,  the  increased 
demand  for  and  lower  supply  of  longer-term  financing  (relative  to  short-term  financing) 
stemming from the introduction of the liquidity coverage ratio is expected to lead to a relative 
                                                 
3   As the previous narrow definition of liquid assets only included government bonds with a 0% risk weight in the 
Basel II standardised approach, a level 2 liquid asset category was introduced. This includes both government 
bonds with a 20% risk weight in that approach, and covered and corporate bonds with an external rating of at 
least AA-. 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 3
increase  of  interest  rates  for  maturities  longer  than  the  threshold  established  by  the 
regulation (30 days) as compared with shorter maturities. This would imply a steeper money 
market yield curve. 
Such effects are important for central banks – a point I will consider later on. First, less active 
money markets, and a corresponding higher volatility of short-term interest rates, could make 
the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  more  difficult  and  less  precise.  Second,  an 
increase  in  the  steepness  of  the  money  market  yield  curve  would  affect  the  transmission 
mechanism and the information extracted from the yield curve for monetary policy purposes. 
To the extent that this effect is well understood and anticipated, central banks will be able to 
adjust  their  policies  to  the  changed  market  environment.  Transitory  changes  during  an 
adjustment period may pose however some challenges.  
Implications for economic activity 
3. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  implications  for  real  economic  activity  associated  with  the  new 
regulation.  There  is  a  widespread  perception  that  the  new  measures  will  act  at  the 
macroeconomic level as a significant negative supply shock.4 Higher bank holdings of liquid-
and-low-return  assets  and  higher  funding  costs  due  to  the  lengthening  of  the  maturity 
structure of banks’ liabilities are regarded as additional operating costs that banks will try to 
pass  on  to  their  retail  business  along  all  margins:  higher  lending  rates,  tighter  lending 
standards,  and  active  shedding  of  loans  in  order  to  leave  room  for  liquid  assets  in  banks’ 
balance sheets – something akin to a credit crunch.  
According to this mechanistic view of the impact of the new measures, policy-makers face a 
trade-off between the degree of safety of the banking system and economic activity. I believe 
that  this  reasoning  suffers  from  what  I  would  call  a  “partial  equilibrium”  and  “static” 
perspective. It is “partial equilibrium” because it does not allow for banks’ adjustment to the 
potentially higher costs of intermediation in other ways, such as efficiency gains, reductions 
in  compensations,  business  restructuring.  And  also  because  it  does  not  consider  that  the 
higher  degree  of  banks’  safety  brought  about  by  the  new  regulation  implies  that  premia 
required  by  investors  to  fund  banks  may  undergo  a  generalised  decline.  It  is  a  “static” 
perspective  because  it  does  not  balance  the  transient  costs  that  may  arise  along  the 
transition  phase  with  the  permanent  benefits  associated  with  a  more  stable  and  safer 
financial  environment.  More  generally,  any  analysis  of  the  costs  of  achieving  a  sounder 
financial system for economic activity should take into account the costs that taxpayers have 
to bear when a financial crisis occurs, and the impact it has on growth potential. 
Recently  published  studies  carried  out  by  the  working  groups  established  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board attempted to perform 
such  a  cost/benefit  analysis.5  The  benefits  are  measured  by  combining  the  decline  in  the 
probability of banking crises made possible by the new regulation with the average output 
losses associated with banking crises. It is found, for instance, that a 25% increase in the 
ratio of liquid assets over total assets could reduce the probability of banking crises by about 
one percentage point.6 This result has to be combined with the other finding that, for each 
percentage  point  reduction  in  the  probability  of  a  banking  crisis,  the  expected  annual 
                                                 
4   See, for instance, the “Interim Report on the Cumulative Impact on the Global Economy of Proposed Changes 
in the Banking Regulatory Framework” (2010) published by the Institute of International Finance. 
5   See, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2010, “An assessment of the long-term economic impact of 
stronger capital and liquidity requirements”, BIS; Macroeconomic Assessment Group, (2010), “Assessing the 
macroeconomic impact of the transition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements”, August Interim Report, 
BIS.  
It should be noted that the precise figure depends on the assumed interaction with the capital requirements. 
6  
4 
 BIS Review 125/2010
economic  benefit  ranges  from  0.2%  of  GDP  (if  the  crisis  results  only  in  temporary  output 
losses) to 1.6% of GDP (if output losses are permanent).  
As regards the costs, it has been found that a 25% increase in banks’ holding of liquid assets 
over total banks’ assets would lead to a loss in GDP of about 0.1% per year.7 I should add, 
though,  that  these  results  are  characterised  by  high  uncertainty  because  of  the  lack  of 
consistent  historical  data.  In  addition,  the  methodology  used  to  quantify  the  costs  is  likely 
however to  overestimate the true costs. First, it assumes that premia  embedded in banks’ 
funding costs will not decline. Second, it assumes that banks will respond mechanically by 
maintaining their return on equity at pre-crisis levels. Third, it does not consider that banks 
may fully adjust by downsizing the trading book with little impact on their retail business, as 
the recent Swiss experience with the new capital requirements seems to suggest.8 Fourth, 
the analysis does not consider that there may be offsetting factors. For instance, it is likely 
that  the  new  regulation  will  lead  to  a  higher  demand  from  banks  for government  bonds  to 
fulfil  the  liquidity  ratios.  This  could  exert  downward  pressure  on  “risk-free”  interest  rates, 
especially  at  medium  and  long-term  maturity.  These  generally  form  the  basis  for  pricing 
mortgages  and  other  banks’  lending  rates  with  long-term  initial  rate  fixation.  Finally,  the 
results  are  predicated  on  the  assumption  of  no  monetary-policy  reaction.  This  modelling 
choice  helps  to  clearly  distinguish  macroeconomic  developments  from  a  possible  policy 
reaction to such developments. However, this implies that the results may overestimate the 
costs associated with the new measures, if they affect risks to price stability and monetary 
policy reacts to them. 
Longer-term implications for the financial system 
4. 
It might be argued that my discussion of the net benefits associated with the new regulation 
still  suffers  from  some  “partial-equilibrium”  shortcomings.  It  does  not  consider  that  the 
endogenous  banks’  response  to  the  new  regulation  may  run  against  the  ultimate  goal  of 
making the financial system more stable. The fear is that liquidity risks may be simply shifted 
outside the perimeter of regulated entities. Such regulations could simply end up inflating the 
unregulated sector. 
The  assumption  here  is  that  the  total  amount  of  risk  in  the  financial  system  is  somehow 
exogenously given, and that the amount of risk in the banking sector and in the unregulated 
sector are inversely related. Therefore, a pessimistic assessment of the new regulation may 
contend that it will only lead to a transfer of risk, trading off a reduction in the risk borne by 
the banking sector with a corresponding increase in the one borne by the unregulated sector. 
To put it differently, policy-makers may choose the desired point on the downward sloping 
frontier linking the amount of risk in the regulated and unregulated sectors, but might not be 
able to shift the frontier downward.  
While I agree that any banking regulation may set in motion some form of risk transfer across 
sectors, I believe that the new framework takes a step forward in making the financial system 
more  stable.  Let  me  provide  two  examples  of  how  the  new  measures  aim  at  preventing 
banks from simply transferring their risk to the unregulated sectors. First, banks may try to 
unload  part  of  their  risk  via  off-balance  sheet  constructs.  But  the  new  regulation  makes  it 
harder to do so. Both the liquidity coverage ratio and the net stable funding ratio take into 
account the potential impact of off-balance sheet exposures on banks’ liquidity conditions. In 
particular, the stress scenario underlying the liquidity coverage ratio includes an increase in 
derivative collateral calls and substantial calls on contractual and non-contractual off-balance 
                                                 
7   Again, the precise figure depends on the assumed interaction with the capital requirements. 
8   See Annex 3 of the Report of the Macroeconomic Assessment Group, (2010), “Assessing the macroeconomic 
impact of the transition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements”, August Interim Report, BIS. 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 5
sheet exposures, including committed credit and liquidity facilities. And the net stable funding 
ratio  determines,  for  each  off-balance  sheet  class,  a  reserve  of  stable  funding,  which 
depends on the characteristic of each off-balance sheet exposure. Having said that, one has 
to admit that there are probably no limits to creativity when it comes to financial innovation.  
Second, banks may try to reduce the maturity of the loans they grant to corporates, small 
and medium-sized enterprises, and households in order to shift the roll-over and liquidity risk 
to  the  final  users  of  financial  services.  But  the  new  regulation  is  designed  to  make  this 
strategy unattractive for banks, as only a part of these loans needs to be financed by stable 
funding. Furthermore, the Governors and Heads of Supervision have decided that the final 
implementation of the new liquidity measures will be preceded by a long “observation period” 
during  which  supervisors  will  monitor  any  unintended  consequences  of  the  new  measures 
and modify the regulation accordingly. The observation period for the liquidity coverage ratio 
is from 2011 to 2014, after which it is to be applied as a minimum regulatory measure. For 
the  net  stable  funding  ratio,  the  observation  period  starts  in  2012,  and  it  won’t  become  a 
minimum standard until 2018.  
Implications for monetary policy 
5. 
What  would  be  the  implications  of  the  new  liquidity  regulation  for  the  central  bank’s 
operational framework and for the conduct of monetary policy? 
Implications for the central bank operational framework 
5.1 
I  will  first  turn  to  the  possible  interaction  of  the  new  regulation  with  the  central  bank 
operational  framework.  Let  me  remark  that  here,  as  a  benchmark  scenario,  I’ll  consider  a 
hypothetical situation in which the ECB has returned to the pre-crisis framework. That is, to a 
system whereby it determines the aggregate liquidity provided to the banking sector in each 
open market operation by conducting variable rate tenders, with a fixed liquidity supply and a 
variable rate. 
There  are  three  areas  in  which  the  new  regulation  can  interact  with  the  central  bank’s 
operational  framework.  First,  the  demand  for  reserves.  Second,  the  participation  in  the 
central  bank’s  longer-term  operations.  Third,  the  impact  on  the  collateral  pledged  to  the 
central bank. 
5.1.1  Demand for reserves 
The changes in the liquidity regulation can have an effect on the demand for central bank 
liquidity, because funds on central bank accounts obtained through open market operations 
or  through  a  lending  facility  (discount  window)  will  count  as  liquid  assets  for  the  liquidity 
coverage  ratio.  Therefore,  the  newly  proposed  regulation  would  make  it  more  attractive  to 
acquire liquidity from central banks. A structurally higher demand for central bank refinancing 
combined  with  an  unchanged  liquidity  supply  by  the  central  bank  would  however  cause 
tender  rates  at  central  banks’  open  market  operations  to  increase.  The  ECB  could 
accommodate  this  demand  by  increasing  the  size  of  its  open  market  operations.  While  in 
times  of  crisis,  a  stronger  intermediation  role  by  the  central  bank  can  be  beneficial,  in  the 
long run it might crowd out market activity, and reduce incentives for peer monitoring. This 
could in turn increase risk-taking behaviour. These are of course side-effects of the proposed 
regulations which should not be neglected. 
Not  only  the  volume,  but  also  the  variation,  of  demand  for  central  bank  funding  over  time 
could be affected by the regulation. This might also play a role in determining the appropriate 
size  of  open  market  operations.  It’s  possible  that  on  some  days  banks  will  seek  financing 
from the central bank for regulatory purposes more than they do on other days. This would 
lead to a time-varying demand for liquidity in central banks’ open market operations and a 
higher volatility of interest rates. In particular, such effects would depend on the enforcement 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2010
of the regulatory measures, whereby calendar effects with temporary peaks in demand could 
arise, which tend to “pollute” the control of short-term interest rates. 
Participation in longer-term operations 
5.1.2 
A  second  area  of  interaction  of  the  new  regulation  with  the  central  bank’s  operational 
framework arises from the maturity structure of the central banks’ operations. Let me point 
out  that  in  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio,  banks’  liquid  assets  are  put  in  relation  to  expected 
outflows over a 30-day horizon; for higher outflows within this period, banks would need to 
hold  more  liquid  assets.  Thus,  the  question  of  whether  funds  obtained  in  open  market 
operations need to be repaid to the central bank before or after this horizon will play a role in 
the fulfilment of the ratio.  
This will make central bank refinancing for longer maturities more attractive than for shorter 
ones. In particular, liquidity obtained in the Eurosystem longer-term refinancing operations, 
which have a three-month maturity, would not count as liquidity outflow, at least not for the 
first two months in which the outstanding maturity is still longer than 30 days. For regulatory 
purposes,  banks  might  thus  try  to  shift  their  participation  in  the  ECB’s  open  market 
operations from the one-week to the three-month operations. The expected increase in total 
demand  for  central  bank  refinancing,  which  I  mentioned  before,  is  therefore  likely  to 
materialise, especially in longer-term operations.  
With  an  unchanged  composition  of  the  maturity  structure  of  ECB  operations,  shifts  in  the 
demand from short- to longer-term funds would lead to changes in marginal auction rates. 
Tender  rates  for  longer-term  operations  would  increase,  and  those  for  shorter-term 
operations  would  be  reduced.  Thus,  the  “term  structure  of  tender  rates”  would  become 
steeper, similar to the term structure of money market interest rates.  
However, the rates on the main refinancing operations (with a one-week maturity) convey the 
monetary  policy  stance.  For  this  reason,  the  ECB  will  monitor  carefully  whether  a  shift  in 
demand from short-term to longer-term operations will take place that could lead to reduced 
participation in the main refinancing operations. Should this reduction occur – which seems 
highly unlikely, but at this juncture it is difficult to quantify the precise extent – the ability of 
the  central  bank  to  control  short-term  rates,  and  thus  to  signal  its  monetary  policy  stance, 
might  be  affected.  The  ECB  could  adapt  its  liquidity  management  practices  in  order  to 
guarantee a continued high demand for short-term refinancing. 
5.1.3  Collateral pledged to the central bank 
The third area in which the new regulation could interact with the central bank’s operational 
framework is the collateral pledged to the central bank. As you know, all refinancing by the 
Eurosystem is provided only against the provision of adequate collateral, so as to protect it 
from losses should a counterparty default. At the same time, collateral should be available to 
a  wide  set  of  counterparties.9  For  this  purpose,  the  criteria  for  assets  to  be  eligible  as 
Eurosystem collateral are quite broad. Government securities, corporate and bank bonds, as 
well  as  high-quality  asset-backed  securities  and  some  other  assets  are  accepted  as 
collateral.  In  addition,  risk  management  tools  are  applied  to  ensure  protection  of  the 
Eurosystem  against  credit  risk.  The  wide  range  of  eligible  assets  proved  to  be  extremely 
valuable in recent years, when markets for certain types of security became very illiquid, but 
banks continued to refinance themselves via the Eurosystem. 
As discussed before, the liquidity coverage ratio is supposed to induce banks to hold more 
liquid assets. One way for banks to boost their ratio is to keep their most liquid assets on 
their balance sheets, and to pledge the more illiquid ones as collateral in ECB liquidity-supply 
                                                 
9   See European Central Bank, Annual Report 2009, p. 102. 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 7
operations.  This  is  possible  as  long  as  the  definition  of  liquid  assets  is  narrower  than  the 
criteria for eligibility in Eurosystem operations. This implies that banks may try to circumvent 
the spirit, if not the letter, of the new regulation by shifting more of their risky assets to the 
Eurosystem. The argument that central banks are in a better position to bear liquidity risks by 
their ability to create money should not be turned into a justification for regulatory arbitrage. 
This is especially true when considering that also credit risk could be shifted to central banks 
as a consequence of this (mis)behaviour.  
Monetary policy and the build-up of financial risk  
5.2 
The  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  the  amount  of  risk  in  the  economy  is  not 
confined to the details of the collateral framework. It extends also to the interest-rate setting 
itself.  
Unfortunately,  most  macromodels  are  not  well  suited  to  analyse  the  relationship  between 
monetary  policy  and  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  They  generally  assume  that 
monetary policy works via the impact of the short-term policy rate on long-term interest rates 
and the exchange rate, possibly amplified by the so-called credit channel. However, recent 
research has challenged the traditional wisdom by suggesting that in reality there are other 
channels  at  work  which  are  relevant  to  understanding  the  interaction  between  monetary 
policy and financial imbalances.10  
First, it has been suggested that policy rates would be crucial in their own right. The reason 
is that financial institutions normally tend to maintain very low spare capacity on their balance 
sheets – for cost reasons – making wholesale funding the only readily available source of 
funds  to  finance  at  the  margin  an  additional  unit  of  investment.  The  close  association  of 
money  market  rates  to  policy  rates  implies  that  the  central  bank  has  a  direct  grip  on  the 
marginal price of financial institutions’ leverage. And leverage is one of the key factors that 
determine the amount of risk and the extent of vulnerability present in the financial system. 
Second, it has been suggested that monetary policy works also via the so-called “risk-taking” 
channel, whereby low levels of policy rates tend to induce excessive risk-taking by financial 
institutions.11 
These new insights can shed light on the effects that very expansionary monetary conditions 
can have on financial imbalances, fuelling in particular the build-up of maturity mismatches 
via excessively low interest rates. And these insights also make clear the hazard to which the 
central bank is constantly exposed. If a liquidity crisis occurs, the central bank may have to 
step  in  and  provide  abundant  liquidity  to  preserve  the  functioning  of  the  transmission 
mechanism  and  counteract  risks  to  price  stability  emanating  from  systemic  instability. 
Anticipating  this  policy  response,  the  private  sector  may  in  normal  times  under-price  the 
value of liquidity, which in itself increases the probability of a liquidity crisis in the future.  
                                                 
10   See  Adrian,  T.,  and  H.  Shin,  (2010),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary  Economics”,  forthcoming  in 
Handbook of Monetary Economics, edited by B. Friedmann and M. Woodford; Borio, C., and H. Zhu, (2008), 
“Capital  regulation,  risk-taking  and  monetary  policy:  a  missing  link  in  the  transmission  mechanism?”,  BIS 
Working Papers No 268. 
11   See,  for  instance,  G.  Jiménez,  S.  Ongena,  J.-L.  Peydró  and  J.  Saurina,  “Hazardous  Times  for  Monetary 
Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?”, 
CEPR Discussion Paper, No 6514, 2007; V. Ioannidou, S. Ongena and J.-L. Peydró, “Monetary Policy, Risk-
Taking and Pricing: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment”, NBER Summer Institute, 2009; A. Maddaloni 
and J.-L. Peydró, “Bank risk-taking, securitisation, supervision and low interest rates: evidence from lending 
standards”, ECB Working Paper Series, forthcoming. 
8 
 BIS Review 125/2010
Giavazzi and Giovannini12 have recently described this hazard as a “trap”, which ultimately 
arises from an asymmetric response of monetary policy to liquidity conditions: benign neglect 
during  the  build-up  of  liquidity  risk,  and  forceful  interventions  during  a  liquidity  crisis.  They 
conclude that monetary policy can avoid this situation by setting the interest rate at a higher 
level  than  the  one  suggested  by  macroeconomic  conditions,  as  measured  by  standard 
indicators.  In  particular,  they  recommend  following  a  Taylor  rule  appropriately  modified  to 
counteract  excessive  liquidity  transformation  by  the  financial  sector.  They  do  not  discuss 
however how to make this prescription operational. But I am sure that these insights will spur 
further research and policy discussions.  
Since  the  inception  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  in  1999,  the  ECB  has  taken  a 
pragmatic approach to limit asymmetries in its policy response. Its two-pillar monetary policy 
strategy accords a prominent role to the analysis of money, credit and liquidity conditions, 
thus explicitly including in its assessment factors that tend to be empirically associated with 
the build-up of risk and financial imbalances. 
Conclusion 
The  regulation  proposed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  should  not  be 
assessed in isolation, but in the context of the comprehensive set of measures to strengthen 
the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector  and  to  reduce  its  overall  level  of  risk.  Real  economic 
activity will profit from such increased stability and, in my view, outweigh the direct cost of the 
regulation, especially in the long run. 
To  be  sure,  the  new  regulation  will  have  an  impact,  in  particular  on  banks’  liquidity 
management and the markets for liquidity along several dimensions. This is actually the aim 
of the regulation. Had the result been “business as usual”, this would have probably made 
some  market  participants  quite  happy,  but  would  have  been  a  sign  of  failure.  There  is  of 
course an issue of gradualism and calibration, with a view to avoiding the two extremes – an 
excessively abrupt adjustment and an everlasting phasing-out. But it seems to me that this 
issue has been dealt with in a reasonable way. 
The changes in the financial system caused by the regulation will have to be factored in also 
by the policy authorities. For central banks, the changes may be far-reaching, ranging from 
the transmission mechanism of  monetary policy to  interactions with several aspects of the 
operational frameworks. At the ECB we are actively working on these issues to ensure that 
our  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  conducted  in  an  effective  way,  also  in  the  new 
environment, so as to maintain price stability, our primary goal. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
 
12   Giavazzi,  F.,  and  A.  Giovannini,  (2010),  “Central  Banks  and  the  Financial  System”,  NBER  Working  Paper 
Series No 16228. 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 9
