Njuguna Ndung’u: How to bring down business costs in banking 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Bank of 
India’s 105th Foundation Day celebrations, Nairobi, 7 September 2010. 
 Your Excellency Sibabrata Tripathi, High Commissioner of India to Kenya; 
Dr. Manu Chandaria, Chairman, Bank of India Local Advisory Committee; 
Mr. Maganbhai Dhodia, Chief Executive, Bank of India, Kenya; 
The Local Advisory Committee Members; 
Management and Staff of Bank of India, Kenya; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  join  you  on  this  auspicious  occasion  celebrating  Bank  of  India’s 
105th foundation day. I appreciate the invitation to share in the celebrations. Allow me at the 
onset  to  commend  the  Bank  of  India,  its  advisory  committee  members,  management  and 
staff  for  steering  the  institution  from  a  single  office  in  Mumbai  in  1906  to  its  current 
international status. Kenya has benefited a lot in these developments. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  From  1969  the  Bank  of  India  became  public  owned  and  has 
expanded  in  leaps  and  bounds  to  claim  its  position  in  the  global  market  with  29  foreign 
offices,  and  more  than  3,200  branches,  including  141  specialized  branches  and  48  zonal 
offices in India. In Kenya, the bank has grown from the one branch established in Mombasa 
in  1953,  to  the  current  four  branches  country  wide.  With  regard  to  its  Kenya  operations,  I 
note that as at July 2010, the bank had an impressive asset portfolio of Ksh.17 billion and 
customer deposits of Ksh.14 billion, supported by a capital base of Ksh.2.4 billion.  
Mr. Chairman: The impressive performance of Bank of India is consistent with the continued 
commendable  performance  of  Kenya’s  banking  industry.  Some  key  highlights  of  this 
performance for the period from July 2009 to end of July 2010 are; 
 
 
Assets grew by 26 percent to stand at Ksh.1.6 trillion; 
Total  deposits  grew  by  Ksh.270  billion,  representing  a  28  percent  growth  rate,  to 
stand at Ksh.1.2 trillion; 
Gross advances amounted to Ksh.848 billion, having grown by Ksh.128 billion from 
a similar period in 2009; 
A  profit  before  tax  of  Ksh.42.8  billion  was  registered  in  the  last  seven  months 
compared to Ksh.28.5 billion in July 2009, a growth rate of 50 percent; 
The number of bank branches at the end of July 2010 stood at 1,020 an increase of 
24 branches from the end of December 2009; 
The  number  of  bank  accounts  has  increased  by  35  percent  from  7.9  million 
accounts in July 2009 to 10.7 million as at the end of July 2010. 
    This  impressive  growth  has  been  supported  by  the  expansion  of  banks  into  new  market 
segments, prudent risk management and enhanced economic prospects underpinned by a 
stable  macroeconomic  environment.  The  Central  Bank  expects  the  banking  sector  to 
continue on this growth trajectory.  Ongoing reform initiatives by the  Government  and CBK 
will serve to further propel the banking sector to new frontiers of financial inclusion for more 
Kenyans.  For  this  reason,  the  Central  Bank  together  with  Kenya  Bankers  Association  has 
been keen to move in the directions that market requires support.  
Mr. Chairman: We need now to concentrate on reducing costs of doing business for banks 
so that we can bring down costs of financial services. For example, the recently introduced 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 1
credit  information  sharing  platform  will  enable  banks  to  extend  more  credit  to  productive 
sectors boosting wealth and employment creation. The information sharing platform will help 
develop  the  required  information  capital  that  will  support  an  adoption  of  a  new  collateral 
technology  in  the  market  and  reduce  the  information  search  costs.  This  will  be  especially 
important for Small and Medium Enterprises and individuals who have been constrained in 
accessing credit due to lack of physical collateral. However, the benefits of credit information 
sharing will only accrue if banks and other information providers ensure information availed 
to  the  Bureaus  is  accurate  and  credible.  It  is  therefore  imperative  that  banks  and  their 
customers  and  licensed  Credit  Reference  Bureaus  continue  to  work  together  to  ensure 
accuracy and credibility of records. 
On its part the Central Bank will continue to work with other players to extend the reach of 
the  credit  information  sharing  mechanism  beyond  the  banking  sector.  But  so  far,  we  are 
encouraged  with  the  first  batch  of  information  sent  to  CRB  Africa  –  78  percent  of  it  was 
accurate – with no errors. This shows that the information template reflects the true picture in 
the banking sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The second area in reducing cost of doing business is the cost of 
rolling  out  branch  networks  to  reach  Kenyans  cost-effectively.  This  will  work  well  with  the 
introduction of Agent Banking. The CBK has so far licensed 5,892 Agents since the roll out in 
May 2010. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The third area to lower cost of doing business is for you banks – you 
have  to  develop  innovative  products  for  the  market.  You  have  to  lower  cost  on  these 
products to ensure uptake and volume. 
The Central Bank will continue more forcefully with its four dimensional approach: Advise; 
cultivate  partnership;  develop  and  regulate  the  market.  This  approach  will  ensure 
innovative policies that work for the market and ensure financial inclusion for all Kenyans and 
also market’s stability. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me once again applaud the Bank of India 
on  your  105th  Foundation  Day,  and  wish  the  bank  continued  prosperity  in  the  years  to  
come – not only in Kenya but also in the EAC market. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2010
