Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur: Challenges to the Ghanaian economy 
Address by Mr Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the annual 
dinner of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, Accra, 27 November 2010. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
President of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, 
Fellows and Members of the Institute, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
1.  
Thank you for inviting me to dinner again. I am, of course, delighted to be here and 
to share with you, members of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, my views on topical issues 
on the economy generally and the particular challenges confronting the financial and banking 
sector. 
2.   Forgive me if I exceed the mandate of the Central Bank has been assigned, but the 
banking  sector  operates  within  the  economy  and  is  very  sensitive  to  developments  in  it. 
Therefore it is appropriate to review some important developments in the economy and how 
they impact on the banking system. 
3.  Last  year,  I  spoke  on  the  challenges,  lessons  and  opportunities  for  the  banking system 
and the Ghanaian economy posed by the global financial crisis. I enumerated a number of 
challenges and systemic risks that confronted the economy and the banking system and the 
need to introduce measures to mitigate the impact on our economy of what were essentially 
external shocks. 
Having  put  in  measures  to  halt  the  decline,  the  economy  has  witnessed  an 
4.  
appreciable  level  of  macroeconomic  stability,  reflected  in  stable  prices,  stable  exchange 
rates and increasing foreign reserves. However a number of new challenges confront us. In 
the  mean  time,  the  Ghana  Statistical  Service  (GSS)  has  undertaken  a  rebasing  of  the 
national  accounts  and  many  people  still  wonder  how  to  interpret  the  results  and  what  the 
implications are. 
5.  
The fundamental dilemma of policy is how to strike a proper balance in sharing the 
costs of the fiscal consolidation process? How do we assure the sustainability of the gains 
we have made in achieving macroeconomic stability? How best do we manage the expected 
revenue from petroleum exports and avert the worst manifestations of the resource curse. 
6.  
My address tonight will therefore attempt to examine the challenges confronting the 
Ghanaian  economy;  the  state  of  the  banking  system  and  our  future  concerns  about  its 
progress. 
Mr Chairman, let me start with the state of the economy: 
It  really  does  not  need  repeating  that  at  the  beginning  of  2009  the  Ghanaian 
7.  
economy  was  confronted  with  macroeconomic  imbalances  that  contributed  to  high  fiscal 
deficits,  high  inflation,  high  interest  rates,  currency  depreciation  and  loss  of  international 
reserves. While the global financial crisis was a contributory factor, the economy reflected a 
highly  expansionary  fiscal  policy  which  was  partly  accommodated  by  monetary  policy, 
adversely impacting on the external current account. 
8.  Mr.  Chairman,  in  the  last  two  years  or  so,  the  economy  has  achieved  a  commendable 
level  of  stability,  reflected  in  a  declining  rate  of  inflation,  lower  interest  rates  and  stable 
exchange rates. From 16 per cent in December last year, the rate of inflation has declined to 
9.4  percent  at  the  end  of  October  this  year.  All  indications  are  that  inflation  will  remain  in 
single digits by the end of the year. The cedi has remained broadly stable throughout 2010 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 1
to 
So  what  happens 
the  other  operations  of  Government, 
appreciating by 0.1 percent against the US dollar. Ghana’s external position, that is, the trade 
and  current  account  balance  has  improved  with  strong  export  receipts  and  private  capital 
inflows  helping  to  boost  international  reserves  to  over  US$4  billion  at  the  end  of 
October 2010.  The  challenge  therefore  is  how  to  sustain  these  positive  developments  and 
create an environment that fosters faster growth. 
9.  
Despite these successes, there is one specific area, the fiscal deficit, where efforts 
at containment have not been as successful. Various attempts to rein-in the expenditure plan 
have failed and as the scope for enhancing taxation seems limited, an unsustainable level of 
public  expenditure  could  worsen  the  deficits  to  a  level  where  they  exceed  the  national 
capacity to finance. 
10.  
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  long-term  problem  with  the  public  expenditure 
programme  are  the  earmarking  of  revenues.  Because  the  legislations  creating  these 
interventions  are  not  time-bound,  funding  of  the  programmes  may  survive  long  after  the 
justification for their existence has lapsed. Let me give an example of the problem using the 
2011 Budget proposals. If the total domestic revenue for the Government is 100, allocations 
to  statutory  funds  (that  is  GetFund,  NHIS,  and  District  Assembly  Common  Fund  (DACF)) 
constitute approximately 24 percent. Interest payments are another 26 per cent of revenues. 
When  we  add  Government’s  contractual  obligations  to  its  current  and  past  employees,  
that  is  wages  and  salaries,  social  security  contributions,  pensions  and  gratuities,  another 
72 per cent of revenues are used up. Together, the contractual obligations of Government 
consume over 120 per cent of total domestic revenues. Therefore when the Finance Minister 
presented  his  budget  to  Parliament,  he  had  in  effect,  already  exceeded  his  revenues  by 
20 per cent. 
11.  
the 
administrative function and capital spending? In effect, these are made possible by foreign 
grants  and  domestic  borrowing.  Thus,  the  priorities  of  Government  in  the  national  budget 
were established years ago and are not those determined by the current Parliament. Those 
relationships established long ago continue to dominate the national budget. As the years go 
by therefore, the budget addresses less and less the current priorities of the Government. 
12.  
The result of this arrangement is the accumulation of arrears, a systemic problem 
created by the everlasting earmarking which monopolize resources and reduce the ability of 
the authorities to fully finance their priorities. The problems thereby created have  negative 
implications for capital spending, private sector growth, stability of the banking system and 
hence overall economic growth. The problem cannot be postponed indefinitely and it needs 
to be urgently confronted in a resolute and bi-partisan manner. 
13.  
Mr. Chairman, let me now quickly deal with two developments which are seen as 
heralding  great  economic  prospects.  The  recent  re-basing  of  the  GDP  and  the  imminent 
production of petroleum. 
14.  
As the Ghana Statistical Service has explained, re-basing is an exercise that needs 
to be undertaken regularly to maintain a realistic measure of economic developments. The 
new  base  year  selected  for  this  purpose  is  2006,  thirteen  years  since  the  last  one.  In  the 
17 years since the base year was last revised, the GSS is saying that we underestimated the 
expansion in our national output by about 4 per cent per annum. On the surface of it, the 
rebased numbers give us much concern than comfort. It shows that we need to do more to 
really  consolidate  our  position  as  a  middle  income  country.  Our  revenue/GDP  ratio  for 
instance  now  suggests  that  a  lot  more  effort  would  have  to  be  directed  at  revenue 
mobilization if we need to maintain a high level of public expenditure. 
15.  
Now to Petroleum. It was a privilege to observe the diligence and rigour with which 
the  joint  session  of  the  Parliamentary  Committees  on  Finance  and  Energy  examined 
proposals for the management of petroleum export revenues in Koforidua a few weeks ago. 
The  2011  budget  statement  projects 
that  Ghana’s  share  of  oil  revenues  will  be 
GH¢584 million (or 1.9 per cent of GDP). This is just a third of the anticipated VAT collection 
including 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2010
and definitely not the sort of resource that the huge expectation of economic transformation 
can be built. It is obvious that the Government has to explore other sources of revenues to 
meet any ambitious spending plans. 
16.   Mr.  Chairman,  the  point  I  am  trying  to  make  is  that  the  fiscal  challenges  need  to  be 
addressed  as  a  matter  of  urgency  to  ensure  that  the  current  macroeconomic  stability  is 
sustained. An improved macroeconomic environment is crucial for a thriving banking sector. 
Mr Chairman, let me now switch the focus of my address to developments in the banking 
sector, which is of the utmost interest to you. 
17.  
Over  the  past  few  years,  we  have  all  watched,  with  varying  degrees  of 
apprehension, as big, respected and global banks that dominated the advanced economies 
weakened  or  simply  collapsed.  To  help  them  survive,  staggering  amounts  of  capital  have 
been injected into “ailing” banks in the advanced economies. 
18.  
Much  closer  home,  Nigeria  had  to  prop  up  some  banks  with  injections  of  about 
N600 billion (or approximately US$4.0 billion) to shore up their capital bases. As we recount 
these  experiences,  the  question  to  ask  is  what  if  the  Ghanaian  banking  sector  had  been 
adversely affected by the global crisis? Could we have been in a position to inject capital, of 
such  magnitude,  into  the  sector  given  the  limited  resources  at  our  disposal,  for  which  a 
number of infrastructural needs compete? 
19.  
Thankfully, banks in Ghana emerged from the global crisis substantially unscathed 
partially because of lower global integration, but also due to the strong reliance on domestic 
deposits  to  fund  banking  activities  and  a  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  limits 
risky  behaviour.  Nonetheless,  the  effect  of  challenges  in  the  domestic  macroeconomic 
environment  since  2008  has  given  rise  to  non-performing  loans  and  impaired  assets, 
weakening the balance sheets of some of our banks. 
20.  
Looking at what has transpired in the global financial system, there is no doubt that 
the banking sector is crucial to the economy; hence instability within the industry would have 
negative  consequences  on  the  economy.  This  is  the  basis  for  safeguarding  the  sector  to 
ensure equitable, fair and strong business practices, giving no room for complacency. Poor 
performance or non-compliance with regulations by individual banks can introduce systemic 
risks and jeopardize the entire banking sector. 
21.  
Mr.  Chairman,  The  Ghanaian  banking  system  has  undergone  significant 
transformation  and  continues  to  improve  with  new  regulations  and  guidelines  seeking  to 
maintain  stability.  This  has  made  the  sector  more  efficient,  innovative,  competitive  and 
profitable.  Currently,  we  have  a  fairly  well-diversified  banking  and  financial  system,  with 
26 banks in operation (soon to be 27), half of which are foreign controlled and the remainder 
Ghanaian controlled. 
22.  
The  size  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the  banking  system  continues  to  expand.  Total 
assets increased by 35.2 percent in October 2010 on a year on year basis to GH¢16.3 billion 
while total deposits rose by 37.2 percent on an annual basis to GH¢10.8 billion at the end of 
October  2010.  The  banking  industry’s  branch  network  continues  to  expand,  and  currently 
exceed 700 nationwide. 
23.  
It is interesting to note however, that the growth in total asset was driven largely by 
the  relatively  new  banks  in  the  system.  Asset  concentration  in  the  few  big  banks  has 
continuously declined, reflecting the intense competitive environment under which banks are 
operating.  The  industry  also  recorded  a  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  of  25.6  per  cent  in 
October, comfortably above the minimum requirement of 10 percent. 
24.  
We believe that the banking sector is growing at a fast pace alongside deepening 
financial intermediation. However, recomputed financial sector indicators using the rebased 
GDP figures show that there is substantial room for improvement. For instance, as at end 
October 2010, total assets of the industry constituted about 64 percent of “old” GDP, but only 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 3
36 per cent of new GDP indicating that our financial sector is not as deep as we imagined. 
Similarly, other indicators of the banking industry in terms of GDP may turn out to be lower 
than previously estimated meaning that collectively, we must intensify efforts to deepen the 
financial sector to match the status of a middle income country. 
25.  
One critical issue that has proved rather challenging for the banking industry and the 
broader  economy  this  year  has  been  high  bank  lending  rates  and  its  effect  on  access  to 
credit.  Traditionally,  a  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rate  environment  is  expected  to  ease 
credit conditions and stimulate economic growth. Contrary to this expectation, the response 
of lending rates within the banking sector to the monetary easing by the Bank of Ghana has 
been sluggish. 
26.  
The  Annual  Percentage  Rates  (APRs)  which  reveal  actual  lending  rates  in  the 
financial  sector  indicates  that  the  average  base  rate  charged  on  borrowing  by  enterprises 
ranged between 27.5 percent and 38 percent at the end of August. By all standards, these 
rates are high and have instigated tight credit conditions in the economy for most part of this 
year.  Some  of  the  underpinning  factors  that  the  banks  claim  to  have  contributed  to  this 
situation include the high non-performing loan ratios and high loan loss provisioning driven 
mainly by Government’s lack of fiscal capacity to honour its obligations to contractors and 
service  providers.  This  is  an  aspect  of  what  I  have  characterised  earlier  as  the 
unsustainability of the Government’s spending plans. 
27.  
Indeed, the quality of the banks’ aggregated loan book remains a source of financial 
sector  vulnerability.  High  levels  of  non-performing  assets  in  the  balance  sheets  of  banks 
have  the  potential  to  lower  profitability  and  erode  the  capital  base.  Indicators  of  asset  
quality,  measured  by  the  Non-performing  loan  (NPL)  ratios  hit  a  peak  of  20  percent  in 
February 2010, declining to 16.5 percent in September and 16.9 percent by end October. 
28.  
The declining trend in the aggregate NPL ratios has given rise to a gradual easing in 
credit conditions since August. By end September 2010, gross credit in the banking industry 
grew by 14.8 percent to GH¢7.37 billion. It is to improve the quality of lending that we request 
banks  to  collaborate  with  the  new  Credit  Reference  bureau  for  access  to  information  on 
prospective  borrowers  to  reduce  the  challenges  of  adverse  selection  in  lending.  Also, 
increased  use  of the  Collateral Registry to secure “collaterized” loan contracts will remove 
some of the constraints on effective loan recovery in the event of default. 
29.  
Other  financial  soundness  indicators  measured  in  terms  of  profitability  continue  to 
improve.  The  liquidity  position  of  the  industry  is  also  strong  and  banks  are  encouraged  to 
make additional efforts towards building strong contingency plans to mitigate any unforeseen 
liquidity crisis. Although aggregated indicators point to stability and strength in the banking 
system,  individual  performance  indicators  show  weaknesses  in  a  few  banks.  To  make  the 
system  more  efficient,  I  wish  to  draw  your  attention  to  some  potential  threats  within  the 
industry that need to be addressed in the way forward to building a strong financial sector.  
30.  
Mr.  Chairman,  In  2007  the  Bank  of  Ghana  took  steps  to  increase  the  minimum 
capital requirements of banks. All the foreign controlled banks have complied with the new 
capital base of GH¢60 million, substantially improving their solvency. However, we observe 
that  the  longer  dispensation  granted  domestically  controlled  banks  to  comply  with  the 
minimum requirement has rather placed them at a competitive disadvantage. 
31. 
I must report that most domestic banks have achieved the first phase of attaining the 
GH¢25 million before next month’s deadline; however, the transition from GH¢25 million to 
GH¢60  million  in  two  years  is  expected  to  remain  a  major  challenge.  To  achieve  the  next 
stage of capitalization therefore, domestic banks have to seriously consider their options and 
consolidate  their  positions  through  mergers  or  open  up  for  acquisitions.  These  will  be 
necessary to enhance their competitiveness and thereby improve their ability to participate in 
high value transactions. 
Mr Chairman, most of our banks rely on ICT Platforms for the delivery of financial services. 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2010
Following  the  global  financial  crisis,  risk  management  has  taken  centre  stage  in 
32.  
bank regulation and supervision. Different kinds of risk have been identified; market, credit, 
operational  and  reputational  risks.  Operational  risk  has  assumed  great  significance,  due 
largely to the reliance on Information and Communication Technolgy, or ICT, platforms for 
the delivery of financial services. 
33.  
The rapid pace of ICT usage in the banking sector requires continuous knowledge 
update  by  both  operators  and  regulators.  Indeed,  regulators  will  have  to  acquire  special 
expertise in IT auditing to ensure appropriate monitoring of ICT-related vulnerabilities in the 
banking sector. The Bank of Ghana will also insist that stakeholders in the industry improve 
corporate  governance  systems,  especially  the  installation  of  an  effective  internal  control 
system. 
Mr Chairman, Broadening Financial Sector Regulation 
34.  
One of the critical lessons that emerged from the global financial crisis is the need to 
tighten  financial  regulation.  This  was  underscored  by  the  inherent  risks  of  diversifying  into 
non-bank  financial  businesses.  The  argument  for  additional  regulation  has  centred  on  the 
risk exposures and speculative activities as banks broadened their horizon to include non-
core  banking  activities  such  as  insurance  and  capital  market  activities  financed  with 
depositors’  funds.  In  the  global  financial  markets,  these  trends  widened  the  boundaries  of 
regulation  beyond  the  banking  sector  and  without  effective  oversight  from  other  financial 
regulatory bodies, gave rise to what is now termed “shadow banking”. 
35.  
As part of restructuring the global architecture therefore, steps are being taken in a 
number of countries to limit banks from actively engaging in proprietary trading that was not 
instigated by clients, referred to as the Volcker Rule. 
36.  
As the financial sector continues to grow in Ghana licensed universal banks have 
started  to  branch  into  areas  such  as  providing  bancassurance  services  or  setting  up 
subsidiaries to engage in capital market activities. There is need for effective collaboration 
between  financial  sector  regulators;  that  is  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  the  National  Insurance 
Commission  and  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  and  the  National  Pensions 
Regulatory Commission. This approach of cross-sector supervision or consolidated supervision 
is  necessary  to  ensure  that  emerging  risks  emanating  from  financial  sector  activities  are 
identified and dealt with. Already, arrangements are underway to institutionalize collaboration 
between BOG, SEC, NPRC and NIC by ensuring regular interaction, information sharing and 
where possible carrying out joint examinations of common institutions. 
37.  
With the growing number of regional banks in the domestic economy, cooperation 
with regional supervisors in the exchange of information on cross border financial activities 
will enhance oversight responsibilities and strengthen our banking systems. Bank of Ghana 
will pursue and formalize these arrangements and deepen and strengthen the work of the 
College of Supervisors in the sub-region to facilitate the process. Substantial progress has 
been made in this area and yesterday, the College of West African Supervisors concluded 
their second meeting in Accra. 
Mr Chairman, Government dominance in the financial sector 
38.  
In  assessing  the  banking  system,  we  have  taken  note  of  the  dominance  of 
Government  and  quasi-Government  agencies  in  the  ownership  structure  of  a  number  of 
banks,  but  also  as  a  major  source  of  deposits,  some  of  which  are  concentrated  and 
contribute to weakening some of the banks. 
39.  
To enhance competition and efficient operation of the banking sector therefore, we 
should  encourage  the  broadening  of  the  ownership  of  the  banks  by  encouraging  the 
offloading  of  shares  on  the  stock  market.  However,  the  withdrawal  of  such  large 
shareholders  from  the  banking  system  has  to  be  properly  sequenced  and  managed.  The 
control objective in the banking system must be balanced by objectives such as growth and 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 5
stability to ensure that the emerging banking system meets the nation’s broad objectives of a 
stable, sound banking system. 
40.  
As a final thought, let me note that in the coming years, Central bank policy will seek 
to  consolidate  the  positive  developments  in  the  financial  system.  Tough  decisions  will  be 
taken,  particularly  in  addressing  emerging  challenges  such  as  recapitalizing  the  banks.  In 
exercising its regulatory and supervisory role, the Bank of Ghana will henceforth show least 
forbearance  for  non-compliant  banks.  This  will  ensure  that  confidence  and  trust  in  our 
financial system is not shaken. 
41.  
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I wish to reiterate that a stable and efficient financial 
system  is  a  pre-requisite  for  economic  growth  and  development.  Greater  macroeconomic 
stability means that banks must reposition themselves in an increasingly competitive market 
in which innovation; efficiency and cost-containment have become important ingredients for 
success.  I  believe  that  as  stakeholders,  we  can  play  invaluable  roles  as  members  of  the 
banking  fraternity  in  consolidating  the  gains  made  so  far  and  recommit  to  the  stability, 
efficiency and development of the Ghanaian banking sector. 
42.  
tonight. 
Thank  you  once  again  for  making  me  feel  at  home  and  for  your  kind  attention 
6 
 BIS Review 164/2010
