Deepak Mohanty: Investment and its financing – what causes private 
investment to remain relatively low in Asia? 
Welcome remarks by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  Asia-Europe  Meeting  (ASEM)  Conference  on  “Investment  and  its  Financing:  What 
causes private investment to remain relatively low in Asia?”, Mumbai, 16 December 2010. 
 1. 
Mr.  Peter  Bekx,  Director,  European  Commission.  Mr.  Subir  Gokarn,  Deputy 
Governor.  Mr.  Moreno  Bertoldi,  Head  of  Unit,  European  Commission.  Ms.  Valerie  Rouxel-
Laxton,  Head  of  Sector,  European  Commission.  Distinguished  representatives  from  the 
ASEM  member  countries.  Esteemed  colleagues  of  central  banks,  representatives  from 
multilateral organisations, think-tanks and academia, distinguished experts and friends. I am 
really  privileged  to  have  this  pleasant  opportunity  of  welcoming  you  all  on  the  occasion  of 
ASEM  Conference  on  behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  on  my  own  behalf.  I 
understand that this is the first ASEM conference of European Commission in India. I thank 
the European Commission for this opportunity. 
2. 
I am indeed honoured to welcome you all to this lovely city of Mumbai. As some of 
you may be aware, Mumbai has a unique place in Indian History and Commerce. Mumbai, 
built on seven islands, was the first British Indian possession. Mumbai came as a part of the 
royal  dowry  in  1661  to  King  Charles  II  of  England  on  his  marriage  to  the  Portuguese 
princess. It was later leased to the East India Company for £10. Today you can’t get even a 
square inch of land in Mumbai for that price. Today Mumbai is one of most expensive cities 
in  the  world.  Mumbai  is  the  business  capital  of  India  and  handles  major  share  of  India’s 
commerce. It houses the headquarters of many major banks, financial institutions, insurance 
companies  and  stock  exchanges.  Mumbai’s  nature  as  the  most  eclectic  and  cosmopolitan 
Indian  city  is  symbolized  in  the  presence  of  Bollywood  within  the  city,  the  centre  of  the 
globally-influential Hindi film and TV industries. The city has valiantly faced many setbacks 
and kept up its vibrancy. That is what Mumbai is! Be that as it may, I am sure, you will get an 
opportunity during your stay to go around the city and experience for yourself the brisk life of 
Mumbai. The Marine Drive which is just opposite this Hotel is popularly known as Queen’s 
necklace which you could see from the Rooftop where we will have our dinner tonight. I must 
also add that the weather is very pleasant at this time.  
Now  let  me  turn  to  today’s  event.  The  Asia-Europe  Meeting,  generally  known  as 
3. 
ASEM,  is  the  embodiment  of  Asia-EU  collaborative  involvement  in  the  endeavour  of 
enhancing  growth  opportunities  in  both  these  regions.  The  forum  of  ASEM  provides  a 
platform for useful dialogue at various levels between Asia and Europe on almost all issues 
of  relevance  ranging  between  finance,  education,  culture,  climate,  information  technology 
and governance. The ASEM conference series which focus on topical issues provide useful 
inputs into ASEM dialogues. The ASEM conferences before, whether on finance or growth or 
terrorism, have brought in insights into the issues aiding policy making both in Europe and 
Asia. 
4. 
The theme of the present conference – “Investment and its Financing: What causes 
private investment to remain relatively low in Asia” is topical and could not have come at a 
better time. It is particularly very important because of two main reasons. First, as we emerge 
from the financial storm of the last couple of years, investment has the key role to restore 
potential output to sustain aggregate demand. Second, investment growth in the emerging 
economies of Asia can play a pivotal role in the multi-speed recovery of the global economy 
characterized by protracted rehabilitation of over-extended balance sheets in the advanced 
economies. 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 1
This  platform,  in  my  view,  should  be  seen  as  a  great  opportunity  to  the 
5.  
academicians as well as policymakers of both Asia and Europe not only to learn from each 
other’s  experiences  but  also  to  develop  a  vision  for  the  realisation  of  faster  and  smoother 
growth  trajectory.  After  every  crisis,  market  agents,  regulators,  journalists  and  academics 
generally believe and persuade themselves that this time it is different. But it never is. There 
is a lot to learn from the past experiences of the crisis and the forum like ASEM conference 
can be immensely beneficial in sharing them. 
6.  
Let  me  now  take  this  opportunity  to  discuss  briefly  about  the  format  of  the 
Conference. We will cover the conference theme in five sessions and a panel discussion. We 
begin with the keynote address by our Deputy Governor Dr. Subir Gokarn followed by the 
technical sessions and discussions. 
The first session will deal with what drives investment in Asia. The second session 
7.  
will delve deep into the issues related to investment and productivity growth in Asia. The third 
session will deal with credit growth and financial stability in the Asian countries. The fourth 
and  the  last  session  of  today  will  be  on  the  ways  to  improve  the  channelling  of  domestic 
saving to investment in Asia. We will resume tomorrow with the fifth session to discuss the 
role of financial sector and credit growth on investment. This will be followed by the panel 
discussion  on  the  impact  of  infrastructure  bottlenecks  on  Asian  growth  chaired  by 
Dr. Y.V.Reddy, former Governor of Reserve Bank of India. 
8.  
Let  me  welcome  you  all  once  again.  In  the  local  language  of  Mumbai  which  is 
Marathi:  Amchya  Mumbait  Tumha  Sarvanche  Swagat  Aahe.  You  are  welcome  in  our 
Mumbai.  May  these  two  days  not  only  be  marked  with  fruitful  discussions  but  also  bring 
closer the Asian and European communities in this increasingly globalised world. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 172/2010
