Svein Gjedrem: Making use of the central bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  
at Norges Bank’s Symposium “What is a useful central bank?”, Oslo, 17 November 2010. 
 The text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
In  his  first  year  as  governor  of  Norges  Bank  in  1985,  Hermod  Skånland  gave  a  speech 
entitled: “Making use of the central bank”.1  
Skånland compared the independence of the Bundesbank with Norges Bank’s position in the 
government administration under the credit rationing policy of the time here in Norway. He 
said: “In Norway, where no great degree of power has been given to the central bank, it must 
develop  other  qualities.”  The  Bank  was  to  be  efficient  in  its  operations  and  function  as  a 
sound adviser for the government authorities.  
But  in  the  course  of  Skånland’s  years  as  governor,  Norges  Bank’s  role  changed  –  the 
interest rate once again became an active monetary policy instrument. 
The Norges Bank of today is a result of its own and the country’s economic history. Although 
the Bank’s role is influenced by central bank developments in other countries, we also have 
our own legal traditions and our own way of organising government administration. The tasks 
assigned to the Bank are also supported by modern economic theory. 
A  central  bank  is  different  from  other  public  bodies  in  that  it  has  its  own  balance  sheet, 
independent budgetary authority and its own accounts. To build confidence in the Bank over 
time,  the  central  bank  must  manage  this  form  of  autonomy  in  a  sound  manner.  I  have 
emphasised the importance of an efficiently run central bank that concentrates on core tasks.  
Over the past 10–12 years, the number of central banking staff in Norges Bank has been 
reduced  from  1200  to  300  (see  Chart  1).  This  is  an  adequate  staff  level.  We  no  longer 
produce statistics, and we are no longer a manufacturing enterprise. We issue the currency, 
but we do not print banknotes or mint coins. The distribution of money has been taken over 
by private business.  
                                                 
1   Lecture at Norwegian Polytechnic Society, Oslo 17 September 1985. Published in Economic Bulletin No. 3, 1985. 
 BIS Review 154/2010 
 1
As  a  result,  we  have  been  able  to  reduce  the  Bank’s  operating  costs  by  about 
NOK 600 million per year, measured at constant prices.  
At the same time, the Bank’s equity capital has increased more than twofold and now stands 
at close to NOK 70 billion (see Chart 2). The central bank’s formal independence must be 
supported by a solid capital base.2  
 The  objectives  pursued  by  the  central  bank  are  for  the  common  good.  The  objective  of 
monetary  policy  has  always  been  determined  by  the  government  and  the  Storting 
(Norwegian parliament) and was for a long period set out in an Act. Norges Bank has issued 
notes and coin throughout its history, for the first hundred years based on the silver or gold 
standard. 
However, Norges Bank’s tasks have otherwise varied over time. 
We  manage  the  Norwegian  oil  fund,  which  was  a  natural  step  in  light  of  Norges  Bank’s 
management of foreign exchange reserves. The fund will not, however, be one of the topics 
of my speech today.3  
The origins of Norges Bank 
Norges  Bank  was  established  in  1816  as  a  limited  liability  company,  privately  owned  but 
under the control of the Storting. It was Norway’s first bank. The Napoleonic Wars had been 
costly for Denmark and eventually led to hyperinflation. In order to secure confidence in the 
new specie daler, Norges Bank had to be independent.4 The intention was to make it difficult 
                                                 
2   A. Cukierman  (2008), “Central Bank Independence and  Monetary  Policymaking Institutions  – Past,  Present 
and Future”, European Journal of Political Economy, 24 pp 722–36. 
3   For a discussion of the Government Pension Fund Global, see Gjedrem (2010): “Perspectives on managing 
the Government Pension Fund Global”, lecture at the Norwegian Polytechnic Society, 2 November 2010. 
4   See  also  Carsten  Smith  (1980):”Bankrett  og  statsstyre”  [Banking  law  and  public  governance],  p.  39:  “Det 
klassiske  system  internasjonalt  sett  har  vært  å  knytte  penge-  og  kredittpolitikken  til  en  selvstendig  stillet 
sentralbank  [The  classic  system  internationally  has  been  to  assign  monetary  and  credit  policy  to  an 
independent central bank].” Universitetsforlaget. 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2010
for the government and the Storting to influence the central bank. The Bank’s headquarters 
were located in Trondheim, a 12-day journey from the capital.5  
The Bank’s tasks were to issue Norwegian notes and coin with a stable value measured in 
silver, perform banking services for the government, provide loans and take deposits. Equity 
capital was procured by introducing a silver tax. The silver standard was replaced by the gold 
standard in 1874, and the following year saw Norway’s entry into the Scandinavian Currency 
Union. The Norwegian krone became the new currency unit.  
Norges Bank as the bankers’ bank 
Norges Bank became a more modern institution with the Act of 1892.6 It became a bank for 
the banks that had emerged and a common national discount rate was introduced. 
The note issuing rules were also changed to enable Norges Bank to meet bank demand for 
liquidity more easily. It was legally established that Norges Bank would be the government’s 
treasurer. 
The  Bank  remained  legally  independent  of  the  government  authorities  in  its  use  of 
instruments: the Act of 1892 reconfirmed that Norges Bank could not be given instructions by 
the  government  or  the  Storting  and  Bank  decisions  could  not  be  reversed  by  other 
authorities. The contemporary ideal was an independent central bank.7  
At the same time, a permanent chair and deputy chair were assigned to Norges Bank’s board, 
both appointed by the government. The other board members were appointed by the Storting, 
as  were  the  members  of  the  Supervisory  Council  who  were  responsible  for  supervising  the 
Bank. It would seem that the need to distinguish between different roles was not very firmly 
rooted:  the  first  permanent  chair  of  the  board,  director  Karl  Gether  Bomhoff,  was  also  a 
parliamentary representative.8 He was, by the way, one of Henrik Ibsen’s few friends.9  
In  1897  the  Storting  had  enough  confidence  in  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  to 
relocate  Norges  Bank’s  head  office  to  Kristiania  (now  Oslo).  Payment  by  cheque  was 
introduced  in  Norway  in  the  same  year,  and  from  1898  Norges  Bank  functioned  as 
settlement bank for payments between private banks.10  
The more flexible note issuing rules proved very useful during the Kristiania crisis in 1899. 
The crisis followed a housing and construction bubble in the capital. This was the first time 
the central bank acted as lender of last resort for the banks.  
Boom, banking crisis and parity policy 
The fairly stable years that then followed after the turn of the century came to an abrupt end 
with the outbreak of World War I. 
                                                 
5   Lars Fredrik Øksendal (2008): “Trondhjem som hovedsete for Norges Bank – noen faktiske og kontrafaktiske 
betraktninger” [Trondheim as Norges Bank’s headquarters – some factual and counterfactual considerations], 
Staff Memo 2008/8, Norges Bank. 
6   See  Oskar  Jæger  (1894):  “Udsigt  over  de  forandringer,  som  Norges  banks  virksomhet  har  undergaaet  ved 
den  nye  banklov”  [Changes  in  Norges  Bank’s  operations  as  a  result  of  the  new  Norges  Bank  Act]. 
Statsøkonomisk tidsskrift. 
7   Gunhild Ecklund (2008): “Creating a new role for an old central bank: The Bank of Norway 1945–1954.” Series 
of Dissertations 2/2008, BI Norwegian School of Management. 
8   There was one parliamentary representative on the board as late as 1983. 
9  
10   See Harald Haare (2007): “Clearing and settlement at Norges Bank – a historical review”, Economic Bulletin 
Ivo de Figueiredo (2007): Henrik Ibsen. Masken [Henrik Ibsen. The Mask], Aschehoug. 
4/2007. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 3
Norges  Bank’s  obligation  to  convert  banknotes  into  gold  was  suspended,  and  the  central 
bank  provided  funding  for  increased  government  activities and  other  purposes.11  The  gold 
standard  ideal  of  an  independent central  bank  was  abandoned  during  the  war.  There  was 
strong credit growth. The discount rate was kept low and there was a surge in government 
spending, while prices for our exports soared and foreign inflows of gold were substantial. 
The combination resulted in a boom period followed by a stock market crash, a banking crisis 
and a fall in monetary value.  
Francis Sejersted wrote the following about the appointment of Nicolai Rygg as governor of 
Norges Bank in 1920: “When [Prime Minister] Gunnar Knudsen [in 1920] called Rygg to the 
position of chairman of Norges Bank’s board, his aim was to secure the services of a strong 
and knowledgeable man. Gunnar Knudsen suspected an economic storm was brewing, and 
he  suspected  something  that  to  a  great  extent  was  his  own  responsibility,  namely  that 
monetary policy had been neglected during the war. It is important to keep this in mind in any 
judgement  of  Rygg  –  that  he  took  over  an  estate  that  had  fallen  into  grave  disrepair.  The 
monetary and fiscal policy pursued during World War I had been lax to a degree that was 
completely unnecessary”.12 
Norges Bank now aimed to raise the value of the Norwegian krone and lower the price of 
gold  by  means  of  so-called  “parity  policy”.  This  line  of  approach  was  followed  by  most 
advanced economies to restore pre-war exchange rates. A system of stable and convertible 
currencies was regarded as essential to growth in global trade.  
Rygg moreover regarded restoring the value of the krone to its former gold parity as a moral 
obligation.13 The Norwegian government held substantial debt in sterling and US dollars and 
he felt it was important to settle Norway’s debts in money of the same value as previously. 
The same applied to small depositors – they were to feel secure that their money would keep 
its value over time.14  
But the central bank also had a banking crisis to deal with. Funding was supplied, partly by 
Norges  Bank  and  partly  by  the  Treasury,  to  keep  the  banks  afloat.  It  took  time  to  restore 
confidence in the krone and for parity policy to be effective. It was not until May 1928 that the 
krone was pegged to gold at par.  
                                                 
11   For  an  overview  of  legislative  amendments  in  connection  with  World  War  I,  see  Carsten  Smith  (1980): 
Bankrett og statsstyre [Banking law and public governance. 
12   Francis  Sejersted  (1973):  Ideal,  teori  og  virkelighet.  Nicolai  Rygg  og  pengepolitikken  i  1920-årene  [Ideals, 
theory and reality. Nicolai Rygg and monetary policy in the 1920s]. J.W. Cappelens forlag. 
13   In their book Norsk økonomi i det 20. århundre [The Norwegian economy in the 20th century], Fritz Hodne and 
Ola  Honningdal  Grytten  refer  to  a  lecture  given  by  Gustav  Cassel,  a  Swedish  economist  of  international 
renown,  at  the  Federation  of  Norwegian  Industries  on  23  November  1923,  where  Cassel  argued  that  in 
Norway’s case a devaluation might be an advantage. This offended Rygg, who reminded Cassel that Norway 
had trodden a difficult path before, and could do so again. Just before he took office, Rygg had written a book 
about  the  history  of  Norges  Bank  1816–1916  and  had  the  years  1822–1842  in  mind,  when  20  years  of 
deflation had been needed to bring the speciedaler back to its former gold parity. He wrote: “The [monetary] 
regime is anchored in our legal system, which  must  be respected. Inherent therein is  a  moral  obligation to 
restore the monetary system to its previous condition. I know the road ahead of us is long, but I would for my 
part emphasise that we will follow that road.” From the newspaper article: “Veien og viljen. Et spørsmaal, hvor 
nordmænd alene har ansvaret. Av direktør N. Ryggs svar til professor Cassel” [The way and the will. An issue 
for  which  Norwegians  alone  are  responsible.  On  Director  Rygg’s  response  to  Professor  Cassel].  See  also: 
Wilhelm Keilhau (1952): Den norske pengehistorie, [Norwegian monetary history] Aschehoug for a review of 
the discussion between Rygg and Cassel. 
14   At that time, small savings played a key welfare function in society. See Francis Sejersted (1973): Ideal, teori 
og  virkelighet.  Nicolai  Rygg  og  pengepolitikken  i  1920-årene.  [Ideals,  theory  and  reality.  Nicolai  Rygg  and 
monetary policy in the 1920s]. Cappelen. 
4 
 BIS Review 154/2010
The  government  and  the  Storting  left  much  of  the  responsibility  for  economic  policy  to 
Norges Bank.15 The recommendation by the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic 
Affairs in the central bank’s annual report for 1924 reads as follows: “The majority finds that it 
does not possess the necessary knowledge of all the interacting factors which under these 
difficult circumstances must affect Norges Bank’s decisions to be able to perform a critical 
review of these decisions.” 16 
In Berge Furre’s words, there was: “... general agreement on the goal – the gold krone – from 
the political right to the political left.” 17 
After  the  value  of  the  krone  had  been  brought  back  to  gold  parity,  the  international  crisis 
reached Norway. Starting in the US in 1929, it led to falling prices and wealth losses in all the 
western economies. The gold standard was an important channel of contagion. Uncertainty 
led to capital flight to countries with substantial gold reserves, such as the US. Countries with 
small reserves had to maintain a high interest rate to prevent substantial gold outflows. In 
September  1931,  the  UK  decided  to  abandon  the  gold  standard.  Denmark,  Sweden  and 
Norway brought gold redemption to a halt in the same month.  
Norges Bank was put to a severe test in the interwar period. Nicolai Rygg’s lot was to resolve 
the problems left by the policy conducted during and just after the war. His approach was on 
a par with international practice at the time.18 Although he had his critics, not all the criticism 
levelled against him would necessarily be regarded as equally well founded today. 
The  general  view  of  Rygg  has  become  more  balanced.19  But  the  perception  of  Rygg  and 
Norges Bank in the interwar years, that subsequently became ingrained, had an impact on 
the  tasks  that  were  later  assigned  to  the  central  bank.  The  pendulum swung  towards  less 
independence for Norges Bank, since the Bank was held responsible for the recession. This 
impression prevailed for such a long time that it also came to influence the current Norges 
Bank Act.  
The  scepticism  was  clearly  expressed  by  Kåre  Willoch,  who  was  prime  minister  when  the 
new  Act  came  into  effect  in  1985:  “[Nicolai  Rygg]  was  held  primarily  responsible  –  and 
                                                 
15   In 1926, Minister of Finance Holmboe, of the centrist-liberal party Venstre, said: “It is however a well known 
fact  that  wherever  governments  have  assumed  authority  over  the  national  bank,  the  outcome  has  been 
unfavourable because vested interests have been so considerable and the temptation so strong that it was 
impossible to resist, and the government has helped itself to the national bank’s cash…”. In Francis Sejersted 
(1973):  Ideal,  teori  og  virkelighet.  Nicolai  Rygg  og  pengepolitikken  i  1920-årene.  [Ideals, theory  and reality. 
Nicolai Rygg and monetary policy in the 1920s]. J. W. Cappelens forlag. 
16   In Francis Sejersted (1973). 
17   Berge Furre (Norwegian historian, theologian and politician for the Socialist Left Party), (1999): “Norsk historie 
1905–2000:  Industrisamfunnet  –  frå  vokstervisse  til  framtidstvil”  [History  of  Norway  1905–2000:  from 
confidence in growth to doubts about the future], Det Norske Samlaget. 
18   For  a  lively  description  of  the  personalities  governing  the  large  central  banks  in  the  1920s,  see  Liaquat 
Ahamed (2009): The Lords of Finance. The bankers who broke the world. Penguin Books. 
19   Hermod Skånland writes about the need to hold someone accountable for the hardships of the 1920s: “The 
government is usually a good target for criticism, but there is little appeal in firing shots at a government that is 
no longer in office, and through the 1920s there had been so many governments that no single government 
stood out as more responsible than others. On the other hand, there had been one central bank governor, 
who had also been a prominent figure. Nicolai Rygg became the obvious scapegoat, open to attack from both 
the masses and from historians, without any economists springing to his defence. 
Thus, the myth became established that the economic difficulties of the 1920s were due to parity policy, and that 
Nicolai Rygg was  responsible for them. From there,  it  was only  a short  step to a general scepticism towards 
monetary policy combined with a more specific distrust of central banks and central bank governors.” Hermod 
Skånland (1998): “Mytedannelsen om paripolitikken” (Myth-making about parity policy), Aftenposten 30 May. 
 BIS Review 154/2010 
 5
virtually  solely  responsible  –  for  a  policy  that  became  a  crucial  deterrent  to  central  bank 
independence for generations of economists and politicians – myself included.” 20 
The postwar period of coordination and regulatory optimism 
Views  on  economic  policy  changed  considerably  from  the  end  of  the  1930s.  The  Bretton 
Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  against  the  US  dollar  was  established,  with  the 
US dollar  pegged  to  gold.  Both  John  Maynard  Keynes’  theories  and  analytical  tools 
developed  by  Norwegian  economists  such  as  Ragnar  Frisch  and  Trygve  Haavelmo 
generated  regulatory  optimism,  which  laid  the  basis  for  a  new  approach  to  economic 
planning, for example through the annual national budgets. 
Fiscal  policy  –  changes  in  public  spending  and  taxes  –  was  now  regarded  as  the  most 
important instrument for smoothing economic fluctuations. The use of direct regulation of the 
economy  increased.  The  role  of  interest  rate  policy  was  toned  down  considerably.21 
Centralised planning gained ground, with the Ministry of Finance playing a prominent role. As 
a result, there was also a shift in Norges Bank’s responsibilities, with the full agreement of 
the Bank. In his first annual address in 1946, Governor of Norges Bank Gunnar Jahn said: “It 
goes  without  saying  that  a  bank  of  issue  cannot  and  should  not  conduct  a  policy  that  is 
inconsistent with that determined by the Storting and the government.”  
Coordination  with  government  policy  was  formally  strengthened  in  1949  when  the 
government  acquired  all  the  shares  in  Norges  Bank.  In  addition,  the  Bank’s  annual  report 
was to be sent to the Ministry of Finance and no longer directly to the Storting. 
Corporatist channels became important, providing some scope for a central bank in search of 
a mission. 
Samarbeidsnemnda  (the  Cooperation  Committee),  a  body  established  in  1951,  comprised 
commercial and savings banks, insurance companies, the Ministry of Finance, the Banking 
Inspectorate and Norges Bank, with the central bank governor as chair. 
Erik Brofoss, the head of Norges Bank from 1954, was enthusiastic:  
“During  discussions  about  monetary  policy  and  other  economic  issues,  Norges  Bank  has 
often found itself in the position of having to find intermediate solutions that could convey the 
positions adopted by the Ministry of Finance and by private financial institutions. The actual 
influence  Norges  Bank  has  had  in  this  respect  both  vis-à-vis  the  Ministry  and  the  private 
financial institutions extends far beyond its formal statutory authority.” 22 
This line of thinking seems very remote to us today.  
Regulatory  optimism  was  the  hallmark  of  the  1960s,23  and  with  the  Act  authorising  the 
regulation of monetary and credit conditions of 1965,24 which was an enabling Act conferring 
                                                 
20   Kåre Willoch [1994]: “Hvor uavhengig bør sentralbanken være?” [How independent should the central bank 
be?],  in  Stabilitet  og  langsiktighet.  Festskrift  til  Hermod  Skånland  [Stability  and  long-termism.  Festschrift  to 
Herman Skånland], Aschehoug. 
21   For example, Governor Erik Brofoss later said: “… the impact of the interest rate, which was once virtually the 
only monetary policy instrument, is now far more limited in scope.” In Erik Brufoss (1959): “Sentralbankens 
statsrettslige  og  forvaltningsrettslige  stilling”  (The  central  bank’s  position  in  relation  to  constitutional  and 
administrative law]. Lecture given on 27 October. Published in Statsøkonomisk tidskrift 1960, pp. 1–31. 
22   Erik Brofoss [1959]: “Sentralbankens statsrettslige og forvaltningsrettslige stilling” [The central bank’s position 
in relation to constitutional and administrative law]. Lecture given on 27 October. Published in Statsøkonomisk 
tidskrift 1960, pp 1–31. 
23   Tore Jørgen Hanisch, Espen Søilen and Gunhild Ecklund (1999): Norsk økonomisk politikk i det 20. århundre. 
Verdivalg  i  en  åpen  økonomi  [Norwegian  economic  history  in  the  20th  century.  Ethical  choices  in  an  open 
economy] Høyskoleforlaget, Kristiansand. 
24   The 1965 Credit Act and the 1950 Act relating to currency control were not repealed in their entirety until 2003. 
6 
 BIS Review 154/2010
authority on the government, Norges Bank gradually drifted into an advisory role. Corporatist 
collaboration  receded  somewhat  into  the  background  and  credit  policy  was  integrated  into 
the national budget.25  
This was probably an all-time low for Norges Bank. The Bank was not allowed to act, while 
inflation gained momentum. 
When Hermod Skånland began working in Norges Bank as deputy governor in 1971, he was 
warned by his colleagues at the Ministry of Finance. Later, he said: “... they did not know how 
right they were to ask their questions. They [had no idea] how little there was to do of any 
interest in Norges Bank at that time. It had no instruments, no policy tasks and was wholly 
and  exclusively  a  supervisory  body  –  apart  from  the  few  occasions  when  it  served  as  a 
consultative body. So I had placed myself on the sideline, but I compensated by offering to 
chair a number of public commissions.” 26 
Governor Knut Getz Wold wrote in 1972 that: “Norges Bank’s position today in relation to the 
government  authorities  is  not,  however,  defined  by  a  formal  right  to  make  decisions  on 
specific issues, but by its role as advisor …”. He went on to say: “Norges Bank has limited 
direct power. This is as it should be. But it has, and should have, influence. If store is to be 
set by its word, it must keep abreast of developments at home and abroad. The Storting and 
the government have the final word. Having said that, Norges Bank will loyally and actively 
follow up their decisions.” 27 
In 1973, the efforts to develop an economy under strong centralised coordination and control 
culminated in a proposal to establish an incomes policy council with regulation of wages.28  
The  proposal  was  logical.  It  was  the  last  wall  in  the  structure  erected  after  the  war. 
Coordination and regulation were important key words. Other elements were: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  proposal  to  establish  an  incomes  policy  council  did  not  receive  support.  Government 
regulation and coordinated wage regulation became excessive.29  
Fiscal policy oriented towards full employment  
Credit regulation within limits specified in a separate credit budget 
Channelling of loans through state banks 
Regulation of capital movements 
Low nominal interest rates stipulated by the government authorities  
A fixed, though adjustable, krone exchange rate  
Use of price regulation 
An active business policy through state ownership and state grants and subsidies  
                                                 
25   The  collaboration  between  the  authorities  and  bankers’  associations  did  not  disappear  completely.  In  the 
economic  policy  tightening  of  1979  and  1980,  the  “konsumlånsforståelsen”  (consumer  loan  understanding) 
played  an  important  role.  Banks  undertook  to  reduce  lending  to  households.  This  led  to  a  marked  rise  in 
saving. 
26   In Økonomisk Rapport Magasin, 12 January 2002: “Graver Gjedrem sin egen grav?” [Is Gjedrem digging his 
own grave?]. 
27   Knut Getz Wold (1972): “Norges Banks samarbeid med statsmaktene, bankene og utlandet,” [Norges Bank’s 
cooperation  with government authorities, the banks and bodies abroad],Kristofer Lehmkuhl Lecture, Norges 
Handelshøyskole 20 September. 
28   See NOU [Official Norwegian Report] 1973:36. Om prisproblemene [On price problems]. 
29   See NOU [Official Norwegian Report] 1983:36 Om prisproblemene [On price problems]. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 7
Today’s economic policy frameworks are partly a reflection of the experiences of the 1970s 
and 1980s, both in other countries and in Norway.  
The  Bretton  Woods  system  collapsed  when  the  US  deficit-financed  the  Vietnam  War  and 
extensive welfare reforms, while interest rates were kept low. The gold standard had to be 
abandoned, inflation rose and an oil price shock was triggered. A shortfall in production and 
unemployment followed in its wake.  
Norway imported high inflation, and domestic inflation was also amplified by galloping wages 
and a series of krone devaluations. 
High  inflation  undermined  the  regulation  of  the  credit  market.  We  had  had  a  low  nominal 
interest  rate  for  a  long  period  –  several  decades  –  but  inflation  had  also  been  moderate. 
From the end of the 1960s, this changed. The real interest rate became highly negative. In 
addition, galloping wages drove incomes into higher tax brackets, resulting in higher marginal 
taxation, and the after-tax real interest rate became even more negative. The regulation of 
credit was not able to stem the tide of credit demand that ensued.  
The  Norwegian  money  market  became  more  closely  integrated  with  a  growing  Eurodollar 
market at that time. This was partly because oil companies had to exchange their US dollar 
revenues into NOK for tax payment purposes.  
The regulatory regime was imploding. 
The interest rate regains its role as a policy instrument 
After the drop in oil prices and the last devaluation of the krone in 1986, the interest rate had 
to be set to support our currency. The alternative was further devaluations, high inflation and 
economic instability. With a binding commitment to a fixed exchange rate policy from early 
summer 1986, interest rate setting was largely shifted to Norges Bank.30  
High  inflation  is  associated  with  substantial  real  economic  costs.  This  came  into  evidence 
when we managed to bring inflation under control again in Norway at the end of the 1980s. 
The fixed exchange rate policy was crucial in this context (see Chart 3).  
                                                 
30   Hermod  Skånland  dates  this  to  December  1986  (see  Skånland  (2005)):  “Tilbakeblikk  på  20  år  med  ny 
sentralbanklov” [“A 20 year retrospective on the new Norges Bank Act”], Penger og Kreditt 3/05 (Norwegian 
only). In my opinion, this shift occurred earlier. 
8 
 BIS Review 154/2010
 Perhaps we can say that the pendulum had swung back from the view that prevailed in the 
early  years  after  the  war.  At  that  time,  it  was  not  Norges  Bank,  but  on  the  contrary  fiscal 
policy  and  the  detailed  regulatory  system  that  had  failed.  Norges  Bank  had  to  be  given  a 
greater role again in promoting a well functioning economy. 
Later,  it  would  transpire  that  having  brought  inflation  under  control  and  a  series  of  far-
reaching structural reforms in the 1980s and early 1990s, would pave the way for two golden 
decades in the Norwegian economy.  
Throughout  the  1990s,  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  was  to  stabilise  the  krone  and 
thereby make a contribution to low inflation. The central government budget was to smooth 
fluctuations in output and employment. This became increasingly demanding as favourable 
economic developments and oil revenues generated government surpluses. Both the interest 
rate  and  the  government  budget  had  then,  in  periods,  the  effect  of  amplifying,  not 
dampening, cyclical developments. This resulted in fluctuations in the krone exchange rate.31  
Norges Bank was forced to recognise that it could not fine tune the exchange rate from day 
to  day  or  month  to  month.  Nor  would  the  Bank  knowingly  contribute  to  fuelling  inflation  or 
deflationary downturns. Interest rate policy was  then instead geared to  keeping inflation in 
line  with  euro  area  countries.  As  from  1999,  the  Bank’s  policy  was  in  practice  oriented 
towards an inflation rate of around 2 per cent.32 Keeping inflation low and stable is the best 
contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  economic  stability  and  a  stable  krone  exchange 
rate.  
A  formal  inflation  target  –  with  a  target  of  2.5  per  cent  –  was  introduced  in  Norway  in 
March 2001. The new monetary policy framework was introduced at the same time as the 
government  drew  up  new  fiscal  policy  guidelines  that  provided  for  a  gradual,  albeit 
sustainable, phasing in of oil revenues into the Norwegian economy.  
Independence in the use of instruments – a premise for stability of the value of money 
A  number  of  considerations  weigh  in  favour  of  setting  objectives  and  delegating  tasks  to 
government  institutions.  This  can  ease  the  central  authorities’  workload.  The  central 
government can also seek to ensure that government agencies fulfil their responsibilities by 
giving them clear objectives and instruments. Furthermore, clear objectives and delegation of 
tasks may enhance predictability for other economic agents.  
In economic policy it is commonly argued that certain long-term objectives can be achieved 
only if short-term considerations are not allowed to influence the use of policy instruments.33 
This  is  the  case  for  monetary  policy  and  inflation  targeting.34  There  may  be  a  desire  to 
achieve higher, yet unsustainable, growth in output and employment through a low interest 
rate. But economic agents are aware of this temptation. If they cannot be confident that the 
key  rate  is  set  to  ensure  stable  inflation,  they  will  expect  higher  inflation  over  time.  The 
                                                 
31   Kjell  Storvik,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  from  1994  to1999,  stated  in  a  lecture  at  FOREX  NORWAY  on 
28 August  1998:  “I  would  point  to  the  well-known  fact  that  a  lower  krone  exchange  rate  may  contribute  to 
fuelling inflation expectations and that such expectations may in turn generate expectations of a weakening of 
the krone exchange rate, thereby reinforcing depreciation pressures. Price expectations may thus prove to be 
a self-fulfilling prophecy. The interest rate level which has now been established should, in addition to directly 
contributing to stabilising the krone exchange rate, dampen price expectations.” 
32   Svein Gedrem (1999) “Utfordringer i pengepolitikken” [Monetary policy challenges], Aftenposten, 4 May. 
33   Kydland, Finn E. and Prescott, Edward C. (1977): “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal 
Plans.” Journal of Political Economy No. 87, pp 473–492. 
34   Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon (1983): “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model”, 
Journal of Political Economy No. 12 pp. 101–121. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 9
long-term  cost  can  be  considerable  and  the  short-term  gains  limited.  Norway  and  other 
countries learned this in the 1970s and 1980s.  
The British prime minister Harold Wilson once remarked, “A week is a long time in politics”. 
This  attitude  also  influenced  economic  policy  in  our  country.  The  result  was  economic 
instability, with both high inflation and high unemployment. Just as Ulysses had himself tied 
to  the  mast  to  resist  the  Sirens’35  temptations,  the  government  authorities  can  prevent 
themselves from pursuing a policy that is harmful in the long run by setting objectives and 
delegating tasks.  
A central bank should be independent in its use of policy instruments, though the objective of 
monetary policy should naturally be set out by the government and the Storting.36  
The  division  of  responsibility  was  clearly  defined  when  the  government  presented  its 
guidelines in 2001. 
Since the various elements of economic policy differ in their effects, they have different tasks:  
Monetary  policy  now  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  in 
 
addition contribute to smoothing fluctuations in output and employment.  
The  central  government  budget  –  growth  in  public  expenditure,  which  must  be 
sustainable in the long term – influences the krone and the size of the internationally 
exposed sector in the medium term.  
Wage  formation  and  economic  structures  and  incentives  provide  the  basis  for 
efficient  use  of  our  labour  resources  and  other  economic  resources,  and  for 
economic growth. 
  There is also an interaction:  
 
In their budget resolutions, the government authorities will attach importance to the 
effects of the budget on the Norwegian economy and will therefore take account of 
the  effect  on  the  interest  rate.  In  this  way,  they  avoid  a  situation  where  growth  in 
public expenditure and the interest rate push the economy in different directions.  
With  a  known  monetary  policy  response  pattern,  the  parties  to  the  centralised 
income settlements can take into account interest rate effects when wage increases 
are agreed.  
Moreover,  the  parties  to  public  sector  negotiations  can  take  into  account  that  the 
higher  the  pay  increases  are,  the  fewer  there  are  who  can  be  remunerated  over 
government budgets.  
  Norges Bank Act of 1985 – a framework for today’s monetary policy 
The Norges Bank Act, passed in 1985, governs monetary policy.37 The Act was drafted in the 
light  of  Norges  Bank’s  role  in  the  postwar  government  administration.  Therefore,  the  new 
Executive Board, which replaced the board of directors under the 1892 Act, is now appointed 
by the Council of State.  
                                                 
35   Elster,  Jon  (1979):  Ulysses  and  the  Sirens.  Studies  in  Rationality  and  Irrationality,  University  Press, 
Cambridge. 
36   Stanley  Fischer  introduced  the  difference  between  goal  and  instrument  independence.  See  Fischer  (1995): 
“Modern approaches to central banking”, NBER Working Paper No. 5064. 
37   The  Norges  Bank  Act  is  discussed  in  Helge  Syrstad  (2003):”  Sentralbankens  uavhengighet”  [Central  bank 
independence], Fagbokforlaget. 
10 
 BIS Review 154/2010
Under  the  Act,  Norges  Bank  is  an  executive  and  advisory  body  for  monetary,  credit  and 
foreign  exchange  policy  and  shall  monitor  developments  in  the  money,  credit  and  foreign 
exchange markets.  
The  Act  makes  no  reference  to  the  objective  of  monetary  policy.  On  the  contrary,  its 
formulations are completely open-ended.38  
The  Bank  shall  conduct  its  operations  in  accordance  with  the  economic  policy  guidelines 
drawn up by the government authorities. How this was to be interpreted was the subject of 
controversy  in  the  first  years.  Today,  in  the  light  of  both  the  text  of  the  Act  and  of  the 
preparatory works, the implications of this may also be unclear. This provision has not gained 
any further practical significance. Today, Norges Bank no longer looks for guidelines in public 
documents.  The  reason  is  that  the  inflation  target,  which  is  governed  by  regulation  in 
pursuance of other provisions of the Act, provides the central bank with a suitable mandate. 
The central bank is no longer a limited liability company as it was until 1985, but a separate 
legal entity owned by the state. 
The central bank shall submit matters of special importance to the Ministry of Finance before 
making a decision. Although this submission arrangement gives the Ministry of Finance an 
opportunity to state its views, and obliges Norges Bank to consider them, it does not relieve 
Norges Bank of the full responsibility for its decisions.  
The  text  of  the  Act  does  not  specify  which  matters  are  not  only  important,  but  of  special 
importance.  The  preparatory  works  of  the  Act  provide  little  guidance  today.  When  the  Act 
was under preparation, the interest rate was not a policy instrument, but had the nature of 
being  an  end  in  itself.  It  was  rarely  changed,  and  then  only  in  critical  situations  for  the 
Norwegian economy. In the period of exchange rate management in the 1990s, changes in 
the  key  rate  were  also  linked  to  large  currency  inflows  or  outflows  that  might  indicate 
substantial  imbalances  in  our  economy.  In  the  past  10–12  years  this  has  changed 
completely. Norges Bank operates a target set by the government authorities, and interest 
rate  changes  are  nearly  always  small  and  rarely  come  as  a  surprise  to  economic  agents. 
While  these  changes  may  appear  to  be  important,  it  would  be  to  inflate  the  wording  to 
characterise them as matters of special importance.  
When in more critical situations, such as autumn 2008, a need arises for more pronounced 
changes in interest rate and liquidity policy, the Bank has without a doubt an obligation to 
submit the matter to the Ministry.  
There  must  always  be  a  good  flow  of  information  from  Norges  Bank  to  the  Ministry  of 
Finance. 
Norges Bank has a special position in public administration. This is expressed, for example, 
in the instructions section of the Norges Bank Act. While ministries in Norway, in contrast to 
Sweden  for  example,  can  easily  issue  instructions  to  their  subordinate  agencies,  this 
provision  sets  strict  formal  requirements  for  instructing  the  Bank.  This  power  cannot  be 
delegated by the Council of State to the Ministry of Finance. The Bank shall be consulted in 
advance and the Storting shall forthwith be notified of the reason for the instruction. Former 
supreme court justice Carsten Smith has stressed that the Act must be interpreted to mean 
that this must be set out in a separate report and under full transparency.39  
                                                 
38  The  following  is  stated  on  page  3  of  the  recommendation  from  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and 
Economic Affairs concerning the Act relating to Norges Bank and the Monetary System etc. (Recommendation 
No.  50  (1984–85)  to  the  Odelsting:  “A  new  Norges  Bank  Act  should  be  able  to  be  adapted  to  various 
scenarios.  In  line  with  this,  the  Committee  proposes  a  general  clause  for  the  Bank’s  activities  and  that  the 
Council of State be authorised to lay down further guidelines in a number of areas”. 
39   Carsten Smith (1992): Rettstenkning i samtiden [Contemporary legal thinking], p. 410. Universitetsforlaget. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 11
In its consultation statement on the new Norges Bank bill, the Ministry of Justice through its 
Legislation Department expressed the view that the right to issue instructions should be in 
closer keeping with ordinary rules relating to government administration, adding: “We note for 
the  record  our  agreement  that  there  are  strong  arguments  for  limitations  on  instructing 
Norges Bank on the exercise of its authority. From a legal standpoint, however, there should 
be  no  doubt  that  the  power  to  do  so  exists  and  that  this  power  should  be  formulated  in  a 
manner which does not make it virtually impossible to exercise it in practice”. 
The views of the Legislation Department were not taken into account. The relevant section of 
the  Act  was  worded  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  the  power  to  instruct  the  Bank  virtually 
impossible to exercise in practice. Nor has it ever been applied in individual cases, except 
when  the  inflation  target  was  introduced  in  2001  after  consultations  with  Norges  Bank. 
Norges  Bank  has,  in  Getz  Wold’s words  from  1972,  followed  up  the  inflation  target  loyally 
and actively.  
The  instruction  section  does  not  prevent  Norges  Bank  from  setting  the  interest  rate 
independently of pressures from the central government authorities. It is difficult to conceive 
today that this could change. There is therefore hardly a pressing need to remove it. It could 
still  be  argued  that  in  international  comparisons  Norges  Bank  is  less  independent  than  it 
actually is. On the other hand, it can be argued that Norway could be faced with a perilous 
situation,  such  as  military  conflict,  for  example,  where  the central  bank  itself  finds that  the 
government should use its power of instruction with regard to foreign exchange reserves and 
the central bank’s management of monetary and liquidity policy. 
In  many  ways  the  current  Norges  Bank  Act  is  a  product  of  1960s  and  1970s  economic 
thinking,  but  certain  adjustments  have  been  made  to  the  Act  since  1985.  Particularly 
important is the prohibition against the central bank granting credit to the central government. 
The practice for appointing members of the Executive Board has also changed. Where the 
political  parties  in  the  Storting  once  nominated  relevant  candidates,  members  are  now 
evaluated independently of party background and appointed by the Council of State upon the 
recommendation of the Ministry of Finance. 
One typical feature of recent central bank legislation in other countries is an objects provision 
that stipulates the central bank’s primary objective as ensuring stability in monetary value. In 
Norway, this is set out in a statutory regulation and as an operational and more intermediate 
target. This is an essential difference.  
Another  feature  of  central  bank  legislation  in  other  countries  is  legal  independence,  in  the 
sense that the central bank’s use of instruments, primarily the key interest rate, cannot be 
overruled, whether by instruction or reversal. 
If the Norges Bank Act were being written today, it would probably include an objects section. 
As mentioned, much of the preparatory works is out of date so that the provisions of the Act 
of 1985 must be interpreted in the light of the current economic system. Moreover, Section 1 
reads “[t]he bank may implement any measures customarily or ordinarily taken by a central 
bank”, and this is something that changes, as we know. The Act is thus flexible enough to 
provide  a  suitable  framework  also  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  today.  It  specifies, 
moreover, that Norges Banks sets the interest rates on its loans and deposits.  
Norges Bank’s responsibilities are also now well established through practice.  
The central bank is accountable 
Norges Bank has two parallel governing bodies. In addition to an Executive Board, appointed 
by the Council of State, it has a Supervisory Council appointed by the Storting. This is also 
shows the peculiar position of the Bank in the government administration. The direct link to 
the  country’s  national  assembly  reflects  that  the  Storting  under  Article  75  (c)  of  the 
Norwegian Constitution “shall supervise the monetary affairs of the Realm”. The Supervisory 
12 
 BIS Review 154/2010
Council continues to have a mix of administrative and supervisory duties, but its tasks were 
delimited by the Act of 1985.40 The Supervisory Council shall supervise the Bank’s activities 
and ensure that the rules governing the Bank’s operations are observed. The council has its 
own secretariat, adopts the annual accounts of Norges Bank and approves its budget.  
The Bank continues in part to be the Storting’s bank. 
A substantial change has taken place over the past decade in that the Supervisory Council 
shall no long submit a  report on its activities to the Ministry of Finance, but directly to the 
Storting. This is a partial reversal of the change to the Act that was made in 1949. 
In  my  judgement,  the  tasks  of  the  Supervisory  Council  could  be  broadened.  Among  other 
things, it should be able to play a greater role in appointments to the Executive Board and 
Bank  management,  for  example,  through  a  formal  right  to  make  recommendations.41  This 
could give the Supervisory Council an even greater sense of ownership over the organisation 
and strengthen their sense of commitment.  
In  central  banking  circles  it  is  easy  to  confuse  independence,  expertise  and  long-termism 
with  infallibility.42  Central  bank  independence  in  the  use  of  instruments  is  contingent  on 
central bank transparency and disclosure of the background for its decisions. This provides a 
basis for evaluating the Bank’s decisions.  
Moreover, the central bank is accountable.  
In Norway, the Ministry of Finance performs an annual evaluation of the conduct of monetary 
policy  in  a  separate  report.  Its  assessment  is  partly  based  on  a  report  by  an  independent 
expert group. The Governor of Norges Bank appears at a parliamentary hearing when the 
Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs works on the report. The discussion 
concludes with a debate in the Storting.  
Advisory role 
With new and clearly defined economic policy tasks, Norges Bank stepped back somewhat 
as economic policy advisor. For example, the Bank has discontinued its annual assessment 
of fiscal policy in what was at the time labelled “budget letters”, and we rarely express our 
views on official reports regarding economic issues.  
Norges  Bank  is  a  consultative  body  for  laws  and  regulations  affecting  the  stability  of  the 
financial system.43 Moreover, the Bank is obliged under the Act to inform the Ministry when in 
the opinion of the Bank, there is a need for measures related to monetary, credit or exchange 
rate policy to be taken by others than the Bank.  
                                                 
40   Helge Syrstad (2003): Sentralbankens uavhengighet [Central bank independence], Fagbokforlaget. 
41   In  a  different  context,  professor  Eivind  Smith  states  another  view  that  may  be  of  importance:  “It  can  be 
conceivably  argued  that  independence  [..]  is  possible  only  if  the  authority  to  appoint  persons  to  the 
“independent” body is delegated to bodies other than those the appointees are supposed to be independent 
of. For example, a body whose members are appointed by the King would not be “independent” of the King (or 
the  ministry).”  Source:  “The  constitutional  power  to  delegate  decision-making  authority  to  “independent” 
bodies”. Appendix 5 to NOU [Official Norwegian Report] 1997:19: Better privacy protection. 
42   We can refer to Norges Bank’s reputation survey. In an otherwise positive report, some respondents were of 
the view that Norges Bank is closed and somewhat unresponsive. See Press release 24 June 2010. 
43   See Section 3 of the Norges Bank Act. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 13
Financial stability 
A challenge for the central bank is that there is a gap between the instruments at the Bank’s 
disposal  in  the  area  of  financial  stability  and  the  existing  expectations  that  the  Bank  can 
ensure the stability of the financial system. If  liquidity dries up among banks in Norway or 
abroad, they are certain to turn to the central bank. The central bank acts as lender of last 
resort,  as  it  can  always  supply  liquidity  in  Norwegian  kroner.  Moreover,  the  central  bank 
holds  foreign  exchange  reserves  that  can  be  made  available  to  the  banks  in  critical 
situations. 
But we have no formal competence with regard to financial market regulation and prevention. 
What we can do is offer advice concerning regulation and set terms for banks’ loans from the 
central bank.  
In  1986,  Norges  Bank  provided  substantial  loans  to  the  banks  –  at  the  highest  around 
NOK 80 billion – to prevent a rise in money market rates after large-scale NOK purchases 
had been made in support of the krone.44 The loans, which were unsecured, were kept on 
Norges Bank’s balance sheet when solvency problems at the banks began in 1987. Norges 
Bank was later criticised for providing these loans. Although the criticism was misdirected, 
the loans did make it more difficult for the government to manage the banking crisis.45 
Today  the  Bank  no  longer  provides  unsecured  loans  and  we  have  gradually  tightened 
collateral requirements. 
Many banks rely heavily on short-term funding in international and domestic money markets. 
The  lesson  from  the  most  recent  financial  crisis  is  that  a  shortfall  in  foreign  funding  can 
weaken stability in the financial system in Norway, even if the banks’ financial position is not 
in jeopardy at the outset. The next step will therefore be not only to require collateral, but 
also impose requirements on our clients – the banks – to improve their funding strategies. 
Banks must not be given the scope to take on substantial liquidity risk in the belief or with the 
certainty that Norges Bank will intervene should foreign funding seize up. A market functions 
poorly in the long term with such hidden support. 
With  large  unsecured  loans,  Norges  Bank  ended  up  providing  income  support  in  one 
instance  in  the  1980s  when  a  savings  bank  experienced  solvency  problems.  The  support 
included a soft loan and the write-down of a loan. The measures were part of a broader bank 
rescue  package.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  immediately  submitted  a  report  to  the  Storting 
(Report  No.  24  (1989–90)  where  the  Ministry  of  Finance  wrote”..The  write-down  of  loans 
from  the  central  bank  may  […]  represent  an  active  use  of  central  government  funds  that 
should be deliberated in the Storting in advance”. The Standing Committee on Finance and 
Economic Affairs endorsed this view and the resolution received final approval only after the 
Storting had deliberated the matter.  
This delimitation of Norges Bank’s tasks is important. Norges Bank shall not provide grants 
or capital to the banks. During the financial crisis in August 2008, the banks’ short-term and 
medium-term funding seized up. Norges Bank provided short-term loans as is customary and 
natural for a central bank. At the same time, we took the initiative to put in place the swap 
arrangement,  whereby  banks  could  exchange  covered  bonds  (OMFs)  for  government 
securities.  This  went  through  the  government’s  balance  sheet  and  not  that  of  the  central 
                                                 
44   See  Chart  1  in  Karsten  Gerdrup  (2004):  “Norges  Bank’  role  in  the  event  of  liquidity  crises  in  the  financial 
sector.” Economic Bulletin no. 2/2005. 
45   For  a  discussion,  see  Tore  Jørgen  Hanisch,  Espen  Søilen  and  Gunhild  Ecklund  (1999):”Norsk  økonomisk 
politikk  i  det  20.  århundret.  Verdivalg  i  en  åpne  økonomi”.  [Norwegian  economic  policy  and  politics  in  the 
20th century.  Ethical choices in an open economy], Høyskoleforlaget, and Fritz Hodne  and Ola Honningdal 
Grytten  (2002):  “Norsk  økonomi  i  det  20.  århundret”  [The  Norwegian  economy  in  the  20th  century], 
Fagbokforlaget. 
14 
 BIS Review 154/2010
bank. The central bank did not provide long-term loans on a large scale.46 This distinguishes 
the management of the financial crisis in Norway from a number of other countries in that we 
are  of  the  view  that  it  is  appropriate  for  such  medium-term  financing  –  as  in  the  case  of 
solvency support – to be provided by the government and not Norges Bank, if the situation 
has  reached  a  point  where  this  is  necessary.47  The  measure  is  given  a  broad  democratic 
grounding  through  government  and  Storting  deliberations.  This  approach  also  serves  to 
counter the kind of criticism that was levelled at Norges Bank when it provided funding for 
banks in the mid-1980s.  
Financial  imbalances  ordinarily  build  up  over  a  long  period  before  they  trigger  a  crisis. 
Internationally,  measures  intended  to  prevent  systemic  risks  in  the  financial  sector  are 
usually referred to as macroprudential policy. 
The  government  authorities  should  primarily  use  structural  measures  to  dampen  self-
intensifying  forces  behind  credit  growth  and  rising  property  prices.  The  most  important 
measure will be to increase banks’ capital requirements.  
The  international  minimum  standard  for  banking  regulation  will  be  strengthened  under  the 
forthcoming  Basel  III  framework.  However,  we  note  that  some  countries  do  not  wish  to 
subject  their  banks  to  stringent  standards.  These  countries’  governments  are  more 
concerned that their banks have framework conditions at least as favourable as competitors 
from other countries. This attitude leads to a competition to weaken the requirements as far 
as  possible.  The  minimum  requirements  will  not  be  lower  than  the  level  all  the  major 
countries will agree to. 
Given such minimum requirements, there is every reason to set stricter national rules. The 
Norwegian authorities have been doing this for a number of years, including requiring banks 
to hold more pure equity than most other countries have done.  
Banks object that higher capital standards make it more expensive to operate and will make 
borrowing  more  expensive  for  households  and  enterprises,  in  addition  to  reducing  the 
competitiveness  of  Norwegian  banks.  But  that  a  bank  should  be  at  a  competitive 
disadvantage if it is not allowed to  be as financially weak as another bank is hard to take 
seriously. This line of thinking presupposes that the government will bail out the banks. But 
we  should  not  accept  this  supposition.  Higher  capital  ratios  will  make  banks  less  risky  for 
shareholders,  creditors  and  the  government.  Less  risk  means  that  banks’  creditors  will 
require a lower interest rate.48  
In  addition  to  higher  permanent  capital  standards  and  other  structural  measures,  it  is  also 
appropriate to use discretionary measures when systemic risk increases above normal.  
Under Basel III, higher capital requirements for banks can be required in the event of rising 
lending  growth  and  surging  property  prices,  see  Chart  4.  But  other  measures  are  also 
possible.  Finanstilsynet  (the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway),  for  example,  sets 
limits  on  the  size  of  a  single  loan  in  relation  to  the  collateral  provided.  Another  possible 
measure is to set minimum requirements for the risk weights banks can use in their internal 
model-based approach to calculating capital adequacy.  
                                                 
46   As an extraordinary measure, in connection with the establishment of the swap facility, 2- and 3-year fixed-
rate  loans  specially  designed  for  small  banks  were  allotted.  This  was  extensively  explained  in  the  Storting 
documents. 
47   See also Peter Stella: “Minimizing Monetary Policy”. Paper presented at the Annual General Meeting of the 
Bank for International Settlements in June 2009. http://www.bis.org/events/conf100624/stellapaper.pdf 
48   The mechanism in known in economic theory, see the Modigliani-Miller theorem. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 15
 In other countries the procedures are now being revised to allow central banks to participate 
when such discretionary measures are implemented. 
In  Norway,  Finanstilsynet  is  highly  competent  in  the  oversight  of  individual  institutions. 
However,  Norges  Bank  has  more  competence  in  macroeconomic  matters,  given  its  tasks. 
The  central  bank  also  has  an  informational  advantage  as  we  are  the  bankers’  bank  and 
operate in foreign and domestic markets. The division of responsibility should be based on 
the  advantages  specific  to  each  organisation.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  should  define  the 
objective of macroprudential supervision and delegate its use. The Ministry must also assess 
whether the objective has been achieved. 
One alternative is to delegate responsibility for implementing discretionary measures against 
systemic risk to Norges Bank. Another is procedural requirements for using Norges Bank’s 
expertise appropriately. The Bank may, for example, have the right and a duty to issue an 
opinion. Finanstilsynet should in principle have to follow the advice provided by the Bank. If 
the advice is not followed, an explanation must be provided and made publicly available.  
In  order  to  ensure  a  disciplined  decision-making  process,  the  relationship  to  the  other 
components  of  economic  policy  must  be  clear.  Macroprudential  supervision  must  seek  to 
reduce systemic risk and take monetary policy and fiscal policy as a given.  
The objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation and to contribute to dampening 
fluctuations in output and employment. Monetary policy takes into account that pronounced 
movements in credit growth and house prices can feed through to inflation and output, but is 
not geared directly to stabilising the financial system.  
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. 
Norges  Bank  is  no  longer  in  search  of  a  role.  We  no  longer  take  part  in  corporatist 
processes. Norges Bank now has a less prominent role as advisor. 
We do not believe in economic fine-tuning, but we do have instruments that can ensure low 
and stable inflation over time. 
Macroprudential supervision is now being moulded. Norges Bank must critically evaluate the 
funding  structures  of  banks  that  have  access  to  our  lending  facilities.  We  must  develop 
16 
 BIS Review 154/2010
instruments that can induce banks to limit their short-term borrowing in domestic and foreign 
markets. 
There is a strong sense at Norges Bank that we are being put to effective use today. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 17
