Jan F Qvigstad: What is a useful central bank? 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at Norges Bank’s Symposium “What is a useful central bank?”, Oslo, 18 November 2010. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  this  symposium.  I  would  like  to  extend  a 
special welcome to those of you who have travelled a long distance to be here today.  
November  probably  does  not  do  justice  to  Oslo.  To  do  that,  we  would  have  held  the 
symposium in February or March, to show you the winter landscape, or in June or July, so 
that you might experience light summer nights. 
But November it is, and not without reason. You all know that the Governor of Norges Bank, 
Svein Gjedrem, will soon have served his two terms. The governor will step down at the end 
of the year.  
The Governor has always believed that too much attention is paid to persons and there is too 
little focus on the position that the person holds. By organising this symposium on a theme of 
keen interest to the Governor, we have tried to combine the strictly academic with respect for 
the way the Governor has filled his role. 
Our  chosen  theme  is  “What  is  a  useful  central  bank?”  But  before  we  can  answer  that 
question, we need to answer the question, “What is a central bank?” This may sound like a 
naive question, especially coming from someone with twenty-five years’ work experience at 
Norges Bank. In recent years, however, I have begun to reflect on the question of what a 
central bank really is. There are two reasons for this reflection.  
First I naturally have an interest in the history of Norges Bank. If we look back in time, for 
example,  to  the  establishment  of  Norges  Bank  in  1816,  a  central  bank  was  something 
completely different from what it is today. History shows that over time, central banks’ core 
tasks have changed. Or have they really? 
Second,  recent  years’  events  in  financial  markets  have  shined  a  spotlight  on  new  central 
bank  tasks.  The  handling  of  the  financial  crisis  also  demonstrates  that  the  definition  of  a 
central bank varies across countries and regions. Or are these tasks really new?  
Stefano Ugolini, a central bank historian at the Graduate Institute in Geneva, has taught me 
that central banks’ balance sheets reveal a lot about what a central bank is. Who does the 
bank trade with? What instruments does it trade? With this as our starting point, I shall take 
you on a brief journey back in time.  
What is a central bank? 
After  the  Napoleonic Wars,  Norway  gained  its  independence  following  a  five-hundred-year 
union with Denmark. The country got its own Constitution on 17 May 1814. According to the 
Constitution, the Norwegian parliament was “to supervise the monetary affairs”.  
When the major powers used force to implement the provision of the Treaty of Kiel uniting 
Norway with Sweden, the Constitution needed to be adapted to the new realpolitik. However, 
the parliament managed to insert a new article in the November version of the constitution. It 
established  an  independent  central  bank,  ensuring  that  Norway  would  have  its  own 
independent monetary system.  
The actual Norges Bank Act was not established until 1816. The first deposits were recorded 
in the books in 1817. At the time there were no functioning banks in Norway. However, there 
was  manufacturing,  consumption,  barter,  investment  and  trade.  There  was  also  a 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 1
rudimentary  credit  market  and  monetary  system.  Commercial  credit  was  available,  savers 
met  investors  and  bills  of  exchange  were  discounted.  But  these  markets  were  rather 
inefficient: their margins were high, the supply of credit meagre and uncertainty high.  
Most activities associated nowadays with a monetary system took place in the “unregulated 
markets,” to use the current term. Accounts were kept, but not always in the numéraire we 
think of today. For example, this is described in the local history of Karlsøy and Helgøy, up in 
northern Norway, where at that time accounts were sometimes kept in commodities such as 
cod liver oil, saithe or flour. 
However,  one  of  these  unregulated  markets  functioned  even  more  poorly  than  the  others, 
namely  the  long-term  credit  market.  For  that  reason,  Norges  Bank’s  initial  activity  was  to 
enter this market. Norges Bank provided loans secured by real property. At its birth, the Bank 
was, to use current terminology again, “market maker of last resort”.  
A private banking system gradually took shape. The first savings bank was founded in 1822 
and the first commercial bank in 1848. In 1852 the first state mortgage bank was established. 
These  developments  allowed  Norges  Bank  to  withdraw  from  the  mortgage  market  and 
concentrate instead on providing liquidity to the short-term money market. However, it was 
not until the 1860s that the Bank’s predominant task was supplying short-term liquidity. 
Much digging and research remains to answer the question of how Norges Bank dealt with 
the challenges during the 19th century. So far, scholars have not found that the Bank took 
emergency  action  when  a  financial  crisis  affected  Norway  in  1847.  But  when  the  crisis  hit 
again ten years later, the Bank sent silver abroad to Hamburg, which was the financial centre 
of  the  Norwegian  merchants.  This  support  was  important  to  enable  Norwegian  industry  to 
carry out international payments and have their bills of exchange discounted.  
In  1892  a  new  Act  was  passed  whereby  Norges  Bank  became  the  bankers’  bank.  As  the 
Governor mentioned in his speech yesterday, this made Norges Bank a modern central bank 
in a legal sense.  
In 1899, Kristiania (as Oslo was called at the time) experienced dramatic fall in house prices. 
The  financial  bubble  contained  all  the  classical  elements,  such  as  a  surging  credit  growth 
and house price inflation. Norges Bank had to carry out several rescue operations to save 
banks that were in trouble. 1899 was probably the first year the Bank functioned as “lender of 
last resort”.  
If  you  take  a  walk  around  the  neighbourhood,  you  will  see  the  physical  aftermath  of  this 
bubble.  You  will  find  buildings  from  the  1890s  and  from  the  1920s  onward,  but  virtually 
nothing built in the intervening period. 
The past years we have again been in troubled waters. In September 2008 the turbulence in 
financial  markets  developed  into  a  full-blown  global  crisis.  Money  markets  seized  up. 
Confidence  between  banks  vanished.  Liquidity  dried  up,  interest  rates  rose  sharply  and 
equity prices fell. The long-term lending market dried up.  
International developments were also felt in Norway. Up until then we could almost take a 
well-functioning  money  market  for  granted  in  this  country.  But  in  the  autumn  of  2008  the 
money  market  stopped  functioning  and  medium-term  funding  for  banks  was  problematic. 
Just as in 1816, Norges Bank acted as “market maker of last resort”.  
And  so,  the  history  of  my  own  central  bank,  expanding  the  window  from  25  years  to  200 
years, does not provide an unambiguous answer to the question of what defines a central 
bank.  
But even if we look at central banks in other countries, there are no clear answers. The way 
the  financial  crisis  was  handled  varied  across  countries.  In  many  places,  for  instance, 
substantial portions of the crisis measures remain on the central bank’s balance sheet. Here 
in Norway, the crisis measures relating to banks’ medium-term funding are on the balance 
sheet of the Ministry of Finance.  
2 
 BIS Review 154/2010
The  financial  crisis  also  demonstrated  the  need  for  macroprudential  policies.  But  who  will 
have responsibility for these policies? The framework for macroprudential policies is likely to 
differ from one country to another. The Governor touched on these questions in yesterday’s 
speech.  
To sum up: Perhaps my question was not so naive after all. The examples above show that 
there  is  not  an  obvious  answer  to  “what  defines  a  central  bank”.  Nevertheless,  some  key 
principles may apply, both historically and across national borders:  
 
As early as 1873 Walter Bagehot1 formulated the well known general principles for 
the role of central banks. He said:  
“To avert panic, central banks should lend early and freely (without limit), to solvent 
firms, against good collateral, and at “high rates” 
The events in 2008 showed us that the lender of last resort function continues to be 
of the utmost relevance and importance.  
The  financial  crisis  also  illustrated  that  central  banks  have  an  important  role  in 
creating and providing liquidity.  
In addition, the establishment of Norges Bank in 1816 and the Bank’s intervention in 
the money markets in 2008 show that central banks also have an important role as 
“market maker of last resort”.  
    Searching for answers 
Even  if  we  can  provide  some  general  answers  to  the  question  of  what  has  characterised 
central banking activities, we must continue to search for answers to what central banks are 
and what makes them useful.  
Norges Bank will celebrate its two hundred year anniversary in 2016. We plan to write three 
books: The History of Norges Bank will be written by historians, and The Monetary History of 
Norway  will  be  written  by  economists.  The  third  book  from  the  project  will  offer  an 
international, historical perspective on central banking, and has been given the working title 
What is a useful central bank? Norway will only be mentioned in this book if our experiences 
contribute to the international understanding of the question at hand.  
This last question was also the topic of the Governor’s speech yesterday and the theme of 
today’s  symposium.  He  pointed  out  that  a  useful  central  bank  must  have  a  clear mandate 
with  relevant  objectives  and  instruments.  The  central  bank  must  also  seek  to  reach  these 
objectives in a manner that ensures confidence. 
Arranging this symposium on a theme that interests the Governor is our way of honouring 
him after having served his two periods.  
Today we begin with a historical perspective on central banking. Professor Bordo will offer 
some  long-term  perspectives,  while  professor  Toniolo  will  discuss  some  experiences  from 
central  banks’  challenges  in  the  interwar  period.  Later,  Governor  Aziz  will  address  current 
challenges for central banks in emerging market economies. After lunch Philip Turner from 
BIS and  Governor Ingves will share some of their insights from the theory and practice of 
central banking. The day will conclude with a panel discussion chaired by professor Gerlach, 
on central banks’ future challenges.  
We are fortunate to have such prominent speakers here with us today. I hope they inspire 
our further research on the topic “What is a useful central bank?”. 
 
                                                
1   Walter Bagehot (1873): “Lombard Street: A description of the Money Market”. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 3
