Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The development of Islamic finance 
Welcoming address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Global Islamic Finance Forum 2010, Kuala Lumpur, 25 October 2010. 
 These  are  defining  moments  in  the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  In  this  current  global 
economic  environment  of  extraordinary  challenges  and  uncertainties,  Islamic  finance  is 
becoming very much a part of the journey to bring the world towards a new level of stability, 
prosperity and international integration that is inclusive. Whilst Islamic finance has come a 
long  way  and  is  set  to  continue  its  growth  trajectory,  new  capabilities  and  strategies  are 
needed  to  tap  the  immense  opportunities  from  the  growing  internationalization  of  Islamic 
finance. 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  and  honour  to  welcome  you  this  morning  to  this  Global  Islamic 
Finance Forum (GIFF) 2010. Allow me to express our gratitude to Duli Yang Teramat Mulia 
Raja Dr. Nazrin ibni Sultan Azlan Shah for gracing and addressing our gathering today, and 
to the Honourable Prime Minister of Malaysia, Yang Amat Berhormat Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib 
bin Tun Haji Abdul Razak for officiating this important forum.  
Since  the  dawn  of  this  21st  century,  Islamic  finance  has  undergone  the  most  dramatic 
transformation to its landscape. This period in the history of Islamic finance is remarkable for 
its  many  significant  milestones  and  for  the  rapid  growth  that  has  been  sustained.  An 
important development in this decade has been the growing significance of the international 
dimension  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  increased  role  in  the  international  financial  system. 
Islamic  finance  has,  during  this  period,  been  expanding  steadily  at  a  double  digit  pace  of 
growth.  The  total  Islamic  financial  assets  size  is  estimated  to  be  more  than  US$1  trillion. 
Such dynamic growth has been driven by two key factors: firstly, the pace of innovation in 
Islamic  finance  has  been  able  to  provide  the  extensive  range  of  financial  solutions  to 
households,  businesses  and  governments  with  attractive  pricing  and  innovative  structures; 
and  secondly,  the  resilience  derived  from  its  inherent  features  which  has  provided  the 
foundations for financial stability in the Islamic financial system.  
The advancement that has been achieved in the sukuk market in particular, testifies to the 
ability of Islamic finance in meeting the requirements of today’s differentiated demands of the 
modern economy. The Sukuk epitomises the very ingenuity in Islamic finance. This important 
segment  of  Islamic  finance  has  seen  a  dynamic  stream  of  cutting  edge  products  and 
structures. Sukuk is distinct in its role as a platform upon which international inter-linkages 
are fostered. The sukuk market has demonstrated its ability to effectively intermediate funds 
across  borders  and  thus  contribute  towards  the  efficient  allocation  of  funds  in  the 
international  financial  system.  On  the  supply  side,  it  has  drawn  the  participation  from 
corporations, sovereigns and multilateral agencies. On the demand side, it has now become 
part  of  mainstream  asset  allocation  strategies 
investors  seeking  greater  risk 
diversification. Today, the sukuk market has become an important avenue for international 
fund  raising  and  investment  activities  with  the  sukuk  becoming  a  truly  global  product, 
generating significant cross-border financial flows.  
The  internationalization  of  Islamic  finance  is  also  evidenced  by  the  growing  presence  of 
Islamic  financial  institutions  that  now  operate  beyond  their  own  jurisdictions  and  the 
increased  number  of  international  foreign  financial  institutions  that  offer  Islamic  financial 
products and services. Indeed, increasingly, Islamic finance has become part of the growth 
strategies  of  a  growing  number  of  the  global  financial  players.  In  addition,  the  traditionally 
domestic-focused 
institutions  are  now  venturing  abroad.  These 
developments  have  resulted  in  the  increased  international  participation  in  Islamic  financial 
markets. New horizons are also fast emerging, as seen by the concrete efforts for legislative 
financial 
Islamic 
for 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 1
and  regulatory  changes  in  several  non-traditional  markets  to  facilitate  the  introduction  of 
Islamic finance in these markets.  
The rapid internationalization in Islamic finance has also been underpinned by the massive 
flow of knowledge, ideas, technology and people across borders, a process which fosters a 
greater international understanding on the practices in Islamic finance. This is taking place 
through the strong international cooperation in the area of human capital development and 
the development of global ancillary service providers that specialize in Islamic finance. This 
has  resulted  in  the  proliferation  of  programmes  and  certifications  that  focus  on  Islamic 
finance  around  the  world  and  the  development  of  Islamic  indices,  information  repositories, 
and the provision of professional consultancy services. More recently, there has also been 
an  increased  global  engagement  in  Shariah  matters  among  scholars,  practitioners  and 
regulators  through  international  platforms.  This  is  a  remarkable  achievement,  given  that 
much  of  these  developments  have  taken  place  amidst  the  tumultuous  global  financial 
environment. 
In parallel with the rapid internationalization of Islamic finance, this recent decade has seen 
the  increased  emphasis  being  given  to  the  development  of  the  international  financial 
infrastructure relating to financial stability in Islamic finance. This is another important area in 
which significant milestones have been achieved. In 2002, we saw the establishment of the 
Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) as the international prudential standard setting body 
for the Islamic finance industry. The work of the IFSB has been crucial to support the orderly 
global  expansion  of  Islamic  finance  thus  ensuring  a  cohesive  cross-border  regulatory 
framework and international best practices for the Islamic financial system.  
A more recent initiative to support the role of the IFSB in promoting the financial stability of 
Islamic finance is the landmark establishment of the Islamic Financial Stability Forum (IFSF). 
Formed with the mandate to serve as a platform for information exchange and engagement 
between the authorities responsible for financial stability in the Islamic financial system, the 
Forum has a major role in promoting effective cross-border cooperation, an aspect which has 
become  crucial  in  the  context  of  maintaining  financial  stability  in  a  rapidly  globalizing 
marketplace. Today, another important milestone is being achieved with the establishment of 
the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM),  a  liquidity  management 
infrastructure to enhance the capacity of Islamic finance in facilitating efficient cross–border 
flows. This represents another major breakthrough for the Islamic financial services industry. 
[  It  will  enable  more  effective  liquidity  management  not  only  for  the  Islamic  financial 
institutions but also for the management of Islamic financial portfolios.] This development is 
also significant as it demonstrates an international collaboration among the Central Banks. 
The  greater  collaboration  among  regulators  seen  in  this  decade  cumulatively  serve  to 
contribute towards the continued resilience of the global Islamic financial system. 
The foundations for the sustainable development of Islamic finance has raised the potential 
for  the  industry  to  have  a  greater  role  in  the  global  landscape.  As  we  usher  into  a  new 
decade,  it  is  timely  for  the  industry  to  reflect  on  its  existing  strengths  and  build  new 
capabilities to create new engines of growth in this next wave of market opportunities that are 
before  us.  This  Global  Islamic  Finance  Forum  (GIFF)  2010  is  designed  to  discuss  these 
potentials. Following the success of the inaugural GIFF in 2007, GIFF 2010 has drawn more 
than  1000  participants  from  across  the  globe  for  the  opportunity  to  have  meaningful  and 
catalytic engagement on issues concerning the future of global Islamic finance. This year’s 
gathering is taking place in the aftermath of the worst global financial and economic crisis of 
the  modern  era.  Amidst  this  changing  global  landscape,  Islamic  finance  must  continue  to 
evolve to address the emerging issues and new challenges and leverage on the emerging 
opportunities in this increasingly more globalised environment.  
With  the  theme  “Islamic  finance:  Opportunities  for  tomorrow”,  the  Global  Islamic  Finance 
Forum 2010 follows from the massive global interest and the widening sea of opportunities in 
Islamic finance that has come from its growing internationalization and global expansion. The 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2010
Forum  aims  to  provide  an  opportunity  for  the  global  Islamic  finance  communities  to  share 
experiences and discuss key developments in Islamic finance and to explore the way forward 
for the international Islamic financial system. The Forum will feature plenary talks and multi-
track  sessions,  which  include  the  Regulator’s  Forum,  the  International  Shariah  Forum  and 
the  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Workshop.  On  the  side  of  this  Forum,  the  inaugural 
IILM Board  Meeting  will  be  convened  to  pave  the  way  for  its  operationalisation.  Another 
important  meeting  taking  place  is  the  ISRA  Council  of  Scholars  Meeting  which  gathers 
eminent  Shariah  scholars  from  around  the  world.  This  gathering  of  minds  will  importantly 
contribute  towards  greater  global  understanding  and  harmonisation  in  the  field  of  Shariah.  
A series of high-level meetings and several important signings of MoUs will also be taking 
place, highlighting increased international cooperation. Also taking place in conjunction with 
this Forum is the ceremony for the inaugural “The Royal Award for Islamic Finance” under 
the auspices of Bank Negara Malaysia and the Securities Commission, to commemorate the 
contribution of the world’s most outstanding individuals in global Islamic finance.  
Let  me  conclude  by  taking  this  opportunity  to  record  our  appreciation  to  the  many 
distinguished speakers for their contribution to GIFF 2010. Let me also once again, express 
our  deep  gratitude  to the  Prime  Minister,  Yang  Amat  Berhormat,  Dato’  Sri  Mohd Najib  bin 
Tun  Haji  Abdul  Razak  and  to  Duli  Yang  Teramat  Mulia  Raja  Dr.  Nazrin  ibni  Sultan  Azlan 
Shah for gracing this Forum.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 3
