Christian Noyer: The role of central bankers in today’s global capital 
markets 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  50th  General  Assembly  and 
Annual Meeting of the World Federation of Exchanges, Paris, 12 October 2010. 
 In May 2009, the ECB initiated a covered bond purchase programme and, in May 2010, it 
embarked  on  rounds  of  interventions  in  the  public  and  private  debt  securities  markets, 
actually the sovereign debt market, with a view to, and I quote, “ensure depth and liquidity in 
those market segments which are dysfunctional”. 
In fact, since 2008, the active presence of almost all central banks on a wide range of market 
segments  could  suggest  that  direct  market  intervention  has  become  the  general  modus 
operandi of central banks. This is far from being the case and I would like to focus my talk 
today on the following two ideas:  
 
 
Central banks require efficient markets to fulfil their mandates. 
This can lead to massive direct interventions in markets but these interventions must 
remain exceptional. 
In order to examine the role of central banks in markets, we should start off by considering 
their  mandate,  which  not  only  covers  the  tasks  themselves  but  the  way  in  which  they  are 
performed, i.e. in keeping with the principle of independence that governs them. 
Since this is not the main topic of our discussion today, I will simply give a brief reminder of 
the facts. 
 
The  role  of  central  banks  in  markets  stems  from  their  objectives,  the  primary  one 
incontestably being to ensure price stability. But this is not their sole objective. As 
we  know,  the  Fed  operates  under  a  “multiple  mandate”  that  is,  and  I  quote,  “to 
promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate 
long-term  interest  rates”  whereas  most  other  central  banks,  and  in  particular  the 
ECB, have a “hierarchical mandate” that places the price stability objective above all 
other  policy  goals.  More  specifically,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  states  that  “without 
prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  the  ESCB  shall  support  the  general 
economic policies in the Community with a view to contributing to the achievement 
of the objectives of the Community”. In that perspective, one of the objectives of the 
Community that we must support is to “promote solidarity among Member States”.  
In order to fulfil its mandate, central banks must be credible and thus independent. If 
economic agents have the least doubt or the least suspicion that the institution might 
have an incentive to surprise them by allowing high inflation, they might adjust their 
behaviour as a precaution and thus “create” higher inflation by increasing their wage 
claims, thereby triggering a wage-price spiral; or by demanding greater returns on 
their  savings,  which  pushes  up  long-term  interest  rates  and  weighs  on  growth. 
Independence, which is particularly well established among euro area central banks, 
prevents this problem; as you know, the Treaty specifies that the Eurosystem and 
the members of its decision-making bodies may not take instructions, in particular 
from governments of a Member State.  
 In practice, central banks achieve their objectives through the performance of tasks, notably 
implementing monetary policy. To do this, we use our main policy instrument, the setting of 
the key interest rate, which is the very short-term interest rate at which commercial banks 
obtain  refinancing  from  the  central  bank.  Monetary  policy  impulses  are  transmitted  to  the 
economy via the interest rate channel in conjunction with the bank lending channel that is of 
particular importance in the euro area economies, which have high levels of intermediation.  
We know the traditional workings of these transmission channels: the central bank sets the 
very short-term risk-free rate and then the markets determine, for all maturities and issuers, 
the  value  of  assets  based  on  their  expectations  concerning  the  future  path  of  this  interest 
rate and their assessment of risks: solvency of debtors, liquidity of assets, and uncertainty 
surrounding  all  parameters.  The  markets  construct  in  this  way  a  set  of  yield  curves  that 
establish the supply and demand for financing balance on financial markets and bank lending 
markets.  
In a world in which the credibility of the central bank to keep inflation low is well anchored, 
the solvency of most agents is taken for granted and markets are well organised and hence 
liquid,  interest  rates  remain  low  across  the  whole  maturity  spectrum  and  valuations  high; 
changes in key rates do not affect inflation expectations that remain low and changes in real 
interest rates allow monetary policy decisions to be effectively transmitted to the economy.  
In normal times, interactions between central banks and markets are therefore important but 
fairly unintrusive: 
 
Central  banks  influence  markets  through  changing  the  level  of  short-term  interest 
rates;  they  explain  the  rationale  behind  their  interest  rate  decisions  in  order  to 
improve  the  quality  of  economic  agents’  expectations;  they  put  in  place  technical 
mechanisms  to  promote  liquidity  on  certain  key  market  segments,  for  example  by 
establishing the list of assets eligible as collateral in their refinancing operations or 
by setting up a discount window that ensures that banks with unexpected temporary 
requirements can refinance themselves.  
While markets listen to central banks, central banks also listen to markets since the 
price  formation  in  markets  reflects  agents’  expectations,  in  particular  concerning 
inflation,  and  their  assessment  of  risks;  central  banks  require  such  information  to 
make their analyses and take their monetary policy decisions.  
 The  smooth  functioning  of  markets  and  financial  stability  are  therefore  essential  for  the 
effective transmission of monetary policy. 
 
If the shape of the yield curve is evolving regardless of monetary policy decisions, if 
risk premia are uncorrelated with fundamentals, if market liquidity dries up, then the 
interest rate channel ceases to function.  
When this affects banks’ funding, in particular via a freezing of the interbank market, 
the bank lending channel seizes up.  
 In  such  circumstances,  central  banks  must  turn  to  non-standard  measures  such  as  direct 
aggressive  interventions  to  ensure  that  their  monetary  policy  decisions  are  effectively 
transmitted and that markets keep ticking over.  
Needless  to  say,  the  recent  period  has  seen  many  such  incidents  as  well  as  the 
implementation  of  many  non-standard  measures.  Among  the  measures  currently  in  place, 
some  are  based  on  “quantitative  easing”,  which  involves  the  purchasing  of  securities 
primarily  with  a  view  to  generating  excess  liquidity  that  in  turn  moves  into  all  market 
segments  and  fosters  a  better  refinancing  of  the  economy;  others  are  based  on  “credit 
easing” and aim to restore the functioning of certain particularly disrupted market segments. 
Seen  from  another  angle,  certain  policies  aim  to  restore  the  smooth  functioning  of  the 
interest  rate  channel  by  directly  impacting  the  yield  curve,  others  aim  to  restore  the  bank 
lending  channel  by  ensuring  that  banks  can  obtain  funding  beyond  the  very  short-term 
maturities  to  which  central  banks  usually  confine  themselves.  In  all  events,  central  banks 
stand in for failing market participants or markets.  
Since 2008, we have seen the Fed come to the rescue of the US commercial paper market 
and the mortgage backed securities market; we have seen the Bank of England purchase in 
the  space  of  a  few  months  GBP  200  billion in government  securities, representing  around 
15% of the United Kingdom’s GDP; the Eurosystem, for its part, has conducted massive one-
year  refinancing  operations  with  euro  area  banks  and  has  kick  started  the  covered  bond 
market, via its EUR 60 billion purchase programme. Next May, it also start intervening in the 
government  securities  market.  This  calls  for  further  clarification  in  the  light  of  my  earlier 
analysis because its motives are highly illustrative of the interactions between markets and 
central banks.  
What was the situation in May and how has it changed? 
 
Price stability was not and is still not in question in the euro area; following a period 
in  which  prices  declined,  largely  due  to  developments  in  energy  prices,  we  are 
steadily  returning  to  a  configuration  that  is  more  consistent  with  our  definition  of 
stability, i.e. price increases below, but close to, 2%. However, all indicators have 
shown continuously, since the beginning of the year, that the upside risks to inflation 
are  very  limited.  The  Commission  published  for  example  in  early  May  euro  area 
inflation  forecasts  of  1.5%  for  2010  and  1.7%  for  2011.  ECB  inflation  forecasts 
published in early September project inflation at 1.6% in 2010 and 1.7% in 2011.  
Euro  area  countries  have  taken  rapid  and  significant  steps  to  bring  their  public 
finances back into balance and going forward to restore the competitiveness of their 
economies. This is clearly the case for countries whose debt markets have been the 
most affected over the past months.  
Yet,  in  May,  financial  markets  started  to  seize  up  again,  admittedly  in  a  slightly 
different  way  than  that  seen  in  2008,  but  with  the  same  potentially  disastrous 
consequences, that is to say a drying up of financing for the economy. In 2008, the 
financial  system  was  badly  impacted  by  the  subprime  crisis  and  the  failure  of 
Lehman  Brothers  that  brought  transactions  to  a  standstill  as  market  participants 
realised that any bank, no matter how big, can fail especially since the exact amount 
of exposure to subprime risk of all institutions were not fully known. In the May 2010 
episode, the same dynamics were at work: the different investors started to believe 
that euro area countries could default on their debt, and therefore stopped lending to 
these  countries  or  their  banks,  or  to  any  banks  with  possible  exposure  to  these 
countries and, finally, as a precaution, ceased all lending activity.  
  This situation called for rapid and decisive action by the ECB because: 
 
We cannot implement monetary policy in dislocated markets that do not effectively 
allocate the liquidity that we inject or that radically modify the effects of our monetary 
policy by offering interest rates that are inconsistent with our key rates.  
We  therefore  took  a  series  of  measures  aimed  at  immediately  restoring  the  situation  by 
dealing with all the problems within our sphere of competence and, in particular, we decided 
to  intervene  on  securities  markets  whose  abnormal  functioning  was  jeopardising  the 
implementation of monetary policy and financial stability. In this case, we targeted sovereign 
debt markets because they determine the financing conditions of the country’s other issuers. 
When  sovereign  debt  markets  cease  to  function,  the  financing  needs  of  the  country  as  a 
whole cannot be met.  
This type of intervention is not a quantitative easing operation since no particular amount is 
set beforehand and all the liquidity provided through the purchase of securities is sterilised in 
the interbank market via term deposits offered to banks. Neither is it a credit easing operation 
targeting a particular type of agent ; government securities are not purchased in the primary 
market and the securities in question may be issued by borrowers such as Greece that has 
almost stopped issuing debt due to the mechanism in place to ensure its financing by euro 
area  countries  and  the  IMF.  It  was  simply  a  measure  to  restore  the  monetary  policy 
transmission channels via the debt markets.  
I  believe  that  recent  episodes  clearly  highlight  what  the  markets  may  expect  from  central 
banks, that is to say resolute action to deflate positive and negative asset price bubbles if 
they  interfere  with  monetary  policy  transmission  channels.  Each  situation  may  call  for  an 
appropriate response and we now know that this includes massive and direct interventions in 
markets, to some extent similar to foreign exchange interventions. It is plain that this type of 
action  has  no  constraints  in  terms  of  amounts  or  timeframes;  such  amounts  are  unlimited 
because central banks can absorb the liquidity injected and they inherently have no liquidity 
problems in their currency. Moreover, I believe that the fact that central banks have shown 
that they are able to take such action is in itself likely to limit the emergence of asset price 
disruptions  by  limiting  speculation.  Some  recent  modest  purchases  under  our  Securities 
Market  Programme  have  acted  as  a  strong  reminder  that  we  were  still  monitoring  very 
closely the evolution of key markets.  
But this does not mean that markets and market participants should always expect central 
banks  to  make  such  interventions.  Similar  to  its  lender  of  last  resort  function,  the  role  of 
buyer of last resort that central banks can take on must not extend to insolvent issuers and 
must not, at the risk of causing a very dangerous moral hazard, be systematic each time a 
problem arises. Such interventions must result, as rapidly as possible, in a return to normal 
market functioning, which is the only way to ensure a truly efficient allocation of capital and 
which enables us to determine economic agents’ expectations.  
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
