Jens Thomsen: Report on the Danish economy 
Statement by Mr Jens Thomsen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the meeting 
of the Danish Economic Council, Copenhagen, 26 October 2010. 
 Thank you for an interesting report. 
The  report  is  based  on  the  revised  national  accounts  for  the  1st  half  of  the  year,  so  the 
forecast deviates from forecasts published by Danmarks Nationalbank in September and of 
the Ministry of Finance in August. 
In  addition,  a  choice  has  been  made  to  the  effect  that  the  higher-than-planned  public 
consumption  in  2010  must  be  counterbalanced  in  2011.  This  will  result  in  weak 
developments in 2011. It is, of course, debatable whether the decline of 1.0 per cent in public 
consumption in 2011 is realistic. 
The  housing  price  model  seems  to  be  very  simplified  –  based  on  the  trend  in  real  cash 
prices. This can provide an indication, but there seems to be a need for further development 
of the housing price model. 
The  surpluses  in  2005–2008  –  of  around  4–5  per  cent  of  GDP  for  public  finances  –  have 
been  replaced  by  a  deficit  of  the  same  magnitude  in  2010,  and  the  report  concludes  that 
consolidation  should  take  place  from  2011.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  supports  this  view.  
A tightening will limit the accumulation of debt. 
One element of such consolidation is that growth in public consumption must not be higher 
than planned. It is therefore important to ensure that local authorities have sufficient incentive 
to observe the agreements. 
Bank taxes as proposed for regulation must be of considerable size to have any impact. It 
should be noted that “uncertain financing” can be difficult to define. European solutions may 
be hard to find due to national differences in bank funding. 
For quite a while, wage increases have been higher in Denmark than in the euro area. 
At the same time, productivity growth has been weak in Denmark. 
The report provides an analysis of productivity developments. 
Denmark’s performance is particularly poor when it comes to TFP (total factor productivity). 
Among  other  things,  the  report  points  to  a  relatively  large  proportion  of  people  with  high 
educations being employed in the public sector. Furthermore, Denmark has a low proportion 
of people with science degrees, who are more oriented towards the private sector. 
This is still somewhat of a puzzle, but the report presents new insights which may help to 
solve the puzzle. 
This is my last meeting in The Economic Council. While I have been a member, there have 
been 45 meetings, most of which I have attended. The reports have provided in-depth – and 
occasionally  somewhat  lengthy  –  treatment  of  the  issues  on  the  agenda.  There  was  one 
report, however, that I was not too pleased about. Discussions in the Council have only to a 
limited extent been interactive, but their scope has depended on the immediate relevance of 
the topics. GATT negotiations spurred less interest than labour market issues. 
The  section  on  current  economic  policy  has  always  attracted  attention  and  has  naturally 
been the most widely discussed section. Soon, The Economic Council will be celebrating its 
50th anniversary. This will be an occasion to note that the Council has played a useful role 
and contributed significantly to the economic debate. 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 1
