Bandid Nijathaworn: Macroprudential policies and capital flows – 
managing under the new globalization 
Remarks  by  Mr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Conference  on  Macroprudential  Policies,  organised  by  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC) 
and the International Monetary Fond (IMF), Shanghai, 18 October 2010. 
 Thank you Chair,  
First, let me thank the PBC and the IMF for the invitation. It is an honour to be here, and to 
be given the opportunity to share my view on this panel.  
Given  time  limitations,  and  the  fact  that  capital  flows  are  important  developments  in  the 
region  at  this  time,  I  want  to  use  this  opportunity  to  discuss  three  issues.  The  first  is  the 
context of the current capital flows to Asia. The second is managing capital inflows and the 
role of macroprudential policies, where I will draw on Thailand’s recent experience. And the 
third  is  my  view  on  what  we  need  to  do  to  deal  more  effectively  with  the  capital  flows 
challenge.  
At  this  time,  capital  inflows  to  Asian  emerging  markets  have  been  large  and  persistent, 
posing  challenges  for  policy.  The  first  challenge  involves  a  macroeconomic  dilemma  that 
centres  around  the  tension  between  appreciation  pressures,  inflation  development,  and 
growth prospect. The second stems from financial stability concerns associated with potential 
build-ups of macroeconomic imbalance, risk of asset price bubbles, and the possibility of an 
abrupt reversal of inflows. In the past, as we have seen here in Asia, serious reversals have 
triggered debt defaults, banking distress, and currency crises.  
Although  capital  flows  are  nothing  new  for  Asia,  what  is  new  and  makes  the  issue  more 
demanding this time is the global context that the flows are taking place, which has important 
implications for the effectiveness of the policy response.  
First, compared to previous episodes, capital inflows this time are not country-specific that 
relate  to  the  financing  of  payment  deficits.  Instead,  capital  inflows  this  time  are  a  global 
phenomenon  propelled  by  near  zero  policy  rates  and  liquidity  expansion  in  the  advanced 
economies,  as  well  as  the  return  of  risk  appetite,  and  the  recognition  that  risk-adjusted 
investment  returns  in  the  advanced  economies  are  likely  to  be  very  low  for  an  extended 
period. This means we are living in a world where the forces that shape the resurgence of 
capital  inflows  lie  outside  the  control  of  policy  by  emerging  markets,  making  it  a  totally 
different challenge.  
Second, given that financial markets have become more integrated and more interconnected 
than ever before, the risk to economic and financial stability associated with capital inflows 
this time is also much greater. This is because large capital inflows relative to the absorptive 
capacity of any economy are more likely to be sustained for a longer period. As a result, the 
effects  of  abrupt  reversals  of  capital  inflows  are  likely  to  be  more  severe  as  well.  Such 
reversals, abrupt or not, are bound to happen once better growth prospects in the advanced 
economies are confirmed. The upshot is that we are living in a world where disruptive tail 
events can be more of a frequent occurrence than was the case in the past.  
And  third,  while  the  forces  underlying  the  current  cycle  of  capital  flows  are  global,  policy 
response  in  emerging  economies  remains  domestic-centric.  This,  I  think,  is  an  important 
point to note in the current capital flows episode. Also, because financial markets are more 
integrated, policy response in one country can have significant unintended consequences on 
other  economies.  In  other  words,  we  are  living  in  a  world  where  events  and  policies  in  a 
country can result in large spillover effects on other economies.  
BIS Review 141/2010 
 1
So, this is the new economic and financial context in which the flows are taking place and the 
policy responses are being shaped. Managing this will be a challenge, and effective policy 
response will require an integrated approach that combines flexible monetary and exchange 
regime, fiscal policy, capital account liberalization, and the use of macroprudential measures, 
in a coherent policy framework. Moreover, the policy response will need to be supported by 
structural reforms and policies to enhance the depth, the resilience, and the strength of the 
domestic  financial system,  as  well as  policies  to  promote  a  greater  degree  of  product  and 
labour market flexibility. In this context, macroprudential measures constitute only one of the 
many policy tools that will have to be used.  
Let me now turn specifically to macroprudential policies. One noted feature of the approach 
to  deal  with  capital  flows  in  the  current  cycle  is  the  recognition  that  an  effective  and 
responsive  prudential  framework  can  help  contain  the  build-up  of  financial  risk  and 
vulnerabilities  that  a  boom  in  capital  inflows  typically  generates.  This  includes  the  use  of 
“microprudential”  instruments  to  help  keep  individual  banks  strong,  or  to  seek  to  contain 
system-wide risk through “macroprudential” measures. Policy tools to serve both  purposes 
are many: all of which aim either at moderating procyclical financial behavior or at enhancing 
the banking sector’s resilience to shocks on both the asset and the liability sides.  
Drawing on Thailand’s recent experience on macroprudential policies, I would like to make 
three comments.  
First, it is important, in the context of public communication, to make a clear distinction that 
macroprudential  measures  are  different 
from  capital  controls.  Technically  speaking, 
macroprudential policies apply to the calibration of regulatory measures from a system-wide 
perspective to dampen procyclicality arising from the interplay between the business cycle, 
the financial cycle, and risk-taking behavior of economic agents. Given such interpretation, 
measures  to  curb  or  discourage  capital  inflows  should  be  considered  as  capital  account 
measures  and  not  macroprudential.  For  example,  Thailand’s  recent  measure  to  reimpose 
withholding  tax  on  non-resident  investment  in  the  bond  market  is  a  policy  to  discourage 
capital inflows.  
Second,  macroprudential  measures  work  by  reducing  systemic  risk  across  the  financial 
system. To this end, they are useful tools to lean against the wind of excessive credit growth 
and  asset  price  increases.  As  we  know,  monetary  policy  alone  is  not  adequate  to  ensure 
financial stability, and the policy rate can be too blunt a tool to deal with asset price increases 
because  of  the  adverse  effects  on  the  economy.  Therefore,  combining  macroprudential 
measures  with  monetary  policy  offers  a  useful  approach  to  help  contain  financial 
vulnerabilities  and  overcome  the  trade-off  that  arises  when  inflation  development  is  not 
consistent with asset price increases or rapid credit growth.  
To  illustrate  with  a  Thai  experience,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  adopted  inflation  targeting 
under  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  and  has  combined  this  with  macroprudential 
measures in our monetary policy framework since 2000. So far, the approach has worked 
well.  From  our  experience,  when  properly  designed,  macroprudential  measures  can 
complement  traditional  monetary  policy  while  supporting  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system.  
To  date,  we  have  successfully  used  macroprudential  measures  on  several  occasions.  For 
example, in 2003, rising high-end real estate prices together with strong mortgage lending 
growth led us to impose a ceiling on the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio for residential property with 
transaction price exceeding ten million baht. Then, between 2004 and 2005, concern about 
household  debt  prompted  us  to  tighten  regulation  on  credit  cards  and  personal  loans  by 
limiting credit lines not greater than five times the applicant’s average monthly income.  
My  third  comment  is  to  acknowledge  that  there  are  practical  difficulties  in  identifying  the 
trigger  points  for  implementing  macroprudential  measures.  Here,  the  challenge  lies  in 
selecting  a  set  of  indicators  that  can  condition  a  timely  policy  choice,  given  the  discrete 
nature of the instruments. To this end, we have put in place a macro-surveillance system to 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2010
monitor vulnerabilities in seven key areas; namely, property market, stock market, banking 
sector,  non-financial  corporate  sector,  household  sector,  government  sector,  and  external 
sector. Indicators are used to evaluate the build-up of vulnerabilities and imbalances in these 
sectors and the need for macroprudential measures is then assessed. This ultimately boils 
down  to  a  judgement  call.  For  us,  integrating  macroprudential  measures  in  the  overall 
macroeconomic  modelling  exercise  to  ensure  a  consistent  and  timely  policy  outcome 
remains a key priority.  
Finally, I want to come  back to the point I raised earlier about the global nature of capital 
flows  and  the  national  orientation  of  policy.  This  is  an  important  point  and  applies  both  to 
emerging markets and advanced economies. Simply  put,  the current cycle of capital flows 
has  a  strong  international  dimension  as  a  key  driving  force  of  capital  flows  is  the 
exceptionally low interest rates in the major economies. Hence, policy response by emerging 
markets is made more demanding if the problems at the source remain.  
Therefore,  given  the  potential  destabilizing  influence  that  capital  inflows  may  have  on 
emerging markets, a question that must be asked is whether there are gains to be had for 
the global economy as a whole in moving away from exclusively domestic-oriented policies? 
As we know, the literature on international monetary policy cooperation indicates that there 
are  gains  to  be  made  from  policy  cooperation,  though  the  size  of  the  potential  benefits  is 
subject to considerable debate. On the other hand, the lack of policy coordination will lead to 
sub-optimal  outcomes.  The  relevant  question  is  then  why  not  greater  international 
coordination of monetary policy to ensure sustained global growth and stability? Similarly, for 
emerging  markets  Asia,  a  question  can  be  raised  about  the  gains  that  can  be  had  from 
greater  coordination  of  macroprudential  policy  standards  on  a  regional  basis,  as  a  way  of 
dealing with the macro-implications of capital inflows from a financial stability perspective.  
I  do  not  have  firm  answers  to  these  questions.  But  at  a  time  when  emerging  markets  are 
increasingly  being  relied  upon  as  the  engine  of  global  growth,  I  think  discussion  on  any 
initiatives that lessen the vulnerability of emerging markets economies to boom-bust cycles 
would be in the global interest.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 3
