Norman T L Chan: SME Financing Guarantee Scheme  
Opening address by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of Hong Kong Monetary Authority 
and  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Hong  Kong  Mortgage  Corporation  Limited,  at  the  SME 
Financing Guarantee Scheme signing ceremony, Hong Kong SAR, 13 December 2010. 
 Good morning, I am very pleased to welcome all of you to today’s Letter of Intent Signing 
Ceremony  for  the  launch  of  the  SME  (small  to  medium-sized  enterprise)  Financing 
Guarantee Scheme by the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation (“HKMC”).  
SMEs  are  an  important  pillar  of  the  Hong  Kong  economy  and  employment.  In  2008,  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers caused credit crunch and market dislocation around the world. 
To mitigate the impact of the global financial crisis, the Hong Kong SAR Government swiftly 
rolled  out  a  series  of  measures  to  “stabilise  the  financial  system,  support  enterprises  and 
preserve employment”. A key measure to help the SMEs was the launch of the $100 billion 
Special Loan Guarantee Scheme in December 2008. By October this year, the scheme has 
helped more than 20,000 companies, with the approved loan amount exceeding $98 billion, 
and helping to secure more than 330,000 jobs.  
With the recovery of the local economy and the improved financing and cash flows for SMEs, 
the Special Loan Guarantee Scheme will cease to receive applications from early next year. 
Since May this year, many SMEs and think-tanks suggested that Hong Kong should develop 
a market-oriented platform to guarantee SME loans upon the phasing out of the Special Loan 
Guarantee Scheme. This suggestion has gained a good measure of support from the market 
and  society  at  large.  The  HKMC  therefore  immediately  launched  an  in-depth  study  and 
market consultation exercise. In mid-November, the HKMC announced that it will launch the 
SME Financing Guarantee Scheme on 1 January next year.  
The Scheme will offer extensive and flexible guarantee coverage to help the SMEs in Hong 
Kong  obtain  more  sustainable  bank  financing  for  their  daily  operations  or  purchase  of 
equipment etc. Also, this Scheme will help banks manage their lending risks more effectively 
–  the  banks  can  meet  the  financing  needs  of  the  SMEs  without  having  to  warehouse 
excessive  credit  risks.  Undoubtedly,  the  Scheme  will  bring  benefits  for  the  SMEs,  banks, 
economy and employment in Hong Kong. 
We  do  not  expect  an  overwhelming  demand  for  the  new  Scheme  initially.  However,  the 
global market conditions change and turn all the time. There is a high degree of volatility and 
uncertainty in the future. The business and financing environments for the enterprises could 
easily  come  under  stress  and  the  SME  Financing  Guarantee  Scheme  will  then  play  an 
important role to help banks maintain a steady and sustainable flow of financing to the SMEs. 
To  promote  the  launch  of  this  new  Scheme,  the  HKMC  will  offer  a  special  discount  for 
applications  filed  on  or  before  30  June  2011.  There  will  be  a  waiver  of  three  months’ 
guarantee  fee  for  loans  with  tenor  of  one  to  three  years  and  a  waiver  of  six  months’ 
guarantee fee for loans with tenor of more than three years. 
Lastly, let me thank once again the senior representatives of the 21 banks for participating in 
today’s  Signing  Ceremony.  We  stand  ready  to  work  with  the  banking  industry  to  jointly 
promote this project which is so meaningful for the SMEs and the local economy. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 170/2010 
 1
