Barbro Wickman-Parak: New international regulations for banks – a 
welcome reform 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting with Tjänstemännens Centralorganisation (TCO), Stockholm, 26 November 2010. 
 Over the past three to four years the world has undergone the largest financial crisis since 
the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  The  scope  of  the  crisis  and  its  catastrophic  economic 
consequences  quickly  led  to  the  realisation  that  something  had  to  be  done  to  avoid  this 
happening again. As soon as the worst phase of the financial crisis was over, extensive work 
began on correcting the inadequacies in the regulatory systems that had come to light. The 
reform work is conducted in many forums at both national and international levels. And not 
least  at  EU  level.  But  today  I  shall  focus  on  the  reform  work  in  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision,  in  which  both  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Financial 
Supervisory  Authority)  participate.  This  Committee  is  the  international  body  that  has 
established frameworks for bank regulation since 1974.  
In  line  with  internationalisation  that  has  taken  place  in  recent  decades,  banks  in  different 
countries  have  become  increasingly  dependent  on  one  another.  This  also  applies  to  our 
Swedish banks, which to a great extent fund themselves on the international markets. Both 
Swedish  banks  and  Sweden  in  general  therefore  benefit  from  banks  around  the  world 
becoming more resilient. Because after the recent crisis, no one can have missed noting how 
much Sweden is affected by financial developments in other countries. So it is a major step 
forward that there is now international agreement on the need for tougher bank regulation. 
The reform package that has been agreed is called Basel III, and the proposed regulations 
will appear both in EU directives and Swedish legislation.  
In brief, the Basel Committee’s proposals entail tightening the regulations in four important 
respects. Firstly, the banks must hold more capital. Secondly, this capital must have better 
quality. Thirdly, a minimum requirement for the banks’ liquidity is being introduced, and this is 
completely new. There has been no regulation on this previously. Fourthly, there are stricter 
requirements regarding the banks’ risk management. This is what I will talk about today.  
It has not been easy to reach agreement on these issues. The process has been punctuated 
by  negotiations  and  compromises  all  the  way  to  the  end.  The  reform  package  has 
nevertheless  been  produced  relatively  quickly,  given  the  complexity  of  the  issues  and  the 
many  different  interests  involved.  Some  would  probably  say  too  quickly.  But  we  at  the 
Riksbank welcome the fact that the work was completed quickly. When the first spark of a 
crisis appears, awareness dawns at first slowly and only to a few, then the spark becomes a 
blaze and the drama begins. When the acute phase of the crisis is over, the memory fades 
with the ashes and interest in crisis prevention work and regulations for crisis management 
soon wanes. It is better to strike while the iron is hot.  
The  Basel  Committee  has  achieved  a  difficult  balancing  act.  Regulations  are  needed  to 
prevent crises, but wrongly-constructed or overly rigid regulations can have a negative effect 
on the economy if they make it more expensive or difficult for households and companies to 
borrow.  The  whole  reform  package  is  not  yet  complete  in  the  sense  that  all  of  the  details 
have been worked out. But agreements have been reached on several major issues and so 
far we at the Riksbank consider that the proposals presented attain a reasonable balance.  
Part of the compromise has involved a long period of implementation for the various parts of 
the  regulatory  framework.  Some  parts  need  not  be  fully  introduced  until  2023.  It  is 
reasonable to have a transition period in which the banks can adjust. But at the same time, 
one may worry that it is too long in some areas. It is important that all parts of the framework 
are  in  place  before  new  turbulence  or  even  new  crises  arise  in  the  financial  system.  The 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 1
longer time that passes, the greater the risk that interest in implementing the changes will 
wane.  
But what exactly does the Basel proposal involve? What consequences will it have? How will 
our  Swedish  banks,  households  and  companies  be  affected?  But  before  I  go  into  these 
issues, I would like to briefly describe the background to the reform package.  
Financial system close to total collapse in autumn 2008  
The global financial system was close to a total collapse in autumn 2008. The large rescue 
packages implemented by central banks and other authorities around the world succeeded in 
preventing  an  even  worse  financial  crisis  than  the  one  we  experienced.  One  hardly  dares 
speculate  as  to  what  might  have  happened  if  the  rescue  packages  had  not  succeeded  in 
restoring confidence in the banking system, because without confidence developments can 
be quick and drastic. The most classic example of this is a bank run. This means that the 
bank’s customers become concerned for their savings and rush to the bank to withdraw them 
in time. But the money isn’t in the bank, it has been lent out. Which is the whole point, of 
course. At the same time, the banks are unable to renew their loans in the market as they 
mature, which means they cannot meet their obligations to deposit customers or creditors in 
the market and they collapse like a house of cards. And without banks the financial system 
cannot function. If not even the most basic functions can be upheld, people will not receive 
their wages and will not be able to pay their bills. The economy will grind to a halt.  
But  even  though  we  managed  to  save  the  financial  system  through  rescue  packages,  the 
costs  of  the  crisis  have  been  immense.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  a  crisis  in  the  financial 
system has far-reaching consequences for the whole economy. The financial crisis causes 
large falls in production, rising unemployment and increased budget deficits as incomes fall 
and  expenditure  rises  in  the  wake  of  the  recession.  There  is  thus  a  big  difference,  from 
society’s  point  of  view,  between  banks  in  distress  and  ordinary  companies  suffering 
problems. This is why we need special regulations for the banks.  
It is no news to us Swedes that crises are extremely expensive. We only need to look back to 
the crisis in the 1990s for a reminder. But this time the crisis was on a global scale. For the 
first time since the Second World War we have experienced a fall in production in the world 
economy.  It  is  clear  that  the  world  will  suffer  the  consequences  of  this  for  a  long  time  to 
come. But we Swedes have also been hit hard this time, too. Not least because we are a 
small, export-driven economy that is very vulnerable to developments abroad. Because when 
the credit taps are turned off, orders that have been made are withdrawn and no new ones 
are made. In 2009 total production in Sweden, GDP, fell by around 5 per cent – the largest 
fall  in  a  single  year  since  the  1940s.  Such  a  large  fall  in  the  production  flow  entails  an 
irrevocable  dent  in  the  long-term  curve.  Gone  forever.  If  one  converts  it,  it  corresponds  to 
about  SEK  20,000  per  Swedish  inhabitant.  This  is  money  we  could  have  used  for 
consumption and welfare. And let us remember that this is just one of the effects. Add to this 
the reduction in wealth in the form of falling values of companies, financial instruments and 
other assets.  
Contagion effects in a globalised financial market  
The origins of the crisis lay in US subprime mortgages. Although Swedish banks had very 
little exposure to this type of asset, the crisis nevertheless affected them. Like the Swedish 
economy as a whole, the Swedish financial system is very dependent on other countries. For 
example, only half of the banks’ funding is deposits from private individuals, companies and 
institutions  in  Sweden.  The  rest  is  borrowed  on  the  market,  and  a  large  part  of  this  on 
international  markets.  Moreover,  most  of  the  funding  is  relatively  short  term.  This  is  not 
unique to Sweden. The advantage is that it reduces the banks’ funding costs, which in turn 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2010
makes  it  cheaper  for  households  and  companies  to  borrow  money.  But  there  are  also 
disadvantages.  
As  the  banks  have  made  themselves  more  dependent  on  the  outside  world,  they  have  of 
course become more vulnerable to problems arising abroad. When the international money 
markets  slammed  on  the  brakes  in  autumn  2008  the  Swedish  banks’  funding  was 
immediately  affected.  Not  least  because  they  had  borrowed  money  in  the  short  term.  So 
unlike the crisis of the 1990s the crisis we have just experienced is largely an imported one. 
But the Swedish banks had also become involved in activities that proved to be risky. I refer 
to their lending in the Baltic countries. These exposures also affected confidence in Swedish 
banks during the crisis.  
As we are affected very directly by disruptions on the international financial markets, it is in 
our  interests  to  have  functioning  global  regulation.  We  therefore  welcome  the  proposals 
made by the Basel Committee. Hopefully, the new regulations will contribute to preventing 
new crises in the financial system, or will at least alleviate their dramatic effects.  
More capital of better quality provides larger buffers  
I shall begin by describing the new requirements regarding the banks’ capital. Because this is 
what a large part of the changes agreed by the Basel Committee concern. One can say that 
this  capital  is  the  money  at  the  bottom  of  the  treasure  chest  that  the  financial  supervisory 
authorities require the banks to always hold.  
The banks have long been obliged to observe special minimum levels regarding the size of 
their capital. There are two main reasons for this. The first is that the capital is to reduce the 
costs  to  the  state  if  the  bank  fails.  Even  though  Sweden  escaped  relatively  lightly  on  this 
occasion, we know from experience that such costs can be very extensive. For instance, the 
state may be forced to take over bad assets or have to pay money to depositors under the 
Swedish deposit guarantee scheme.  
But the role of capital is primarily to reduce the risk of a bank failing at all. When the bank 
suffers losses it should have a capital buffer to meet them and thereby be able to continue its 
operations. What this means for the banks in the end, as for the rest of us, is that they must 
try  to  earn  more  money  than  they  spend  and  have  sufficient  reserves  to  cope  with  the 
periods  when  they  don’t.  The  banks  manage  this  by  constantly  assessing  the  risk  that  a 
borrower will experience difficulties in meeting interest payments or paying off the loan. If this 
risk  increases,  the  bank  leaves  a  good  margin  for  it  by  adjusting  its  lending  or  allocating 
reserves  for  potential  losses.  But  as  borrowers  are  affected  by  so  many  factors  that  are 
difficult to judge – for instance, economic recessions have very different impacts on different 
sectors  and  geographical  areas  –  it  is  easy  for  the  bank’s  losses  to  become  larger  than 
expected.  The  minimum  capital  required  by  the  regulations  should  act  as  a  buffer  against 
such unexpected losses.  
It is necessary for everyone to be convinced the bank will survive in order for it to survive. If 
the bank is perceived as unsteady, the supply of money will be cut off. A lack of sufficient 
capital buffers can easily shake confidence in the bank. And this was exactly what happened 
when the crisis loomed large. People were uncertain how badly off the banks were. No one 
knew how large the losses would be and whether the reserve capital would suffice. Funding 
ran  short.  Because  what  financiers  in  the  market  would  want  to  give  loans  to  a  bank  that 
appears unsteady? And who would want money in an account in this bank? I am sure you 
will  remember  the  pictures  of  the  queues  outside  Northern  Rock’s  branches  in  the  United 
Kingdom. To restore confidence, the state and the taxpayers in many countries had to inject 
capital and go in as owners of the banks. This would not have been necessary if the banks 
had held more capital when the dark storm clouds gathered in summer 2007.  
The  Basel  Committee  has  taken  note  of  this.  The  current  capital  requirements  are  being 
raised  substantially.  If  I  may  go  into  technical  details,  the  new  regulations  require  that  the 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 3
banks should have a Tier 1 capital corresponding to at least 6 per cent of their assets, or 
more correctly their risk-adjusted assets. The risk adjustment means that for each asset one 
recalculates  the  value,  depending  on  whether  the  value  of  the  asset  can  be  regarded  as 
certain. One sign of this might be, for instance, that the value of the asset has varied a lot. 
The  higher  risk  an  asset  is  believed  to  entail,  the  more  capital  needs  to  be  allocated.  At 
present,  the  minimum  requirement  for  Tier  1  capital  is  only  4  per  cent  of  the  total  risk-
weighted assets.  
However, this comparison is not entirely valid, for two reasons. Firstly, the new regulations 
entail  much  stricter  requirements  regarding  what  is  accepted  as  Tier  1  capital.  In  future  a 
much  larger  share  of  this  capital  must  be  of  the  highest  possible  quality.  This  “common 
equity  Tier  1  capital”  is  made  up  of  equity  capital  and  withheld  profits  (the  red  part  of  the 
columns in the figure below). This capital can immediately and without complication be used 
to cover losses. In addition, one must have additional capital – what is known as other Tier 1 
capital – of good quality, which can also be used to meet losses in going concern (orange 
colour  in  the  figure).  One  must  also  have  further  capital  in  the  form  of,  for  instance, 
subordinated loans (yellow colour in the figure). This part of the capital differs from the other 
two in that it can only be used once the bank has gone bankrupt.  
Secondly, one will to a greater extent assume that the asset values are overestimated. So 
the risk adjustments in the value of the assets that I mentioned will be much tougher. Quite 
simply, one will now assume that the values of many asset classes are more inflated than 
was previously assumed.  
So despite the increase in Sweden being only around 2 percentage points for Tier 1 capital, it 
actually entails a much tougher minimum requirement. But above all, it means that the global 
minimum level is raised substantially. Especially with regard to common equity Tier 1 capital. 
But  not  only  that.  The  banks  should  also  hold  buffers  over  and  above  the  minimum 
requirements.  One  such  buffer  is  what  is  known  as  the  capital  conservation  buffer.  The 
further a bank is from meeting the capital conservation buffer requirement, the more limited 
its capacity to pay dividends to shareholders. The reason is that one wants to prevent the 
banks  from  showering  its  owners  with  riches  in  the  good  times,  and  then  being  caught 
unprepared when the economic climate changes. If one adds this buffer, the requirements for 
common  equity  Tier  1  capital  is  7  per  cent.  Moreover,  national  authorities  will  have  the 
opportunity to force the banks to build up extra buffers during economic upturns, so that they 
can more easily weather difficulties when there are downturns.  
The Swedish banks already comply with the capital requirements stipulated in the new Basel 
regulations. And this is an important condition for them to be able to fund themselves on the 
markets.  
4 
  BIS Review 159/2010
Liquidity regulations increase resilience when funding is difficult  
But even if a bank is well-equipped in terms of capital, it can nevertheless come unstuck if it 
does not have sufficient liquidity buffers. And this is what happened to many banks during 
the  crisis.  To  ensure  the  banks  are  better-equipped,  the  Basel  Committee  has  agreed  on 
introducing requirements regarding the banks’ liquidity management. These are entirely new 
regulations – there have previously not been any regulations in this field at all.  
Liquidity can be compared to the ability to pay one’s bills as they fall due. Even if you have 
large  capital,  you  may  not  have  good  liquidity.  This  is  particularly  important  for  the  banks. 
While they receive money from depositors and borrow on the market at fairly short horizons, 
their lending is usually long term – perhaps 30 years or more for a mortgage. This ability to 
transform  short-term  saving  into  long-term  loans  is  the  banks’  main  function  in  society.  It 
enables companies to invest and households to buy their homes.  
Normally,  a  shortage  of  liquidity  does  not  present  a  problem.  Withdrawals  from  bank 
accounts  follow  normal  patterns  and  the  banks  are  able  to  monitor  this.  If  special  needs 
arise, the banks can manage the situation by selling assets and thus acquire cash. Normally 
the banks have also been able to manage their short-term borrowing without problems. But 
during the crisis problems arose on many markets. In some cases there were quite simply no 
buyers  at  all  and  market  funding  ceased  functioning.  And  as  the  banks  had  become 
dependent  on  short-term  borrowing,  there  was  little  they  could  do  when  their  financiers 
decided it was safest to demand their money back. Money the banks could not get hold of.  
In these situations there is not much a bank can do. The usual remedy is liquidity assistance 
from the central bank. But most central bank make tough demands regarding collateral for 
lending money to banks with liquidity shortages. Collateral which the banks in many cases 
were  lacking  during  the  crisis,  or  at  any  rate  to  the  extent  needed  to  compensate  for  the 
enormous decline in funding on the international capital markets experienced by many banks 
– in Sweden and abroad.  
So  central  banks  were  forced  to  change  the  regulations  so  that  the  banks  could  pledge 
collateral with a less reliable value. But this solution is not sustainable in the long run, as it 
exposes the central bank – and ultimately taxpayers – to unacceptable risks. In practice, it 
means that the central bank is forced to act as dumping ground for bad assets as soon as 
there are problems in the financial markets. Of course, we want to avoid such situations in 
the future, and this is why the Basel Committee has produced a number of regulations aimed 
at making the banks less sensitive to liquidity problems.  
So what do the regulations entail? In future, a certain part of the borrowing must be longer 
term. Moreover, it must come from more stable sources of funding. In concrete terms, the 
regulations mean that one multiplies the amount the bank borrows from each type of funding 
source by a stability factor – in roughly the same way as for risk adjustment of the value of 
assets when calculating capital requirements. This gives a stability-adjusted funding profile 
for each institution that should better match the maturities for the banks’ lending.  
One will also require that a certain percentage of the banks’ assets are liquid, in the sense 
that they can be converted into cash relatively easily. This reduces the banks’ vulnerability to 
sudden outflows of funds deposited or maturities of loans that cannot be rolled. Put simply, 
they  require  that  the  bank  holds  a  liquidity  buffer.  The  size  of  the  buffer  is  calculated  to 
ensure that the bank can manage a 30-day period with very large withdrawals of deposits 
and substantial loan maturities.  
These two regulations – on liquidity buffers and more stable sources of funding – entail less 
risk  that  the  banks  will  be  taken  by  surprise  as  they  were  during  the  financial  crisis.  But 
above  all  the  regulations  will  lessen  the  contagion  effects  on  the  markets.  Stable  liquidity 
management reduces the risk of turbulence in individual markets or banks quickly spreading 
and creating financial problems for other banks.  
BIS Review 159/2010 
 5
Stricter risk management  
The third part of the Basel Committee’s reform package concerns what is perhaps the most 
important mainstay of the banks – the way they manage their risks. If risk management is 
inadequate, having plenty of capital or apparently good liquidity management will not help.  
Risk  management  mainly  concerns  credit  risks  and  market  risks.  Credit  risk  means  that  a 
borrower is unable to repay his or her loan. Market risk is the risk that the bank’s assets will 
vary in value in a way that was not anticipated, and this makes it difficult for the bank to get 
hold  of  capital  without  making  a  loss.  For  example,  fluctuations  in  interest  rates  and 
exchange rates can affect the value of the assets. In addition to these risks, there are what 
are known as operational risks. This can involve, for instance, a technical system failing to 
function, or a human error that puts the bank at great risk. Some of you may remember how 
the  British  bank  Barings  collapsed in  1995  as a  result  of speculation  and  unchecked  risks 
taken  by  a  single  employee.  Risk  management  is  about  protecting  oneself  against  such 
undesirable  and  unexpected  outcomes.  In  short,  one  wants  to  take  calculated  risks. 
According to earlier agreements within the Basel Committee, the banks have the possibility 
to develop models themselves to calculate the size of their risks and this is an opportunity 
most of the major banks have used. Over time, their risk calculation models have become 
increasingly sophisticated.  
But  during  the  crisis  it  turned  out  that  not  even  the  most  advanced  models  managed  to 
capture the real risks. Sometimes it was not the model that was inadequate; there was a lack 
of available data for assessing the risk. In many cases there was quite simply not enough 
historical data, as the financial instruments were such fresh inventions. You may have heard 
of various types of complicated derivative, such as CDOs, CDSs and so on. In other cases, 
there  was  a  change  in  the  relationships  between  prices  and  other  factors  that  had  been 
previously observed. The calculated probabilities quite simply did not reflect the reality.  
It is easy to make a comparison with Swedish humorist Tage Danielsson’s classical sketch 
about  the  probability  of  a  nuclear  accident:  as  Harrisburg  had  just  happened,  there  was 
absolutely  no  risk  that  history  would  repeat  itself.  Or  to  look  at  it  another  way,  as  the 
complicated financial instruments had previously escaped sudden price falls, one need not 
expect any sudden price fall in the future. Slightly exaggerated. Underestimating risks and 
taking excessive risks are two sides of the same coin. And this was just what happened, right 
up until the US house price bubble burst and the crisis was upon us.  
It is thus clear that there is a need to ensure that risk management is tightened and that the 
deficiencies  in  the  banks’  balance  sheets  are  corrected.  The  Basel  Committee  therefore 
requires that the banks assume that many financial instruments – including the derivatives I 
just  mentioned  –  are  much  riskier  than  the  banks  previously  assumed.  So  under  the  new 
regulations the banks must leave a good margin for substantial losses possibly arising when 
they buy and sell risky instruments.  
Moreover, the Basel Committee is introducing a new risk measure – a leverage ratio. Behind 
this  term  lies  a  fairly  simple  measure  of  risk  that  is  not  based  on  any  advanced  risk 
calculation models. The bank’s capital is examined in relation to all of its assets, even off-
balance sheet items. And to meet the requirements, the capital must not fall below a certain 
ratio. One does not take into account historical risk relationships and other aspects usually 
used in the banks’ risk calculations. The leverage ratio thus limits risk taking regardless of 
whether the banks’ models show that their risk is low. Alternatively, the banks are forced to 
allocate  much  larger  capital  reserves  than  they  do  now.  Otherwise,  the  leverage  ratio  will 
hamper  growth  in  their  lending.  In  this  way,  gross  solvency  functions  as  an  additional 
protective  layer  against  the  type  of  incorrect  assumptions  in  the  banks’  models  and 
measurements that were revealed during the crisis.  
Because the leverage ratio is a relatively uncomplicated measure, it is also more difficult to 
manipulate or misunderstand. This reduces the probability of the banks’ boards of directors, 
financial  supervisory  authorities,  shareholders  and  others  being  deceived  or  else 
6 
 BIS Review 159/2010
misinterpreting information. In connection with this, I can mention that the Basel Committee 
recently agreed on a number of principles that aim to clarify the role and responsibilities of 
the  board  of  directors  and  to  reinforce  the  independence  and  competence  of  the  risk 
management function.  
Security and costs – a balancing act  
A valid question here is how all this will affect the banks and the Swedish economy. Various 
representatives of the bank sector have complained about the new liquidity regulations, for 
instance. They claim these involve too much cost. But these are the rules of the game. The 
fact  is  that  we  at  the  Riksbank  have  spent  considerable  time  estimating  the  effects  of  the 
regulations to be introduced. Next week we will publish some our estimates of the effects in 
our Financial Stability Report. And our calculations show – even if they, like all estimates are 
somewhat uncertain – that the negative effects will be fairly limited. Above all, the costs for 
the  banks  are  expected  to  be  slightly  higher.  It  is  expensive  to  create  new  systems  and 
establish new routines to manage risks and money flows. Holding more capital means that 
one ties up money that could otherwise have been lent out and generated interest income. 
And  the  same  applies  to  holding  more  liquid  assets;  there  is  a  cost  in  the  form  of  lower 
interest income than one would have had if the funds were instead lent out.  
The banks will probably pass on a small part of these costs to their customers in the form of 
slightly higher lending rates. But here we are talking about changes of some few tenths of a 
percentage point for the average customer – perhaps slightly more for households and less 
for companies. One can probably also expect a dampening effect on the banks’ profits, and it 
is  fairly  natural  that  the  required  rate  of  return  for  bank  shares  will  decline  as  the  banks 
become more secure. The banks may also experience increased costs for long-term funding. 
But this should be compensated to some extent by the banks becoming more secure and 
thus a fall in risk premiums on loans to banks. Although our calculations show that the costs 
of the new regulations are limited, it is unavoidably the case that stricter regulation entails 
various forms of cost. It is in the nature of the regulation.  
The important thing is that these costs are seen in relation to the gains in the form of a more 
stable bank system. And there is no doubt that the gains are substantial, after what the world 
has  gone  through  since  the  financial  crisis  began.  Here  I  refer  to  the  severe  economic 
downturn I mentioned at the start.  
But it is nevertheless important not to tighten the screws too much. This would mean that the 
banks only wanted to lend money to the most secure customers and investments. A lot of 
good investments would be missed. A lot of people would be unable to buy homes. Long-
term economic growth would be slowed down and our total welfare would decline. We must 
quite simply ensure we do not put a spanner in the works so the banks reduce their lending 
too much. When I first worked at the Riksbank, in the 1970s and 1980s, the credit market 
was severely regulated and this is not a situation we should wish to return to.  
Nor should we ignore the fact that banks have an ability to circumvent regulations and make 
use of loopholes in the law. And the tougher the regulations, the greater the reason for the 
banks to try to circumvent them. If they succeed, no one has won. Instead, there is a risk we 
will  be  lulled  into  a  deceptive  security,  despite  the  risks  merely  being  moved  or  hidden  in 
other  forms.  I  might  also  add  that  regardless  of  which  regulations  are  introduced,  one  still 
needs effective oversight and supervision of the financial system as a whole and of individual 
institutions.  
If we take all of these aspects into account, I believe the Basel Committee’s proposals are a 
successful balancing act. They entail a substantial upgrading of the bank system in terms of 
resilience. And the costs to the banks and society are small.  
BIS Review 159/2010 
 7
Long phase-in period  
The Swedish banks are well-capitalised and the costs of the new capital requirements are 
therefore small or non-existent. But we must remember that the situation is more difficult for 
many  banks  around  the  world.  If  we  force  the  banks  to  observe  the  new  teachings 
immediately, their ability to offer loans to companies and households may be impaired. This 
could jeopardise the economic recovery. Because although the world economy appears to 
be  slowly  recovering,  the  situation  is  still  fragile.  To  avoid  this,  the  Basel  Committee  has 
agreed on a long phase-in period. Some of the new regulations will begin to apply in 2013. 
Most of them will be phased in gradually. It will take a further ten years or so before all of the 
regulations apply in full.  
Although one must give the banks time to adjust, and allow the legislation process to run its 
course, one may nevertheless consider the phase-in period to be longer than necessary. A 
lot  can  happen  in  ten  years  or  more.  Over  the  past  ten  years,  for  instance,  the  financial 
market and the world economy have been subjected to a number of shocks: the bursting of 
the  dotcom  bubble,  the  subprime  crisis  and  not  least  the  debt  crisis  currently  being 
experienced by some countries. There is nothing to say that we will not experience similar 
 –  and  just  as  earth-shaking  –  events  in  the  coming  ten  years.  Postponing  the 
implementation of the new regulations may be doing ourselves – and others – a disservice. 
But at the same time, I should mention that a number of countries have signalled that they 
will  set  tougher  requirements  than  the  minimum  stated.  Some  countries  are  also  talking 
about introducing the regulations sooner.  
One step in the right direction – more are needed!  
Now that the requirements regarding capital and liquidity are increasing, the allocation of risk 
between  the  bank’s  owners  and  society  as  a  whole  is  changed.  The  banks  should 
themselves  bear  the  consequences  of  high  risk  taking  to  a  greater  degree.  One  might 
therefore expect that the banks will actually take smaller risks in future. This, together with 
the  strengthening  of  the  banks’  resilience,  reduces  the  risk  of  the  banks  experiencing 
problems. But it does not make them immune to trouble.  
Because although the capital buffers are much larger in the new system, they can be wiped 
out in an instant if the losses are big enough. Despite the liquidity requirement, banks may 
suffer a confidence crisis resulting in overwhelming bank runs and other funding difficulties. 
And  risk  management  can  never  be  entirely  watertight.  In  short,  we  cannot  rest  on  our 
laurels. Because even if we strengthen the banks, there is always a risk of banks failing. And 
the fact is that we currently lack the tools to deal with this properly.  
We  therefore  support  continuing  reform  work  by  the  Basel  Committee  in  this  field.  For 
instance, they are trying to ensure that financial supervisory authorities have the right tools to 
be able to manage what are known as systemically important banks. These are banks that 
are so important that the functioning of the entire financial system would be threatened if they 
failed. This could be due to their size, for instance. Or because they are involved in a large 
number  of  transactions  with  other  banks  or  financial  market  participants.  It  is  almost 
impossible to predict the effects on the financial system, and thus the costs to society, if such 
a  bank  were  to  fail.  For  this  simple  reason,  we  dare  not  take  the  chance.  And  both  the 
systemically important banks and their customers realise this. They rely on the state to inject 
capital or provide some other form of assistance if they should get into trouble. In this way, 
the  systemically  important  banks  benefit  from  the  implied  state  guarantees.  For  instance, 
through attracting more customers or being able to pay lower interest rates to their financiers. 
However,  when  the  survival  of  smaller  banks is  threatened,  they  are  left  to  their  fate.  The 
Basel Committee is now discussing the possibility of systemically important banks having an 
additional increase to the capital requirement I mentioned earlier. This additional requirement 
would further increase these institutions’ resilience, as problems in these banks to a greater 
8 
 BIS Review 159/2010
degree affect other parts of the financial system. Switzerland has decided to introduce such 
requirements anyhow.  
But  here  in  Sweden,  too,  we  need  to  continue  the  work  on  strengthening  the  financial 
system.  We  must,  for  instance,  ensure  that  we  have  an  effective  regulatory  framework  for 
winding up banks in distress so that their operations can continue at the same time as the 
shareholders  have  to  bear  the  costs.  And  this  does  not  only  apply  to  large,  systemically 
important  banks.  In  the  wake  of  the  HQ  crisis,  both  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  and  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  have  expressed 
concern regarding the difficulties in dealing with banks in distress. The Riksbank shares this 
view. Fortunately, the EU is carrying out extensive work on providing the conditions and tools 
to facilitate dealing with banks on the verge of bankruptcy.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  is  good  that  the  Basel  regulations  will  make  greater  demands 
regarding  the  banks’  liquidity.  But  they  do  not  say  anything  about  preparedness  regarding 
liquidity in foreign currencies. This is particularly important to us in Sweden. Around 50 per 
cent  of  the  banks’  funding  is  through  the  markets,  and  a  large  part,  around  two  thirds, 
through  the  international  markets.  This  requires  that  we  at  the  Riksbank  can  provide  the 
banks  with  liquidity  in  foreign  currency  when  funding  runs  short.  We  must  therefore  hold 
liquid  funds  in  our  foreign  currency  reserves,  and  this  costs  money.  The  Riksbank  is  thus 
supplying  an  insurance  –  an  insurance  that  the  banks  know  they  can  use  but  don’t  pay  a 
premium for. This type of problem is not dealt with in the Basel regulations, or anywhere else 
for that matter, but it is something we need to discuss here in Sweden.  
So  although  I  hope  I  have  made  it  clear  that  neither  Finansinspektionen  nor  we  at  the 
Riksbank – nor our international counterparts – have been idle, there is still a lot of work that 
remains  to  be  done  to  make  the  bank  system  less  vulnerable  and  more  resilient.  Both 
globally  and  here  in  Sweden.  And  at  the  same  time  we  must  continue  our  daily  work  on 
maintaining financial stability. We at the Riksbank are constantly trying to refine our analysis 
so we can detect at an early stage any risks that could threaten the stability of the system. 
And we must be clear in communicating the risks we see. We also carry out stress tests on 
the  banks  to  measure  their  resilience  to  negative  events  that  would  cause  large  losses. 
These tests are a very important part of our work, and we are also working on developing 
them further. When we publish the second Financial Stability Report of the year next week, 
you will see examples of this. 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 9
