 Axel A Weber: Monetary policy after the crisis – a European perspective 
Keynote speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
Shadow Open Market Committee (SOMC) symposium, New York City, 12 October 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure to be here and to speak to such a distinguished audience. Hence, I would like 
to thank the organisers for their kind invitation. 
The Shadow Open Market Committee, founded by Allan Meltzer and Karl Brunner in 1973, 
can look back on a long and impressive history. The Committee has also served as a role 
model for establishing similar bodies in Europe. 
Karl  Brunner  was  a  visiting  professor  at  the  University  of  Konstanz  from  1969  to  1973. 
Regrettably, I missed his lectures at the time since I did not start my economic studies at the 
University  of  Konstanz  until  a  few  years  later.  Both  his  teachings  and  his  research 
established the reputation of Konstanz as the German centre for monetary research and as 
an  “incubator  of  German  monetarism”.1  The  “Konstanz  Seminar  on  Monetary  Theory  and 
Policy”, which he also founded and where I met him later, has maintained its status as an 
exclusive  forum  for  promising  young  economists  and  attracts  a  constant  flow  of  very 
distinguished monetary experts; it celebrated its 40th anniversary last year. I have enjoyed 
attending the seminars for more than 30 years. Beyond that, Karl Brunner’s work has had a 
major  impact  on  policy  in  Germany  –  something  which  is  strikingly  illustrated  by  the 
introduction of monetary targets by the Deutsche Bundesbank in 1973. 
In the Konstanz scientific manifesto of 1972, Karl Brunner wrote on the division of “monetary 
theory” and “monetary policy” as distinct academic subjects: “… theory without application to 
our environment is useless and policy discussion or judgements not based on analysis are 
dangerous”.2  Over  the  past  four  decades,  fortunately,  both  subjects  have  converged  to  a 
large extent, and modern monetary policy has become unthinkable without a state-of-the-art 
theoretical background. 
Having  said  that,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  current  und  future  challenges  facing  monetary 
policy, in particular as regards the euro area. 
A brief review of the Eurosystem’s response to the crisis 
2. 
Central banks in the euro area and in many other industrialised economies had to take bold 
and decisive action in order to limit the repercussions of the financial and economic crisis. On 
both sides of the Atlantic, the major central banks have implemented a comprehensive set of 
standard and non-standard measures both to guarantee the liquidity of the financial system 
and to counteract deflationary pressures. Nevertheless, every central bank had to tailor its 
response to the crisis to the specific needs of its own economy. When it comes to comparing 
the  response  of  the  Eurosystem  with  that  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  or  the  measures 
implemented by the ECB Governing Council with those of the FOMC, due account has to be 
                                                 
1   Monissen, H.G. (1977), Karl Brunner at the University of Konstanz, 1969–1973, in Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, Vol. 9, pp. 251–253. 
2   As quoted in Fratianni, M., J. von Hagen (2001), The Konstanz Seminar on monetary theory and policy at 30, 
in European Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 17, pp. 641–664. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 1
 taken  of  fundamental  differences  between  the  financial  structures  of  the  economies 
concerned. In contrast to the U.S. financial system, banks play a dominant role in funding 
euro-area  non-financial  corporations.  Over  the  period  from  2004  to  2008,  bank  financing 
represented,  on  average,  more  than  two-thirds  of  total  external  financing  for  those 
corporations,  compared  with  less  than  one-half  in  the  United  States.  The  Eurosystem’s 
response  to  the  crisis  has  therefore  concentrated  on  measures  to  enable  liquidity-
constrained banks to close their short-term funding gaps and, ultimately, to sustain the ability 
of  the  banking  sector  to  lend  to  the  real  economy.  Under  this  “enhanced  credit  support” 
approach,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  besides  lowering  its  key  interest  rates  to 
historically  low  levels,  decided  to  temporarily  extend  its  liquidity  operations  in  terms  of 
frequency and maturity and to expand the list of eligible collateral. Furthermore, we decided 
to purchase 60 billion euros worth of covered bonds. As a result of its liquidity measures, the 
Eurosystem has become the central counterparty of the euro-area money markets. 
Compared with, for example, the Federal Reserve or the Bank of England, however, outright 
asset  purchases  have  played  only  a  minor  role  in  the  Governing  Council’s  strategy.  The 
Covered  Bonds  Purchase  Programme  I  just  mentioned  represents  just  3%  of  the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet. The more recently established Securities Markets Programme 
(SMP) presently amounts to somewhat more than 60 billion euros, which again equates to 
3%. There is no evidence that asset purchases have had any significant impact on average 
euro-area sovereign bond yields on which euro-area monetary policy must exclusively focus 
as  its  main  transmission  channel.  But  the  SMP  risks  blurring  the  different  responsibilities 
between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy.  As  the  risks  associated  with  the  SMP  outweigh  its 
benefits, these securities purchases should now be phased out permanently as part of our 
non-standard policy measures. 
3. 
Current and future challenges for monetary policy 
Exit from exceptional policy measures 
3.1 
The challenge facing monetary policymakers now and in the near future is to get the timing 
and  sequencing  of  the  exit  from  stimulus  measures  right.  This  applies  to  both  the  non-
standard measures as well as the monetary policy stance, and therefore, key interest rates, 
as the two dimensions of the exit. While we are far from declaring the crisis over, it would be 
unwise  to  postpone  relevant  considerations  to  the  end  of  the  crisis.  As  regards  the 
Eurosystem’s  set  of  non-standard  policy  measures,  these  were  designed  with  exit 
considerations  in  mind.  The  overwhelming  majority  of  measures  can  therefore  be  easily 
withdrawn whenever we deem it necessary. 
As  regards  the  two  dimensions  of  exit  consisting  of  phasing-out  non-standard  liquidity 
measures  and  normalizing  our  clearly  expansionary  policy  stance,  there  are  risks  both  in 
exiting too early and in exiting too late. I believe the latter are greater than the former. For 
example, maintaining the accommodative policy stance for too long may risk a de-anchoring 
of inflation expectations, which is costly to reign in. For the time being, however, the policy 
stance remains appropriate, since inflation risks remain low over the policy-relevant horizon. 
The  two  dimensions  of  exit  are  independent  and  separated  by  concept.  Thus,  a 
normalization  of  key  interest  rates  could  in  principle  start  before  the  phasing-out  of  non-
standard  measures  has  been  finished.  The  phasing-out  of  non-standard  measures  mainly 
depends  on  the  situation  in  the  financial  markets  and  the  interbank  money  market,  in 
particular.  While  improved  conditions  enabled  us  to  embark  on  a  gradual  phasing-out  of 
exceptional policy measures at the end of 2009, renewed financial market tensions in early 
May  forced  us  to  reintroduce  some  measures  that  had  already  been  phased  out.  Looking 
ahead,  the  situation  in  the  financial  markets  shows  continuing  signs  of  normalization  – 
despite some remaining volatility and fragility. Against this background, it is necessary, from 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 a monetary policy point of view, not to postpone the exit from non-standard measures for too 
long, in particular since we always emphasized it would be a state-contingent process. 
Before I discuss the challenges of the phasing-out in more detail, let me briefly recall some 
key aspects of our monetary policy implementation. In the euro area, the bulk of liquidity is 
provided  via  revolving  refinancing  operations  (collateralized  lending)  of  different  maturities, 
with  the  main  refinancing  operation,  that  is  the  one  week  operation,  being  the  most 
important.  Prior  to  October  2008,  refinancing  operations  were  conducted  as  variable  rate 
tenders,  with  allotment  amounts  closely  aligned  with  the  aggregate  liquidity  needs  of  the 
banking  system  (often  referred  to  as  “benchmark  allotment”).  Conceptually,  the  liquidity 
needs  of  the  banking  system  mainly  result  from  non-banks’  demand  for  banknotes  and 
substantial remunerated reserve requirements. The particular tender procedure means that 
average short-term money market rates are normally just slightly above the minimum bid rate 
in the weekly main refinancing operation, which serves as the key policy rate. 
However, in October 2008, the variable rate tender procedure with benchmark allotment was 
replaced by a fixed rate full-allotment procedure, in order to ensure banks’ liquidity despite 
the  drying  up  of  the  interbank  money  market  following  the  Lehman  collapse.  The  full 
allotment  policy  allowed  banks  to  accumulate  substantial  amounts  of  surplus  liquidity  (or 
excess reserves to use U.S. terminology), which could be lent to other banks or placed in the 
Eurosystem’s deposit facility – an overnight facility to deposit excess reserves. As a result, 
short-term  money  market  rates  usually  traded  only  a  couple  of  basis  points  above  the 
Eurosystem deposit rate throughout most of 2009 and 2010. This was by design. 
Meanwhile, given an ongoing normalization in financial markets, money market rates have 
increased significantly but smoothly without any monetary policy tightening signals and the 
corresponding headlines. 
Despite  the  overall  improvements  in  financial  market  and  money  market  conditions,  some 
financial  institutions,  however,  continue  to  rely  strongly  on  the  liquidity  support  measures 
provided by the Eurosystem. In principle, the strong demand for central bank liquidity from 
these Eurosystem counterparties could lead to elevated tender spreads after the return to a 
variable  rate  tender  procedure.  More  specifically,  banks  with  limited  market  access  could 
place high bids in the variable tender procedure, possibly translating into somewhat higher 
marginal and weighted average rates than were observed before the crisis. Some observers 
are worried that such an elevated tender spread could blur the monetary policy signal, which 
is  primarily  indicated  by  the  minimum  bid  rate,  and  thereby  complicate  the  planned 
continuation of the gradual phasing-out of those non-standard measures. 
However, I do not share these concerns to the same extent. While it seems plausible that 
banks with limited access to the interbank money market would tend to place higher bids in 
auctions  for  central  bank  liquidity,  it  should  be  equally  clear  that  elevated  tender  spreads 
would occur only due to the segmentation of the interbank money market and must not be 
confused with a change in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy stance. 
In order to facilitate the return to variable rate tender procedures, I believe a good starting 
point  would  be  to  have  generous  allotment  amounts  in  the  main  refinancing  operations.  If 
these  were  substantially  above  the  benchmark  amount,  this  would  lead  initially,  in 
quantitative terms, to a quasi-replication of the full allotment result. In such an environment, 
the immediate impact on money market rates of the switch to variable rate tenders should be 
modest. Subsequently, the gradual nature of the phasing-out process would be reflected in a 
step-by-step reduction of the allotment amounts, broadly in line with the estimated decline in 
banks’ demand for surplus liquidity. Short-term money market rates would, over time, remain 
close to the level of the key policy rate without undue volatility. 
Should additional measures flank the exit from the full allotment policy? I am convinced that 
any such measures – if needed at all – should not be targeted at individual counterparties. 
Clearly, monetary policy must act at the macro level, not the micro level. Monetary policy has 
to be directed at all monetary institutions as a whole. Therefore, any operational measures 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 3
 should apply equally to all counterparties of the Eurosystem. But our operational measures 
cannot  provide  the  solution  to  the  problems  still  plaguing  that  part  of  the  banking  sector 
which  has  limited  access  to  the  interbank  market.  Shareholders  and  governments  solely 
remain  responsible  for  resolving  remaining  undercapitalization  and  funding  issues  at 
individual financial institutions and will have to undertake greater resolution efforts, as non-
standard monetary policy measures are gradually being phased-out. 
Monetary policy and financial stability 
3.2 
This illustrates, however, how quickly monetary policy becomes involved in issues that are 
primarily financial stability issues. During the remainder of my speech, I would therefore like 
to focus more generally on the interplay of monetary policy and financial stability. 
The question that has been raised in this regard against the backdrop of the worst financial 
and economic crisis since the end of the Second World War is “Should monetary policy react 
to  asset  prices?”  Put  like  that,  however,  I  find  the  focus  too  narrow.  It  would  be  more 
appropriate to ask “What is the role of monetary policy in the financial cycle?”. 
While  it  would  be  misleading  to  blame  the  financial  crisis  on  monetary  policy,  it  has  to  be 
acknowledged  that  monetary  policy  has  a  significant  influence  on  the  financial  cycle, 
including  booms  and  busts.  Before  the  crisis,  policymakers  neglected  the  impact  of  their 
decisions  on  the  risk-taking  behaviour  of  financial  market  players.  Yet  once  market 
participants recognise that expansionary monetary policy reactions are much stronger during 
downturns than the moves in the opposite direction during upswings, adverse incentives are 
created. 
Hence,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  more  symmetrical.  Such  an  approach  would  imply 
taking  greater  account  of  the  implicit  risks  stemming  from  lively  money  and  credit  growth, 
booming  asset  markets  and  decreasing  risk  premiums,  especially  with  regard  to  their 
implications  for  price  stability  in  the  long  run.  In  turn,  this  could  imply  extending  the  time 
horizon of monetary policy beyond the standard projection horizon of roughly two years. This 
is already part of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB’s Governing Council: The separate 
analysis of money and credit growth provides a very useful toolset for the early detection of 
rising  risk  potential  in  financial  markets.  Taking  the  additional  information  provided  by 
monetary analysis into account, and possibly even more so than before the crisis, does not, 
however,  imply  actively  “leaning  against  the  wind”  of  financial  imbalances.  Somewhat  less 
volatile  financial  cycles  would  instead  come  as  a  welcome  by-product  of  a  medium-term 
monetary policy strategy that implicitly takes into consideration the repercussions of financial 
instability on price stability over the medium to long term. 
Such an approach would, in particular, neither imply nor require establishing financial stability 
as an additional monetary policy target or downgrading the objective of price stability. I just 
explained  why  monetary  policy  is  an  inappropriate  tool  to  fix  the  underlying  problems  of 
banks  with  limited  access  to  the  interbank  market.  Risks  to  financial  stability  should  be 
addressed through financial regulation and macroprudential policy rather than using the blunt 
tool of short-term interest rates. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Let me conclude my remarks. 
Central banks on both sides of the Atlantic have mitigated the impact of the financial crisis on 
the financial system and the economy. Monetary policymakers, too, must learn their lessons 
from the crisis and take greater account of the impact their decisions have on the financial 
cycle. The challenge ahead is to find the right balance between exiting too early and exiting 
too late. 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 Naturally there are other important topics in monetary policy which I have had to leave out. 
For example, considerable challenges for monetary policy arise from the bad shape of public 
finances  in  the  euro  area  –  which  is,  of  course,  a  problem  common  to  many  advanced 
economies  –  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  growing  heterogeneity  within  the 
monetary union. Both can hamper the conduct of the single monetary policy in general and 
the exit from its very accommodative stance in particular. Maybe we can touch upon some of 
these issues in the discussion. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 5
