 Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The Uganda Securities Exchange’s 
efforts in deepening and broadening capital markets 
Speech  by  Prof  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Nation Media Group Shares Cross-listing Luncheon, Kampala, 19 October 2010. 
 The Chairman, Nation Media Group, Mr. Wilfred Kiboro  
The Chairman, Capital Markets Authority, Uganda, Mr. Haji Twaha Kawasse  
The CEO, Uganda Securities Exchange, Mr. Joseph Kitamirike  
The CEO, Nation Media Group, Mr. Linus Gitahi  
Directors and Staff of Nation Media Group, Shareholders, Investors,  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies & Gentlemen  
I  am  pleased  to  have  been  invited  to  attend  and  make  key  remarks  at  this  luncheon 
commemorating today’s cross listing of East Africa’s premier Media House, the Nation Media 
Group. I want to commend and appreciate Nation Media Group for the gesture.  
The building block of the success of the Uganda Securities Exchange that we witness today 
is  largely  attributed  to  Government  and  we  must  applaud  its  efforts  in  creating  an 
environment in which the economy can thrive.  
Together  with  the  Government,  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda  in  particular  consists  of 
providing  a  supporting  environment  for  rigorous  economic  activity  through  sound  and 
coherent  macroeconomic  policies.  The  Central  Bank’s  efforts 
towards  supporting 
macroeconomic environment have centered on preserving price stability.  
Ensuring a reasonably low level of inflation helps reduce uncertainty in economic decision-
making so that individuals and investors have a reliable basis for long-range decisions and 
plans. The Bank’s efforts to keep inflation in check have so far been successful. A continuing 
commitment  to  prudent  macroeconomic  policies  builds  confidence  in  Uganda  as  an 
investment destination and boosts the country as a whole.  
The USE has played it role in providing an efficient, well regulated exchange that has made 
the  investment  process  as  simple,  affordable  and  transparent  as  possible.  However,  the 
underlying investment decision is dependent upon perceptions of the future performance of 
Uganda as a whole.  
In conclusion, I wish to highlight some critical factors that will govern the progress of the USE 
going forward. Firstly, will be the steadfast commitment to taking a regional and global view 
for purposes of deepening and broadening our capital markets. Secondly, our regulatory and 
enforcement structures should be responsive to today’s market place.  
In  conclusion,  I  want  to  congratulate  the  Nation  Media  Group’s  Board  of  Directors,  the 
Management  and  staff  for  this  monumental  achievement  today  and  also  recognize  the 
following  parties  who  were  very  important  to  ensuring  this  transaction  was  concluded 
professionally and in good time:  
The Transaction Advisor African Alliance Uganda,  
The Legal Advisors in Uganda Sebalu & Lule,  
The Legal Advisors in Kenya Iseme, Kamau, Maema Advocates  
and finally  
The Reporting Accountants PriceWaterhouseCoopers.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 1
