Andrew G Haldane: Global imbalances in retrospect and prospect  
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England,  
at the Global Financial Forum, Chatham House Conference on “The New Global Economic 
Order”, London, 3 November 2010. 
 I am grateful to Charlie Bean, Martin Brooke, Oliver Bush, Richard Davies, Katie Farrant, Samuel Knott, William 
Speller,  Gregory  Thwaites,  Iain  de  Weymarn,  Tomasz  Wieladek,  Michelle  Wright  and  Gabriele  Zinna  for 
comments and contributions. 
Global  imbalances  are  colossal.  At  their  high-water  mark  in  2006,  imbalances  of  the 
G7 economies totalled around 5% of GDP. Like Colossus, global imbalances straddle many 
of today’s most important global public policy issues. These include the architecture of the 
international monetary system, the future of the international trading system and the design 
of the international financial system. These are high stakes.  
This paper assembles some facts from the past on global imbalances. More speculatively, it 
also  assesses  some  of  the  factors  shaping  the  course  of  imbalances  in  the  future.  Those 
medium-term forces suggest that imbalances may get worse before they get better. If so, this 
global  financial  fault-line  could  cause  further  tremors  to  the  international  monetary,  trading 
and financial system in the period ahead, the like of which we are currently experiencing.  
Global imbalances – past 
Global imbalances are a natural by-product of free trade in goods, services and capital. In 
others words, capital flows are a necessary ingredient of trade and capital liberalisation. In 
that sense, they are good cholesterol. But capital flows may also demonstrate an imbalance 
between  demand  and  output  in  an  economy,  which  must  eventually  correct  if  debt  and 
wealth  stocks  are  not  to  become  unsustainable.  Sharp  corrections  in  rates  of  domestic 
absorption and/or capital flows could then result, with attendant output costs. In that sense, 
global imbalances may also be bad cholesterol.1 
So  which  are  capital  flows  today?  Historical  evidence  is  illuminating.  Chart  1  plots  (the 
absolute value of) current account balances in thirteen countries, as a % of GDP, since 1880. 
Other  than  in  wartime,  global  imbalances  are  at  their  highest  in  well  over  a  century.  They 
have surpassed levels which prevailed during the classical Gold Standard and are more than 
twice levels during the Bretton Woods period (Chart 2). For some individual countries, these 
capital flows look larger still, both absolutely and relative to historical norms (Chart 3). 
It is not just the size of these global flows that is unusual. So too is their direction. Contrary to 
theory,  capital  is  flowing  from  developing  countries  with  a  low  capital  stock,  towards 
developed  countries  with  a  high  capital  stock  (Lucas  (1990)).  In  other  words,  capital  is 
flowing  “uphill”,  away  from  countries  where  the  marginal  product  of  capital  should  be  high 
and towards countries where it should be low. This makes the pattern of global capital flows 
doubly perplexing. 
                                                 
1   Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) discuss the causes of “good” and “bad” imbalances. 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 1
 
Perplexing need not mean bad. Current account imbalances are no more than the arithmetic 
difference between gross capital inflows and outflows. As these gross flows increase as a 
result of financial liberalisation, it is natural to expect the difference between them to become 
more volatile (Obstfeld (2010)). As Chart 4 shows, the growth of gross capital flows in the 
 2 
 BIS Review 174/2010
years preceding the crisis was dramatic. At the start of the 1980s, gross capital flows were 
around 5% of world GDP. By 2007, they had risen to 7 times that. 
This  growth  in  capital flows  and  imbalances  has  been  mirrored  in  the path  of  the external 
balance sheets of the major economies. These, too, have adjusted rapidly. In 1985, the US 
was  a  net  external  creditor.  By  2009,  it  had  become  a  net  external  debtor  to  the  tune  of 
around 20% of GDP. In 1999, China was a net external debtor. By 2008, it had become a net 
external creditor of around one third of GDP.  
An interesting perspective on the drivers of imbalances is provided by looking at the gross 
saving  and  investment  behaviour  of  surplus  and  deficit  countries  over  this  period.  Chart  5 
looks at these patterns. It suggests a couple of striking patterns.  
First,  the  correlation  between  saving  and  investment  rates  appears  to  have  weakened 
significantly  over  the  past  two  decades,  for  both  surplus  and  deficit  countries.  This  is 
consistent  with  increasing  capital  mobility.  Historically,  there  has  been  a  high  correlation 
between national saving and investment rates – the Feldstein-Horioka (1980) puzzle. Chart 6 
plots the Felstein-Horioka correlation coefficient alongside an index of financial liberalisation 
from Obstfeld and Taylor (2004).  
Between 1930 and 1980, the Feldstein-Horioka coefficient was close to one – a puzzlingly 
high co-movement between saving and investment. But that pattern has shifted significantly 
over the past 30 years. Saving and investment correlations are no longer puzzlingly strong. 
Indeed, just ahead of crisis, saving/investment correlations had fallen to around zero. They 
are  presently  at  their  lowest  levels  in  almost  a  century.  On  the  face  of  it,  this  might  point 
toward  a  rather  benign  interpretation  of  rising  global  imbalances:  they  may  simply  be  the 
mirror image of rising capital liberalisation. This would be a good cholesterol story.  
Even then, however, there may be risks associated with intermediating large global flows of 
funds.  Gross  flows  can  matter.  As  experience  during  2008  illustrated  (Chart  4),  sharp 
reversals of these gross flows can disrupt the functioning of financial systems, in particular 
banking  systems  reliant  on  overseas  funding.  Large  inflows  may  also  cause  indigestion 
problems for small domestic capital markets. The strong upward pressures on asset prices in 
a number of emerging market economies over the past few months are testament to that. 
As Chart 5 also shows, most of the rise in global flows over the past decade is accounted for 
by changes in the saving rates of deficit and surplus countries, rather than in their investment 
rates. In other words, differential savings behaviour has been the prime mover behind rising 
global  imbalances.  It  is  unsurprising,  then,  that  savings  behaviour  lies  at  the  heart  of  the 
current debate among policymakers and academics on the causes of imbalances. 
This, too, need not be bad news. For example, differential savings may simply be mirroring 
fundamentals,  reflecting  differences  in  rates  of  time  preference  among  consumers  or 
differential  rates  of  technological  progress  among  companies.  Equally,  it  is  possible  to 
conceive of explanations for differential saving which are less well-rooted in fundamentals, 
such as lax monetary policy in the West or mercantilist trade policy in the East.2 These latter 
explanations take us closer to a bad cholesterol story for global imbalances.  
This is where much of the current debate on global imbalances is centred. Are they the result 
of surplus countries saving excessively – a “savings glut” explanation (Bernanke (2005))? Or 
is it instead the deficit countries saving too little – a “savings shortage” explanation (Taylor 
(2007)). Put differently, is the problem impatience in the West or excessive patience in the 
East? 
                                                 
2   This can lead to a global co-ordination (or adding-up) problem, as countries seek individually to each run a 
current account surplus, so depressing global demand (King (2010)). 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 3
 Global imbalances – present  
To  begin  to  answer  those  questions,  consider  recent  saving  behaviour  in  two  archetypical 
surplus and deficit countries – China and the US. Chart 7 looks at the respective contributions 
of  China  and  the  US  to  global  savings  since  1980.  In  1980,  the  US  contributed  around  a 
quarter  of  global  saving.  Today,  it  contributes  around  a  tenth.  China  has  been  the  mirror 
image. Having contributed less than 5% in 1980, today China is the single largest source of 
global saving, contributing around one fifth. 
It has been argued by some that these trends could simply reflect different cultural attitudes 
towards  saving  among  US  and  Chinese  citizens.  In  the  US,  it  is  often  said  that  there  is  a 
culture  of  spending  rather  than  saving  –  neurologically,  the  impatience  gene  may  be 
dominant (Haldane (2010)). In China, by contrast, the culture may be biased towards saving 
rather  than  spending,  with  the  patience  gene  dominant.  In  other  words,  differences  in  
agents’ rate of time preference, or degree of patience, might account for savings imbalances 
(Buiter (1981)).  
4 
 BIS Review 174/2010
  
But a recent survey of time preferences in 45 countries suggests cultural differences are not 
the full story (Wang, Rieger and Hens (2010)). Asked to choose between a payoff this month 
and a larger payoff next month, 68% of US students choose to wait; they exhibit patience. 
Facing  the  same  trade-off,  62%  of  Chinese  students  made  the  same  choice.  These 
differences are small.3 They are also the “wrong way around” to explain imbalances. 
So if cultural factors are not the explanation, what is? Charts 8 and 9 plot national saving 
rates in China and the US, broken down on a sectoral basis. There are striking differences in 
saving  behaviour  across  the  government,  household  and  corporate  sectors  in  the  two 
countries.  
Around  two-thirds  of  the  rise  in  Chinese  savings  since  the  early  1990s  derives  from  the 
corporate sector.4 This reflects two things. First, rapidly rising corporate profitability, against a 
backdrop  of  strong  growth  and  rising  productivity  (Ma  and  Yi  (2010)).  Since  2000,  profits 
among Chinese industrial companies have risen around 30% per year.  
Second,  more  significantly  still,  most  of  these  profits  have  been  retained  within  Chinese 
companies  rather  than  distributed  to  shareholders  (Qiao  and  Song  (2009)).  These 
differences  in  US/Chinese  corporate  savings  behaviour  show  up  dramatically  in  dividend 
payouts. The average dividend payout ratio among US corporations in 2009 was 40%, with 
less than a quarter of companies failing to pay a dividend. The average dividend payout ratio 
among listed Chinese corporations in 2009 was around 18%. Among these, more than half 
paid no dividend whatsoever.  
                                                 
3   Among the 45 countries, Germany ranked as the most patient (almost 90% of students waited), Nigeria the 
least patient (less than 10%). 
4   Using firm-level data, Bayoumi, Tong and Wei (2010) argue that Chinese listed firms’ corporate savings rates 
are neither especially high compared to listed firms in other countries and the gross savings rate for a typical 
listed Chinese firm has declined, albeit insignificantly, between 2002–2007. 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 5
Charts 10 and 11 consider the distribution of changes in dividend payout ratios among global 
and Chinese companies. Among global companies, payout ratios rarely fall. More than half of 
the  time  they  increase.  Impatient  investors  demand  immediate  dividend  gratification,  
leading to large and rising distributions. This dividend ratchet is a puzzle in empirical finance 
(Black (1976)). If anything, it is one which is growing over time.  
The payout pattern among Chinese quoted firms could not be more different. Increases and 
decreases  in  payout  ratios  are  roughly  evenly  split.  The  high  proportion  of  “unchanged” 
payout  ratios  simply  reflects  the  zero  payout  policy  of  more  than  half  of  quoted  Chinese 
companies. There is no distribution ratchet. Profits are largely ploughed back. In this respect, 
Chinese  payout  behaviour  today  is  not  dissimilar  to  that  among  US  companies  during  its 
rapid growth phase in the 19th century (Chart 12). 
There  is  more  than  one  explanation  for  this  behaviour  among  Chinese  firms.  A  benign 
interpretation is that it reflects the high option value of Chinese companies retaining funds 
given  future  growth  prospects,  as  with  US  firms  in  the  19th  century.  A  less  benign 
interpretation  is  that  it  reflects  an  absence  of  external  sources  of  company  finance  and 
shortfalls  in  corporate  governance,  with  insufficient  discipline  on  companies  by  outside 
investors. In practice, both factors are likely to have been important over recent years. 
Turning  to  US  and  Chinese  households,  during  this  century  household  gross  saving  as  a 
fraction of GDP has averaged less than 5% in the US. In China, it has averaged around 20%. 
In  China,  the  constancy  in  high  household  saving  rates  masks  two  striking,  but  broadly 
offsetting,  factors:  a  10  percentage  point  fall  in  household’s  income  share;  and  a 
10 percentage point rise in household’s saving propensity (Ma and Yi (2010)). Much of the 
rise  in  saving  propensities  appears  to  be  precautionary.  Facing  “three  mountains”  in  the 
future  –  education,  pensions  and  health  care  –  Chinese  consumers  have  taken  the  high 
(saving) road.  
In  the  US,  the  fall  in  the  household  financial  balance  correlates  strongly  with  the  path  of 
household net worth (McKelvey (2010), Chart 13). This correlation emerged strongly during 
the 1980s, with the simultaneous rise in net wealth and fall in saving. This correlation has 
remained strong as net worth has reversed recently due to falling house and equity prices.  
What  lies  behind  these  movements?  Lax  monetary  policy  has  been  suggested  by  some 
(Taylor (2007)). Financial liberalisation is a second plausible candidate. This had the effect of 
loosening constraints on the supply of housing credit and thereby boosting housing demand 
and prices in the US. It also enabled households to mobilise and withdraw the accrued equity 
in  their  property  to  finance  spending.  Estimates  of  housing  equity  withdrawal  for  spending 
rose from under 2% of personal disposable income in 2000 to around 4% at the peak in 2005 
(Greenspan and Kennedy (2007), Chart 14).  
Micro-level  data  support  this  story.  They  show  that  home  equity  withdrawal  was  driven 
primarily by households with low credit scores and high credit card utilisation rates, who are 
most  likely  to  have  been  credit-constrained  in  the  past  (Mian  and  Sufi  (2009)).  As  these 
constraints loosened, spending rose and saving fell. Liberalisation fed impatience.  
These  patterns  are  also  consistent  with  an  inequality-based  explanation  for  lower  saving 
(Rajan  (2010)).  Rising  inequality  may  generate  an  increased  desire  to  “keep  up  with  the 
Jones’s”. That, in turn, may have led to higher borrowing, and lower net saving, by the poor.  
And  what  applies  within  countries  appears  also  to  apply  across  them.  Among  advanced 
countries,  there  is  a  significant  negative  relationship  between  within-country  measures  of 
inequality and the current account position (Chart 15). Rising inequality, by lowering savings 
rates among the poor, appears to be deficit-inducing. Rising imbalances may have important 
social, as well as economic, roots. 
 
6 
 BIS Review 174/2010
 BIS Review 174/2010 
  7
 8 
   BIS Review 174/2010
Global financial integration;  
Differential savings behaviour.  
Global imbalances – future 
So what will be the key forces driving global imbalances in the period ahead? Judging from 
the recent past, two factors have been important:  
 
 
Consider in turn their likely evolution.  
Global financial integration. In the period ahead, this will be shaped by a number of medium-
term structural factors. One key such factor is cross-country GDP convergence. Over time, 
we  would  expect  countries’  income  levels  to  converge,  as  currently  low  income  countries 
catch-up  with  their  high  income  trading  neighbours  (Solow  (1956)).  This  convergence 
process is a well-established empirical phenomenon (Barro (1991) and Mankiw, Romer and 
Weil (1992)).  
Accompanying this GDP convergence is likely to be catch-up in gross external balance sheet 
positions. As countries develop, so too does their integration into global capital markets, with 
higher levels of gross external assets and liabilities. Cross-country evidence bears this out. 
There  is  a  well-defined  empirical  relationship  between  a  country’s  GDP  per  head  and  its 
gross external balance sheet position (Chart 16). 
 
 BIS Review 174/2010 
  9
Taken together, these two factors imply a pattern of steadily rising gross capital flows over 
time,  with  growth  strongest  among  countries  catching  up  with  their  high-income  trading 
neighbours.  It  is  possible  to  calibrate  these  integration  trends  and  project  them  forward  to 
simulate future external balance sheets positions among the major economies.  
These simulations take as initial conditions cross-country GDP per capita, projected forward 
using  a  calibrated  rate  of  growth  convergence  drawn  from  previous  empirical  studies  and 
adjusted  for  known  future  changes  in  population  growth.  This  gives  a  set  of  cross-country 
projections for GDP per capita. These are then translated into gross external balance sheet 
positions using historical relationships with per capita GDP.  
Chart  17  plots  some  projections  of  (the  average  of)  gross  external  assets  and  liabilities 
relative to GDP for the G7 countries, China, India, Brazil and Russia. These projections go 
out  to  2050.  Among  the  G7  economies,  external  balance  sheet  ratios  are  broadly  flat  at 
around  twice  nominal  GDP.  This  flatness  is  driven  in  large  part  by  assumption,  as  it  is 
assumed the highest-income countries maintain a flat ratio of external assets to GDP.  
This is almost certainly too extreme an assumption. Although smaller than in the past, there 
remain strong home biases in the investment portfolios of developed countries’ institutional 
investors (Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) and IMF (2010)). As liberalisation progresses, these 
biases  would  be  expected  to  unwind,  boosting gross  external  assets in  relation  to  GDP  in 
developed  countries.  For  that  reason,  the  calibration  here  can  be  thought  of  as  a  limiting 
case of the likely adjustments in the pattern of global capital flows.  
Subject to that important caveat, the growth in the non-G7 economies’ contribution to global 
capital markets is still striking. Among the BRICs, external balance sheets as a fraction of 
GDP exceed G7 levels by around 2035. By 2050, they are around 2.5 times nominal GDP. 
These patterns are even more striking when expressed as a share of global external assets. 
By 2050, over half of all G20 external assets are associated with the BRICs, up from around 
9%  currently  (Chart  18).  Among  the  non-G7,  non-BRIC  G20  countries,  their  share  trebles 
from 5% to around 15%.  
Within  this,  some  countries’  share  of  global  assets  sky-rocket.  China’s  share  of  global 
finance rises to around 30% by 2050, roughly that of the entire G7. India rises to almost 20%, 
from less than 0.5% currently (Chart 19). The US share falls from 28% to around 12%.  
The  flow  counterpart  to  these  external  stock  positions  is  no  less  dramatic  (Chart  20).  By 
2020, gross capital flows of the non-G7 countries are projected to exceed those of the G7 
economies. By 2030, non-G7 flows are more than three times G7 flows. And by 2040, they 
are almost four times G7 flows.  
Even if these calibrations represent an extreme case, they are indicative of a striking power 
shift in the pattern of global financial flows. If this path were to be even broadly followed, it 
would have implications for the scale of global imbalances, which will tend to rise as gross 
capital  flows  outpace  GDP  growth.  It  would  have  implications  for  financial  stability,  as  the 
scale of gross capital surges (fuelling bubbles) and reversals (fuelling crises) increases. And 
it may also have implications for the dollar’s reserve currency status. 
Differential savings behaviour. Consider next the possible future path of savings behaviour 
across  the  world’s  major  economies.  There  are  likely  to  be  many  factors  affecting  cross-
country saving rates in the period ahead. Predicting these is fraught with uncertainty. But one 
key medium-term determinant of saving is demographics (Wilson and Ahmed (2010)). And 
demographic trends are something about which there is little uncertainty in the period ahead.  
 
10 
 BIS Review 174/2010
    BIS Review 174/2010 
 11
Chart  21  looks  at  projected  changes  in  the  fraction  of adults  in  the  age  range  40  to  59  in 
developed  and  emerging  countries  –  the  “prime  savings”  cohort.  It  suggests  a  sharp 
bifurcation in demographic trends in developed and emerging economies. Among advanced 
countries, an ageing population results in a decline in the middle-aged share, from a peak 
today of almost 30% to around 25% by 2050. For developing economies the reverse is true, 
with  a  continuing  rise  in  the  fraction  of  middle-aged  individuals  from  20%  today  to  around 
25% by 2050.  
Cross-country  correlations  suggest  a  relationship  between  this  prime-saving  cohort  and 
saving  behaviour.  Chart  22  suggest  that  every  1  percentage  point  rise  in  the  middle-aged 
population share raises the national savings rate by around 1.75 percentage points.5 Taken 
together with emerging population trends, this suggests some potentially important life-cycle 
pressures on the global pattern of savings in the period ahead. 
 
  
To bring these pressures to life, Chart 23 projects saving rates in a selection of countries out 
to 2050 based on population and GDP projections. This is plainly a gross over-simplification. 
These projections take no account of a whole host of other factors that may push in the other 
direction, including later retirement dates which may boost saving in countries with an ageing 
population, and falls in saving rates in emerging countries as the social safety net is widened.  
But  based  on  demographic  and  convergence  trends  alone,  saving  rates  in  the  BRICS, 
already  high,  are  projected  to  continue  their  ascent.  For  example,  in  India  they  lead  to  an 
increase in saving of around 10 percentage points of GDP, raising the saving ratio to 50% by 
2050, as demographics push a larger fraction of the population into the high savings cohort. 
Among developed countries, meanwhile, these trends are reversed with further demography-
induced falls in savings rates. 
                                                 
5   See also the evidence in Wilson and Ahmed (2010). 
12 
 BIS Review 174/2010
  
Given the rising income share of the BRIC countries, these patterns are even more dramatic 
when we consider country shares of future global savings. China rises to represent around 
40%  of  global  savings  by  2050.  Over  the  same  period,  the  US  share  of  global  savings 
continues its descent, stabilising at around 5%.  
On  the  face  of  it,  these  partial  equilibrium  projections  of  future  savings  rates  suggest  that 
medium-term pressures on global imbalances could intensify, with saving rates rising among 
surplus  countries  and  falling  in  deficit  countries.  To  bring  this  intuition  to  life,  assume  for 
simplicity’s  sake  that  investment  rates  as  a  fraction  of  GDP  remain  fixed  at  2010  levels 
across countries, but that saving rates evolve as in Chart 23. The result would be a trebling 
of global imbalances from current elevated levels over the next twenty years.  
Of course, these projections only look at the marginal impact on imbalances of medium-term 
demographic  and  GDP  trends.  They  take  no  account  of  a  host  of  other  factors  that  may 
defuse  pressures  on  imbalances,  including  adjustments  in  real  exchange  rates,  lower 
investment ratios as the marginal product of capital reduces in emerging markets and falls in 
saving rates in emerging markets as the social safety net is widened and deepened. These 
offsetting  factors  will  need  to  be  very  significant,  however,  if  they  are  to  counterbalance 
medium-term upward pressures on global imbalances from demographics and convergence.  
Conclusion  
So where does this leave us? With a potentially dramatic change in the future international 
financial landscape. With a potentially decisive shift in the pattern of global capital flows. With 
potential  pressures  for  a  further  widening  in  global  imbalances.  And,  if  so,  with  a  likely 
intensification  of  pressures  on  international  monetary,  financial  and  trading  systems.  The 
impetus to reform these global systems is strong today. It may be stronger still tomorrow. 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 13
References  
Barro,  R  J  (1991),  “Economic  Growth  in  a  Cross  Section  of  Countries”,  The  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 106(2), pp 407–443.  
Bayoumi, T, Tong, H and S-J Wei (2010), “The Chinese Corporate Savings Puzzle: A Firm 
Level Cross-country Perspective” NBER Working Paper, No. 16432.  
Bernanke,  B  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Housing  Bubble”,  Speech  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia.  
Black, F (1976), “The Dividend Puzzle”, Journal of Portfolio Management, 2(2), pp 5–8.  
Blanchard, O and G M Milesi-Feretti (2009), “Global Imbalances: In Midstream?”, IMF Staff 
Position Note 09/29.  
Buiter,  W  H  (1981),  “Time  Preference  and  International  Lending  and  Borrowing  in  an 
Overlapping-generations Model” Journal of Political Economy, 89(4) pp 769–797.  
Feldstein,  M  and  C  Horioka  (1980),  “Domestic  Saving  and  International  Capital  Flows” 
Economic Journal, XC, pp 314–29.  
Greenspan, A and J Kennedy (2008), “Sources and Uses of Equity Extracted from Homes” 
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 24(1), pp 120–44.  
Haldane,  A  G  (2010),  “Patience  and  Finance”  Remarks  at  the  Oxford  China  Business 
Forum, Beijing, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech445.pdf  
International Monetary Fund (2010), Global Financial Stability Report, October 2010.  
King, M (2010),  speech to the University of Exeter Business Leaders’ Forum, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech419.pdf  
Kuijs, L (2006), “How Will China’s Saving-investment Balance Evolve?” World Bank Policy 
Research Working Paper, No. 3958.  
Lane, P R and G M Milesi-Ferretti (2007), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised 
and  Extended  Estimates  of  Foreign  Assets  and  Liabilities,  1970–2004”  Journal  of 
International Economics, 73(2), pp 223–50.  
Lucas, R E, Jr. (1990), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”, American 
Economic Review 80(2), pp 92–96.  
Ma, G, and W Yi (2010), “China’s High Saving Rate: Myth and Reality” BIS Working Papers, 
No. 312.  
Mankiw, N G, Romer, D and D N Weil (1992), “A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic 
Growth”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, (107)2, pp 407–437.  
McKelvey,  E  (2010),  “Housing  Holds  the  Key  to  the  Consumer  Conundrum”,  Goldman 
Sachs US Economic Analyst, Issue No: 10/14.  
Mian,  A  and  A  Sufi  (2010),  “House  Prices,  Home-equity  Based  Borrowing,  and  the  US 
Household Leverage Crisis” American Economic Review, forthcoming.  
Obstfeld,  M  (2010),  “Expanding  Gross  Asset  Positions  and  the  International  Monetary 
System”  Remarks  at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  symposium  on 
“Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Obstfeld, M and K Rogoff (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: 
Is There a Common Cause?”, NBER Working Paper 777.  
Obstfeld, M and A Taylor (2004), Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth, 
Cambridge University Press.  
14 
 BIS Review 174/2010
Qiao,  H  and  Y  Song  (2009),  “China’s  Savings  Rate  and  Its  Long-term  Outlook”  Goldman 
Sachs Global Economics Paper, No. 191.  
Rajan,  R  (2010),  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World  Economy, 
Princeton University Press.  
Reinhart,  C  M  and  K  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial 
Folly, Princeton University Press.  
Solow,  R  M  (1956),  “A  Contribution  to  the  Theory  of  Economic  Growth”,  The  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 70(1), pp 65–94.  
Taylor,  A  M  (2002),  “A  Century  of  Current  Account  Dynamics”  Journal  of  International 
Money and Finance, 21(6) pp 725–748.  
Taylor, J (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy”, NBER Working Paper, No. 13682.  
Wang, M, Rieger M O and T Hens (2010), “How Time Preferences Differ: Evidence from 
45 Countries”, Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper, No. 09–47.  
Wilson, D and S Ahmed (2010), “Current Accounts and Demographics: The Road Ahead”, 
Goldman Sachs Global Economics Paper, No. 202. 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 15
