Muhammad Al-Jasser: The need for national data compilation and 
dissemination 
Opening speech by His Excellency Dr Muhammad Al-Jasser, Governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  (SAMA),  at  the  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  and  Monetary 
Statistics workshop, Institute of Banking, Riyadh, 11 December 2010. 
 Dear Workshop Organizers and Participants, 
It is my pleasure to inaugurate such an important workshop at a time when many national 
data compiling agencies are confronted with ever increasing user demands and challenges. 
I  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  thanks  to  all  the  GCC  organizations  (central  banks, 
ministries  of  finance,  and  statistics  centers)  participating  in  this  event.  Of  course,  I  also 
extend  my  appreciation  to  the  IMF  for  providing  pivotal  leadership  in  building  capacity  for 
producing official statistics in the region, and paving the way for adding new dimensions and 
quality to official statistics and thereby contributing to the global statistical system. 
Dear Participants, 
The need to compile and disseminate data in a systematic and professional way, especially 
with  respect  to  the  growing  data  needs,  can  hardly  be  overemphasized.  For  example,  the 
recent global financial crisis has exposed the lack of data in key statistical areas that might 
have helped authorities better measure and understand the risks to the international financial 
system. Remedies to fill such data gaps (e.g., maturity mismatches) are critical for monitoring 
systemic risk originating from systemically important financial institutions. 
Similarly, the rapid transformation of the world economy has also brought new data needs for 
environmental and social welfare statistics. Data needs could originate from the necessity to 
cover new areas of measurement and use new methodologies to improve data quality, use 
and  availability.  They  could  also  stem  from  the  requirement  to  come  up  with  new  subject 
measures and variables.  
Therefore, national data compiling agencies must be cognizant of such evolving data needs 
to remain relevant and useful. After all, it is the responsibility of the statistical community to 
make sure to address new data-related challenges which are driven by current and emerging 
user demands for official statistics. 
It is potentially in recognition of emerging data-related challenges that the IMF took several 
steps  to  enhance  transparency  and  openness,  and  launched  two  key  data  dissemination 
standards  in  the  1990s.  These  included  the  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  (SDDS) 
and the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). 
Let me briefly touch on these standards. 
The  SDDS  was  established  in  1996  to  guide  IMF  member  countries,  interacting  or  set  to 
interact  with  international  capital  markets,  in  the  provision  of  their  economic  and  financial 
data to the public. Countries that subscribe to the SDDS agree to follow good practices in 
four areas which include the coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of data, public access to 
those  data,  data  integrity,  and  data  quality.  Earlier  this  year,  the  IMF  Board  expanded  the 
scope  of  the  SDDS  to  include  seven  financial  soundness  indicators  in  order  to  make  all 
stakeholders  better  understand  cross-border 
for 
participating nations to report international investment positions on a quarterly basis over a 
transition  period  of  four  years.  Indeed,  the  SDDS  is  a  global  benchmark  for  disseminating 
macroeconomic data to the public. So far 64 countries have subscribed to the SDDS. 
linkages,  and  made 
it  mandatory 
BIS Review 170/2010 
 1
The  GDDS,  on  the  other  hand,  was  launched  in  1997  for  member  countries  with  less 
developed statistical systems. This system gives member countries a basic framework for a 
broader national statistical development strategy, addresses the full range of issues critical 
for  compiling  and  disseminating  data,  and  makes  explicit  plans  for  improvement  to  align 
national procedures with best practices. Until now, the number of participating countries in 
GDDS is 106. 
Both  standards  share  several  common  features,  and  have  successfully  contributed  to 
enhancing  the  range,  quality,  and  timeliness  of  country  data  available  to  the  public.  They 
have  also  been  instrumental  in  providing  better  information  to  underpin  the  operations  of 
international  financial  markets  and  economic  policy  assessments  in  general,  and  thus 
facilitating public and private decision making. May countries that have participated in GDDS 
be able to eventually join the club of the SDDS. This is what Saudi Arabia has planned for. 
Dear Participants,  
This 5-day workshop is to expand on many data-related issues and standards, including the 
ones that I have just talked about. Some of the important topics which would be covered over 
the next five days include: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
IMF's key data dissemination initiatives 
Essentials of SDDS and its subscription 
Essentials of standardized report forms 
Development  details  of  statistical  bulletin  tables  proposed  by  the  GCC  monetary 
union. 
This  workshop  will  provide  an  opportunity  for  all  GCC  organizations  in  the  statistical 
community to share national experiences, and lead discussions to identify areas for mutual 
cooperation for further improvement in data production and presentation. 
I may emphasize here that timely availability of reliable and mutually consistent national data 
would  be  of  great  help  to  the  GCC  Monetary  Council  in  its  task  of  preparing  for  the 
achievement of the ultimate goal of GCC Monetary Union. It will also provide the basis for 
judicious  policy  formulations  even  after  the  establishment  of  the  Monetary  Union  for  the 
region.  I  therefore  urge  you  all,  to  actively  engage  in  workshop  discussions  to  fully 
understand these matters, come to useful conclusions and make your deliberations fruitful. 
Dear Participants 
I  hope  that  by  the  end  of  the  workshop  you  will  have  achieved  at  least  the  following  two 
objectives: 
1. 
Sufficient statistical insight to effectively address burgeoning data-related issues and 
concerns, and be in a position to produce intended statistical forms and table, and; 
Identification of some future work based on mutual cooperation.  
2. 
I thank you all for your attention and wish all a productive and rewarding workshop. 
2 
 BIS Review 170/2010
