Anna Maria Tarantola: Women nurturing sustainable development 
Remarks by Ms Anna Maria Tarantola, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the 
58th  World  Forum  for  Women  Entrepreneurs  (Femmes  Chefs  d’Entreprises  Mondiales  – 
FCEM) World Congress, Florence, 22 October 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  President  of  AIDDA,  Laura  Frati  Gucci,  for  inviting  me  to  the 
58th FCEM  World  Congress  in  this  conference  entitled  “How  Women  Face  the  New 
Economy  and  Ecology”.  The  goal  of  the  conference,  to  assess  women’s  contribution  in 
balancing  economic  growth  and  natural  resource  conservation,  is  both  topical  and 
challenging. This is not the first time I find myself considering human-ecosystem interaction: 
natural resources are a fundamental input for production and consumption; the environment 
is the receptacle for the waste generated by these processes.1 The fundamental question we 
must  address  today  is  how  to  increase  and  spread  wealth  and  wellbeing  while  respecting 
and protecting the environment. 
The  role  of  women  is  central.  Throughout  history,  women  and  nature  have  been  closely 
linked: in Ayurvedic philosophy, prakriti – nature – is symbolized by a woman; similarly, the 
idea of “mother earth” is common to many Indo-European cultures. Perhaps it is no accident 
that  so  many  of  those  who  have  contributed  to  raising  our  environmental  consciousness 
have been – and are – women. Let me mention four of these outstanding women. 
The biologist Rachel Carlson was the first to study the harmful effects of DDT in the early 
nineteen-sixties.  She  can  be  considered  the  founder  of  the  modern  environmental 
movement. She was a scientist who stood behind her findings despite fierce attacks from the 
chemical industry lobby.2 
The  environmental  scientist  Donella  Meadows  co-authored  the  book  Limits  to  Growth3 
which laid the foundations for an analysis of the Earth’s limited capacity to support economic 
and  demographic  growth.  This  report  was  criticized  –  in  particular  by  economists4  –  but 
without doubt it had a profound impact on the analytical method used to study environmental 
problems. Meadows used computer technology to apply  the theory of complex systems to 
the economic analysis of the reciprocal effects of growth and the environment; this is now the 
standard method to analyse the economic effects of climate change (Integrated Assessment 
Modelling). 
The  Nobel  Peace  Prize  winner  Wangari  Maathai,  an  activist  and  founder  of  the 
environmental  movement  Green  Belt,  contributed  importantly  to  the  reforestation  of  vast 
areas  of  Kenya.5  Reforestation  not  only  plays  a  primary  role  in  combating  desertification, 
ensuring that soil retains its nutrients and water resources, but it is also an essential tool for 
reducing greenhouse gases.6 
                                                 
1   Tarantola  A.M.  (2010),  Crescita  economica,  benessere  e  sostenibilità  della  domanda  di  energia,  remarks 
addressed to the Istituto Giuseppe Toniolo di Studi Superiori, Naples, 20 January. 
2   www.rachelcarson.org. 
3   Meadows D.H., Randers J., Meadows D.L. and W.W. Behrens (1972), The Limits to growth: A report for the 
Club of Rome's Project on the Predicament of Mankind. 
4   Nordhaus  W.D.  (1992),  Lethal  Model  2:  The  Limits  to  Growth  Revisited,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic 
Activity, Economic Studies Program, The Brookings Institution, vol. 23. 
5   www.greenbeltmovement.org. 
6   About  one-fifth  of  green  house  gas  emissions  are  linked  to  deforestation.  As  a  result,  reforestation  has 
become a means of reducing the concentration of climate-altering gases, and whose centrality is witnessed by 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 1
Maathai demonstrated that managing common resources, such as the environment, does not 
necessarily  have  to  lead  to  over-exploitation,  to  the  “Tragedy  of  the  Commons”  as 
prophesied by Garrett Hardin. The economist Elinor Ostrom found evidence to support this 
outcome  in  her  research  on  institutional  economics.  Ostrom  was  awarded  the  2009  Nobel 
Prize  in  Economic  Sciences,  the  first  woman  ever  to  win  in  this  category,  for  her  work  on 
economic governance. 
Women and the environment in developing countries 
1.  
In  industrialized  countries,  women  have  made  important  contributions  in  raising  our 
environmental  consciousness.  In  developing  countries,  however,  where  rural  communities 
are still prevalent, women remain in a condition of profound dependency on their surrounding 
environment;  women  are  often  responsible  for  activities  essential  for  family  subsistence: 
collecting water and firewood and working in the fields.7 
For  this  reason,  environmental  degradation,  and  the  effects  of  climate  change  on  the 
availability of water resources and crop yields, particularly hurt women. Migration owing to 
climate change,8 which primarily affects men, further increases the burden of toil for women. 
Moreover,  women  and  children  account  for  the  majority  of  victims  in  environmental 
catastrophes,9  the  frequency  of  which  could  increase  in  the  future  because  of  global 
warming. 
It  is  emblematic  that  the  Millennium  Goals  place  side-by-side  the  objectives  of  gender 
equality and a development model for the sustainable use of natural resources.  
Women  are  therefore  the  ideal  interlocutors  for  the  adoption  and  dissemination  of 
sustainable practices and it is precisely because of their sensibility that Agenda 21 for the 
promotion of sustainable development recommends increasing “[…] the proportion of women 
decision  makers,  planners,  technical  advisers,  managers  and  extension  workers  in 
environment and development fields”. 
A prerequisite for increasing female participation is improving conditions overall for women. A 
World Bank study shows that in countries where women are better educated, there is greater 
success  adapting  to  the  negative  effects  of  climate  change.10  Indicators  from  the  Global 
Gender  Gap,  referring  in  particular  to  economic  participation  and  opportunity,  on  the  one 
hand, and political empowerment on the other, show depressingly low figures for women in 
Sub-Sahara Africa, the Middle East, and North African countries (below 0.5 with reference to 
economic participation, 0.2 with reference to political empowerment) and reveal an enormous 
disparity with respect to men.11  
                                                                                                                                                      
the United Nations’ Program for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (UNREDD) – 
which  aims  to  make  it  more  economic  to  conserve  and  manage  forest  resources  correctly  than  to  deplete 
them. 
7   A  review  can  be  found  in  the  volume  published  by  UNEP  (United  Nations  Environmental  Program),  2004, 
Women and the Environment. 
8   Tarantola A.M. (2009), Economia solidale e sviluppo sostenibile nell’era della post globalizzazione, remarks 
addressed to the Fondazione Sorella Natura, Rome, 26 June. 
In the recent tragic flooding in Pakistan, 85 per cent of the victims were women and children. Mandelbaum J.,  
The female victims of Pakistan's flood, Salon, 20 August 2010 
(www.salon.com/life/broadsheet/2010/08/20/pakistan_floods_women_victims_open2010). 
9  
 
10   World Bank (2010), Adaptation to climate extremes in developing countries: the role of education. 
11   World Economic Forum (2010), The Global Gender Gap Report 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2010
The industrial world: a green economy led by women? 
2.  
In industrialized countries, the availability of high quality forms of energy has greatly reduced 
the  amount  of  time  and  effort  that  women  must  dedicate  to  housework.  Women  here  no 
longer are required to interact directly, and on a daily basis, with the environment to meet 
family needs. Nonetheless, there is substantial evidence that women are more sensitive to 
environmental matters. 
According to OECD research, the most environmentally-aware consumers are women. They 
are more likely than men to recycle domestic waste, buy organic food and green products, 
and place greater value on fuel-efficient means of transport.12  
These results are confirmed by other studies. A survey conducted by Eurobarometro found 
that  in  2007  the  share  of  women  who  said  they  had  done  something  to  improve  the 
environment was six percentage points higher than for men; the International Social Survey 
Programme’s 1993 study of attitudes to the environment found, in the sample of countries 
surveyed, a large gap between women and men in terms of willingness to pay more for eco-
friendly  consumer  goods,  particularly  in  Italy,  Australia  and  Norway.13  Recent  behavioural 
studies give further support to these results.14 
Can this greater willingness to consider the effects of one’s actions on the environment be 
integrated in the transformation process that is “greening” our economies? In brief, does the 
green economy represent an opportunity to capitalize on the strong bond between women 
and nature? 
The answer is yes – but only if the necessary policies are implemented to ensure that this 
opportunity  is  realizable  and  we  can  reap  the  dual  dividends  of  more  sustainable,  less 
discriminatory,  economic  growth.  For  this  to  happen,  actions  must  be  taken  to  increase 
women’s presence in the work force in general and in the green economy in particular.  
The  Lisbon  agenda  indicated  the  affirmative  action  that  should  be  taken  to  prevent 
discrimination against women in their professional development. Among these, those making 
it easier for women to combine career and family are particularly important. For example, a 
study of the development of the photovoltaic sector in Southern Italy underlines the fact that 
despite  very  high  female  employment  potential  (among  recent  architecture  graduates, 
women outnumber men), the realization of this potential could be blocked by the lack of pre-
school facilities for young children.15  
Other measures relate specifically to the possibilities offered by the new green sectors with 
the  greatest  growth  potential  (renewable  energy,  construction  techniques,  and  agricultural 
biomass). 
In these sectors, women represent a very small part of the total work force and they rarely 
hold the top positions.16 This is due primarily to cultural factors, which have perpetuated a 
high  level  of  segregation  in  these  industries.  Even  in  traditional  energy  sectors,  female 
participation is extremely low – 14 per cent according to the latest survey of firms. 
                                                 
12   OECD, Survey on Household Environmental Behaviour, 2008. 
13   The data can be consulted online at zacat.gesis.org/webview/index.jsp. 
14   Czap N. and H.J. Czap (2010), An experimental investigation of revealed environmental concern, “Ecological 
Economics”, vol. 69. 
15   Barboni A. (2009), Women Workers in the Photovoltaics Industry in Southern Italy, a study prepared for the 
previously cited Sustainlabour report. 
16   A joint UNEP-Sustainlabour study estimates that fewer than 1 per cent of top managers in the energy industry 
are women. Sustainlabour (2009), Green Jobs and Women Workers, Draft Report. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 3
In the future, the fact that only a small number of women pursue advanced degrees in the 
sciences  could  penalise  their  access  to  the  green  economy.  In  Italy,  only  17  per  cent  of 
women under the age of 44 have taken a scientific degree course at university (compared 
with 39 per cent of men); almost twice as many study the humanities. It is essential to launch 
a comprehensive information campaign to guide women’s choices towards the subjects that 
have  the  greatest  employment  potential,  breaking  the  vicious  cycle  of  segregation  in  the 
traditional energy sectors. 
Women must have the opportunity to play a leading role in developing the green economy. It 
would be ironic indeed if the growth achieved with the development of the green economy 
actually increased the employment gap between men and women. 
Conclusion 
3.  
Women  have  a  unique  and  strong  bond  with  nature.  This  can  and  must  be  used  as  a 
stepping  stone  to  design  policies  for  sustainable  development.  We  must  aim  to  reconcile 
economic  welfare,  the  conservation  of  natural  resources,  and  environmental  quality.  We 
cannot afford to lose this opportunity to paint the green economy pink.  
To achieve these goals, however, women must be enabled to provide their contribution. The 
weight  of  women  in  politics,  in  institutions  and  throughout  the  business  world  must  be 
increased,  including  at  the  top  levels.  For  this  to  happen,  a  joint  effort  is  required  by  all 
stakeholders  –  politicians,  firms,  trade  unions,  civil  and  cultural  leaders,  the  media  –  and 
women  themselves.  A  more  efficient  use  of  female  resources  in  the  labour  market  and  a 
higher presence of female entrepreneurs can help us to pursue a more sustainable and more 
equitable  economy,  more  attentive  to  the  needs  of  the  environment  and  of  human  beings 
themselves. 
In less developed countries, policies aimed to ensure women greater freedom of action (such 
as  access  to  education  and  the  right  to  vote)17  can  help  contrast  the  adverse  impact  of 
climate  change,  for  example  through  mitigating  measures  (such  as  reforestation)  and 
enabling ecosystems to be more resilient to higher temperatures (for instance, through the 
management of land and water resources to prevent desertification).  
In industrialized countries, women’s greater eco-awareness places them in an ideal position 
to actively participate in setting policies that can attenuate the utilization of natural resources 
and  limit  the  harmful  effects  of  consumption  and  production  on  the  environment.  The 
presence  of  a  greater  number  of  women  entrepreneurs  in  innovative  sectors,  such  as  the 
green economy, is also key to achieve these goals.  
Even  simple  actions  can  help  to  reduce  our  impact  on  the  ecosystem:  conservation  of 
resources (by water and energy saving) and pollution control (for example, more ecofriendly 
means of transport and producing less household waste). The literal meaning of economics 
is  “household  management”  and  women  have  traditionally  been  the  frugal,  pragmatic, 
responsible  and  farsighted  managers  of  home  and  family.  The  same  can  be  true  for  the 
environment – home to us all.  
Almost twenty years ago, the Rio Declaration proclaimed that “Women have a vital role in 
environmental management and development. Their full participation is therefore essential to 
achieve sustainable development”. Now is the time to translate this declaration into action to 
ensure a better, fairer and more sustainable future, for all of us and for generations to come. 
                                                
 
17   Amartya Sen sees this extension of freedom, and not just greater physical wellbeing as the key to overcoming 
women’s subordination in the less developed countries. The same conclusions can be extended to the socially 
excluded in the developed countries. Sen A. (2001), Development as Freedom, O.U.P., 1999. 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2010
