 Thomas M Hoenig: The Federal Reserve’s mandate – long run 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at 
the National Association of Business Economists Annual Meeting, Denver, 12 October 2010. 
 The  views  expressed  by  the  author  are  his  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, its governors, officers or representatives. 
Introduction and framework  
Thank you, and it is a pleasure to welcome you to Denver. This is the largest metropolitan 
area in the Tenth Federal Reserve District and home to one of three branches of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City.  The  Denver  branch  serves  Colorado,  Wyoming  and 
New Mexico – three of the seven states of our region.  
I appreciate this opportunity to engage and interact with business economists from around 
the  country  regarding  the  policy  choices  now  confronting  the  nation,  especially  those 
confronting the Federal Reserve.  
In setting out my views, I’ll first spend a minute describing the economy’s performance and 
then turn to the matter of quantitative easing versus my preferred path of gradual steps to a 
renormalization of monetary policy.  
Short-term outlook  
Currently,  a  major  and  necessary  rebalancing  is  taking  place  within  our  economy.  This 
includes the deleveraging of consumers, businesses and financial institutions, and it’s during 
a time that state and local governments are struggling with budgets and mounting debt loads. 
In this context, a modest recovery with positive overall data trends should be seen as highly 
encouraging.  
Following a bounce back from restocking earlier this year, the economy has slowed but it has 
not faltered. GDP growth has averaged about a 2½ percent annual pace since the first of the 
year. Industrial production is showing growth of almost 6 percent, and high-tech more than 
double that. The consumer continues to buy goods, with personal income growing at more 
than a 3 percent rate, personal consumption expenditures at about 3 percent, and retail sales 
at  more  than  4  percent.  And  the  U.S.  economy  has  added  more  than  850,000  net  new 
private sector jobs since the first of the year. While modest, these are positive trends for the 
U.S. economy.  
The issue is, of course, that while private jobs are being added within the economy, it is not 
enough  to  bring  unemployment  down  to  where  we  all  would  like  to  see  it.  Unemployment 
remains  stubbornly  high  at  9.6  percent.  With  such  numbers,  there  is,  understandably,  a 
desire and considerable pressure for the Federal Reserve to “do something, anything” to get 
the economy back to full employment. And for many, including many economists, this means 
having the Federal Reserve maintain its zero interest rate policy or further still, engage in a 
second  round  of  quantitative  easing  –  now  called  QE2.  Some  are  even  suggesting  these 
actions are necessary for the Federal Reserve to comply with its statutory mandate.  
Interpreting the policy mandate  
The FOMC’s policy mandate is defined in the Federal Reserve Act, which requires that: “The 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  shall  maintain 
the  monetary  and  credit  aggregates 
long-run  growth  of 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 1
 commensurate  with  the  economy’s  long-run  potential  to  increase  production,  so  as  to 
promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-
term interest rates”.  
There is, within the Act, a clear recognition that our policy goals are long-run in nature. In this 
way, the Act recognizes that monetary policy works with long and variable lags. Thus, the 
FOMC should focus on fostering maximum employment and stable prices in the timeframe 
that monetary policy can legitimately affect – the future. The FOMC must be mindful of this 
fact  and  be  cautious  in  pursuing  elusive  short-term  goals  that  have  unintended  and 
sometimes disruptive effects.  
In  recent  weeks,  some  have  argued  that  with  inflation  low  and  the  jobless  rate  high,  the 
Federal Reserve should provide additional accommodation. Such an action – the purchase 
of  assets  by  the  central  bank  as  a  policy  easing  tool  –  would  mark  a  second  round  of 
quantitative easing. While there are several ways to accomplish this, many suggest that the 
most  likely  method  would  be  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  purchase  additional  long-term 
securities, including U.S. Treasuries.  
Proponents of QE2 argue that it would provide a near-term boost to the economy by lowering 
long-term interest rates while raising inflation. These benefits would arise from the purchase 
of  U.S.  Treasury  securities,  which  would  lead  to  lower  U.S.  Treasury  and  corporate  rates. 
These lower interest rates would then stimulate consumer and business demand in several 
ways,  including  encouraging  mortgage  refinancing  that  could  lead  to  increased  consumer 
spending, boosting exports through a likely lower exchange rate, and fostering higher equity 
prices,  thereby  creating  additional  wealth.  Such  a  move  is  said  to  be  consistent  with  the 
FOMC’s September 21, 2010 announcement, which stated that it was “prepared to provide 
additional accommodation if needed to support the economic recovery and to return inflation, 
over time, to levels consistent with its mandate”.  
Such easing, it is hoped, would bring inflation back up to something closer to 2 percent, a 
rate that many judge to be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate. In addition, higher 
inflation  would  increase  demand  as  consumers  move  purchases  forward  to  avoid  paying 
higher prices in the future.  
So, with these purported benefits, why would anyone disagree? 
New risks and QE2  
I  believe  there  are  legitimate  reasons  to  be  cautious  when  considering  this  approach.  A 
meaningful evaluation of QE2 must consider not simply whether benefits actually exist but, if 
they do, how large they are and whether they are larger than possible costs.  
Based on recent research and the earlier program of purchasing long-term securities – known 
as LSAP – I think the benefits are likely to be smaller than the costs.  
Some  estimates  suggest  that  purchasing  $500  billion  of  long-term  securities  might  reduce 
interest rates by as little as 10 to 25 basis points. The LSAP program was effective, in part, 
because we were in a crisis. Financial markets were not functioning properly, or at all, during 
the  depths  of  the  financial  crisis.  In  such  a  situation,  it  is  reasonable  that  central  bank 
purchases would be useful and effective. However, currently the markets are far calmer than 
in the fall of 2008. The financial crisis has passed and financial markets are operating more 
normally. One could argue, in fact, that with markets mostly restored to pre-crisis functioning, 
the effect of asset purchases could be even smaller than the 10 to 25 basis point estimate.  
I  would  also  suggest  that  even  if  we  achieved  slightly  lower  interest  rates,  the  effect  on 
economic activity is likely to be small. Interest rates have systematically been brought down 
to unprecedented low levels and kept there for an extended period. The economy’s response 
has been positive but modest.  
2 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 In  fact,  right  now  the  economy  and  banking  system  are  awash  in  liquidity  with  trillions  of 
dollars lying idle or searching for places to be deployed or, perhaps more recently, going into 
inflation hedges. Dumping another trillion dollars into the system now will most likely mean 
they will follow the same path into excess reserves, or government securities, or “safe” asset 
purchases. The effect on equity prices is likely to be minor as well. There simply is no strong 
evidence  the  additional  liquidity  would  be  particularly  effective  in  spurring  new  investment, 
accelerating  consumption,  or  cushioning  or  accelerating  the  deleveraging  that  is  hopefully 
winding down.  
If the purported benefits are small, what are the possible costs?  
First,  without  clear  terms  and  goals,  quantitative  easing  becomes  an  open-ended 
commitment  that  leads  to  maintaining  the  funds  rate  too  low  and  the  Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet too large. The result is a further misallocation of resources, 
more imbalances and more volatility.  
There  is  no  working  framework  that  defines  how  a  quantitative  easing  program  would  be 
managed.  How  long  would  the  program  continue,  and  what  would  be  the  ultimate  size? 
Would purchases of long-term assets continue until the unemployment rate is 9 percent or 
8 percent  or  even  less?  Would  purchases  continue  until  inflation  rises  to  2  percent  or 
3 percent  or  more?  Would  the  program  aim  to  reduce  the  10-year  Treasury  rate  to 
2¼ percent or 2 percent or even less? Without answers to these and other questions, QE2 
becomes an open-ended policy that introduces additional uncertainty into markets with few 
offsetting benefits.  
As central bank assets expand under quantitative easing, what will be the exit strategy? In 
the midst of a financial crisis, we may not have the luxury of thinking about the exit strategy. 
In current circumstances, however, we must define an exit strategy if the objective is to raise 
inflation  but  contain  interest  rate  expectations.  If  history  is  any  indication,  without  an  exit 
strategy the natural tendency will be to maintain an accommodative policy for too long.  
While  I  agree  that  the  tools  are  available  to  reduce  excess  reserves  when  that  becomes 
appropriate, I do not believe that the Federal Reserve, or anyone else, has the foresight to 
do it at the right time or right speed. It may work in theory. In practice, however, the Federal 
Reserve doesn’t have a good track record of withdrawing policy accommodation in a timely 
manner. 
Second,  we  risk  undermining  Federal  Reserve  independence.  QE2  actions  approach 
fiscal  policy  actions.  Purchasing  private  assets  or  long-term  Treasury  securities  shifts  risk 
from investors to the Federal Reserve and, ultimately, to U.S. taxpayers. It also encourages 
greater attempts to influence what assets the Federal Reserve purchases. When the Federal 
Reserve buys long-term securities – such as the $1.2 trillion in mortgage backed securities it 
purchased during the financial crisis – it favors some segments of the market over others. 
And  when  the  Federal  Reserve  is  a  ready  buyer  of  government  debt,  it  becomes  a 
convenient source of cash for fiscal programs. During a crisis this may be justified, but as a 
policy instrument during normal times it is very dangerous precedent.  
Third, rather than inflation rising to 2 or 3 percent, and demand rising in a systematic 
fashion, we have no idea at what level inflation might settle. It could remain where it is 
or  inflation  expectations  could  become  unanchored  and  perhaps  increase  to  4  or 
5 percent. Not knowing what the outcome might be makes quantitative easing a very risky 
strategy. It amounts to attempting to fine-tune inflation expectations – a variable we cannot 
precisely or accurately measure – over the next decade.  
And why might inflation expectations become unanchored?  
The budget deficit for 2011 is expected to be about $1 trillion. Even if the Federal Reserve 
were  to  purchase  only  $500  billion  –  and  this  amount  in  itself  is  a  source  of  considerable 
uncertainty – that would appear to monetize one-half of the 2011 budget deficit. In addition, 
the  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  –  now  and  over  the  next  decade  –  will 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 3
 influence  inflation  expectations.  Expanding  the  balance  sheet  by  another  $500  billion  to 
$1 trillion over the next year, and perhaps keeping the balance sheet at $3 trillion for the next 
several years, or increasing it even further, risks undermining the public’s confidence in the 
Fed’s commitment to long run price stability, a key element of its mandate.  
While QE2 might work in clean theoretical models, I am less confident it will work in the real 
world.  Again,  I  will  note  that  the  FOMC  has  never  shown  itself  very  good  at  fine-tuning 
exercises  or  in  setting  and  managing  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  to  achieve  the 
desired results.  
Given  the  likely  size  of  actions  and  the  time  horizon  over  which  QE2  would  be  in  place, 
inflation  expectations  might  very  well  increase  beyond  targeted  levels,  soon  followed  by  a 
rise in long-term Treasury rates, thereby negating one of the textbook benefits of the policy.  
Non-zero rates as an option  
At  this  point,  with  a  modest  recovery  underway  and  inflation  low  and  stable,  I  believe  the 
economy  would  be  better  served  by  beginning  to  normalize  monetary  policy.  If  long  run 
stability is the goal, then re-normalizing policy is an important step toward realizing that goal. 
How might we achieve this goal?  
First, rather than expand the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet by purchasing additional U.S. 
Treasury securities, the Fed should consider discontinuing the policy of reinvesting principal 
payments from agency debt and mortgage-backed securities into Treasury securities. Given 
where  we  are,  we  would  need  to  make  such  a  change  slowly  but  systematically.  Allowing 
maturing mortgage backed securities to roll off, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would 
shrink gradually, with relatively small consequences for financial markets.  
Second, we should take the first early steps to normalize interest rate policy. This is not a call 
for high rates but a call for non-zero rates. In 2003 the FOMC delayed our efforts to raise 
rates. In that period we reduced the federal funds rate to 1 percent and committed to keeping 
it  there  for  a  considerable  period.  This  policy  fostered  conditions  that  let  to  rapid  credit 
growth,  financial  imbalances  and  the  eventual  financial  collapse  from  which  we  are  still 
recovering. Had we been more forceful in our action to renormalize policy then, it’s likely we 
might have suffered far less in 2008 through 2010.  
Also, any effort to renormalize policy would include signaling a clear intention to remove the 
commitment to maintain the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent “for an extended period”. As 
the public adjusts to this, we should then turn to determining the pace at which we return the 
funds rate to 1 percent. Once there, we should pause, assess and determine what additional 
adjustment might be warranted. A 1 percent federal funds rate is extremely accommodative, 
but from that point we could better judge the workings of the interbank and lending markets 
and determine the order of policy actions that would support sustained long-term growth.  
Other concerns regarding zero rates  
These  are  difficult  times,  no  doubt,  and  it  is  tempting  to  think  that  zero  interest  rates  can 
spark  a  quick  recovery.  However,  we  should  not 
the  possible  unintended 
consequences of such actions. Zero rates distort market functioning, including the interbank 
money and credit markets; zero rates lead to a search for yield and, ultimately, the mispricing 
of risk; zero rates subsidize borrowers at the expense of savers.  
Finally, it is important to note, that business contacts continue to tell me that interest rates 
are  not  the  pressing  issue.  Rather,  they  are  concerned  with  uncertainties  around  our  tax 
structure; they are desperate to see this matter settled. They need time to work through the 
recent healthcare changes; and they are quite uncertain about how our unsustainable fiscal 
policy will be addressed. They are insistent that as these matters are addressed, they will 
ignore 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 once  again  invest  and  hire.  QE2  cannot  offset  the  fundamental  factors  that  continue  to 
impede our progress. 
Conclusion  
We are recovering from a set of shocks, and it will take time. These shocks did not develop 
overnight,  but  came  after  years  of  interest  rates  that  were  too  low,  leverage  that  was  too 
high, and financial supervision that was too lax. If we have learned anything from this crisis, 
as well as past crises, it is that we must be careful not to repeat the policy patterns we have 
used in previous recoveries, such as 1990–91 and 2001. If we again leave rates too low for 
too  long  out  of  fear  that  the  recovery  is  not  strong  enough,  we  are  almost  assured  of 
suffering these same consequences yet again. I am fully committed to the Federal Reserve’s 
dual maintain to maintain long-run growth so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum 
employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 5
