Patrick Honohan: Economic stability issues 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Joint Committee on Economic Regulatory Affairs, Dublin, 10 November 2010. 
 Thanks  for  inviting  me  to  discuss  issues  of  economic  stability  with  you  here  today.  I  am 
accompanied  by  Bernard  Sheridan,  Assistant  Director  General  in  charge  of  Consumer 
Protection  at  the  Bank,  and  Anne-Marie  McKiernan  head  of  the  newly  created  Risk 
Department. 
The topic could not be more relevant as I need hardly remark and, although it is specifically 
financial stability that is the most explicit part of our remit at the Central Bank, we also have 
as  one  of  our  main  explicit  objectives,  as  set  out  by  the  Oireachtas  in  the  Central  Bank 
Reform Act that was passed just a few months ago, “the provision of analysis and comment 
to  support  national  economic  policy  development.”  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  I  approach  our 
discussion today. 
Clearly  this  is  a  time  of  considerable  risk  and  balance  sheet  stress  in  Ireland.  Banks, 
households, firms and the Government have all been under pressure and what will inevitably 
be  a  lengthy  period  of  balance  sheet  repair  involving  consolidation  of  net  spending  is  in 
progress.  
I begin with the banks, whose behaviour has been central to the situation that has emerged 
both because of their own losses, but also because of the fact that the property price and 
construction  bubble,  which  they  fuelled  with  credit,  created  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial 
position of other sectors including the Government. 
The banks as a group went into the downturn more exposed than most other systems, and 
have correspondingly had to cope with worse loan-losses than most. 
The regulatory response over the past few quarters in Ireland has aimed at making them less 
vulnerable to confidence shocks or adverse sentiment. The scale on which capital has been 
replenished is very large, though the favourable impact on investor confidence has not yet 
been as strong as might be hoped for. Much of the reason for the slow return in confidence 
lies in the parallel weakness of the fiscal situation – a weakness which also has its roots in 
the credit-driven property bubble which lulled the managers of the public finances into a false 
sense  of  security  ending  up  with  a  tax  and  spending  structure  highly  vulnerable  to  the 
downturn. 
With the government finances so stretched, the additional burden of recapitalizing the banks 
has reduced fiscal headroom and contributed to the concern of the financial markets. Still, as 
I have been reminding foreign observers that this recapitalization burden is often over-stated 
as a contributor to the required fiscal adjustment. Indeed, the interest cost of servicing the 
notes  injected  to  recapitalize  the  banks  only  accounts  for  about  one-tenth  of  the  fiscal 
adjustment now in prospect over the next four years.  
I will not rehearse here the details of the scale on which capital has been injected into the 
banks with which members of the Committee will be fully aware. It is important that relevant 
foreign investors have this information at their finger tips so that they can run their slide-rule 
over  these  figures  so  that  they  can  see  the  extent  to  which  buffers  have  been  created  to 
absorb not only the loan-losses that can be fully expected to occur, but also to take account 
of  any  additional  loan-losses  over-and-above  what  has  been  projected  as  likely  over  the 
coming couple of years. I sense a concern in the market that some other problems might be 
hiding  somewhere.  Possibly  this  concern  is  due  to  the  way  in  which  the  later  NAMA  loan 
tranches  turned  out  to  involve  more  severe  haircuts  than  the  first  lot.  Specifically  though, 
attention has naturally focused on the residential mortgage book, and the scale of the loan-
BIS Review 149/2010 
 1
in 
trends 
the  expected 
Ireland.  Despite  recent 
losses that need to be allowed for here. Although the actual accounting provisions taken by 
the banks on this portfolio are small, the Central Bank has insisted that allowance be made 
for much higher loan losses. The stress case loan-loss ratio to 2012 of 5 per cent used by 
the Central Bank for the Irish residential loan books to determine required capital levels is 
well  outside  historic  experience 
in  arrears  and 
reschedulings, there is as yet no hard indication that the stress levels would be exceeded. In 
anticipation of next year’s update of the PCAR exercise, the Central Bank is embarking on a 
more  granular  analysis  of  the  this  part  of  the  portfolio  in  particular  to  track  its  evolving 
performance  and  determine  whether 
loss  amounts  remain  sufficient. 
Undoubtedly  there  are  many  stressed  households  with  burdensome  mortgage  debts,  not 
least in the buy-to-let category; the policy challenges that this presents in terms of achieving 
workable and fair solutions are more complex than the mere issue of the likely loan-losses 
that might be involved.  
Presumably over-capitalizing the banks could help build confidence, but this is not something 
which the State can be lightly asked to do, given the pressures on its finances. Indeed, the 
market’s perception of the stressed condition of the Sovereign is surely weighing also on the 
banks in terms of interest costs and ready access to funding; just as the banking problems 
have weighed on the Sovereign. 
Liquidity issues for the banks relate to the working out of the portfolio imbalances that had 
accumulated  by  2008,  specifically  the  very  large  loan-to-deposit  ratio  entailing  borrowing 
abroad. Much of this exposure to rollover and withdrawal risk has been transformed into a 
claim of the ECB. Over time this block of legacy indebtedness will be run off, a process that 
could be assisted by sale of securitized parts of the portfolio. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  need  to  stem  the  deterioration  in  the  Government’s  balance  sheet  and 
return it to a contained convergent path. Much ink has been spilled on this matter in recent 
days and weeks and I do not need to provide much background. 
For the record, let me state that I strongly endorse the Government’s decision to set out a 
multi-year budgetary plan. The need to announce and implement a clear and fully specified 
plan to bring the public finances onto a credibly convergent path of debt dynamics is of the 
utmost  importance  in  order  to  restore  domestic  and  international  confidence  and  thereby 
unblock  growth  dynamics  and  restore  access  at  reasonable  cost  to  international  capital 
markets. I also regard the parameters as being within the credible range and a good basis for 
rebuilding confidence.  
Household  and  business  balance  sheets  are  also  stressed.  I  have  already  referred  to  the 
over-indebtedness  of  some  households,  not  least  those  affected  by  the  increase  in 
unemployment. Working through these issues is something on which the Central Bank has 
specific responsibilities to ensure that distressed households are dealt with properly by the 
banks, and my colleague Matthew Elderfield, who has participated in the Expert Group on 
Mortgage Arrears has spoken on these matters recently. I don’t need to add anything to what 
he  has  said,  except  perhaps  to  emphasize  and  reiterate  that,  when  I  have  used  the  word 
“manageable”  in  recent  times,  in  relation  to  the  costs  of  bank  recapitalization,  I  have  of 
course  been  referring  to  the  overall  fiscal  program.  It  is  an  important  message  for  me  to 
transmit  to  investors  drawing  their  attention  to  the  fact  that  these  costs  are  clearly  not 
“unmanageable”. I have evidently not being referring to the consequences of the downturn 
and the fiscal measures already taken or contemplated on individual households: it would be 
more than impertinent for me to do so. 
Finally,  there  is  the  question  of  the  business  sector  and  here  I  think  more  work  is  also 
needed on restructuring the finances of many small firms whose underlying viable business 
is threatened by the overhand of property-related debt that they accumulated on the side, so 
to speak. This is a challenging work out job for the banks to tackle, and it needs to be done 
expeditiously in order to ensure that viable businesses are not overwhelmed but can instead 
resume their contribution to the economic recovery. 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2010
