Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Electronic trading and financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Kiyohiko  G  Nishimura,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
International Paris-Europlace Financial Forum, Tokyo, 29 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
1.  
I am honored and delighted to have been given the opportunity to speak at this International 
Financial Forum, organized by Paris EUROPLACE. Further, it gives me great pleasure to be 
alongside  our  long-time  friend  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France.  Paris 
EUROPLACE has played an important role both in the growth of the financial industry and in 
the  evolution  of  financial  markets.  In  particular,  it  has  provided  various  opportunities  for 
discussion among its members, who represent a broad spectrum of the financial industry. I 
salute  the  members  for  their  contributions.  Growth  in  major  economies  has  slowed 
substantially  since  the  financial  crisis  of  2008,  and  it  is  now  more  than  ever  important  to 
examine  the  ways  in  which  the  financial  industry  can  regain  credibility  and  strengthen 
macroeconomic fundamentals. This forum provides a timely opportunity to exchange views 
on the positioning of the financial industry for new growth opportunities. The key to growth in 
the financial industry is to find businesses which are in a position to grow domestically and 
internationally, and then to assist these businesses further by providing ready access to risk 
money. At the same time, we should improve the infrastructure of financial markets, through 
which money is funneled.  
In this respect, advances in information and communication technology (ICT) have already 
changed  the  landscape  of  financial  markets,  providing  a  set  of  powerful  tools  for  financial 
institutions:  These  advances  have  increased  the  efficiency  of  trading  and  settlement,  and 
proved useful in evaluating the price and risk of financial products.  
Today,  I  will  focus  on  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  ICT-induced  changes,  that  is,  the 
impressive  developments  made  in  recent  years  in  the  electronic  trading  of  financial 
products.1  
Global expansion of electronic trading and the Japanese market  
2.  
I will start with an overview of the global expansion of electronic trading, which involves two 
elements. The first is automated order placement and trade execution, so-called algorithmic 
trading. The second is the substantial speed-up and improved efficiency in matching orders 
in  the  market,  that  is,  the  new  generation  of  order-matching  engines.  Although  these  two 
elements  have  been  present  since  the  1980s  and  90s,  their  global  application  has  been 
expanding  and  accelerating  particularly  rapidly  in  recent  years,  thanks  to  advances  in 
Information and Communication Technology.  
Electronic  trading  has  made  especially  dramatic  developments  in  the  equity  and  currency 
markets of major industrialized countries. As much as 60 to 70 percent of the amount traded 
in  the  United  States,2  and  some  50  percent  of  that  traded  in  Europe,3  is  executed 
                                                 
1   The following is partly based on Sugihara, Y., 2010, “Approaches of Market Participants for the Reduction of 
Transaction Costs: Application of Algorithmic Trading and Trading Venues,” IMES Discussion Paper Series 
No. 2010-J-26, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan (in Japanese). 
2   See Hendershott, T., C. M. Jones, and A. J. Menkveld, 2011, “Does Algorithmic Trading Improve Liquidity?” 
The Journal of Finance, forthcoming (February 2011). 
3   See Hendershott, T. and R. Riordan, 2009, “Algorithmic Trading and Information,” NET Institute working paper 
No. 09–08. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 1
electronically and automatically, according to surveys and recent studies of equity markets. 
In  currency  markets,  about  half  of  the  amount  traded  is  estimated  to  3  involve  algorithmic 
trading.4 
Although  there  is  less  electronic  trading  in  the  Japanese  equity  market  than  in  the  United 
States  and Europe,  it  is  currently  a  growing  focus  of  attention.  Arrowhead,  the  new  order-
matching  engine  for  cash  products  on  the  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange,  has  been  operating 
smoothly and steadily since its launch at the beginning of this year. The results have been 
impressive. The order-response time of cash equity trades has been reduced to only a few 
milliseconds. Also, in February 2011, the Osaka Stock Exchange plans to launch J-GATE, a 
new  high-speed  order-matching  engine  for  equity  derivative  trading.  Proprietary  trading 
systems (PTSs), which correspond to the multilateral trading facilities (MTFs) in Europe, still 
have only a small market share in Japan, but their trading volume is gradually increasing.  
In tandem with these infrastructural developments, algorithmic trading volumes seem to be 
increasing steadily in Japanese equity markets. Although no official statistics are available, 
20  to  30  percent  of  all  orders  received  by  the  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange  are  placed  at  co-
location sites,5 which are specially designed for automatic, high-speed trading.6 This gives 
an indirect but clear indication of the growing importance of electronic and automated trades 
in Japan.  
Positive effects of expanding electronic trading  
3.  
With  its  greater  speed  and  diversified  trading  venues,  electronic  trading  has  changed  the 
market microstructure of the financial world. Market participants’ trade execution strategies 
have  changed  dramatically.  High-frequency  trading  has  come  to  have  a  greater  presence. 
High-frequency  trading  can  be  considered  as  a  type  of  trading  strategy  similar  to  market 
making and short-term liquidity provision. Various execution strategies, derived and devised 
from the experience of traders and the results of computationally intensive research, have 
been transformed into computer algorithms and offered to various investors in the financial 
market.  
These changes have enabled institutional investors to take advantage of cutting-edge tactical 
executions. Depending on market conditions, many of the algorithmic trading strategies slice 
block  orders  into  smaller  child  orders,  to  avoid  the  price  changes  caused  by  block-order 
executions, that is, so-called market impact. The expansion of algorithmic trading is leading 
to fundamental changes in the market: for example, orders are smaller but more numerous 
than before.  
This development in market microstructure has had a positive impact on market functioning, 
improving investment performance per risk capital through the reduction of transaction costs. 
In fact in the U.S. market, where algorithmic trading started earlier than other places, it has 
reduced  market-making  costs  and  narrowed  bid-offer  spreads  significantly.7  Moreover, 
recalling  that  algorithmic  trading  strategies  for  block  trades  are  designed  to  reduce  their 
                                                
 
4   See  Table  2  in  Chaboud,  A.,  B.  Chiquoine,  E.  Hjalmarsson,  and  C.  Vega,  2009,  “Rise  of  the  Machines: 
Algorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market,”  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve  System, 
International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 980. 
5   Co-location is a service that allows market participants to install their devices at data centers of trading venues 
to minimize the physical distance between data centers and market participants’ devices. 
6   According to the Tokyo Stock Exchange. 
7   See  Figure  1–3  in  Hendershott  et  al.,  2009,  in  footnote  2.  There  is  an  empirical  study  on  the  reduction  of 
transaction costs as a result of MTF expansion in the recent European markets. For details, see Brandes, Y. 
and I. Domowitz, 2010, “Alternative Trading Systems in Europe: Trading Performance by European Venues 
Post-MiFID,” Journal of Trading, 5(3), pp.17–30. 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2010
market impact, an empirical study has shown that this type of algorithmic trading contributes 
to stabilizing intra-day realized volatility. Thus, algorithmic trading may help stabilize market 
prices, under normal circumstances and most of the time.8 
There  is  an  additional  positive  point.  Electronic  trading  enables  faster  information 
propagation.  Arbitrage  trades  between  individual  equities  and  between  markets  have 
increasingly been conducted automatically and at lightning speeds using algorithms. This is 
likely to boost the efficiency of the financial market and the allocation of scarce resources.  
Three challenges posed by electronic trading  
4.  
Although the expansion of electronic trading has brought many positive effects, as noted, it 
also  has  its  own  negative  side  with  respect  to  the  proper  functioning  of  financial  markets. 
There are three crucial issues.  
The  first  issue  is  market  vulnerability  induced  by  the  presence  of  electronic  trading.  In 
particular, algorithmic trading is vulnerable to unpredictable events. On May 6 of this year, 
the so-called Flash Crash caused a violent fluctuation in prices over some ten minutes in the 
U.S.  equity  market.  The  U.S.  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  and  the  Securities 
and  Exchange  Commission  carried  out  a  joint  investigation  into  the  incident.9  Their  Joint 
Report pointed out that, at the start of the Flash Crash episode, one algorithm’s automated 
execution  of  a  very  large  sell  order  confused  and  dislocated  other  algorithms.  As  a  result, 
many  market  participants,  whether  algorithmic  or  human,  refrained  from  buying,  and  thus 
market  liquidity  decreased  sharply,  leading  to  unusual  turbulence  in  several  stocks.  Some 
algorithm-based  arbitrage  trades  contributed  to  spreading  this  market  seizure  to  a  wide 
range of individual stock prices, leading to the full-blown Flash Crash.  
Although algorithmic trading may contribute to market stabilization in normal times, this may 
not  be  the  case  when  unexpected  events  or  unknown  unknowns  occur.  Mechanistic 
algorithms may not be able to respond properly to unexpected and unprecedented events in 
the  same  way  as  humans,  who  have  common  sense.  In  such  circumstances,  the  human 
brain performs better than the digital computer. Thus, a mutually complementary relationship 
between  algorithms  and  humans  is  absolutely  crucial.  In  particular,  safeguard  should  be 
considered, such as circuit breakers compatible with high-speed algorithmic trading.  
The Japanese equity market has not been immune from this type of market disruption. There 
have been several instances caused by large but erroneous orders that were filled instantly. 
Learning from these incidents, Japanese brokerage houses are now required to refrain from 
placing  orders  that  exceed  a  threshold  amount,  to  prevent  the  execution  of  mistaken 
orders.10 Moreover, a new market safeguard has been introduced which is compatible with 
high-speed  trading.  Just  in  time  for  Arrowhead’s  launch,  the  Tokyo  7  Stock  Exchange 
instituted  a  new  trading  rule,  requiring  a  one-minute  pause  at  order-matching  when 
sequential execution of a single order causes a large price impact which exceeds a certain 
price-change limit. 
The second question that electronic trading, or high-frequency trading in particular, poses to 
the market, is the issue of possible new ways of manipulating the market, and how to detect 
and  prevent  such  illegal  activities  in  the  age  of  lightning-speed  order  execution.  Some 
                                                 
8   See Chaboud et al., 2009, in footnote 4. 
9   See 
Futures 
Commodity 
U.S. 
Commission,  2010, 
http://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2010/marketevents-report.pdf. 
“Findings  Regarding 
Trading 
Commission 
Exchange  
the  Market  Events  of  May  6,  2010,”  available  at 
Securities 
and 
and 
10   See Article 5 in “Regulations Concerning the Establishment of an Order Management System by Association 
Members,” by the Japan Securities Dealers Association. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 3
algorithms incorporate information available on limit-order books to estimate current supply-
demand imbalances that might be open to exploitation. Note that such information gathering 
activities  are  necessary  for  properly  functioning  markets,  and  that  human  dealers  are  also 
engaged in similar activities. At the same time, it is true that illegal attempts to manipulate the 
market  may  be  hidden  behind  such  information  gathering  activities.  We  all  remember  the 
many lengthy and complicated probes of illegal market manipulation in the past. The point is 
that  high-speed  algorithmic  trading  makes  such  illegal  market  manipulation  ever  more 
sophisticated and harder to detect.  
There is particular concern about plots involving algorithm traders alone. For example, one 
algorithm  trader  may  try  to  drive  the  price  in  its  favor  by  intentionally  manipulating  other 
algorithm traders by instant quote stuffing, which human traders could not recognize visually, 
being  carried  out  at  lightning  speed.  Since  only  algorithmic  traders  are  involved,  an 
investigation  of  this  type  of  plot  would  entail  scrutinizing  a  tremendous  number  of  order 
records,  making  it  difficult  to  detect  illegal  manipulations  in  a  traditional  way.  Here,  the 
appropriate application of information 8 technology can be most effective. To put it differently, 
regulators and overseers should arm themselves with technology comparable to that used by 
high-speed villains themselves, though there is still a long way to go in this area. 
The third issue, which is more technical but more profound in nature than the previous two 
issues, is the question of how to avoid over-reliance on high-frequency traders as liquidity 
providers.  A  research  paper  on  the  background  to  the  Joint  Report  on  the  Flash  Crash 
reveals  an  interesting  fact.11  Toward  the  end  of  the  Flash  Crash,  some  high-frequency 
traders intensified their activities as market liquidity declined dramatically. Declining market 
liquidity  meant  the  absence  of  their  usual  trading  counterparties,  and  thus  these  high-
frequency  traders  repeated  and  intensified  their  automatic  high-speed  trading  among 
themselves. Their activities led to sizable price volatility in a very short period of time.  
It  should  be  noted  here  that,  even  though  high-frequency  traders  supply  liquidity  to  the 
market by offering a limit order and thus make a position when it is hit, these high-frequency 
traders try to close the position immediately after the original transaction. This is indeed why 
such  traders  are  called  “high  frequency”  traders.  Consequently,  when  there  are  large 
demand-supply gaps among non-high-frequency traders in the beginning, it is not at all likely 
in the end that the liquidity provided by high-frequency traders is sufficient to fill these gaps. 
Moreover,  if  the  market  is  dominated  by  mechanistic  traders,  who  react  to  microscopic 
directional  changes  in  9  prices  rather  than  to  market  fundamentals,  market  prices  may 
deviate further and further from the fundamentals once a demand-supply gap emerges. The 
Flash Crash is a perfect example of this, where the end result was just the contrary to the 
supposed stabilization. 
This serves to remind us of the utmost importance of market diversity, with respect to sellers 
and buyers, their strategies, and their referenced information. I would like to insist again that, 
in  order  to  make  markets  function  well,  it  is  essential  to  have  both  non-high-frequency 
investors  and  high-frequency  traders,  of  various  kinds.  Just  focusing  on  high-frequency 
traders  is  rather  misleading  in  understanding  the  impact  of  electronic  trading  in  financial 
markets.  
Closing remarks 
5.  
As I have documented so far, advances in information and communication technology have 
sent  ripples  and  waves  over  the  entire  financial  industry,  providing  new  opportunities  for 
growth  and  efficiency.  At  the  same  time,  these  advances  pose  serious  challenges  to 
                                                 
11   See  Kirilenko,  A.,  A.  S.  Kyle,  M.  Samadi,  and  T.  Tuzun,  2010,  “The  Flash  Crash:  The  Impact  of  High 
Frequency Trading on an Electronic Market,” preprint, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1686004. 
4 
 BIS Review 160/2010
maintaining market stability and integrity. Thus, to take full advantage of these opportunities, 
we  should  work  together  to  maintain  the  stability  and  integrity  of  the  financial  market  and, 
thereby, the financial system itself. This should be done in a timely manner, so as to cope 
with the rapid developments in technology.  
As a market participant, the Bank of Japan will continue to promote the stability, efficiency, 
and integrity of the financial system. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 5
