Patrick Honohan: The importance of sound information in assessing the 
health of the Irish banking sector 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the Chartered 
Accountants Ireland, Dublin, 23 November 2010. 
 There is a letter in the archives of the World Bank in Washington DC on the letterhead of the 
Shelbourne  Hotel,  Dublin,  dated  Saturday,  June  7,  1958.  Benjamin  King  writes  back  to 
headquarters on his mission to Ireland. This was the first ever such mission sent by either of 
the Bretton Woods Institutions (the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund) since 
Ireland had joined both of them in the previous year. King was in Dublin at the invitation of 
the Secretary of the Department of Finance, T.K. Whitaker, who had asked the World Bank 
to  help  by  carrying  out  a  review  of  the  Irish  economy  with  a  view  to  a  possible  borrowing 
programme for Ireland from the Bank.  
But King found that much analysis had already been carried out by the Irish administration. 
Indeed, he had been perusing a draft of the document that would change the course of Irish 
policy towards its economic engagement with the rest of the World. “I have asked Whitaker”, 
he writes, “to send you by airmail his report “Economic Development”. It is over 200 pages 
and seems pretty good to me.” And it’s not just a document of factual analysis, but addresses 
challenging policy issues. He notes that “it is also quite tough (in a velvet-glove sort of way) 
with some old-established practices”. With this document, King believes that Ireland would 
be already “halfway toward [having] a sensible program”.  
Ireland did not in fact borrow immediately from the World Bank but eventually it borrowed a 
total of US$ 150 million between 1969 and 1975 for a variety of projects, ranging from power 
generation, to agriculture, to education. The last World Bank loan to Ireland, to support the 
then  ICC  (now  BOSI  –  alas  closing  at  the  end  of  this  year)  in  promoting  regional 
development and employment, was approved in August 1975.  
The resonances from this 52-year old letter are particularly sonorous this week, as an IMF 
team  scrutinizes  another  Irish  plan  and  maps  out  another  international  programme  of 
borrowing by Ireland (with the additional support on this occasion of European institutions).  
The 1958 economic policy shift launched a move towards increasing internationalization and 
– to use a word not yet in use back then – globalization for Ireland. To be sure, Ireland had 
long  been  an  open  economy,  but  one  whose  international  economic  relationships  were 
predominantly with Britain and its former empire (and, for migration, with the United States). 
Since  independence,  both  domestic  politics  and  the  international  economic  and  military 
environment had encouraged higher barriers to trade and investment. Now these were to be 
progressively dismantled as Ireland opened up to a wider and deeper engagement with the 
global economy.  
One key dimension of this opening up is of course trade: exports as a percentage of GDP 
grew from 24 per cent in 1960 to an astonishing 101.5 per cent in 2011 (as forecast), placing 
Ireland in a very select league of countries (Malaysia and Singapore being the other ones of 
significance)  for  which  exports  exceed  GDP.  The  pattern  of  exports  also  shifted. 
Predominantly  agricultural  in  the  1950s,  today  (while  agriculture  and  agribusiness-based 
exports are  far from negligible) exports are dominated by  manufactures and services. The 
shift  to  globalization  was  accompanied  eventually  by  a  rapid  and  more  or  less  complete 
convergence  in  living  standards  to  the  highest  levels  of  Western  Europe.  Once  a  laggard, 
whose  relative  position  had  slipped  since  independence,  Ireland  became  seen  as  a 
European growth leader – even though much of the growth in the 1990s was really a catch-
up  to  the  production  frontier  as  enough  jobs  were  at  last  being  generated  to  employ 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 1
essentially  all  of  those  who  wanted  work  and  sucked  in  returned  emigrants  and  new 
immigrants as well.  
Speaking  to  an  audience  of  accountants,  I  must  naturally  remind  you,  though,  of  the 
accounting  and  measurement  challenges  that  have  been  presented  by  the  extraordinarily 
globalized nature of the Irish economy as it evolved over the years. These include national 
accounting – which I know is not so much the professional concern of this audience today – 
and also corporate accounting and reporting. For it was not only the volume of exports that 
was  remarkable,  it  was  their  character,  largely  produced  by  foreign  owned  multinational 
corporations  and  with  a  high  profit  component  reflecting  returns  on  R&D  and  other 
investments  accruing  to  the  owners  and  not  to  Irish  residents.  That  distinctive  pattern  of 
globalization meant that the most common measure of economic performance – GDP – is 
quite misleading for Ireland, exceeding as it does by over 25 per cent the aggregate statistic 
which  better  measures  the  national  component  of  production,  GNP.  Though  GNP  growth 
was certainly very strong in the period from 1994–2007, and reached a very high level in per 
person terms, growth rates and levels of GNP have been much lower than GDP. Indeed in 
the recent downturn, quarterly GNP has fallen 20 per cent peak to trough – much more than 
GDP. A mistaken national accounting focus on GDP thus risks exaggerating the strength of 
the Irish economy.  
There  are  knock-on  effects  of  the  distinctive  globalized  structure  of  the  Irish  economy  on 
other accounting measures of performance. With the structural shift towards high-productivity 
sectors during the 1990s and again since 2007, unit labour costs tend to fall even if wage 
costs for any individual firm or industry are increasing. Because of this shifting composition 
effect, as has been well-known for decades, but is routinely forgotten by superficial analysts, 
unit  labour  costs  are  a  false  friend  in  judging  competitiveness  developments  for  Ireland. 
Measurement and accounting are of crucial importance at times of structural change. Careful 
scrutiny is needed to ensure that policy choices are quantitatively well-judged. These matters 
will no doubt retain their importance throughout the period of the recovery programme now 
being discussed with the IMF, the EU Commission and the ECB.  
Banking  is  a  main  focus  of  these  discussions.  This  is  not  the  time  or  the  place  to  go  into 
comprehensive detail on the elements being included in the programme to improve further 
the  resilience  of  the  banks  and  restoring  greater  market  confidence  in  their  long-term. 
Instead  let me  continue  to  weave  the  globalization  and  accounting  dimensions  to  the  Irish 
banking story. Actually, important aspects of the banking crisis are themselves a part of the 
globalization story. Probably almost enough has by now been said about poor loan appraisal 
practices and the consequences of the bubble mentality, but of course that would not have 
added  up  to  anything  of  great  consequence  had  it  not  been  for  the  access,  through  the 
globalized  banking system,  to  vast sums  that  could  be  borrowed  from  abroad.  To be  sure 
here  too  the  banks  had  been  internationally  integrated  for  a  couple  of  centuries.  They 
sourced  funds  in  times  of  need  from  the  Bank  of  England,  but  more  normally  placed  very 
substantial  funds  on  deposit  in  the  London  money  market,  given  that  Irish  land  and 
professional classes were net savers and the banks unenthusiastic in the past about lending 
too much locally.  
Well  we  all  know  what  happened  from  2003  when  the  banks  wanted  to  keep  feeding  the 
property and construction boom. The run-up in net foreign borrowing was spectacular, and its 
contraction  equally  sharp  (as  foreign  lenders  declined  to  roll-over  into  an  economy  with  a 
property  bust  and  then  also  a  stressed  Sovereign).  Deleveraging  this  exposed  funding 
position  through  structural  measures  is  a  key  goal  of  current  banking  policy  as  has  been 
mentioned elsewhere.  
Apart from the pressure on the Sovereign, the capital position of the banks has, as is well-
known,  been  placed  under  pressure  by  actual  and  especially  prospective  loan  losses. 
Naturally,  long-term  lenders  to  banks  need  assurance  as  to  the  adequacy  of  the  banks’ 
capital position and this means not only that the banks’ capital has had to be increased – and 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2010
this has been done on a very large scale over the past two years – but that investors need 
more and better information about the portfolio of the banks.  
The  lengthy  process  of  determining  the  NAMA-related  loan  losses  and  the  time  taken  in 
some  cases  to  meet  the  Central  Bank’s  capital  target  set  out  in  the  Prudential  Capital 
Adequacy  Review  PCAR  announcement  of  March  30,  2010,  and  revised  at  the  end  of 
September,  has  tended  to  muddy  communication  around  the  capital  adequacy  of  the  Irish 
banks. There is market concern about tail risk in the banks‟  portfolios. This, together with 
the  heightened  market  uncertainty  prevailing  since  the  end  of  April,  certainly  argues  for 
higher percentage capital targets. And, while the external experts have found no fault with 
the methodology used for this year’s PCAR stress test, the next exercise, which takes place 
early in 2011, will both dig deeper where possible, and take account of evolving economic 
and loan performance developments and prospects over the year. As already indicated in the 
past couple of days, it is clear that addressing both the capital ratios and the PCAR exercise 
will be key elements of the programme being negotiated at present with the EU Commission 
and the IMF in liaison with the ECB.  
Capital is an indispensable multi-purpose buffer against unexpected risks, though it is costly, 
especially for dealing with tail risks. There is another dimension along which tail risk can be 
lowered, thereby further increasing confidence of investors on a less costly basis. This falls 
into your area as accountants, because I am talking about accounting and other information 
disclosed to the market.  
I  have  already  railed  elsewhere  against  the  backward-looking  loan-loss  provisioning 
practices encouraged by International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and still all too 
pervasive  in  the  reporting  by  most  of  the  Irish  banks.  I  find  it  unsatisfactory  that  expected 
losses  in  many  parts  of  the  portfolio  are  clearly  higher  than  the  provisions  already  taken, 
because I fear that this evident and in some cases explicit discrepancy may awaken doubts 
in the minds of investors as to the relevance of other aspects of the reported accounts.  
But banks could build confidence by going further, to disclose much more information to the 
market. Probably disclosure practices by Irish banks were formed during good times, when 
share  prices  were  high  and  most  of  the  market  analysts  following  Irish  banks  were  equity 
analysts.  
Credit analysts are different from equity analysts. When stock prices are high, questions of 
loan losses and defaults are not on people’s minds. The equity analyst is looking at growth 
potential, market share evolution, the competitive environment as it influences spreads, cost 
control  and  so  on.  When  stock  prices  are  low,  we  have  moved  into  a  different  region  of 
probabilities:  the  underlying  source  of  volatility  of  CDS  and  subordinated  debt  spreads  is 
what needs to be analyzed and it is the credit analyst that comes to the fore.  
Different information flows are relevant to the credit analysts, and this sort of information has 
been provided by the Irish banks only in a limited way and not uniformly as between different 
banks.  
There is a lot of information that could be provided. For instance, for the residential mortgage 
book,  which  has  been  much  discussed  recently,  one  could  imagine  much  more  extensive 
disclosures  about  the  size  distribution,  broken  down  into  a  variety  of  sectoral  and  other 
classifications. 
loans  between  different 
performance  buckets  would  also  help.  Bottom  line:  the  banks  might  do  well  to  call  in  the 
leading  credit  analysts  and  find  out  what  information  would  be  of  greatest  use  to  them  in 
identifying and quantifying tail risks. And then provide it. 
For, if there is no information, the credit analyst tends to assume the worst. They think: “if the 
actual situation were good, would the bank not have been at pains to disclose it?” Since it is 
not  disclosed,  it  must  be  bad.  At  present,  regulators  have  been  gathering  more  and  more 
information  of  this  type,  and  the  size  and  quality  of  the  information  set  available  to  the 
regulators has been improving by leaps and bounds. Communicating more information to the 
the  aging  and  migration  of 
Information  on 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 3
market would not only enlist the expertise of market credit analysts in a way helpful to all, but 
could lower the cost of term borrowing as investors regain confidence. We plan to explore 
this aspect further with the banks; they have much to gain and formal regulation here may 
not be needed.  
As the information flow to the market improves both in quantity and quality, and especially 
when the economy improves and the news contained in the information is getting better, we 
will  hopefully  move  towards  the  euthanasia  of  the  Irish  bank  credit  analyst  (though  not  of 
course of the accountants!).  
More important, and more broadly, restoration of market confidence in the banks and in the 
finances  of  the  Irish  state  will  step  by  step  be  rebuilt  by  these  and  other  measures  to  be 
contained in the programme on which negotiations have begun. This effort will help set the 
course  of  economic  and  financial  policy  on  a  more  secure  path  leading  to  reduced 
uncertainty and a return to a sustainable path of employment growth and economic activity. 
We will have a slimmed down banking system that is much better placed to serve the needs 
of the economy into the future. While all of this will take some time to be worked through, we 
can be reassured by the announcements of recent days that the banking system retains the 
support, not only of the Central Bank of Ireland, but of the European Institutions.  
The globalization unleashed by Whitaker’s initiatives in the 1950s generated great benefits 
and  lifted  living  standards  over  the  following  two  generations.  Analysing  the  distinctive 
structure of the economy that it created requires careful analysis of good accounting data, 
both  national  and  private.  Some  distortions  have  undoubtedly  resulted  in  the  process  of 
globalization,  not  least  the  excessive  dependence  in  the  last  number  of  years  on  foreign 
borrowing  and  its  consequences.  These  distortions  reflect  the  phenomenal  ability  of 
globalization to generate a rapid amplification of changes that would occur slowly in a closed 
and inward-looking economy and society. The rapid leap forward of the Celtic Tiger period 
was  a  favourable  amplification;  the  credit  and  construction  bubble  a  disastrous  one.  This 
perspective  suggests  that,  once  we  find  our  stride  again,  with  the  renewed  help  of  the 
international  and  European  partners  with  which  we  joined  in  1957,  1973  and  1999,  a 
favourable amplification will restore prosperity, albeit of a more sober variety. 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2010
