 Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: From convoy to parting ways? Post crisis 
divergence between European and US macroeconomic policies 
Comments  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  on  the  paper  by  Messrs  Jean  Pisani-Ferry  and  Adam  Posen,  at  “The 
Transatlantic  Relationships  in  an  Era  of  Growing  Economic  Multipolarity”  conference, 
Washington DC, 8 October 2010. 
 The paper is extremely interesting and stimulating. I will not discuss all the arguments, but 
will rather focus on a few issues, mainly related to monetary policy, given my comparative 
advantage. In the paper, Pisani-Ferry and Posen try to explain the differences in policies on 
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  on  the  basis  of  underlying  economic  fundamentals  and  policy 
preferences. I would like to make three main observations. 
The first observation relates to the role that underlying economic conditions play in explaining 
policy  differences.  I  would  like  to  add  one  element  that  has  not  been  fully  explored  in  the 
analysis.  It  refers  to  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  a  post-bubble  economy.  In 
particular, the flow of credit to the private sector in the euro area seems to differ from that in 
the United States. Considering the overall amount of lending to households and non financial 
corporations, supplied both by the banking sector and by the capital market, there has been 
a  recovery  in  the  euro  area  in  recent  quarters  (Chart  1).  In  the  United  States,  credit  to 
households and to the corporate sector, by contrast, has been in negative territory for some 
time (Chart 2). This might be explained by both demand and supply factors. As Pisani-Ferry 
and Posen have shown, before the crisis US households and corporates had a higher debt 
levels than their euro area counterparts and have had to progressively deleverage. On the 
supply side, US banks are probably also deleveraging more quickly. 
This  difference  in  the  flow  of  financing  to  the  private  sector  partly  explains  the  different 
techniques followed in the implementation of monetary policy on the two sides of the Atlantic. 
It  may  also  explain  the  differences  in  the  results  achieved.  To  be  sure,  the  ability  to 
consistently  anchor  inflation  expectations  throughout  the  crisis  has  enabled  the  ECB  to 
effectively  reduce  real  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area,  as  shown  in  Chart  3,  and  thus  to 
support economic activity. 
The second point is about the lessons that central banks can learn from the past to guide 
their  future monetary  policy.  Pisani-Ferry  and  Posen  cite  three  episodes  in  the  past  which 
central bankers should look at carefully, namely the Great Depression, Japan’s lost decade 
and,  more  generally,  previous  experiences  of  post-financial  crisis  periods.  We  all  certainly 
take a great deal of interest in, and inspiration from, these episodes. Looking at other post-
crisis experiences, like that in Japan, some lessons can be learned. Let me mention three: 
1. 
After a financial and housing bubble has burst (what about the primary commodities 
bubble?),  the  growth  potential  is  impaired,  and  possibly  even  reduced,  for  some 
time. According to all major international institutions, this also applies to the current 
period. 
Monetary policy can smoothen the transition to the new steady state, but it cannot 
by itself pull the economy back to the pre-crisis level, which was not in a sustainable 
equilibrium, within a short period of time. 
The recapitalisation and restructuring of the banking system is far  more important 
than monetary policy in avoiding a credit crunch.  
2. 
3. 
There are, of course, other lessons to be learned from past episodes. But in my view, we 
should also look at another important period of history, the period that preceded the crisis. In 
my  view,  there  is  much  more  to  learn  from  the  decade  that  preceded  the  crisis  than  from 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 1
 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
other experiences. To be sure, this crisis has confronted the economics profession with the 
challenge of rethinking its analytical basis. Central banks cannot be immune from such an 
exercise. We should not be afraid of taking a critical look at the recent past. Let me mention 
seven lessons from the recent past that may be useful for the future. 
1. 
The growth recorded in advanced economies that experienced large current account 
deficits  over  the  last  decade  was  not  sustainable.  For  macroeconomic  policies  to 
continue to be aimed at the attainment of similar rates of growth in the future would 
imply generating the same imbalances that led to the crisis.  
Very  low  levels  of  interest  rates  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time  can  result  in  a 
misallocation of resources and encourage risk-taking that fuel asset price bubbles. 
There is now increasing evidence of this correlation (see Charts 4 and 5). I consider 
it not to be fair for central bankers to shift all the blame for the build-up of the bubble 
before the crisis to only regulators and market participants. 
The  view  that  monetary  policy  should  not  look  at  financial  market  conditions  and 
should only intervene to counter the effects of the bursting of the bubble (i.e. what 
has been labelled the “Greenspan put”) has proved to be wrong. 
Interest rates were kept too low for too long before the crisis, mainly on account of 
fears that the economy would enter a Japanese-style deflation, fears that turned out 
to have been mistaken. Risk management-type monetary policy aimed at avoiding 
deflation is thus not without risk. 
Monetary policy cannot by itself transform a jobless recovery into a job-generating 
recovery.  If  anything,  keeping  the  cost  of  capital  excessively  low  may  encourage 
capital-intensive investment, rather than labour-intensive capital expenditure. 
Core  inflation  is  not  a  good  predictor  of  headline  inflation,  nor  of  underlying 
inflationary pressures emerging in a global economy. 
It is very difficult to measure output gaps. This is not a new finding, but it tends often 
to be forgotten. Looking at the period before the crisis, what looked like as a large 
output gap in 2003 turned out to be a very small one a few years later. Therefore, it 
is very dangerous to calibrate monetary policy mainly on the basis of this variable 
(see Charts 6 and 7). 
If  we  want  to  avoid  repeating  the  mistakes  of  the  past,  we  have  to  keep  these  lessons  in 
mind. 
This leads me to the third point I would like to make. It relates to the position of central banks 
in the institutional framework underpinning economic policy-making in our societies. Pisani-
Ferry and Posen argue that in countries where the relationship between the central bank and 
the government is “unproblematic”, the central bank is freer to go beyond its usual mission, in 
particular with respect to the adoption of non-conventional measures.  
In fact, the institutional framework underlying the ECB does not prevent it from taking non-
conventional monetary policy measures of the type that other central banks have done. The 
ECB  did  not  embark  on  large-scale  purchases  of  government  bonds  of  Member  States 
because  it  could  not  do  so,  but  because  we  did  not  consider  that  to  be  an  appropriate 
instrument in conducting monetary policy. The non-conventional measures we adopted relied 
more on the banking system, given its prominence in the transmission of monetary policy in 
the euro area. I have shown previously that our measures have been as effective, if not more 
effective,  than  others  in  providing  liquidity  to  the  financial  system.  Selected  purchases  of 
government  bonds  were  used  only  in  exceptional  circumstances,  to  address  specific 
problems in the transmission of monetary impulses. 
It  is  clear  that  embarking  on  large-scale  purchases  of  government  bonds  may  affect  the 
relationship between the central bank and the fiscal authority. What I am not sure of is when 
such  a  relationship  can  be  characterised  as  “problematic”  or  “unproblematic”.  Reading  the 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 paper, I gained the impression (perhaps wrongly) that a “problematic” relationship is one in 
which monetary and fiscal policies are distinct, as is the case in the euro area. I would then 
like to ask: “Just where is the problem if monetary policy is kept distinct from fiscal policy, 
and cannot be manipulated by the fiscal authorities to solve budgetary problems?” Perhaps it 
is  a  problem  for  the  fiscal  authorities,  because  they  would  like  to  use  the  instrument  of 
monetary  policy  to  inflate  away  the  fiscal  problems  and  have,  instead,  to  resort  to  fiscal 
measures that are subject to parliamentary approval and that all citizens are able to judge 
and assess.  
It seems to me that it is not a problem for the citizens at large, especially for the less wealthy, 
that fiscal problems are not solved through the inflation tax or by keeping the rate of interest 
on public debt instruments artificially low. To be sure, for the European population at large, 
the  role  of  the  central  bank  should  remain  distinct  from  that  of  the  fiscal  authorities,  and 
monetary  policy  should  remain  firmly  in  the  hands  of  the  central  bank.  This  is  why  the 
prohibition  of  monetary  financing  of  the  government  and  the  independence  of  the  central 
bank have been enshrined in the Treaty. It is the best way to ensure that budgetary problems 
are  addressed  in  a  democratic  way,  rather  than  through  the  manipulation  of  the  currency, 
which  has  hidden  distribution  effects  on  the  population.  In  Greece,  Ireland  and  Spain,  in 
France and Germany, the governments are adopting budgetary policies in full awareness of 
the fact that they cannot count on the inflation tax to solve their fiscal challenges, challenges 
that all advanced societies have to face. Can we consider this to be a problem? 
Let  me  conclude  on  a  broader  issue,  related  to  the  title  of  the  conference:  Transatlantic 
Relationship  in  an  Era  of  Growing  Economic  Multipolarity.  At  many  of  the  conferences  on 
trans-Atlantic  relations  that  I  have  attended  in  the  past,  participants  often  discussed  the 
decreasing  relevance  of  these  relations  in  the  light  of  the  new  emerging  global  powers. 
Interestingly,  when  we  get  to  discuss  monetary  issues,  trans-Atlantic  relations  remain 
important. The reason is that they are the only relevant ones. 
A  great  deal  of  attention  seems  to  be  devoted  to  potential  –  and  I  would  add,  minor  – 
differences and divergences between policies in Europe and the United States, while the rest 
of  the  world  is  completely  forgotten.  The  paradox  of  major  emerging  market  economies 
asking  for  a  greater  say  in  global  governance,  but  at  the  same  time  shying  away  from 
responsibility  in  monetary  matters  has  thus  far  captured  little  attention.  Many  important 
emerging  market  economies  either  do  not  have  any  monetary  policy  at  all,  because  they 
have pegged their exchange rate to the currency of an advanced economy, or impose capital 
controls  and  restrict  the  international  use  of  their  own  currency.  This  creates  monetary 
divergences  that  are  much  larger  in  scale  than  those  we  discussed  today,  with  global 
repercussions.  Thus,  rather  than  talking  about  “monetary  wars”,  which  makes  little  sense, 
more  attention  should  be  devoted  to  what  I  would  call  a  “monetary  void”  in  the  world 
economy.  As  a  result  of  such  a  void,  many  of  the  problems  experienced  by  advanced 
economies before the crisis, like very low levels of interest rates – especially in comparison 
with the underlying rate of economic growth – are now migrating to emerging markets, with 
potentially very critical consequences for both these economies and the global system. More 
attention needs thus to be paid to these issues, and to their consequences with respect to 
achieving a balanced and sustained recovery of the global economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 3
  4 
 Chart 1 
Nominal GDP, debt financing – EA 
Annual percentage changes, nsa 
Source: EAA, ECB and Eurostat. 
Note:  *  includes  loans,  **  includes  loans,  debt  securities  and 
liabilities  for  direct  pension  commitments  of  employers  (i.e.  not 
including  other  payables).  The  latest  observation  2010  Q2  is 
estimate  from  BSI  data.  ***  Nominal  GDP  calculated  as  simple 
annual growth rates. Latest observation: 2010 Q2. 
 Chart 2 
Nominal GDP, debt financing – US 
Annual percentage changes, nsa 
 Source:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, 
BIS. 
Note:  *  includes  credit  market  instruments  (i.e.  loans  not 
including  other  payables)  and  debt  securities  issues  by  non-
profit  organisations,  **  includes  loans,  debt  securities  and 
liabilities for direct pension commitments of employers (i.e. not 
including  other  payables).  Latest  observation:  2010  Q1. 
*** Nominal  GDP  calculated  as  simple  annual  growth  rates. 
Latest observation: 2010 Q2. 
BIS Review 131/2010
 5-year real yield 5 years ahead in the EA and the US (%p.a.) 
Chart 3 
 
Source:  Reuters,  Bloomberg,  FED  staff  calculations,  ECB 
calculations. Latest observation: 5 Oct 2010. 
Note:  5-year  5  years  ahead  constant  maturity  zero-coupon  yield 
based  on  triple  A  inflation-linked  bonds  for  euro  area.  5-year 
5 years ahead constant maturity zero coupon yield based on TIPS 
for the United States. 
 Chart 4 
Monetary policy and financial stability (i) 
Corporate loans 
Source: Maddaloni and Peydró-Alcalde (2010). 
 BIS Review 131/2010 
 5
  6 
 Chart 5 
Monetary policy and financial stability (ii) 
Mortgage loans 
Source: Maddaloni and Peydró-Alcalde (2010). 
Spring vintages of EA output gap estimates by IMF 
Chart 6 
  Source: IMF (WEO) 
Note:  Output  gaps  are  defined  as  the  percentage  deviation  of  actual 
output from potential output 
BIS Review 131/2010
 Spring vintages of US output gap estimates by IMF 
Chart 7 
Source: IMF (WEO) 
Note:  Output  gaps  are  defined  as  the  percentage  deviation  of  actual 
output from potential output 
 BIS Review 131/2010 
 7
