Stanley Fischer: Corporate governance in Israel 
Summary  of  the  address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  
to  the  general  assembly  of  the  Association  of  Publicly  Traded  Companies,  Jerusalem, 
23 December 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  talk  of  three  issues  relating  to  corporate  governance  in  different  economic 
entities in Israel. 
The Bank of Israel will soon undergo a significant change in the way it makes its decisions. 
Till now, the Governor has had sole responsibility for interest rate decisions. That situation 
was the result of, among other things, the generally accepted practice around the world when 
the  Bank  of  Israel  was  established,  and  also  of  the  outstanding  personality  of  the  first 
Governor,  Mr.  David  Horowitz.  There  are  still  today  several  central  banks  in  which  the 
Governor formally makes the decision alone. However, I do not know a single Governor who 
actually  does  decide  entirely  by  himself.  In  the  Bank  of  Israel,  for  example,  there  is  a  set 
mechanism of the monetary discussion in a narrow forum, in which a discussion is held at 
the  highest  professional  level.  Research  has  shown  that  on  average  group  decisions  are 
better  than  decisions  taken  by  one  person.  The  fact  that,  till  now,  one  person  makes 
operational decisions in the Bank of Israel, and that there is no board of directors as there is 
in public companies, is certainly not the ideal situation. 
The new Bank of Israel Law states that the Bank of Israel will have a Monetary Committee 
that  will  make  the  policy  decisions  and  an  Administrative  Council  that  will  make  the 
operational  decisions.  As  well  as  managers  from  the  Bank  of  Israel,  the  Committee  and 
Council  will  have  representatives  of  the  public.  The  Government  has  appointed  a  search 
committee under retired Judge Winograd charged with putting forward a list of candidates for 
these  entities.  The  search  committee  is  required  to  consult  with  the  Governor  about  the 
proposed  members  of  the  Committee  and  Council,  but  the  final  decision  is  that  of  the 
government. I hope that members of the two bodies will be appointed soon, and I am sure 
that the decisions they will take in the new system in the Bank of Israel will be better. 
The  second  subject  I  would  like  to  speak  about  is  corporate  governance  in  the  banking 
system. The crisis greatly deepened our understanding of the need to strengthen corporate 
governance in banks. The main measures introduced in Israel in this context are based on 
the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision and on the Financial Stability Board. The most 
important  topic  on  which  our  attention  is  focused  is  an  update  of  Directive  No.  301  in  the 
Proper  Conduct  of  Banking  Business,  which  deals  with  several  aspects  of  the  work  of  the 
board of directors: 
 
Clarifying the role of the board of directors and emphasizing the difference between 
the functions of the board and those of management; 
Strengthening 
professionalism of the outside directors; 
Raising  the  level  of  director’s  qualifications,  and  clarifying  expectations  regarding 
their functions; 
Improving the board’s working practices. 
 
The Bank Supervision Department has drawn up the principles regarding the existence of a 
main risk management function in banks, and all banks have appointed a chief risks officer. 
The principles of a proper compensation policy have also been formulated, and changes in 
this sphere are becoming evident world wide. 
the  composition  of 
independence  and 
the  board,  and 
  the 
BIS Review 175/2010 
 1
My third subject is what is known as the shadow banking system. The practical significance 
of  this  term  is  that  it  deals  with  aspects  of  the  financial  system  that  the  regulators  do  not 
know how to supervise. In the US and the UK, and to a lesser extent in Europe too, a large 
part  of  the  credit  market  is  now  outside  the  banking  system.  In  Israel  the  banking  system 
currently  covers  slightly  above  50  percent  of  total  credit,  credit  from  abroad  accounts  for 
some 18 percent, so that nonbank credit has increased to more than 30 percent of the total, 
mainly as a result of the pensions reform and the Bachar Committee reform. No system of 
regulation can be perfect, but it is essential that we find a way to supervise nonbank credit. It 
is no coincidence that many of the companies affected by the crisis belonged to one industry, 
the real estate industry, and that tells us something. The Securities Authority is responsible 
for transparency, but it does not regulate due diligence in new issues. In the final analysis, it 
is the institutions that manage the public’s money that must take the investment decisions. 
These areas have advanced and improved recently, but we must continue to enhance the 
quality  of  supervision  over  the  conduct  of  these  entities,  and  the  quality  of  corporate 
governance in companies. 
2 
 BIS Review 175/2010
