Gill Marcus: Has monetary policy independence been undermined? 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the 1926 Rand 
Club, Johannesburg, 30 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
We are nearing the end of a difficult year, a year that began with so much promise but is now 
ending on a note of high uncertainty. On the global front, the expectations of a normalisation 
in the advanced economies were proved to be wrong, and indications are that low growth 
and  accommodative  monetary  policies  are  likely  to  be  sustained  for  some  time.  This  has 
contributed to the strength of the rand exchange rate as capital continues to flow out of the 
advanced economies in search of higher yields. Domestically, growth has also disappointed. 
However  the  strong  rand  has  contributed  to  the  more  benign  inflation  environment  which, 
along with a persistent negative output gap, has contributed to lower interest rates. 
During the year there has been a focus on issues relating to monetary Policy Independence 
in response to the letter from the Minister of Finance clarifying the mandate of the Bank, as 
well  as  the  recent  New  Growth  Path  document,  in  which  reference  was  made  to  a  looser 
monetary policy stance. 
There  are  perceptions  that  these  documents  have  undermined  the  independence  of  the 
Bank, and there has been a tendency to over-interpret monetary policy actions in terms of 
these discussions. For example, when the repo rate was reduced at the previous meeting, 
some  analysts  argued  that  because  there  was  no  economic  rationale  for  this  move,  it 
therefore  must  have  been  politically  inspired.  A  few  days  later,  when  the  disappointing 
growth figures were announced, these analysts conceded that our decision was vindicated 
on economic grounds. There are some who believe that any reference we make to growth or 
unemployment is an indication that we are not independent enough. At the same time there 
are  elements  in  society  who  believe  that  we  are  too  independent  and  that  the  goals  of 
monetary policy should be changed. 
In my talk this evening, I will state the Bank’s perspective on these issues and then briefly 
review our monetary policy actions over the past year. 
Monetary policy independence 
In discussing the issue of monetary policy independence, it is useful to distinguish between 
goal  independence  and  instrument  or  operational  independence.  The  former  refers  to  the 
setting  of  the  objectives  of  the  central  bank,  while  the  latter  relates  to  the  actual 
implementation of the mandate that is given to the bank. It is generally accepted that the goal 
of monetary policy should be set by the elected representatives of the country. But even here 
choices are constrained by what monetary policy can achieve. The objectives should be set 
within  the  parameters  of  what  monetary  policy  can  achieve,  not  what  we  would  like  it  to 
achieve but is unattainable. Monetary policy independence generally relates to operational 
independence,  and  derives  from  the  need  to  avoid  using  monetary  policy  for  political 
expedience  and  to  avoid  the  so-called  political  interest  rate  cycle,  where  there  was  a 
temptation for some governments to reduce interest rates before a general election and then 
raise them soon thereafter. 
In South Africa, monetary policy independence is enshrined in the Constitution. In terms of 
the Constitution, the primary objective of the Bank is to “protect the value of the currency in 
the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth  …  The  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, in pursuit of its primary object, must perform its functions independently and without 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 1
fear, favour or prejudice, but there must be regular consultation between the Bank and the 
Cabinet member responsible for national financial matters.” 
There are three important issues that come out of this. First, the goal of monetary policy is to 
maintain  the  value  of  the  currency,  which  means  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  current 
framework is one of inflation targeting with the actual target set by the government. This is 
very  much  in  line  with  the  practice  in  many  countries.  But  it  is  important  to  note  that  the 
objective  of  low  inflation  is  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  in  the  interest  of  sustainable  and 
balanced growth. In other words it is a recognition that monetary policy should contribute to 
long-term growth, which it does through providing a conducive environment for growth. But 
as  we  have  stated  before,  we  also  have  to  recognise  the  limits  to  our  impact  on  growth. 
Monetary policy can and does affect cyclical growth around long run potential output growth. 
In  other  words,  we  can  affect  the  size  of  the  output  gap  by  impacting  on  cyclical  growth. 
However,  our  impact  on  potential  output  itself  is  limited  –  this  is  really  the  job  of  micro-
economic and structural policies. 
Second,  while  the  Bank  does  not  have  goal  independence,  it  has  independence  in  the 
application of monetary policy. Thus it is we who are responsible and accountable for how 
we implement policy within a given goal. Third, we are required to consult regularly with the 
Minister of Finance. This is not an undermining of independence, but rather a mechanism to 
ensure effective macroeconomic coordination. 
It should be clear then that central bank independence is not absolute. We are an integral 
part  of  the  economy  and  therefore  not  independent  of  the  economy.  We  are  not  an  ivory 
tower, or in our case a glass and granite tower that is independent of and impervious to the 
economy  in  which  we  operate.  We  also  take  our  cue  with  respect  to  our  goals  from  the 
constitution and from government. 
The “mandate letter” 
We are aware that there is still some uncertainty in the public domain relating to the letter 
that  was  sent  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  myself  in  February,  in  which  he  clarified  the 
mandate of the Bank. 
The  letter  very  clearly  confirms  that  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  the 
containment  of  inflation  within  the  target  range  of  3  to  6  per  cent.  Furthermore  the  letter 
confirmed the flexibility of the mandate in allowing for deviations from the target in the event 
of exogenous shocks, and the need to avoid unnecessary instability in output and interest 
rates under such circumstances. This is the essence of flexible inflation targeting. 
At the same time it is stated that in taking monetary policy decisions, we should have due 
regard to the factors that might impact on the attainment of balanced and sustainable growth. 
These factors include the output gap, credit extension and asset bubbles, employment and 
other  labour  market  developments  and  the  stability  and  competitiveness  of  the  exchange 
rate. These factors are not only taken into account with respect to their impact on inflation, 
but our actions have also been affected by a concern for the impact of our actions on these 
variables.  A  number  of  studies  have  borne  this  out,  including  a  2007  paper  by  Ortiz  and 
Sturzenegger in which the reaction rule of the Bank was estimated and found to be in line 
with  those  estimated  for  a  number  of  advanced  economies.  The  study  showed  that 
compared to emerging markets, South African monetary policy has been more stable, with a 
more consistent anti-inflation bias but with a somewhat larger weight on output, although a 
low weight on the exchange rate. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  mandate  letter  that  we  feel  undermines  our  independence  with 
respect to monetary policy implementation. There was however an additional aspect to the 
letter which is often overlooked. That is the additional specific mandate for financial stability 
that was given to the Bank. Although the role of financial stability is generally implicit in the 
mandates  of  central  banks,  it  is  often  not  explicit.  The  financial  crisis  underlined  the 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2010
importance of clarifying the roles of the different institutions in the economy with respect not 
only to normal microprudential regulation and supervision of the banking sector, but also to 
broader  macroprudential  oversight.  The  central  role  of  the  Bank  in  this  respect  was 
reaffirmed  in  the  recent  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement.  A  great  deal  of  work  is 
currently  under  way  in  various  international  fora  to  get  a  deeper  appreciation  of  what 
macroprudential  oversight  actually  entails,  and  the  organisational  structures  and  legal 
framework that needs to be in place. 
Monetary policy and the New Growth Path 
Government’s new growth path was published recently and places employment creation at 
the  centre  of  government’s  strategic  focus.  Given  the  high  rate  of  unemployment  in  the 
economy, this is as it should be. While I would not want to comment on the detail of the plan, 
it would be appropriate for me to say a few words about the proposals that affect the Bank 
directly. But before doing so, I wish to emphasise an aspect that came through strongly in the 
Growth Path proposals: that is, the need for policy cohesion and coordination. Apart from the 
need for common purpose, different elements of policy can only work effectively if there is an 
appropriate  policy  mix,  and  if  the  different  policies  are  coordinated.  Policy  consistency, 
coordination and sequencing are essential requisites for policy success. The macroeconomic 
proposals outlined in the new growth path should be seen in this context. 
According to the New Growth Path, the macroeconomic stance will be guided by “a looser 
monetary policy and a more restrictive fiscal policy backed by microeconomic measures to 
contain inflationary pressures and enhance competitiveness … The monetary policy stance 
will  continue  to  target  low  and  stable  inflation  but  will  do  more  to  support  a  more 
competitive exchange rate and reduced investment costs through lower real interest rates. 
This  will  be  accompanied  by  measures  …  to  contain  inflationary  pressures  and  enhance 
competitiveness”. These latter measures include more effective competition policies, and a 
review  of  administered  prices  to  ensure  that  their  increases  are  not  higher  than  inflation 
unless there are compelling reasons. Furthermore, the proposals include a social accord to 
moderate or cap wage and salary increases. 
Our interpretation of this is that the proposals recognise that the Bank’s mandate remains the 
achievement of low and stable inflation. In a low inflation environment, nominal and possibly 
real interest rates will be lower, and the real exchange rate will be more competitive because 
our prices and wages will not be increasing relative to those of our competitor countries. 
Monetary policy actions are guided to a large extent by the pressures that are being placed 
on inflation. For a long time  we have noted that the main risks to the inflation outlook are 
administered price increases, many of which are significantly above inflation, as well as wage 
increases that are unrelated to inflation and productivity increases. The lack of competition in 
some sectors of the economy has also been identified as a constraint to price-setting that is 
more responsive to domestic demand conditions, and therefore more responsive to changes 
in the monetary policy stance. Improvements in these areas can help to reduce inflation and 
create the space for a more accommodative monetary policy stance. 
The same is true for a tighter fiscal policy. There is a clear theoretical rationale for a tight 
fiscal policy and loose monetary policy mix, and this was at the heart of the macro-economic 
proposals of the Harvard-led international panel in 2007. 
Theoretically,  lower  interest  rates  will  allow  for  a  weaker  exchange  rate  because  of  the 
narrowing  of  interest  rate  differentials  which  make  it  less  attractive  for  foreigners  to  buy 
interest-bearing securities. But because of the inflationary impacts of the low interest rates 
and the weaker currency, fiscal policy needs to compensate for this by reducing expenditure 
and providing the additional policy instrument. 
At this stage further work needs to be done to determine the degree to which fiscal policy 
needs to be tightened in order to support monetary policy in this way. It is also not clear that 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 3
fiscal policy has the flexibility to take over the role of monetary policy as an antiinflationary 
policy  on  a  cyclical  basis.  Discretionary  changes  to  the  fiscal  policy  stance  take  time  to 
implement, unlike in the case of monetary policy. 
The  current  fiscal  policy  stance  is  tighter  than  it  was  at  the  height  of  the  crisis,  but  the 
estimated structural deficit of around 4 per cent represents a much looser stance than was 
the  case  during  2000–2008  when  it  was  generally  well  below  2  per  cent.  Similarly,  real 
interest rates are currently much lower than was the case over the past years. The long term 
real  repurchase  rate  has  averaged  between  3–3,5  per  cent  over  the  past  decade.  The 
current  real  repurchase  rate,  assuming  an  expected  inflation  of  around  4,5  per  cent,  is 
equivalent to 1 per cent. Should inflation surprise on the upside, this real rate would decline 
as well. 
This suggests that currently both fiscal and monetary policies are relatively loose, which in 
our view is appropriate for the current state of the economy and the low global real interest 
rate environment. However, should the economy, particularly domestic expenditure, start to 
pick up significantly, this mix would have to be changed. 
We must also not forget the issue of sequencing and coordination. Some of these proposals 
may take some time to implement and to be effective. Monetary policy cannot be loosened in 
advance of these other reforms unless there is a clear notion of the extent of fiscal tightening 
and certainty about the time horizon over which microeconomic reforms can be effectively 
implemented and achieve results. 
In the absence of such coordination, excessively low real interest rates will not necessarily 
bring  about  increased  investment.  They  are  more  likely  to  result  in  higher  inflation  and 
consequently  higher  long  term  interest  rates,  which  will  impact  negatively  on  the  cost  of 
government  borrowing  and  the  cost  of  capital.  Under  such  circumstances,  real  long  term 
interest  rates  are  likely  to  rise  even  further  because  of  a  possible  increase  in  the  risk 
premium. 
The proposals as set out, if successful, will help to contain inflationary pressures and thereby 
give an additional degree of freedom to monetary policy and allow for the “looser” monetary 
policy  stance  that  is  proposed.  Such  a  stance  of  monetary  policy  would  in  fact  follow 
automatically  under  such  circumstances,  particularly  under  conditions  of  weak  domestic 
demand. 
The Bank’s view therefore is that the independence of monetary policy is not undermined in 
the  New  Growth  Path  proposals.  Our  mandate  remains  the  attainment  of  low  and  stable 
inflation,  and  to  the  extent  that  other  policies  and  micro-economic  interventions  are 
supportive, we will have greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy. 
However,  as  I  indicated  above,  we  have  to  be  realistic  about  what  monetary  policy  can 
achieve in solving an unemployment problem that is essentially structural in nature. 
Part of the rationale for the monetary policy proposals were to deal with the strong exchange 
rate. The New Growth Plan recognises that intervention in the foreign exchange market is 
not a simple solution as intervention is expensive and not necessarily effective. Nevertheless 
further intervention is not ruled out and is consistent with the Bank’s activities in the foreign 
exchange market. 
However  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  competitiveness  of  the  currency  refers  to  the  real 
exchange  rate  i.e.  the  nominal  exchange  rate  that  is  adjusted  for  relative  inflation  rates. 
Achieving a more depreciated nominal exchange rate will not help with competitiveness if it is 
simply  offset  by  higher  inflation.  Therefore  the  need  for  low  and  stable  inflation  cannot  be 
overemphasised, and this is apart from the adverse effects that inflation has on the poor in 
particular. 
In advocating the macroeconomic policy mix of tight fiscal policy and loose monetary policy, 
there  is  an  underlying  assumption  that  the  main  determinant  of  the  exchange  rate  is  the 
4 
 BIS Review 167/2010
interest rate differential, and that lower domestic interest rates will reduce interest sensitive 
capital flows. However, experience has shown us that reality is not so simple. There have 
been periods in the past, and this was true for much of the 2000s, when capital inflows were 
dominated by flows into the equity markets. In other words, capital was attracted by growth 
prospects rather than interest rate yield differentials. To the extent that lower interest rates 
improve the growth outlook, the decline in interest-sensitive inflows may be more than offset 
by flows into the equity market or to direct investment. 
Finally, I should emphasise that while the proposals may have an internal economic logic, 
the reality may be far more complicated. In particular, it is not always possible to achieve the 
goals  of  low  and  stable  inflation,  a  competitive  exchange  rate  and  low  real  interest  rates 
simultaneously. There are unfortunately times when conflicts between these objectives will 
arise, and the bank should be in a position to act independently, in line with its constitutional 
mandate, when such a situation arises. 
Recent monetary policy 
The past year was a challenging one for the conduct of monetary policy. At the beginning of 
the year, the view that policy normalisation in the advanced economies would begin by the 
middle  of  the  year  implied  an  expected  moderation  of  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets 
during  the  year.  Domestic  growth  was  also  expected  to  be  positively  affected  by  the 
improved global environment. At that stage, when the repurchase rate was still at 7 per cent, 
the exchange rate was at around R7,60 against the dollar and inflation expected to average 
just under 6 per cent over the year. It was also our view that we had possibly reached the 
bottom of the interest rate cycle. The interpretation of the high frequency data at that time 
was also complicated by the distortions created by the World Cup. 
As the year progressed, it became increasingly apparent that the monetary policy environment 
in the advanced economies was likely to remain highly accommodative for longer, and this 
view was reinforced by the emerging sovereign debt crisis in Europe. This had implications 
for  the  rand  exchange  rate  and  its  expected  future  path,  as  well  as  for  the  outlook  for 
domestic  inflation.  Domestic  growth  was  also  expected  to  be  negatively  affected  by  these 
events.  As  a  result,  our  inflation  forecast  was  progressively  revised  downwards.  For 
example,  at  the  March  meeting,  the  expected  low  point  for  inflation  in  the  third  quarter  of 
2010  was  4,9  per  cent.  By  the  September  meeting  this  had  been  revised  down  to 
3,7 per cent. 
Furthermore, and of greater significance, the longer term expected trend of inflation was also 
revised downward to the extent that the entire expected inflation trajectory over the forecast 
period  was  seen  to  be  comfortably  within  the  inflation  target  range.  The  forecast  in 
November 2010  indicated  that  inflation  was  expected  to  be  4,8  per  cent  at  the  end  of  the 
forecast period in the final quarter of 2012. 
Against the backdrop of relatively weak domestic demand, we felt that there was room for 
further  monetary  accommodation  to  help  stimulate  the  economy  without  jeopardising  the 
inflation target. If inflation is, or is expected to remain within the target, monetary policy will 
have greater flexibility to focus on growth issues, particularly when the growth rate is below 
potential. This is entirely consistent with a flexible inflation targeting framework. 
The  repurchase  rate  was  reduced  by  50  basis  points  on  three  occasions:  in  March, 
September and November. On each occasion it was the view of the MPC that we were either 
at or close to the bottom of the interest rate cycle and we had signalled that the room for 
further  cutting  was  limited.  However,  in  subsequent  meetings,  as  I  have  said  already,  the 
outlook had changed significantly, and in effect the real interest rate was increasing with the 
decline in expected inflation. 
It is important to reemphasise that any signal is not a commitment, but a signal conditional 
upon no significant changes in the outlook. Under periods of heightened uncertainty, as we 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 5
have  been  experiencing,  it  is  likely  that  conditions  will  change  more  rapidly,  although  the 
direction  and  extent  is  not  always  clear.  As  we  signalled  in  our  most  recent  meeting,  the 
room for further rate cuts is limited by the fact that we are now seeing more definite signs of 
a sustained recovery in household consumption expenditure and domestic credit extension. 
Conclusion 
Monetary policy is always made under conditions of uncertainty. The lags in the impact of 
monetary  policy  mean that  policy  has  to  be made  on  the  basis  of  expected  developments 
and expected inflation outcomes. The more uncertain the environment is, the more difficult it 
is to have a clear future path of interest rates. 
Monetary policy settings will need to change in line with changing circumstances. At the very 
least,  we  should  strive  to  be  consistent  on  the basis  of  how  we  view  the  rapidly  changing 
world. Our actions have been and will continue to be guided by how we see and interpret 
these developments, and we will continue to implement monetary policy independently, but 
mindful of the impact on other variables in the economy. 
The policy rate is currently at its lowest level in over 30 years, the real rate is below its long 
term average and the inflation rate is expected to remain within the inflation target range for 
the forecast period. These developments are a result of a consistent application of a flexible 
inflation targeting mandate. As always the Bank stands ready to play its part in contributing to 
longer  term  sustained  economic  growth  in  the  economy  by  ensuring  a  low  inflation 
environment. Low inflation or price stability can contribute to long-term growth by providing 
greater stability and reducing uncertainty, which will be positive for longer term investment. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 167/2010
