Nout Wellink: Towards an international dispute resolution facility for the 
financial markets 
Speech by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  expert  round  table,  World  Legal  Forum,  
Den Haag, 25 October 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to address you in this magnificent venue. The 
Peace Palace is a symbol of peace that – at the time of its opening in 1913 – was acclaimed 
to be a “dream palace as big and mighty as the idea of world peace itself”. The ambitions of 
world peace were embodied by contributions of numerous nations in the form of works of art, 
furniture  and  building  material  that  today  still  decorate  this  building.  This  is  a  striking 
entourage  to  discuss  new  initiatives  aimed  at  maintaining  another  global  ambition,  the 
ambition of financial stability.  
Financial innovation, advantages  
Over the past decades we have witnessed a huge growth in complex and innovative financial 
products, including in the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets. According to the latest 
BIS  estimates,  the  notional  value  of  outstanding  OTC  contracts  exceeded  the  staggering 
amount  of  615  trillion  USD  by  the  end  of  20091.  I  believe  that  financial  innovation  has 
brought  us  real  benefits.  Financial  products  like  credit  derivatives  have  increased  the 
possibilities  to  spread  and  manage  risks.  And  indeed,  the  financial  system  proved  to  be 
better capable of absorbing shocks, as was demonstrated when the dot.com bubble burst or 
after 9/11. However, clearly, financial innovation has not prevented the financial crisis from 
happening. In fact, financial innovation is often pointed out as one of the root causes.  
Risks associated with financial innovation  
The  risks  associated  with  financial  innovation  are  real.  First  of  all,  not  only  size,  but  also 
complexity in the markets for sophisticated financial products increased rapidly. This came at 
the cost of transparency. At the outset of the financial crisis, hardly anyone seemed to know 
what the true risks and value of complex financial products were and who would in the end 
bear the losses. In many cases, this was even true for the parties who created them in the 
first  place.  Risk  management  systems  of  financial  institutions  could  hardly  keep  up  with 
product  innovation.  Furthermore,  the  increased  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets 
made that not only gains, but also losses were transmitted through the system easily, hardly 
hampered by time or national borders. Although the system was less vulnerable to shocks, it 
turned  out  that  it  was  at  the  same  time  prone  to  large  accidents  and  sudden  loss  of 
confidence. By implication, the risks associated with financial innovation is nowadays a topic 
of  heated  debates  among  policy  makers,  market  participants  and  academics  worldwide. 
However,  consensus  exists  that  OTC  derivatives  markets  have  to  become  safer,  more 
resilient and more transparent.  
                                                
 
1   Regular OTC Derivatives Market Statistics 11 May 2010. 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 1
Derivatives can pose systemic risks  
One of the key risks associated with OTC derivatives is counterparty risk. Counterparty risk 
depends  on  a  complex  set  of  factors  including  the  underlying  value  of  the  asset,  the 
creditworthiness  of  the  counterparty,  and  the  interaction  between  the  two.  Optimal  models 
that  can  properly  assess  these  risks  remain  under  construction.  Furthermore,  the  lack  of 
transparency of these markets plays an important role. With the strong growth of derivatives 
a complex network of bilateral dependencies has been created, opening up a web of inter-
linkages  and  contagion  channels.  This  lack  of  transparency  also  makes  it  complicated  to 
properly assess counterparty risk.  
Legal certainty supports financial stability  
Furthermore, OTC derivatives do form part of a sometimes highly complex legal framework. 
Over the last decades various branch organisations have undertaken the standardization of 
derivatives  contracts,  which  is  a  means  of  diminishing  legal  risk  of  transactions.  An 
international  dispute  resolution  facility  could  in  my  view  be  a  logical  next  step  in  these 
standardization efforts. It can lead to a further improvement of legal certainty and thereby – 
at least in an indirect way – support financial stability.  
Improvement of stability through legal certainty  
How would legal certainty be achieved? The fact that the same contractual terms are used 
across  the  world  implies  that  a  decision  in  a  dispute  between  two  parties  may  have 
implications  that  go  beyond  their  specific  contractual  relation.  The  interpretation  of  a  local 
court of a standard contract term might differ significantly from what the parties involved and 
the market would expect. The result: legal uncertainty for other transactions. This would also 
be  true  for  disputes  regarding  transactions  for  which  a  court  in  another  jurisdiction  is 
competent; 
the 
standardization  efforts  in  the  globalised  markets  can  be  partly  hampered  by  decentralized 
and non-coordinated dispute resolution and interpretation of contractual terms. One universal 
court with judges and arbitrators specialised in this specific subject matter could reduce legal 
risks.  
But  what  should  such  a  universal  financial  court  look  like?  And  how  should  it  function  to 
promote financial stability? These specific legal issues obviously are not the core business of 
a central bank, but I am happy to share some thoughts on this matter. The basic idea behind 
this is actually quite simple: legal certainty.  
terms  are  at  stake.  Therefore, 
the  same  contractual 
the  end, 
in 
Tribunal of public or private nature?  
The  first  question  is:  should  this  international  dispute  resolution  facility  be  of  a  public  or 
private nature? Full standardisation of the dispute resolution process in the financial markets 
could only be reached if states would transfer part of their jurisdiction to an international court 
on the basis of a treaty. At this moment there is no initiative to prepare a treaty like this, nor 
is  there  any  indication  that  enough  states  would  be  willing  to  adhere  to  it.  I  will  therefore 
focus  on  the  standardization  of  the  judicial  process  by  private  initiative.  There  are  four 
features that an international dispute resolution facility should have from the perspective of 
stability.  
Swift and final end to disputes  
First of all, dispute resolution should be quick and final. Legal proceedings that last for years 
can be a burden to legal certainty. That does not only affect the parties to a dispute, but also 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2010
the  market  as  a  whole.  The  fast  resolution  of  disputes  can  for  example  prevent  other 
institutions  from  engaging  in  litigation  on  the  same  standard  contract  terms.  Therefore,  a 
court  decision  can  prevent  procedures 
from  being  duplicated.  Although  arbitration 
procedures are not necessarily faster, the procedural rules could be shaped in such a way 
that parties can be forced to proceed swiftly. Between two parties engaged in the arbitration, 
a  decision  will  normally  mean  an  end  to  the  dispute.  An  arbitral  decision  will  also  be 
recognised  in  most  states  under  the  New  York  Convention  of  1958.  A  more  challenging 
aspect is the voluntary nature of arbitration. No-one can be brought before the court without 
consent, implying that other parties cannot easily be joined in the same litigation.  
Responsiveness to party and market expectations  
Second,  decisions  should  meet  justified  market  expectations.  Disputes  on  derivative 
contracts differ from other disputes for the reason that standard contracts are used across 
many  jurisdictions  worldwide.  Parties  to  a  contract  may  have  agreed  on  its  terms  without 
having  contemplated  the  economics  or  the  history  behind  them.  In  some  respects,  the 
interpretation of such standard terms resembles statutory interpretation. To mitigate the risk 
of  unexpected  decisions,  an  international  dispute  resolution  facility  should  consist  of 
arbitrators  with  extensive  knowledge  of  the  specific  market  environment  in  which  the 
transactions take place.  
Insight in conflict of law issues  
Third,  financial  markets  are  global,  but  their  legal  frameworks  are  of  a  regional  or  even 
national nature. This may make it hard to establish which jurisdictions apply in each case. 
Arbitrators would need to have a very good understanding of the conflicts of law this brings 
about. Therefore, it would be desirable to involve arbitrators with different legal backgrounds, 
depending on the matter at hand. In this way, the legitimacy of the court would be ensured, 
both towards the market and public stakeholders.  
Public availability of awards  
A  last  important  feature  is  the  public  availability  of  judgements.  The  creation  of  a  body  of 
decisions  on  standard  terms  used  in  financial  transactions  would  improve  legal  certainty, 
thereby  enhancing  the  stability  of  the  derivative  markets.  Yet,  this  goal  would  only  be 
reached  if  the  market  would  get  to  know  the  outcome  of  disputes  and  if  the  decisions 
rendered by the tribunal would be public. Any reluctance of market parties to go public with 
their  disputes  can  be  taken  away  by  making  the  court  decisions  anonymous.  Of  course, 
different  laws  may  be  applicable  to  the  relevant  master  agreements,  and  the  regulatory 
regime in which the transactions take place may differ. However, if they are of a high quality 
and  well  motivated,  the  decisions  may  de  facto  be  authoritative  across  the  world  by  the 
power of persuasion of their content and the stature and prestige of the institution by which 
they are rendered.  
Other initiatives: central counterparties  
The idea of an international dispute resolution facility for the financial markets fits well in a 
rapidly  changing  environment.  Both 
in  Europe,  central 
counterparties [CCPs] for the central clearing of derivatives have been launched. ICE Clear 
Europe  for  instance  clears  credit  default  swaps  and  SwapClear  is  a  CCP  for  interest  rate 
swaps.  This  is  a  significant  development,  since  for  instance  SwapClear  claims  to  clear 
currently  more  than  40%  of  the  global  interest  rate  swap  market,  with  a  total  notional 
principal of 229 trillion USD. Central clearing by CCPs not only mitigates counterparty risk, 
the  United  States  and 
in 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 3
but  also  minimises  the  cash  flows  between  counterparties.  In  addition,  a  CCP  increases 
transparency,  as  it  registers  all  transactions.  Also,  CCPs  require  daily  collateralisation  of 
open derivative positions which reduces the leverage in the financial system and contributes 
to financial stability.  
Legislative initiatives  
It is not surprisingly, therefore, that the G20 leaders committed in September 2009 that all 
standardised OTC derivatives should be cleared through CCPs by end – 2012 at the latest. 
Also, it decided that OTC derivatives contracts should be reported to trade repositories. In 
the US this resulted in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. In 
the EU, the European Commission recently proposed a Regulation that creates a framework 
for the regulation of CCPs and trade repositories. Both the EU and the US regimes aim to 
impose clearing and reporting obligations on a broadly defined class of derivatives. There are 
differences though at a more detailed level. In the US there is only a narrow exemption from 
the clearing obligation for non-financial entities that enter into certain hedging transactions. In 
the  EU  the  clearing  obligation  applies  to  financial  counterparties  when  dealing  with  other 
financial  counterparties;  non  financial  counterparties  only  become  subject  to  the  clearing 
obligation when their positions exceed a certain threshold.  
Nevertheless, an obligation to clear eligible derivatives through CCPs can only mitigate part 
of  the  risk  associated  with  derivatives.  After  all,  there  will  always  be  a  need  for  bespoke 
contracts that cannot be standardised. By implication, there will be an OTC derivative market 
for  tailor  made  or  more  complex  products.  Therefore,  improvements  of  risks  management 
systems  are  desirable,  also  for  institutions  outside  the  banking  sector.  Requirements  to 
register  derivatives  contracts  in  central  repositories,  especially  those  that  are  not  cleared 
through central counterparties, will contribute to transparency. Also, national authorities will 
have to cooperate closely and share relevant information in order to assess where systemic 
risk might be building up.  
Certain capital requirements / BASEL III  
Another recent initiative to mitigate counterparty risk in the derivatives markets is a proposal 
of  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision.  The  basis  idea  is  straightforward:  the 
capital  weight  for  derivatives  that  are  bilaterally  cleared  will  be  higher  than  those  for 
derivatives cleared through CCPs. In this way, the additional risk for these trades can – at 
least – to some extent be taken into account. It also provides an incentive to clear derivatives 
through  CCPs.  The  costs  associated  with  the  use  of  a  CCP  might  be  a  lesser  burden  if 
capital needs to be reserved for bilaterally traded derivatives. In addition, the requirements 
for  banks  to  use  internal  models  for  calculating capital  requirements  for  derivatives  will  be 
tightened.  This  proposal  also  includes  a  reconsideration  of  the  zero  risk  weight  for  CCPs, 
even when the CCP complies with international standards. CCPs will become systemically 
important,  as  more  and  more  derivatives  will  be  cleared  through  CCPs.  There  will  be  a 
concentration of risks on CCPs. Therefore, the Basel Committee also proposes to increase 
the capital charge for exposure on CCPs [the current charge for CCPs is 0%]. The capital 
charges will be calibrated in such way that the incentive to use CCPs will be preserved.  
The  establishment  of  an  international  dispute  resolution  facility  that  contributes  to  legal 
certainty in the OTC derivatives markets, fits well in a broad range of initiatives to enhance 
financial stability. DNB therefore welcomes this initiative.  
Conclusion 
I started by saying that this is an inspiring place to discuss an international dispute resolution 
facility for the financial markets. It might even be worth to consider establishing this facility 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2010
just here as well. Although the concept of a world financial tribunal is of greater importance 
than the question of where it is located, I believe the tribunal would find a perfect home in 
The Hague. The first world peace conference was held in 1899 in The Hague and resulted in 
the establishment of the Permanent Court of Arbitration. The idea of adding private dispute 
resolution in the financial markets to this landmark decision would fit perfectly in The Hague’s 
international judicial tradition. 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 5
