Andrew G Haldane: Curbing the credit cycle 
Speech  presented  by  Andrew  G  Haldane,  Executive  Director,  Financial  Stability,  Bank  of 
England, at the Columbia University Center on Capitalism and Society Annual Conference, 
New York, 20 November 2010. 
 The speech was prepared by Messrs David Aikman, Andrew G Haldane and Benjamin Nelson. The views are not 
necessarily  those  of  the  Bank  of  England.  We  are  grateful  to  Piergiorgio  Alessandri,  Richard  Barwell,  Salina 
Ladha, Roland Meeks, Victoria Saporta and Alan Taylor for comments. Thanks to Vijay Balle and Clare Rogowski 
for excellent research assistance and to Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor for making their data available to us. 
Introduction 
1. 
Credit lies at the heart of crises. Credit booms sow the seeds of subsequent credit crunches. 
This  is  a  key  lesson  of  past  financial  crashes,  manias  and  panics  (Minsky  (1986), 
Kindleberger  (1978),  Rogoff  and  Reinhart  (2009)).  It  was  a  lesson  painfully  re-taught  to 
policymakers during the most recent financial crisis. 
This time’s credit cycle has been particularly severe and synchronous. In 2006, private sector 
credit across the UK, US and euro area rose by around 10%. During 2009, private credit in 
these countries fell by around 2%.1 The knock-on consequences for real growth were equally 
severe  and  synchronous.  Peak  to  trough,  G7  real  output  fell  by  3.6%  during  the  Great 
Recession.  
In response, there have been widespread calls for remedial policy action. These proposals 
come  in  various  stripes.  Some  have  proposed  a  more  active  role  for  monetary  policy  in 
addressing financial imbalances (Taylor (2010), White (2009)). Others have suggested using 
new  macro-prudential  tools  to  rein  in  credit  excesses  (Borio  and  Lowe  (2002),  Bank  of 
England (2009), Kashyap et al (2010)). Others still have proposed a radical root-and-branch 
reform of the structure of banking (Kay (2009), Kotlikoff (2010)). 
Evaluating the merits of these proposals requires a conceptual understanding of the causes 
of  the  credit  cycle  and  an  empirical  quantification  of  its  dynamic  behaviour.  What  is  the 
underlying friction generating credit booms and busts? Are credit cycles distinct from cycles 
in  the  real  economy?  And  how  have  they  evolved,  both  over  time  and  across  countries? 
Answers  to  these  questions  should  help  frame  public  policy  choices  for  curbing  the  credit 
cycle.  
To  fix  ideas,  Section  2  sketches  a  model  of  the  credit  cycle.  In  this  model,  a  lack  of 
information provides incentives for banks to expand their balance sheets to boost profits and 
signal their ability to investors. This gives rise to a coordination failure, as banks collectively 
risk-up. That, in turn, generates a systematic credit boom and subsequent bust when risk is 
realised.  
Sections 3 and 4 present some empirical evidence on the credit cycle. Across countries and 
across a sweep of history, credit cycles are both clearly identifiable and regular. Typically, 
they presage banking crises. In their frequency and amplitude, credit cycles are distinct from 
the business cycle. 
There is also evidence  of them arising from coordination failures, which generate spillover 
effects across banks and countries. 
                                                 
1   See IMF (2010). 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 1
Drawing  on  this  evidence,  Section  5  identifies  some  implications  for  the  design  of  public 
policy. It suggests that neither monetary nor micro-prudential policy may be well-equipped to 
tackle  the  credit  cycle.  Instead,  some  new  policy  apparatus  may  be  needed  which  (unlike 
monetary  policy)  targets  bank  balance  sheets  directly  but  which  (unlike  micro-prudential 
policy)  does  so  systematically.  This  is  one  key  dimension  of  so-called  macro-prudential 
policy.2 
Various  international  macro-prudential  policy  committees  are,  or  are  about  to  be,  put  in 
place – in the US the Financial Stability Oversight Committee, in the euro-area the European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  and  in  the  UK  the  Financial  Policy  Committee.  These  provide  one 
element of a macroprudential policy framework. Other elements remain to be put in place. 
Knowledge of the sources and dynamics of the credit cycle will be important in assembling 
those missing pieces. This paper is intended to be a contribution towards that goal. 
A model of the credit cycle 
2. 
We begin by sketching a model which captures some key features of past and in particular 
the present, credit cycle. There are a number of existing models of the credit, or leverage, 
cycle. In all of these models, cyclicality in financial variables is aggravated by various micro-
economic  frictions.  These  frictions  typically  then  amplify  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy. 
Broadly, these models can be classified according to the underlying micro-economic friction.  
For  example,  a  well-established  body  of  literature  has  looked  at  the  effects  of  asymmetric 
information between borrowers and lenders in placing limits on credit (Bernanke, Gertler and 
Gilchrist  (1996),  Holstrom  and  Tirole  (1997)).  These  constraints  can  be  loosened  by  the 
borrower pledging collateral to the lender, in effect as a substitute for information (Kiyotaki 
and  Moore  (1997)).  This  solves  one  problem,  but  at  the  potential  expense  of  another: 
movements in the prices of collateral then have the potential to aggravate cycles in leverage 
and credit (Geanakoplos (2010)). These cycles can in turn act as a “financial accelerator” for 
the  business  cycle.  These  are  typically  models  of  a  representative  bank  and  credit-
constrained investor.  
A second potential source of credit market friction arises from coordination failures among 
lenders  (Gorton  and  He  (2008)).  In  these  models,  banks  are  heterogeneous  and  their 
behaviour strategic. The individually rational actions of heterogeneous lenders can generate 
collectively  sub-optimal  credit  provision  in  both  the  upswing  (a  credit  boom)  and  the 
downswing  (a  credit  crunch),  perhaps  through  herding  (Acharya  (2009),  Acharya  and 
Yorulmazer (2008)). This is the result of a collective action, or co-ordination, problem among 
banks. 
In credit markets, these co-ordination failures are far from new. Keynes memorably noted:  
“A  sound  banker,  alas,  is  not  one  who  foresees  danger  and  avoids  it,  but  one 
who,  when  he  is  ruined,  is  ruined  in  a  conventional  and  orthodox  way  with  his 
fellows, so that no one can really blame him” (Keynes (1931)). 
Eighty  years  later,  Chuck  Prince,  then-CEO  of  Citibank,  captured  the  collective  action 
problem thus: 
“As  long  as  the  music  is  playing,  you’ve  got  to  get  up  and  dance.  We’re  still 
dancing” (Prince (2006)). 
As Prince’s quote attests, these incentives were a key driver of risk-taking behaviour in the 
run-up to the crisis. In the face of stiffening competition, banks were increasingly required to 
                                                 
2   There are other potential non-cyclical instruments of macro-prudential policy, including instruments to tackle 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2010
keep pace with the returns on equity offered by their rivals – a case not so much of “keeping 
up with the Joneses” as “keeping up with the Goldmans”. To achieve these higher returns, it 
was individually rational for banks to increase their risk profiles. They did so in various ways 
including  through  higher  leverage,  marked  to  market  gains  on  trading  books  and  writing 
contracts with deep out-of-the-money option payoffs (Alessandri and Haldane (2009)). 
These  strategies  had  the  desired  effect.  They  generated  high  and  synchronous  reported 
returns (Chart 1). But they did so at the expense of higher risk in aggregate – a case of a 
competitive coordination failure. Reported returns were, in this sense, risk illusory. As those 
risk illusions were shattered, all of the pre-crisis gains in banks’ reported returns were lost. 
Our  model  captures  the  spirit  of  these  dynamics,  with  short-run  risk-taking  to  preserve 
reputation and boost returns (a credit boom) in time giving way to longer-term collective costs 
when the music ceases (a credit crunch). 
Price to book ratios for UK, US and European institutions(a)  
Chart 1 
 Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Datastream and Bank calculations 
(a) 
Chart shows the ratio of share price to book value per share. 
Simple  averages  of  the  ratio  in  each  peer  group  are  used. 
The chart plots the three month rolling average.  
Excludes  Nationwide  and  Britannia  from  Major  UK  Banks 
peer group.  
(b) 
The set up 
2.1 
We  develop  a  simple  framework,  in  the  spirit  of  Rajan  (1994),  to  capture  these  collective 
action failures. Rajan’s (op.cit.) model generates multiple equilibria. We use a version of the 
Morris and Shin (2003) “global games” framework to pin down a unique equilibrium for the 
coordination game among banks, which then allows an evaluation of policy options.3 
                                                 
3   For other applications of the “global games” framework to banking, see inter alia, Rochet and Vives (2004) 
and  Goldstein  and  Pauzner  (2005).  Broadly  speaking,  these  models  use  the  framework  to  pin  down 
uniqueness  in  the  coordination  game  played  by  the  depositors  of  fragile  banks,  a  la  Diamond  and 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 3
The set up is as follows. Each period there is a continuum of agents, indexed by 
, 
all  of  whom  work  as  financial  intermediaries  for  a  single  period.  In  other  words,  bankers 
have, by assumption, short horizons. They aim to maximise their reputation in the market at 
the end of this period.4 At the beginning of each period, each bank originates a risky asset, 
the return on which depends on (i) the banker’s ability, which can be high or low, and (ii) the 
macro state, which can be good or bad. Both are unobservable to the market. 
The  macro  state  is  good  with  probability 
.  High  bank  ability  and  a  good  macro  state 
increase the probability of positive asset returns. That is, when the macro state is bad, assets 
turn out to be bad, irrespective of bankers’ ability. But when the macro state is good, both 
high and low ability bankers achieve high returns with some probability, with high ability types 
always  achieving  high  returns  and  low  ability  types  achieving  high  returns  with  probability 
  in the market, where 
Asset returns are realised in the middle of each period and are observed only by banks. If the 
asset is good, banks make a profit (normalised to be a negligible amount). If the asset is bad, 
banks face a loss of –1. Because of their short horizons, bankers care about both the present 
value of their asset returns and their reputation 
 is the probability 
assigned by the market to a banker being high ability. 
The  market  is  unable  to  observe  banks’  actions  directly,  so  instead  infers  bankers’  ability 
from observed bank earnings. Banks’ earnings are affected by their choices when returns are 
low. If an asset turns out to be bad, banks can hide negative earnings in the short run by 
engaging in risky policies to boost returns – in effect, engaging in risk illusion. When a bank 
engages in a risky policy, an immediate loss is avoided with probability 
. But risky policies 
always involve longer term expected losses of 
If instead of setting risky policies banks choose immediately to liquidate assets, they set a 
tight  policy,  realising  a  loss  of  –1  for  sure.  So  banks’  choices  when  faced  with  low  asset 
returns  determine  their  risk  profiles.  If  returns  are  low,  under  a  risky  policy  banks  can 
increase short term earnings with some positive probability, but must incur a long term loss; 
while under a tight policy, banks can accept low short term earnings for sure now, avoiding 
losses in the future.  
 Suppose banks attach weight 
 to the 
net present value of future profits. When the asset is good, banks earn a return normalised to 
zero.  When  the  asset  is  bad,  two  strategies  are  possible.  If  a  bank  chooses  a  risky 
(superscript 
 to their reputation in the market and 
) policy, it obtains  
 where a proportion l of all banks also set a risky policy. The bank makes a loss of 1 with 
probability 
 while enjoying reputation 
, incurring long term cost 
5, 6 
                                                                                                                                                      
Dybvig (1983). For a survey of coordination games in macroeconomics, see Cooper (1999) and Morris and 
Shin (2000). 
Individuals might receive intrinsic utility from being thought of as high  ability, or it might matter materially  if 
future job prospects (including wages) depend on current reputation (see Scharfstein and Stein (1990)). The 
threat of corporate takeovers might also generate shortened managerial horizons, or agents might engage in 
hyperbolic discounting, which generates a short-term bias. 
4  
5   We assume no discounting, as in Rajan (1994). The qualitative results would not change were we to consider it. 
6  
4 
   is  the  probability  assigned  by  the  market  of  the  bank  being  high  ability,  conditional  on  the  bank 
  and 
setting  a  risky  policy  (unobserved  by  the  market),  the  asset  being  bad,  the  macro  state  being 
proportion 
 other banks also setting risky policies. 
BIS Review 168/2010
When the loan is bad, setting a tight (superscript  ) policy yields  
as  the  probability  of  a  loss  is  unity  under  a  tight  policy  and  the  bank  obtains  reputation 
 .7 
The evolution of reputation is key for determining behavioural dynamics in the model. The 
marginal effect on reputation of banks adopting risky rather than tight policies is given by  
   improvements  in  the  macro  state  increase  the  incentive  banks  face  to 
We  posit 
liberalise  their  risk  management  policies.  When  the  macro  state  is  good,  any  negative 
earnings  are  more  likely  to  be  attributed  to  low  ability.  This  is  the  “Prince  constraint”.  A 
concern for reputation incentivises banks to seek risky ventures (to keep dancing), the more 
so the better is the market’s prior on the macro state (the louder the music). 
We also posit 
 as a larger proportion of banks set risky credit policies, the larger the 
incentive  to  pursue  similarly  risky  policies.  When  others  are  posting  positive  earnings,  the 
reputational loss from foreclosing and taking losses is that much greater. This is the “Keynes 
constraint”.  It  is  better  for  your  reputation  to  fail  conventionally  than  to  succeed 
unconventionally.  
These conditions generate the potential for credit booms and busts. The better is the macro 
state,  the  greater  banks’  incentive  to  pursue  risky  projects  to  preserve  reputation,  as  the 
market  attributes  low  earnings  to  low  ability.  But  one  bank’s  announcement  of  positive 
earnings  encourages  others  to  announce  positive  earnings  by  setting  risky  policies  too.  In 
Rajan’s model this strategic complementarity between banks generates multiple equilibria: in 
sufficiently  good  states,  banks  coordinate  on  risky  policies  (“credit  booms”),  while  in  bad 
states they coordinate on tight policies (“credit crunches”). In between, either equilibrium is 
possible.  
Define the payoff function 
. Substituting gives:  
This captures the marginal return to adopting a risky policy. It allows us to define the regions 
of  fundamentals  over  which  risky  policies  and  tight  policies  dominate  respectively.  A  risky 
policy dominates a tight policy, even when no other banks set risky policies (
), when 
 where 
 A tight policy dominates a risky policy, even when other banks set risky policies (
when 
 where 
  In  the  intermediate  range 
policies optimal when others adopt risky (tight) policies too. 
,  there  are  multiple  equilibria,  with  risky  (tight)  credit 
  7  
 is defined analogously to 
, but is conditioned on tight rather than risky policies. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 5
The model in a “global game” 
2.2 
Next, we apply the technology of Morris and Shin (2003) to define a unique equilibrium from 
this game. Assume that banks observe fundamentals with some small amount of noise, with 
bank 
 receiving signal 
  are distributed in the population with continuous density 
where the noise terms 
 with 
support on the real line. Our model satisfies the conditions set out in Morris and Shin (2003) 
for there to exist a unique equilibrium in this game. In particular, each bank’s strategy 
 
 when in receipt of a low signal falling short 
conditional on its signal 
 when in receipt of a high signal 
of some critical level 
exceeding  some  critical  level 
  is  (see 
Appendix)  
.  The  condition  determining  this  threshold 
, and adopting strategy 
 satisfies 
  , or 
(1) 
Condition  (1)  allows  us  to  perform  comparative  statics  on  the  unique  coordination 
equilibrium. Using (1) it follows that the threshold level of fundamentals above which banks 
,  and 
set  risky  policies  is  (a)  increasing  in  the  long-term  cost  of  extending  bad  credit 
(b) decreasing in relative reputational concerns 
Both  results  accord  with  intuition.  First,  increasing  the  cost  to  banks  of  pursuing  risky 
strategies  causes  banks  to  coordinate  on  risky  policies  only  at  very  high  levels  of 
fundamentals. Or, put differently, safety prevails over a larger range of fundamentals when 
risky policies are costly. Prudential policies (discussed further in Section 5) are one means of 
raising the cost to banks of pursuing such risky strategies. 
These prudential policies would have both direct effects and strategic effects in the model. 
A rise in long term costs raises the direct cost to bank 
 of adopting a risky strategy. But it 
also leads bank 
 has both 
a  direct  effect  on  banks’  actions  and  an  effect  through  banks’  expectations  of  others’ 
actions.8 This expectational channel is crucial from a policy perspective. 
Second, reputational concerns act in the opposite direction. As greater weight is placed on 
shortterm  reputation,  incentives  are  sharpened  to  signal  high  ability  by  pursuing  risky 
policies, even when their signalling effect is relatively small ( is low). As in Rajan (1994), a 
tight credit policy becomes optimal for all levels of fundamentals as   , or as reputational 
concerns vanish. Conversely, if increased competition and deregulation increase reputational 
concerns,  this  increases  the  propensity  of  the  system  to  periodic  credit  booms  and 
subsequent busts.  
 to expect fewer other banks to adopt risky policies. So a rise in 
Dynamics 
2.3 
This model can generate credit cycles which amplify cycles in the real economy relative to a 
world without credit cycle frictions.9 Without frictions, bad loans are liquidated immediately, 
allowing new assets to be originated next period to unencumbered borrowers. By contrast, 
                                                 
8   These  expectation  effects  are  necessarily  intra-temporal  in  our  model.  The  actual  operation  of  macro-
prudential policy may well have effects through inter-temporal expectations as well. See Section 5 below. 
9   The property that global games generate endogenous cycles in dynamic settings has been analysed in, inter 
alia, Steiner (2006) and Giannitsarou and Toxvaerd (2007). 
6 
 BIS Review 168/2010
extending  credit  to  bad  risks  eventually  results  in  balance  sheet  impairment  for  both 
borrowers and lenders.  
We  perform  a  simple  simulation  to  illustrate  these  dynamics.  Suppose  the  macro  state 
moves  stochastically  around  its  trend  as  a  result  of  a  sequence  of  iid  productivity  shocks. 
The macro state is mean-reverting as long as banks set tight policies when they realise low 
asset returns. This occurs when reputational effects are switched off 
Next suppose reputational concerns are introduced, leading banks to risk up to signal high 
ability. Because of strategic complementarities, banks do this whenever 
. This leads 
to  subsequent  impairment  of  the  borrowing  sector.  These  dynamics  are  captured  in  the 
simple specification 
    in  period 
 relative to 
 begin also to shape the real economy. 
 is assumed to have a higher mean and variance than 
 are iid normal shocks and 
  and  value 
 is the indicator 
where   indexes time, 
function  taking  value  1  when 
  otherwise.  As  reputational  concerns 
disappear, the term 
 goes to zero, leaving simple autoregressive dynamics. But 
with  reputational  externalities,  productivity  shocks  become  amplified  by  the  credit  cycle:  a 
high  realisation  of 
  could  push  the  macro  state  above  the  risky  policy 
threshold, at which point the dynamics of 
The distribution of 
 to simulate the 
effects of the credit boom. In particular, we constrain the distribution of 
 such 
that expected risk-adjusted fundamentals are constant over time.10 So we have, in effect, a 
regime-switching  model.  When  banks  play  safe  strategies,  fundamentals  are  relatively 
stable. When banks risk up, they create a temporary improvement in expected fundamentals 
at the cost of greater volatility.  
This  dynamic  specification  has  some  interesting  properties.  First,  even  small  shocks  can 
have disproportionately large effects on fundamentals depending on the initial conditions. In 
particular, if fundamentals happen to be close to the switching threshold, a further positive 
shock will lead all firms to coordinate on the high risk-taking strategy. That drives up both the 
expected value of fundamentals and its volatility. This generates a form of path dependence. 
Second,  credit  cycles  are  endogenous  in  this  framework.  As  firms  coordinate  on  high  risk 
strategies, this drives up the expected value of fundamentals. But it also drives up volatility 
due to risk illusion. Because riskadjusted returns are constant, this must entail an increase in 
the probability of there being a severe negative shock, so the probability of a crash rises. 
Chart 2 shows a simulation of the model when 
 for 100 periods 
with  normally  distributed  shocks.  The  frictionless  benchmark  model  generates  the  path 
shown by the maroon line. As specified, the path is mean reverting, with movements in the 
macro state around trend. Allowing for reputational effects generates the blue path, giving a 
threshold level of fundamentals 
 shown by the green dashed line. As the macro state hits 
the threshold, banks adopt risky policies to signal high ability. In this simulation this happens 
four times, in periods 3, 50, 68 and 72. 
Consider the threshold breach in period 72. As during the Great Moderation, the good macro 
state  at  first  persists.  The  credit  boom  fuels  high  fundamentals.  But  while  headline 
fundamentals have improved, risk-adjusted fundamentals have not. Eventually, this results in 
a crunch in credit and a sharp deterioration in the macro state, as risk is realised. 
                                                 
10   In  particular,  the  Sharpe  ratio  (the  expected  value  of  fundamentals  relative  to  their  standard  deviation)  is 
constant across both regimes. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 7
Now suppose that financial liberalisation generates heightened competition between banks, 
  in  the  model. 
increasing  the  market  premium  on  reputation.  This  raises  the  value  of 
Chart 3 shows the effects of the reputational weight being raised 
. The threshold for 
risky policies falls. Relative to the baseline, there is an additional large and persistent boom 
in the middle of the simulation, followed by a period of below counterfactual fundamentals. 
The  path  of  the  economy  is  more  volatile,  with  deviations  from  trend  larger  and  more 
persistent. In other words, the credit cycle has real and adverse consequences. 
Chart 2 
Model simulation with low reputational weight 
Source: Bank calculations. 
Chart 3 
Model simulation with high reputational weight 
  Source: Bank calculations. 
8 
 BIS Review 168/2010
Empirical implications 
2.4 
Several  empirical  implications  follow  from  the  model.  First,  strategic  complementarities 
incentivise banks to adopt risky strategies in a coordinated fashion during the boom. So the 
dynamics  of  the  model  predict  that  we  should  observe  cycles  in  financial  activity  at  a 
macroeconomic  level.  Initial  productivity  improvements  are  amplified  into  lending  booms, 
which  are  followed  by  credit  busts  and,  potentially,  crises.  Second,  at  a  micro-economic 
level, the coordination of risky strategies during the boom should compress the dispersion of 
bank earnings, as low ability banks masquerade as high ability banks during good times. But 
during the bust, when the macro state turns bad, the dispersion of banks’ earnings should 
increase as low ability types crystallise losses while high ability types do not. We turn next to 
the macro and micro evidence.  
Credit cycle dynamics 
3. 
To what extent are the macroeconomic credit cycle dynamics predicted by the model present 
in the real world? To assess that, we draw on a dataset recently developed by Schularick 
and  Taylor  (2009).  This  covers  a  lengthy  time-series  (often  more  than  a  century  of  data) 
across  12  developed  countries.11  It  enables  us  to  identify  lower  (than  business  cycle) 
frequency movements in credit, just as Comin and Gertler (2006) do for post World War II 
US GDP.12 We concentrate on results for the UK and US, though broadly similar patterns are 
evident for the other ten countries.  
Table  1  presents  some  summary  statistics  (mean  and  standard  deviation)  of  real  GDP 
growth, real loan growth and real bank asset growth in the UK and the US since 1880.13 The 
sample is split into four periods: 1880–1913; 1914–1945; 1945–79; and 1980–2008. Charts 4 
and  5,  meanwhile,  plot  loan  or  asset  to  GDP  ratios  for  the  UK  and  US  over  the  sample. 
Several features are clear: 
 
Average real GDP growth is little changed either side of the wars (Table 1). But real 
credit  has  grown  around  twice  as  quickly  since  1945.  In  consequence,  loan/GDP 
ratios trend upwards from around 1945, consistent with financial liberalisation and 
deepening (Charts 4 and 5). 
The  same  general  pattern  is  evident  in  the  volatilities  of  output  and  credit.  The 
variability of real GDP growth has, if anything, fallen in the period since 1945. The 
standard deviation of real credit growth rose in the years immediately following 1945 
and has remained above those levels, especially since 1980. 
Since 1945, the standard deviation of real credit growth has been around five times 
that of real activity. 
  On the face of it, these summary statistics are consistent with credit dynamics being distinct 
from GDP dynamics. It is possible to formalise this intuition by using filtering techniques to 
                                                 
11   The  countries  covered  are:  Australia,  Canada,  Germany,  Denmark,  Spain,  France,  United  Kingdom,  Italy, 
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United States. 
12   They argue that medium term cycles in GDP reflect persistent responses of real activity to the high-frequency 
fluctuations normally associated with the “business cycle” (Comin and Gertler, op. cit.). In this sense, there is a 
direct  analogy  with  our  model,  in  which  strategic  complementarities  in  risk  taking  can  generate  persistent 
credit cycles in response to high-frequency fluctuations in fundamentals. 
13   The  bank  loans  series  consists  of  total  domestic  currency  loans  of  banks  and  banking  institutions  to 
companies and households, while the assets series consists of total domestic currency assets of banks and 
banking  institutions.  For  a  full  description  of  the  data  and  its  sources,  see  Schularick  and  Taylor  (2009), 
Appendix B. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 9
extract the cycle in credit. To do so, we apply a band-pass filter to the data.14 This isolates 
the cyclical component of a series operating in a frequency range specified by the user.15 
Charts 6–7 show cyclical fluctuations in real loan growth in the UK and US. The specified 
frequency  domain  is  8–20  years.  Shorter-term,  business  cycle  fluctuations,  say  between  
2–8  years,  were  typically  not  found  to  account  for  much  of  the  overall  cyclical  variation  in 
credit.  In  other  words,  credit  growth  exhibits  a  clear  cyclical  pattern  with  a  medium-term 
orientation. The credit cycle appears to be a well-defined empirical regularity. It also appears 
to have been operating for well over a century. And its frequency suggests factors other than 
the  business  cycle  may  be  responsible  for  driving  it  –  including,  for  example,  financial 
liberalisation and competition. 
Table 1 
Summary statistics of real GDP growth, real loan growth  
and real bank asset growth in the UK and the US 
Sources: Shularick and Taylor (2009) and Bank calculations. 
                                                  
14   We  also  experimented  with  the  Hodrick-Prescott  filter.  Although  the  choice  of  an  appropriate  smoothing 
parameter is not straightforward a priori, this approach produced broadly similar results to the band-pass filter. 
See e.g. Harvey and Jaeger (1993) and Canova (1998) for discussions. 
15   In  what  follows,  we  use  Christiano  and  Fitzgerald’s  (2003)  optimal  finite  sample  approximation  to  the  band 
pass  filter.  An  alternative  to  Christiano  and  Fitzgerald’s  procedure  is  provided  by  Baxter  and  King  (1999). 
Christiano  and  Fitzgerald  provide  evidence  to  suggest  that  their  optimal  finite  sample  approximation  is 
preferable  to  Baxter  and  King’s  when  extracting  cycles  at  lower  frequencies.)  Suppose  the  time  series  in 
is 
question 
. The properties of the time series can be captured in the frequency domain by taking 
is  a  stationary  stochastic  process 
Its  auto-covariance 
  with  expectation 
 a Fourier transform of the auto-covariances yielding the power spectrum  
   where 
  is  the  frequency  (in  radians)  in  the  range 
.  Since  the  power  spectrum  is  a 
,  it  can  be  viewed  as  a  decomposition  of  the 
function  of  the  auto-covariances  (including  the  variance 
variance of the time-series in terms of frequency. When the power spectrum is normalised by the variance 
, the resulting standardised function is known as the spectral density. The filter then isolates ‘bands’ in the 
frequency domain of the spectral density and returns the resulting series. 
10 
 BIS Review 168/2010
Chart 4 
Ratio of loans to GDP and assets to GDP (UK) 
Sources: Shularick and Taylor (2009) and Bank calculations. 
Chart 5 
Ratio of loans to GDP and assets to GDP (US) 
  Sources: Shularick and Taylor (2009) and Bank calculations. 
The  credit  cycle  is  distinct  from  the  business  cycle  in  amplitude  as  well  as  frequency.  To 
show this, Charts 6–7 plot the medium-term cycles in real GDP for the UK and US alongside 
the credit cycle. The amplitude of the credit cycle is twice that of fluctuations in GDP over the 
medium  term.  It  is  roughly  five  times  that  of  fluctuations  in  GDP  at  conventional  business 
cycle frequencies. The peak-to-trough variation in the typical credit cycle has been around 
20 percentage points in the UK. For real GDP, it is around 10 percentage points. As a result, 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 11
ratios  of  credit  to  GDP  themselves  exhibit  a  distinct  cyclical  pattern  in  the  UK  and  US 
(Charts 4–5).  
Chart 6 
Medium-term cycle in real GDP and credit (UK) 
Source: Bank calculations. 
Chart 7 
Medium-term cycle in real GDP and credit (US) 
  Source: Bank calculations. 
The same broad patterns are evident in the data when moving from credit to asset (equity 
and house) prices in the UK and US (Charts 8–9). A clear financial cycle is evident in both 
these series, distinct from the typical business cycle in its amplitude as well as frequency. 
12 
 BIS Review 168/2010
The  peak  to  trough  variation  in  asset  prices  is,  if  anything,  greater  than  for  credit:  around 
40 percentage  points  for  equities  and  around  15  percentage  points  for  house  prices  over 
medium-term horizons in the UK.  
Charts 10 and 11 demonstrate those differences, plotting medium-term frequency cycles in 
GDP and asset prices in the UK and US since 1945. 
Medium-term cyclical fluctuation in UK real equity and house prices 
Chart 8 
Source: Bank calculations. 
Medium-term cyclical fluctuation in US real equity and house prices 
Chart 9 
  Source: Bank calculations. 
 BIS Review 168/2010 
 13
Medium-term frequency cycles in GDP and asset prices in the UK 
Chart 10 
Source: Bank calculations. 
Medium-term frequency cycles in GDP and asset prices in the US 
Chart 11 
  Source: Bank calculations. 
14 
 BIS Review 168/2010
In Annex 2 we show results for the other 10 countries, applying the same techniques to real 
GDP and real credit. Although the cycles are sometimes not as regular, the same general 
cyclical patterns in output and credit are present using the wider panel of countries. As Irving 
Fisher noted almost eighty years ago: 
“The old and apparently still persistent notion of “the” business cycle, as a single, 
simple, self-generating cycle,…is a myth. Instead of one cycle, there are many 
co-existing cycles, constantly aggravating or neutralising each other, as well as 
co-existing with many non-cyclical forces” (Fisher (1933)). 
Historically, the credit cycle appears to have been just such a phenomenon.  
But  why  should  we  care?  One  reason  might  be  that  credit  booms  and  busts  are 
systematically related to the incidence of crises, with their associated social costs. Using the 
filtered credit series for the 12 countries, and the dating of banking and currency crises from 
Bordo  et  al  (2001),  it  is  possible  to  test  this  hypothesis.16  Over  the  sample  period,  these 
countries were in a state of banking and/or currency crisis anywhere between 10% and 25% 
of the time. This broadly matches the frequency of the credit cycle. 
 
Table 3 
The credit cycle and subsequent crises 
 Total peaks 
1880–2008* 
Crisis 
years** 
within 
5 years 
following a 
peak 
% peaks 
with crisis 
years within 
the 
following 
5 years 
Banking 
crisis within 
5 years 
following a 
peak 
% peaks 
with 
Banking 
crisis within 
the 
following 
5 years 
AUS 
CAN 
DEU 
DNK 
ESP 
FRA 
GBR 
ITA 
NLD 
NOR 
SWE 
USA 
 
9 
11 
9 
10 
8 
5 
9 
11 
8 
13 
10 
9 
112 
6 
6 
2 
4 
5 
3 
7 
8 
1 
5 
4 
6 
57 
66.7% 
54.5% 
22.2% 
40.0% 
62.5% 
60.0% 
77.8% 
72.7% 
12.5% 
38.5% 
40.0% 
66.7% 
50.9% 
2 
2 
1 
3 
2 
1 
3 
6 
1 
2 
2 
5 
30 
22.2% 
18.2% 
11.1% 
30.0% 
25.0% 
20.0% 
33.3% 
54.5% 
12.5% 
15.4% 
20.0% 
55.6% 
26.8% 
*  Interwar data missing for most countries. Data coverage incomplete for other countries e.g. only post-1945 
data  available  for  France.    **  Defined  as  years  in  which  either  a  banking  crisis  or  a  currency  crisis  or  both 
(“twin crisis”) occur. 
Source: Bordo et. al. (2001) and Bank calculations. 
                                                 
16   We also used crisis dating from Lopez-Salido and Nelson (2010) for the US. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 15
Table 3 asks what proportion of crisis years occurred within 5 years of the peak in the credit 
cycle in those countries. On average, more than half of all financial crisis years across the 
12 countries  appear  to  have  been  preceded  by  a  credit  boom.  Among  Anglo-Saxon 
countries, such as the US, UK and Australia, closer to 75% of crisis years occurred following 
a  credit  boom.  This  is  relatively  concrete  evidence  of  the  credit  cycle  having  real  and 
damaging effects on output.17, 18 
Credit cycle spillovers 
4. 
This empirical evidence to date, operating at a macro-economic level, is consistent with the 
model  in  Section  2:  a  credit  cycle  is  clearly  discernible;  its  frequency  is  different  and  its 
amplitude larger than the business cycle; and its fluctuations may exacerbate the business 
cycle. But the model also has implications at a micro-economic level, arising from strategic 
complementarities,  or  spillover  effects,  across  firms.  In  this  section  we  consider  empirical 
evidence on such credit spillover effects.  
The  model  implies  that  the  cross-sectional  distribution  of  returns  to  banking  should  be 
compressed during a credit boom, as banks seek to keep up with competitors by collectively 
boosting  returns.  This  is  a  time-series  phenomenon.  A  second  implication  is  that  the 
dispersion  in  returns  may  be  smaller  for  financial  than  for  non-financial  companies  to  the 
extent that former are more susceptible to risk illusion. This is a cross-sectional phenomenon. 
To assess these hypotheses, Charts 12 and 13 look at the dispersion of returns for publicly 
listed US banks calculated in two ways: implied market returns on bank equity and reported 
returns on banks’ equity (ROE). For comparison, the dispersion of returns among the largest 
US non-financial companies is also shown, together with identified periods of credit boom. 
Two features are striking.  
First,  measures  of  return  dispersion  are  consistently  lower  for  banks  than  for  non-banks: 
simple t-tests reject the null of equal mean dispersion between the two types of institution at 
the 1% level. Given the much higher levels of leverage among banks than non-banks, that is 
surprising: high leverage should bias against finding lower dispersion in banking. It is consistent 
with stronger herding incentives in banking. Second, measures of return dispersion tend to 
fall during periods of credit boom, statistically significantly so at the 1% level. For example, 
measures of equity return dispersion hit all-time lows at the height of the recent credit boom 
in 2006–2007.19 
Counter-cyclical  variation  in  equity  return  dispersion  is  well  documented  in  the  finance 
literature.  For  example,  Schwert  (1989)  finds  no  single  macroeconomic  variable  that  can 
explain  low  frequency  movements  in  equity  price  volatility.  Further  evidence  is  provided  in 
Hamilton and Lin (1996), Perez Quiros and Timmerman (2001), Brandt and Kang (2004) and 
Belratti  and  Morana  (2006).  These  econometric  studies  leave  the  structural  causes  of 
counter-cyclical dispersion unexplained. Our model suggests that the desire to signal ability, 
                                                 
17   We  also  conducted  some  probit  regressions  using  lagged  real  credit  growth  to  predict  the  probability  of 
banking crisis, following Schularick and Taylor (op.cit.). We replicated their results: lagged real credit growth 
(up  to  five  or  six  years)  was  jointly  significant  in  positively  contributing  to  the  probability  of  there  being  a 
subsequent banking crisis, and robust across sub-samples pre and post WWII. The joint significance of five-
six  annual lags of real credit growth is consistent  with our depiction of the credit cycles as a  medium term 
phenomenon in which sustained booms are statistically significantly related to banking crises. 
18   See also Bordo and Haubrich (2010), who show that more severe financial events are associated with more 
severe real effects in the US 1875–2007. 
19   There are, of course, alternative explanations. See, for example, Gomes, Kogan and Zhang (2003), whose 
model predicts counter cyclical dispersion driven by productivity shocks. Our explanation differs both in that 
(a) we relate dispersion to lower frequency fluctuations in fundamentals than the business cycle and (b) we 
stress imperfect information, and in particular the incentive to convey type, which is absent in their model. 
16 
 BIS Review 168/2010
rooted  in  imperfect  information  and  short  horizons,  may  be  a  cause  of  counter-cyclical 
dispersion in banking returns.20 
Charts  14  and  15  look  at  the  same  metrics  for  UK  banks.  We  have  also  examined  return 
patterns among the largest global banking and non-financial firms.21 The results are much 
the  same.  On  average,  the  dispersion  in  banking  returns  is  statistically  significantly  lower 
than for non-banks, at the 1% level, both for UK and global institutions. And, in general, we 
observe a compression of returns during credit booms and a dispersion in busts. There is 
evidence  of  an  increase  in  the  degree  of  coordination  of  global  banks’  activities  after  the 
financial  liberalisation  of  the  1980s.  This  suggests  credit  cycles  may  have  become 
increasingly synchronous globally.  
To test this formally, we construct pair-wise correlations between countries’ credit cycles for 
two post-war sub-samples, 1945–79 and 1980–2008. We plot the cumulative distributions of 
these  cross-country  correlations  in  Chart  16.  The  same  technique  can  be  applied  to 
correlations between countries’ medium term fluctuations in GDP (Chart 17). In each chart, a 
shift to the right of the cumulative distribution indicates an increase in the degree of cross-
country correlation.  
Chart 12 
Dispersion of equity returns of US banks and  
top 100 US PNFCs (by market cap) 
 
(1),  (2)  and  (3)  represent  medium  term  credit  booms.  Outside  of  these  areas  represent 
medium term credit busts.  
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. 
                                                 
20   Theoretical  explanations  have  been  put  forward  by,  among  others,  Campbell  and  Cochrane  (1999)  and 
Mele (2007), who show that habits and cyclically asymmetric risk premia respectively may generate counter 
cyclical volatility in asset pricing models. 
21   This global group of banking institutions included UK and US banks as a subset. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 17
Chart 13 
Dispersion of ROE of US banks  
and US top 20 PNFCs (by market cap) 
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. 
 Consistent  with  Bordo  and  Helbling  (2003,  2010),  there  is  evidence  of  increasing 
synchronicity  in  medium  term  GDP  fluctuations  across  countries  since  1980:  a  Wilcoxon 
rank-sum test rejects the null that the two samples are drawn from the same distribution at 
the 1% level and Jenrich’s test rejects the null that the correlation matrices are equal.22, 23 
This  increased  synchronisation  can  be  explained  by  increasing  trade  and  financial 
liberalisation (see Bordo and Helbling (op. cit.)).  
We observe an analogous pattern for credit cycles, with the correlation between countries’ 
credit cycles higher on average after 1980. The Wilcoxon test rejects the null of equality at 
the 5% level and Jenrich’s rejects its null at the 1% level. This is consistent with the notion 
that global banks’ activities have become increasingly alike, possibly as a result of increased 
competition  and  crossborder  lending.  The  increase  in  the  cross-country  correlation  of  the 
credit  cycle suggests  policy  needs  an  international  dimension  if it  is  to  curb  effectively  the 
credit cycle, to which we turn next. 
 
                                                 
22   Wilcoxon’s  test  pools  the  correlation  matrices  from  the  two  sub  samples  and  ranks  individual  country-pair 
observations by magnitude. If one set  of observations features systematically  higher cross-correlations, the 
rank of each of the observations will be higher on average in the pooled sample. Using the rankings of each 
correlation in the pooled sample, a normally distributed test statistic is constructed, under the null that the two 
samples are drawn from the same distribution. 
23   Jennrich’s test for the equality of two correlation matrices derives a chi-squared distributed test statistic from 
transformations of the correlation matrices, including a term correcting for the bounded support ([-1,1]) of the 
difference between two correlations. The null is equality of the matrices. 
18 
 BIS Review 168/2010
Chart 14 
Dispersion of equity returns of major UK banks  
and top UK 100 PNFCs (by market cap) 
Source: CapitalIQ and Bank calculations. 
 Chart 15 
Dispersion of ROE of top 10 UK banks  
and top 10 UK PNFCs (by market cap) 
Source: CapitalIQ and Bank calculations. 
  BIS Review 168/2010 
  19
Chart 16 
Cumulative distribution function of cross-country  
correlations of credit cycles  
Source: Bank calculations 
 Chart 17  
Cumulative distribution function of cross-country correlations  
between medium term GDP cycles 
  Source: Bank calculations. 
 20 
 BIS Review 168/2010
Curbing the credit cycle 
5. 
Taking together the evidence from Sections 2–4, what are the implications for public policy? 
First,  according  to  the  model  a  credit  cycle  arises  from  a  collective  action  failure  among 
banks.  The  lending  decisions  banks  take,  while  individually  rational,  are  collectively  sub-
optimal. Specifically, individual banks may fail to internalise the reputational externalities their 
lending  actions  impose  on  others.  The  result  is  a  periodic  tidal  wave  of  credit  during  the 
boom followed by protracted credit drought during the crunch. Chuck Prince’s disco inferno 
causes murder on the dance floor.  
These credit cycle externalities provide a justification for state intervention to help co-ordinate 
lending expectations and actions by banks. At least in principle, these externalities suggest a 
role for the state in enforcing collective lending action, to curb the peaks and troughs in the 
credit cycle. The case for policy action may have grown over recent decades as competition 
in banking, and associated externalities, have intensified. 
Second,  it  has  been  suggested  that  one  means  of  curbing  credit  cycle  frictions  is  through 
monetary policy – either by ensuring it moderates appropriately the business cycle (Taylor 
(2010)) or, more ambitiously, by having it play a wider role in curtailing financial imbalances 
(Borio and White (2004)). The evidence presented here is not especially encouraging on that 
front.  The  frequency  and  amplitude  of  the  business  and  credit  cycles  is  quite  different. 
Monetary policy may be an inefficient tool for calming the credit cycle, if at the same time it is 
to moderate the business cycle.  
Recent history offers a good case study. Between 2000 and 2007, UK nominal GDP growth 
exhibited no signs of exuberance, with GDP growth at trend and inflation at target. Over the 
same period, UK banks’ balance sheets trebled. Using monetary policy to tame credit growth 
over this period would have come at the expense of a destabilisation of non-financial activity. 
Activist monetary policy would have resulted in instability migrating from the financial to the 
non-financial sector. In tackling the credit cycle, monetary policy may have, in Irving Fisher’s 
language, “aggravated rather than neutralised” the business cycle. 
Econometric  evidence  tends  to  support  this  view.  Model-based  simulations  by  the  IMF 
suggest the need for two instruments to tackle efficiently real as well as financial imbalances 
(IMF (2009)). And the empirical evidence in Bean et al (2010) suggests that monetary policy 
may  be  a  rather  ineffective  instrument  quantitatively  in  constraining  credit  growth.  This 
suggests  that  assigning  monetary  policy  the  task  of  tackling  financial  imbalances  may  be 
inefficient, perhaps ineffective.  
Charts 18 and 19 plot credit cycles in the UK and US from 1880, together with the different 
monetary  policy  regimes  which  have  operated  over  this  period.  Strikingly,  credit  cycles 
dynamics  appear  to  be  largely  invariant  to  the  monetary  policy  regime  –  fixed  or  floating, 
rules or discretion, lax or tight. This, too, is indicative evidence that monetary policy may not 
be the most effective tool for moderating credit fluctuations. 
Third,  micro-prudential  policy  aimed  at  tackling  financial  imbalances  in  individual  financial 
institutions may also be ineffective for dealing with aggregate credit cycles. That is because 
bankspecific actions will not, by themselves, internalise the spillovers that arise across banks 
over the credit cycle. At best, this means that micro-prudential actions may be impotent in 
curbing  the  credit  cycle.  At  worst,  however,  it  could  mean  that  bank-specific  prudential 
actions are counterproductive. They might actually boost risk-taking incentives among banks 
which are not subject to prudential intervention. 
 
 
 
 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 21
Chart 18 
UK credit cycle across monetary regimes 
 
(1) Gold  Standard.        (2) Inter-war  suspension.    (3) Resumption  of  Gold 
Standard.    (4) Sterling  Area.    (5) Bank  of  England  nationalised;  Bretton 
Woods.    (6) Bretton  Woods;  Sterling 
(7) Monetary  Targeting.    (8) Exchange  Rate  Mechanism.    (9) Inflation 
Targeting.    (10) Bank of England independence. 
Source: Bank calculations. 
full  external 
convertibility.    
Chart 19 
US credit cycle across monetary regimes 
 established; 
(1)  Gold  Standard.        (2) Inter-war  suspension.        (3) Resumption  of  Gold 
Standard.    (4) FDIC 
(5) Bretton Woods.      (6) Treasury-Federal  Reserve  Accord  (1951).      (7) End 
convertibility into gold (“Nixon Shock”) (1971).    (8) Volker era.    (9) Greenspan 
era.    (10) Bernanke era. 
Source: Bank calculations. 
Reserve 
Federal 
reorganisation.     
22 
 BIS Review 168/2010
To see that, consider a two-bank variant of the model described by the payoffs in Table 4, in 
  now  references  the  market’s  prior  over  the  macro  state,  which  it  updates  having 
which 
 is neither too big nor too small, there are 
observed a bank’s earnings. When 
two  symmetric  Nash  equilibrium  strategies  in  this  game:  {Risky,  Risky}  and  {Tight,  Tight}. 
When  Bank  1  sets  {Risky},  Bank  2  does  not  want  to  set  {Tight}  and  declare  negative 
earnings as this is more likely to signal low ability, provided the long term costs   are not too 
big. On the other hand, if Bank 1 sets {Tight}, Bank 2 sets tight too if long term costs 
 are 
not too small. This results in a classic coordination game with multiple equilibria. 
 
 Risky 
Tight 
 
1
 
k
n
a
B
Table 4 
Payoffs in a two-bank game 
Bank 2 
Risky 
  Tight 
   
Now  suppose  the  regulator  forces  Bank  2  to  set  tight  policies  whenever  it  realises  low 
returns.  So  if  Bank  2  announces  positive  earnings,  it  must  be  because  the  macro  state  is 
good. But given this, Bank 1 does not want to  signal low ability by playing {Tight}  when it 
makes a bad loan since doing so would be taken by the market to imply low ability. If the 
spillover  from  Bank  2’s  actions  to  the  market’s  assessment  of  the  macro  state  is  strong 
enough, {Tight, Tight} may no longer be an equilibrium. Instead, Bank 1 may play Risky. The 
resulting  equilibrium  is  {Risky,  Tight}.  In  this  way,  bank-specific  intervention  may  have 
perverse consequences for risk-taking.  
Fourth,  this  co-ordination  problem  suggests  systematic,  across-the-system  actions  are 
needed  to  curtail  effectively  credit  booms  and  busts.  This  is  one  dimension  of  macro-
prudential policy. To be effective, these policies need to increase the long-term cost of credit 
extension  to  banks  during  booms  and,  as  importantly,  to  lower  these  costs  during  busts. 
These  actions  would  help  smooth  out  credit  supply  over  the  cycle.  There  are  a  variety  of 
macro-prudential tools which could have this effect, including pro-cyclical capital and liquidity 
requirements,  or  remuneration  packages  that  tie  individual  earnings  more  closely  to  long 
term performance (Bank of England (2009), Kashyap et al (2010), G30 (2010)). 
Chart 20 illustrates the impact of increasing the long term cost of short term risky strategies, 
,  across  the  entire  system  in  our  simple  model.  The  “low 
”  and  frictionless  paths  are 
identical  to  Chart  2.  But  if  the  regulator  raises  the  cost  of  risky  policies,  the  signalling 
threshold  rises  to  the  green  dashed  line.  In  this  example,  the  increase  in  this  threshold  is 
sufficient to prevent risky policies arising at any point over the horizon. In other words, the 
“high 
“  (macro-prudential)  path  replicates  the  frictionless  equilibrium.  The  large  output 
swings caused by risky lending cycles are reduced significantly. The financial accelerator is 
defused. 
 
 
 
 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 23
Chart 20 
Model simulation high long term cost of  
short term risky strategies  
Source: Bank calculations. 
 Fifth,  because  credit  cycles  emerge  from  a  failure  to  co-ordinate  lending  decisions, 
expectations  are  crucial  for  the  effectiveness  of  macro-prudential  policies.  Perhaps  even 
more than in a monetary policy context, macro-prudential policy works by acting on agents’ 
expectations.  For  example,  raising 
  has  a  direct  effect  on  lenders’  behaviour,  increased 
incentives to reduce risk. But as importantly, it also has an indirect expectational effect, as all 
lenders anticipate they will become subject to the same simultaneous squeeze. Anticipating 
that, lenders will co-ordinate their lending choices today provided policy is credible. 
These collective action dynamics underscore the importance of the expectations channel for 
macroprudential policy. This has important implications for the design of a macro-prudential 
framework.  Without  absolute  clarity  about  the  objectives  of  any  macro-prudential  policy 
framework  and  the  policy  rule  necessary  to  deliver  these  objectives,  expectations  will  not 
adjust and policy will be impotent. Any lack of transparency or failure of communications is 
likely to inhibit seriously the effectiveness of macro-prudential policy. 
Sixth,  because  macro-prudential  policy  is  new  in  most  developed  countries,  there  are 
understandable  concerns  that  policymakers’  knowledge  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
policy is incomplete and imperfect. The model of the credit cycle developed here offers some 
grounds for optimism. Signalling is the key transmission channel. Quantitative estimates of 
the effects of, for example, higher capital ratios on banks’ cost of credit provision have wide 
confidence  intervals  (BIS  (2010)).  But  this  may  not  be  fatal  if  macro-prudential  policy  
by-passes these channels and works by acting, first and foremost, through expectations. 
Seventh, the credit cycle is increasingly an international phenomenon, as well as a national 
one. Credit spillovers occur across borders as well as across banks. This suggests macro-
prudential policies need also to have an international dimension if they are to tackle credit 
externalities.  This  is  recognised  in  the  macro-prudential  policy  framework  currently  being 
discussed by the international regulatory community (BIS (2010)). This framework includes 
an  explicit  reciprocity  provision.  For  example,  judgements  on  local  credit  conditions 
determine  the  amounts  of  capital  to  be  held  by  international  banks  on  their  exposures  in 
24 
 BIS Review 168/2010
those countries. This reciprocity feature should help to reduce the arbitrage risks posed by 
the internationalisation of the credit cycle.  
Eighth,  a  second  potential  source  of  regulatory  arbitrage  is  the  shadow  banking  system. 
Even  ahead  of  the  present  crisis,  this  had  grown  to  a  scale  potentially  in  excess  of  the 
conventional banking system (Adrian et al (2010)). Operating macro-prudential policy on a 
sub-set of credit providers, ignoring the shadow banks, suffers the same problems as micro-
prudential policy operating on a sub-set of banks. It risks not only being ineffective, but also 
providing  incentives  for  risk  to  migrate  to  the  unregulated  sector.  This  underlines  the 
importance of policing the regulatory boundary and moving this boundary if credit provision 
risks crossing the border in the course of setting macroprudential policy. 
Ninth, especially at the outset, uncertainties about the role and efficacy of macro-prudential 
policy  will  be  considerable.  Simplicity  and  humility  will  be  needed.  Simplicity  to  prevent 
confusion about the objectives and transmission channels for macro-prudential policy, given 
the importance of signalling. Humility to reduce the chances of banks over-relying on public 
policy signals about credit provision at a time when these are sure to be noisy (see Morris 
and Shin (2002)). As with the business cycle and monetary policy, macro-prudential policy 
cannot be expected to eliminate the credit cycle. This is neither feasible nor desirable. And 
simple rules, augmented by judgement, offer  the best chance of ensuring robust decision-
making at the start of a new macro-prudential policy regime (Taylor and Williams (2010)). 
Tenth,  the  state  of  macro-prudential  policy  today  has  many  similarities  with  the  state  of 
monetary  policy  just  after  the  second  world  war.  Data  is  incomplete,  theory  patchy,  policy 
experience negligible. Monetary policy then was conducted by trial and error. The same will 
be  true  of  macroprudential  policy  now.  Mistakes  will  be  made.  But  as  experience  with  the 
other arms of macroeconomic policy has taught us, the biggest mistake would be not to try.  
BIS Review 168/2010 
 25
Annex 1:  
Model proofs 
Reputational probabilities:  Here  we  motivate  the  conditions  that 
.  Suppose 
the market has prior 
 that a banker’s ability is high. If a banker is of low ability, she achieves 
positive returns on loans with probability 
 when the macro state is good, while high ability 
bankers achieve positive returns on loans with probability 1 when the macro state is good. 
When the macro state is bad, all bankers achieve zero returns. Let 
 be the probability that 
the macro state is good. Let the market conjecture that under a risky policy and a bad state 
of the world, earnings are positive with probability 
, while under a risky policy and a good 
state of the world, earnings are positive with probability 
. Conditional on risky policies and 
observing positive earnings, the probability of being of high ability is 
which is increasing in 
Similarly, under tight policies, 
   which  is  decreasing  in 
effects. 
.  The  conditions  in  the  text  that 
  capture  these 
Equilibrium: Our model satisfies following conditions, set out in Morris and Shin (2003), viz.: 
 
 
 
Condition 1: Action Monotonicity: 
Condition 2: State Monotonicity: 
Condition 3: Uniform Limit Dominance: There exist 
that  (1) 
 is non-decreasing in  .  
.  
  and  (2)  there  exists 
 is non-decreasing in 
 such 
  such  that 
  for  all 
 and 
 for all 
  and 
. 
   Condition  4:  Strict  Laplacian  State  Monotonicity:  There  exists  a  unique 
solving 
  Condition 5: Finite Expectations of Signals: 
 is well defined.  
Condition  6:  Continuity: 
and density 
   is  continuous  with  respect  to  signal 
 Morris and Shin use these to show 
 
Lemma 1: (Morris and Shin 2003) Let 
  there  exists 
  such  that  for  all 
deletion of strictly dominated strategies, then 
 be defined by Condition 4. Then for any 
,  if  strategy  s  survives  iterated 
 = {Tight} for all 
 and 
 = {Risky} for all 
  Proof: See Morris and Shin (2003), Proposition 2.2. 
26 
 BIS Review 168/2010
i.e. that agents play cut-off strategies, adopting strategy 
“low”  signal 
signal 
. Condition 4 gives the threshold. 
,  and  adopting  strategy 
 = {Tight} when in receipt of a 
  =  {Risky}  when  in  receipt  of  a  “high’ 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 27
Annex 2  
International medium-term frequency cycles  
in real GDP and credit 
 28 
   BIS Review 168/2010
   BIS Review 168/2010 
 29
   30 
 BIS Review 168/2010
    BIS Review 168/2010 
 31
   32 
 BIS Review 168/2010
References 
Acharya,  V.V.  (2009),  “A  Theory  of  Systemic  Risk  and  Design  of  Prudential  Bank 
Regulation”,Journal of Financial Stability, Vol 5, 3, 224–255.  
Acharya,  V.V.,  and  Yorulmazer,  T  (2008),  “Information  Contagion  and  Bank  Herding”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 40, 1, 215–231.  
Adrian,  T,  Ashcraft,  A,  Boesky,  H  and  Pozsar,  Z  (2010),  “Shadow  Banking”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 458. 
Alessandri, P and Haldane, A G (2009), “Banking on the State”, Bank of England.  
Angeletos, G, Hellwig, C and Pavan, A (2006), “Signalling in a Global Game: Coordination 
and Policy Traps”, Journal of Political Economy 114(3). 
Bank of England (2009), “The Role of Macroprudential Policy – A Discussion Paper”, available at  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/financialstability/roleofmacroprudentialpoli
cy091121.pdf 
Bean, C, Paustian, M, Penalver, A and Taylor, T (2010), “Monetary Policy After the Fall”, 
available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech444.pdf  
Belratti  and  Morana  (2006),  “Breaks  and  persistency:  macroeconomic  causes  of  stock 
market volatility”, Journal of Econometrics, 131 pp 151–177.  
Bernanke, B, Gertler, M and Gilchrist, S (1996), “The Financial Accelerator and the Flight 
to Quality”, The Review of Economics and Statistics 78(1), pp 1–15, MIT Press. 
BIS  (2010),  “Countercyclical  Capital  Buffer  Proposal  –  Consultative  Document”,  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements. 
Bordo,  M,  Eichengreen,  B,  Klingebiel,  D  and  Martinez-Peria,  M  S  (2001),  “Is  the  crisis 
problem growing more severe?”, Economic Policy 16(1), pp 51–82.  
Bordo,  M  and  Haubrich,  J  (2010),  “Credit  crises,  money  and  contractions:  An  historical 
view”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 1–18.  
Bordo,  M  D  and  Helbling,  T  (2003),  “Have  National  Business  Cycles  Become  More 
Synchronized?”, NBER Working Paper 10130. 
Bordo,  M  D  and  Helbling,  T  (2010),  “International  Business  Cycle  Synchronization  in 
Historical Perspective”, NBER Working Paper 16103. 
Borio  and  Lowe  (2002),  “Asset  Prices,  Financial  and  Monetary  Stability:  Exploring  the 
Nexus”, Bank for International Settlements Working Papers 114. 
Borio,  C  and  White,  W  R  (2004),  “Whither  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability?  The 
Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes”, Bank for International Settlements Working Papers 
147.  
Brandt,  M  and  Kang,  Q  (2004),  “On  the  relationship  between  the  conditional  mean  and 
volatility  of  stock  returns:  A  latent  VAR  approach”,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics,  
217–257.  
Campbell,  J  and  Cochrane,  J  (1999),  “By  Force  of  Habit:  A  Consumption-Based 
Explanation  of  Aggregate  Stock  Market  Behaviour”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  
205–251.  
Canova, F. (1998), “Detrending and Business Cycle Facts”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 
41 475–512.  
Comin,  D  and  Gertler,  M  (2006),  “Medium  Term  Business  Cycles”,  American  Economic 
Review, Vol. 96 No. 3. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 33
Cooper,  R.  W.  (1999),  Coordination  Games:  Complementarities  and  Macroeconomics, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Diamond, D and Dybvig, P (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”, Journal 
of Political Economy, 91, 401–419.  
Fisher,  I  (1933),  “The  Debt-Deflation  Theory  of  Great  Depressions”,  Econometrica 1,  
pp 337–357.  
Geanakoplos,  J  (2010),  “The  Leverage  Cycle”,  NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual  2009 
Vol. 24, pp 1–65, University of Chicago Press. 
Giannitsarou,  C  and  Toxvaerd,  F  (2007),  “Recursive  Global  Games”,  CEPR  Discussion 
Paper 6470. 
Goldstein,  I  and  Pauzner,  A  (2005),  “Demand-Deposit  Contracts  and  the  Probability  of 
Bank Runs”, Journal of Finance, 60, 1293–1327.  
Gomes,  J,  Kogan,  L  and  Zhang,  L  (2003),  “Equilibrium  Cross  Section  of  Returns”,  The 
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 111, pp. 693–732, University of Chicago Press. 
Gorton,  G  and  He,  P  (2008),  “Bank  Credit  Cycles”,  Review  of  Economic  Studies  75(4), 
pp 1181–1214, Blackwell Publishing. 
Group  of  Thirty  (2010),  Enhancing  Financial  Stability  and  Resilience:  Macroprudential 
Policy,Tools, and Systems for the Future. 
Hamilton, J and Lin, G (1996), “Stock Market Volatility and the Business Cycle”, Journal of 
Applied Econometrics, 573–593.  
Harvey, A.C., and Jaeger, A. (1993), “Detrending, Stylized Facts and The Business Cycle”, 
Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 8, 231–247.  
Holmstrom,  B  and  Tirole,  J  (1997),  “Financial  Intermediation,  Loanable  Funds,  and  the 
Real Sector”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3), pp 663–91, MIT Press.  
IMF  (2009),  “Lessons  for  monetary  policy  from  asset  price  fluctuations”,  World  Economic 
Outlook, Chapter 3, October. 
IMF  (2010),  “Meeting  New  Challenges  to  Stability  and  Building  a  Safer  System”,  Global 
Financial Stability Report, International Monetary Fund, April.  
Kay, J (2010), Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation, Centre for the Study of 
Financial Innovation. 
Kashyap, A K, Stein, J C and Hanson, S (2010), “A Macroprudential Approach to Financial 
Regulation”, Forthcoming in Journal of Economic Perspectives. 
Keynes, J M (1931), “The Consequences to the Banks of the Collapse of Money Values”, 
Essays in Persuasion, Macmillan Publishers. 
Keynes, J  M (1936),  The  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money,  Macmillan 
Cambridge University Press. 
Kindleberger,  C.P.  (1978),  Manias,  Panics  and  Crashes:  A  History  of  Financial  Crises, 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
King,  M  (2010),  “Banking:  From  Bagehot  to  Basel,  and  back  again”,  Speech  given  at  the 
Second  Bagehot  Lecture  Buttonwood  Gathering,  New  York  City.  Available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech455.pdf  
Kiyotaki, N and Moore, J (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy 105(2).  
Kotlikoff, L J (2010), Jimmy Stewart is Dead: Ending the World’s Ongoing Financial Plague 
with Limited Purpose Banking, John Wiley and Sons. 
34 
 BIS Review 168/2010
the  Eighth  World  Congress  of 
Lopez-Salido,  D.  and  Nelson,  E.  (2010),  “Postwar  Financial  Crises  and  Economic 
Recoveries in the United States”, mimeo. 
Mele, A (2007), “Asymmetric stock market volatility and the cyclical behaviour of expected 
returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, 446–478.  
Minsky, H P (1986), Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, Yale University Press. 
Morris,  S  and  Shin,  H  S  (2000),  “Rethinking  Multiple  Equilibria  in  Macroeconomic 
Modelling”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 15, 139–161.  
Morris, S and Shin, H S (2002), “Social Value of Public Information”, American Economic 
Review 92(5), pp 1521–1534. 
Morris,  S,  and  Shin,  H  S  (2003),  “Global  Games:  Theory  and  Applications”,  Advances  in 
Economics  and  Econometrics  (Proceedings  of 
the 
Econometric Society), Cambridge University Press. 
Perez-Quiros, G and Timmerman, A (2001), “Business cycle asymmetries in stock returns: 
Evidence  from  higher  order  moments  and  conditional  densities”,  Journal  of  Econometrics, 
259–306. 
Rajan,  R  G  (1994),  “Why  Bank  Credit  Policies  Fluctuate:  A  Theory  and  Some  Evidence”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2), pp 399–441. 
Reinhart, C M and Rogoff, K S (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial 
Folly, Princeton University Press. 
Rochet, J C, and Vives, X (2004), “Coordination Failures and The Lender of Last Resort: 
Was Bagehot Right After All?”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol 2. No. 6. 
Scharfstein,  D  S  and  Stein,  J  C  (1990),  “Herd  Behavior  and  Investment”,  American 
Economic Review, vol. 80(3), pages 465–79, June. 
Schularick, M and Taylor, A M (2009), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Levrage 
Cycles and Financial Crises, 1970–2008”, NBER Working Paper Series 15512.  
Schwert, G W (1989), “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?”, The Journal 
of Finance, 1115–1153.  
Steiner, J (2008), “Coordination Cycles”, Games and Economic Behaviour 60, pp 308–327.  
Taylor,  J  (2010),  “Commentary:  Monetary  Policy  After  the  Fall”,  Presentation  at  the 
Symposium “Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead”, Jackson Hole. 
White,  W  R  (2009).  “Should  Monetary  Policy  ‘Lean  or  Clean’?”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Dallas Globalisation and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 34. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 35
