Subir Gokarn: Monetary policy considerations after the crisis – 
practitioners’ perspectives 
Plenary lecture by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
conference “Economic Policies for Inclusive Development”, New Delhi, 1 December 2010. 
Inputs and feedback from Muneesh Kapur are gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance and the National Institute of Public Finance and 
Policy  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  International  Conference  on  Economic  Policies  for 
Inclusive  Development.  We  tend  to  associate  the  process  of  inclusive  growth  and 
development  with  structural  factors  and  the  roles  that  they  play  in  accelerating  growth, 
enhancing labour productivity, creating human capital, providing access to safety nets and 
essential public services and so on. Many of the previous sessions have dealt directly with 
these  issues.  On  the  other  hand,  we  do  not  usually  associate  monetary  policy  with  these 
typically  long-term  considerations.  However,  among  the  many  lessons  that  will  be  drawn 
from  the  recent  crisis,  is  the  critical  one  that  imbalances  in  the  financial  sector  can 
significantly  disrupt  the  processes  that  sustain  stable,  long-term  growth,  which  is  a  key 
requirement for effective inclusion. High volatility and a propensity for destabilizing shocks do 
not allow either the private or public sectors to make the resource commitments consistent 
with these two objectives. On the fiscal front, particularly, the costs of rescuing the economy 
from a crisis may significantly reduce the capacity of governments to sustain commitments to 
growth and welfare enhancing expenditure. 
From  this  perspective,  economic  stability,  defined  in  the  broadest  possible  sense,  can  be 
seen as an essential component of any strategy for inclusive development. To the extent that 
central  banks  play  a  role  in  providing  that  stability,  the  experience  of  the  crisis  has  led  to 
considerable  thinking  and  debate  on  its  implications  for  central  bank  mandates,  strategies 
and  instruments  in  the  quest  for  maintaining  stability.  A  lot  of  this  is  being  articulated  by 
central bankers around the world, as they try and distill the lessons of the crisis into what 
they should be doing more or less of, or differently and how they should go about fulfilling 
possibly changed objectives. 
In this talk, I would like to explore some of the thinking around these issues as reflected in 
recent articulations by a cross-section of central bankers and use this as a backdrop for our 
own thinking on how to deal with challenges to macroeconomic stability. I will first lay out a 
simple framework, which I find useful to think about monetary policy and central banking and 
then use it to talk about issues that have emerged in the post-crisis debates. 
A stability framework 
The  well-known  Taylor  Rule  has  dominated  the  analytics of  monetary  policy  over  the  past 
two decades. In its standard form, in which the optimal short-term interest rate is a function of 
both  the  deviation  of  the  inflation  rate  from  its  target  and  the  output/unemployment  gap,  it 
accommodates both formal inflation targeting and a more flexible growth-inflation balance as 
objectives of monetary policy. However, when we look at the range of activities that central 
banks around the world perform, it is clear that monetary policy is only one of many in the 
case of most countries. Prudential regulation and supervision is also a responsibility in most 
cases, so at least one dimension of financial stability was already on the charters of many 
central  banks.  Many  of  them  also  managed  the  Balance  of  Payments  through  active 
intervention, with both exchange rate and reserve accumulation objectives in mind. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 1
Looking  over  this  landscape,  the  point  I  would  like  to  make  is  that  even  as  central  banks 
typically  pursued  multiple  objectives,  some  of  which  may  have  been  only  informally 
articulated,  there  was  a  common  theme  running  through  all  of  them.  This  was  stability.  In 
other words, the core objective of central bank activity along all of the dimensions referred to 
earlier – price, output, financial sector and external sector – was to preserve stability on that 
respective  dimension.  This  provides  the  foundation  for  what  I  will  call  the  Stability 
Framework.  Stated  in  terms  of  objectives,  it  covers  these  four  dimensions  of  central  bank 
activity:  
The  first  two  components  are  non-controversial  and  reflect  the  formalization  of  the  Taylor 
Rule. 
1.  
Price Stability: minimizing the deviation of the actual inflation rate from a target or 
benchmark rate 
Output Stability: minimizing the deviation of real economic activity from its potential 
2.  
The  next  two  are  more  difficult  to  pin  down,  because  they  may  mean  different  things  in 
different  contexts.  Also,  unlike  the  first  two,  which  are  amenable  to  a  single  instrument 
approach, the next two, besides not being necessarily sensitive to policy rates (at least in the 
desired  direction),  may  need  different,  even  multiple,  instruments  in  different  situations.  In 
fact,  much  of  the  debate  on  these  objectives  revolves  around  the  issues  of  definition  and 
controllability.  Given  this,  for  my  purpose,  I  will  use  rather  broad  definitions  for  these  two 
objectives.  
3. 
Financial  Stability:  minimizing  the  risk  that  the  financial  system  collapses,  thereby 
disrupting economic activity 
External Stability: minimizing the risks associated with financing a current account 
deficit with volatile capital inflows, which may disrupt economic activity. 
4. 
Of  course,  not  all  central  banks  assigned  non-zero  weights  to  all  dimensions.  To  a  large 
extent, the post-crisis debate on monetary policy and central banking has been shaped by 
this asymmetry: should the weights for, particularly, the last two objectives be introduced or 
changed to reflect the learnings from the crisis?  
I  will  now  go  on  to  explore  current  thinking  on  the  components  of  this  framework  in  three 
sections:  Price  and  Output  Stability  together  and  then  Financial  Stability  and  External 
Stability separately. 
Price and output stability 
I would argue that very little has changed with respect to the basic approach to price and 
output stability as a result of the crisis. The basic objective of the monetary policy function of 
central  banks  still  remains  price  stability,  with  or  without  attention  being  given  to  output 
stability.  However  a  number  of  issues  emerge  even  within  the  relatively  robust  intellectual 
foundations of this proposition. About a year ago, there was a debate between John Taylor 
and  Ben  Bernanke  on  the  appropriate  measure  of  inflation  to  be  used  in  calculating  the 
appropriate policy  position  from  the  Taylor  Rule  formula.  In  response to  the  claim  that  the 
Fed’s easy money policy was a significant contributory factor to the crisis, Bernanke argued 
that  the  Fed’s  relatively  easy  stance  was  justified  by  the  fact  that  inflation  forecasts  were 
trending significantly downward, while Taylor rebutted saying that actual inflation rates and 
not  forecasts  were  the  appropriate  inputs  into  the  formula.  Had  this  been  done,  the  policy 
stance would have been different and so might have been the outcome. 
However, this was a debate on detail, not on the basic approach. One line of argument that 
has emerged after the crisis is that inflation targeting – assigning a relatively low weight to 
the output gap in the Taylor Rule – had been discredited. Many economies which did target 
inflation  in  this  way  appeared  to  have  lost  a  little  bit  of  the  flexibility  or  response  to  the 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2010
impending  financial  shock,  which  then  made  its  impact  even  more  severe.  Proponents  of 
inflation targeting have defended the approach by introducing a number of nuances into their 
cases. Charles Bean, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, for example, argues that the 
crisis does not invalidate the case for targeting, since there needs to be a credible long-term 
anchoring for inflationary expectations and an explicit target is the best way to achieve that 
(Bean,  2010).  Rather,  the  crisis  suggests  that  rigid  adherence  to  the  target  may  be  the 
problem  and  that  the  central  bank  needs  some  “constrained  discretion”  to  respond  to 
temporary price-level shocks. 
Lars  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  also  advocates  flexible  inflation 
targeting “applied in the right way and in particular using all the information about financial 
conditions that is relevant for the forecast of inflation and resource utilization at any horizon – 
remains  the  best  practice  monetary  policy  before,  during  and  after  the  financial  crisis” 
(Svensson, 2010). 
The Reserve Bank of India has defined itself as not being an inflation targeter in the strict 
sense.  In  recent  speeches,  Governor  Subbarao  has  put  forward  two  kinds  of  arguments 
against committing to an explicit target (Subbarao, 2010). One is logistical, with reference to 
the  current  absence  of  an  effective,  nationally  representative  index  to  target.  The  other  is 
conceptual,  referring  to  the  frequency  of  temporary,  often  mild  supply  shocks,  to  which 
monetary  responses  are  unwarranted  because  of  lags,  but  which  would  be  required  if 
inflation  were  effectively  targeted.  Expectations  are  sought  to  be  managed  through  the 
articulation of medium and long term inflation objectives on the premise that communication 
is  also  a  tool  of  monetary  policy,  and  by  striving  for  consistency  between  the  overall 
macroeconomic assessment and policy actions. The significant decline in the average rate of 
inflation  since  the  mid-1990s  reflects  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  managing 
inflation, in combination with a range of structural reforms. 
This  is  not  the  place  to resolve  the “to  target  or  not  to  target”  debate. The  point  I want  to 
emphasize is that the approach to the core objectives of monetary policy, whether inflation 
alone or the growth-inflation balance, does not appear to have been significantly impacted by 
the  crisis.  In  normal  circumstances,  i.e.,  in  the  absence  of  a  visible  domestic  or  external 
shock, what was held to be valid before the crisis remains so after it. It is when such shocks 
strike that the room for maneuver needs to be available, providing enough flexibility in terms 
of powers and instruments to deal with a variety of shocks. 
Financial stability 
In hindsight, financial stability has always been a part of this flexibility, on the basis of which 
central  banks  in  many  countries  have  used  their  powers  to  try  and  avoid  catastrophic 
damage to the financial system. Sometimes this has been soft power by way of facilitating 
mergers  and  acquisitions  of  vulnerable  institutions;  on  other  occasions,  the  muscle  of  the 
“lender of the last resort” role has been used. In fact, I would argue that it is precisely this 
role that makes central banks critical players in preventing the financial system from being 
incapacitated by liquidity constraints. But, beyond this traditional function, a number of issues 
arise on both goals and instruments. 
One approach to integrating financial stability explicitly into the central bank mandate is to 
introduce an additional variable into the standard Taylor Rule (e.g. William Poole, 2010). This 
will then allow the policy rate to be set at a level which is consistent with whatever indicator 
of  financial  stability  is  used  –  e.g.,  the  deviation  of  asset  prices  from  some  benchmark 
valuation based on fundamentals. In other words, the policy response is conditioned both by 
commodity  price  inflation  and  by  asset  price  inflation.  The  dilemma,  of  course,  is  that  real 
activity will probably be constrained by a policy response to asset price inflation, something 
that  may  not  necessarily  have  been  warranted  by  economic  conditions.  Finding  the  right 
benchmark  –  real  estate,  equities  or  a  complex  portfolio  –  by  which  to  measure  financial 
instability may also pose challenges, not to mention the fact that a major source of instability 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 3
is  in  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  intermediaries,  which  may  not  be  fully  captured  by 
market prices because of information asymmetries. 
A less explicit approach to central banks dealing with financial stability is “leaning against the 
wind” – situational responses to what appear to be unsustainable increases in asset prices. 
Of course, a judgment would have to be made as to whether a bubble is in progress in order 
to justify a response. Jurgen Stark, member of the Executive Board of the ECB, accepts the 
difficulties  involved  with  identifying  a  bubble  and,  consequently,  the  risks  inherent  in  a 
leaning against the wind strategy (Stark, 2010). He argues burst bubbles may be more costly 
for  the  economy  than  previously  believed.  In  terms  of  effectiveness,  he  points  to  research 
suggesting  that  monetary  responses  to  asset  price  movements  have  a  strong  signaling 
impact, materially changing the risk perceptions and behavior of financial intermediaries. In 
short, he sees conventional monetary instruments as a legitimate instrument in addressing 
the financial stability objective.  
By  contrast,  Adam  Posen,  external  member  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary  Policy 
Committee, argues that from the angles of identification of bubbles, cleanup costs angle and 
the  effectiveness  of  monetary  instruments,  leaning  against  the  wind  will  not  work  (Posen, 
2010).  He  believes  that  we  as  yet  know  too  little  about  the  underlying  mechanisms  and 
therefore,  the  probabilities  of  making  the  wrong  move  are  high,  with  obviously  adverse 
consequences for the real economy. This largely seems an unresolved issue, which makes it 
difficult to translate into clear policy implications. 
However, there have been some significant developments in the thinking on the central bank 
role in financial stability. This has come not from the monetary policy perspective, but from 
the  prudential  regulation  viewpoint.  Prudence  was  largely  seen  to  be  an  entity-specific 
phenomenon in the pre-crisis period. If the balance sheet risks of every entity were identified 
and provided for, it was believed that the system as a whole would be safe. That perception 
has been decisively proved false by the crisis; there is “superadditivity” in the system with the 
risk in the whole being more than the sum of the risks in the parts as a result of multiple and 
complex  inter-relationships  between  supervised  and  unsupervised  entities.  The  concept  of 
macro-prudential or systemic risk mitigation has assumed great importance in the post-crisis 
regulatory  architecture.  While  national  and  international  regulatory  agencies  deal  with  the 
operationalization of this concept, with respect to both indicators and mitigation measures, 
some broad understanding on the role of the central bank in this process has emerged.  
One, the repository of information on the basis of which systemic risks can be gauged is with 
the prudential regulator, which may be either inside or outside the central bank. Leveraging 
the  micro-prudential  data  and  assessments  that  emerge  from  the  supervisory  process  into 
making systemic risk judgements is where new resources and skills need to be brought in 
and in a way in which they can effectively work with the traditional supervisory establishment. 
However, once judgements are made and a response is warranted, both central banks and 
governments come into the picture. If the threat is one of liquidity shortages, the lender of the 
last resort function will come into play. If the threat is more of insolvency, governments may 
have to decide between letting institutions fail and arranging conditional rescues, which will 
involve  possibly  significant  infusions  of  capital.  Given  the  significance  of  inter-connections 
between prudentially regulated and unregulated entities, other regulatory agencies who keep 
some watch on the latter, also become logical parts of a collective and co-ordinated systemic 
risk monitoring and mitigation framework. 
This  is  the  direction  in  which  many  countries,  including  India,  are  moving.  These  new 
arrangements will obviously take some time to evolve, and, since they are essentially pre-
emptive in nature, the non-recurrence of a financial crisis for reasons similar to the previous 
one will be one test of their effectiveness. However, the underlying premise that the best way 
to deal with financial stability is through the prudential rather than the monetary  route is a 
sound  one  and  resolves  some  of  the  dilemmas  about  stability  indicators  and  the 
effectiveness of monetary instruments referred to earlier. 
4 
 BIS Review 168/2010
This has been the premise of the Indian approach to financial stability even though it may not 
have been explicitly stated as such. The Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) provided the banking 
system  with  a  credit  risk-free  buffer,  an  instrument  that  is  coming  back  into  global 
consideration in the form of enhanced norms for fully liquid assets to be held by banks. In 
dealing  with  what  was  perceived  to  be  an  overheating  real  estate  market,  earlier  during 
2005–06  and  more  recently  in  the  latest  quarterly  review  of  November  2010,  prudential 
measures  in  the  form  of  loanto  value  ratio  caps  and  higher  risk  weights  and  provisioning 
requirements were used as a way to buffer the financial system from a potential decline in 
prices, without having to take an explicit view of what constituted a fair value of the assets. 
External stability 
There  are  both  long-term  and  short-term  issues  in  relation  to  the  central  bank’s  role  in 
external  management.  Should  the  exchange  rate  be  a  policy  instrument  for  long-term 
growth? Are the choices and trade-offs different between large and small economies? These 
are important questions in the current global economic debate. However, in the immediate 
aftermath of the crisis, a short-term concern has arisen with respect to the possibility of large 
capital inflows into emerging economies. This reflects the unevenness of the strength of the 
recovery in advanced and emerging economies and the attempts by the former to find ways 
to continue to provide stimulus. The latter are clearly worried that a surge would destabilize 
their domestic economies through exchange rate appreciation or excess liquidity in a situation 
in which they are generally trying to cool things down a bit. 
What  should  central  banks  be  doing  to  deal  with  this  situation?  It  must  be  viewed  as  an 
essentially  short-term  phenomenon,  because  if  it  achieves  the  intended  stimulus  in  the 
advanced  economies,  there  will  be  a  rebalancing  of  flows  as  those  economies  begin  to 
recover  more  strongly.  In  that  case,  the  conclusions  of  an  IMF  Staff  Position  Note,  
co-authored by Jonathan Ostry and others, are relevant “... if the economy is operating near 
potential, if the level of reserves is adequate, if the exchange rate is not undervalued and if 
the  flows  are  likely  to  be  transitory,  then  the  use  of  capital  controls  –  in  addition  to  both 
prudential  and  macroeconomic  policy  –  is  justified  as  part  of  the  policy  toolkit  to  manage 
inflows” (Ostry et al. 2010). 
While the justification for controls is subject to several conditions, clearly, many countries that 
do  not  meet  all  those  conditions  would  be  equally  tempted  to  use  controls  as  a  way  of 
protecting themselves against the threats to stability from volatile capital flows and exchange 
rates  and  domestic  liquidity  conditions.  In  fact,  the  IMF  Note  also  reports  empirical  results 
indicating that countries which had controls aimed at achieving a less risky profile of external 
liabilities showed greater robustness during the crisis. 
So, is this an argument for capital controls, an inversion of the pre-crisis view? To an extent, 
yes,  reflecting  the  conditions  during  the  crisis  and  how  different  groups  of  countries  have 
emerged  from  it.  However,  the  specific  conditions,  both  domestic  and  global,  that  would 
determine the desirability of capital controls for specific countries need to be thought through. 
Intervention  to  manage  the  exchange  rate  is  another  way  in  which  a  central  bank  may 
contribute  to  external  stability.  From  a  short-term  perspective,  the  decision  to  intervene  in 
order to avoid destabilizing both exporting and import-competing domestic producers needs 
to  be  viewed  in  the  overall  context  of  domestic  conditions.  An  assessment  by  Masaaki 
Shirakawa, Governor, Bank of Japan, illustrates the dilemma. He argues that in a situation in 
which policy rates are already at the zero boundary, exchange rate appreciation, which helps 
dampen inflationary pressures, would allow the low interest rate scenario to persist, thereby 
raising the risks of an asset price bubble (Shirakawa, 2010). In other words, for a country in a 
zero interest rate situation, it is important to preserve and even grow external demand for its 
products so that it can create the space to normalize domestic policy. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 5
If  one  were  to  apply  this  reasoning  to  countries  in  which  rising  domestic  demand  is 
contributing  to  inflationary  pressures,  appreciation  would  presumably  help  contain  those 
pressures,  by  way  of  a  contraction  of  demand  in  exporting  and  importcompeting  sectors. 
While  the  long-run  growth  of,  particularly,  the  former  is  important  from  the  perspective  of 
inclusive development, given their relative labour intensity, the arguments made above point 
to  some  of  the  trade-offs  involved  in  using  the  exchange  rate  as  a  policy  instrument  in 
different macroeconomic conditions. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  on  exchange  rates  has  been  articulated  as  broadly  non-
interventionist, except when confronted with excessively volatile, lumpy or disruptive flows. 
This is an approach consistent with the notions of “flexibility” or “constrained discretion” used 
earlier  in  the  context  of  boundary  conditions  for  traditional approaches  to  monetary  policy. 
These are, essentially, boundary conditions, which would presumably trigger some deviation 
from normal policy if abnormal circumstances were to arise. What would constitute abnormal 
conditions, of course, cannot be explicitly indicated but will presumably be defined by specific 
circumstances in which actions are taken. 
Concluding remarks 
In this talk, I have tried to provide a sense of the choices, dilemmas and constraints facing 
central bankers as they attempt to navigate their economies out of the crisis. In the process, 
some  traditional  positions  on  monetary  policy  and  central  banking  activity  may  have  been 
reinforced,  while  some  new  thinking  on  mandates  and  instruments  may  have  emerged. 
Clearly, these are issues for which analytical foundations need to be strengthened or even 
developed from scratch to enable an internally consistent view of policy choices in different 
circumstances.  Central  bankers  will  obviously  be  avid  consumers  of  these  intellectual 
developments. But, even as that process unfolds, there are some important messages to be 
extracted  from  the  thoughts  and  articulation  of  practitioners.  Let  me  conclude  with  what  I 
believe to be three key messages.  
First,  the  crisis  has  not  in  any  way  undermined  the  core  objectives  and  approaches  of 
monetary  policy,  i.e.,  the  use  of  conventional  interest  rate  and  liquidity  instruments  to 
address commodity price and output stability, with whatever weights may be assigned to the 
two objectives. What it has done is to make the case for flexibility in deviating from a set path 
when  confronted  with  shocks.  This  essentially  suggests  that  a  standard  approach  be 
followed in normal times but deviations are legitimate when times turn abnormal; of course 
somebody has to decide when this occurs. Defining and quantifying “abnormality” is clearly 
an important analytical requirement to make this judgement more reliable.  
Second, even as the boundaries of normality are being approached or breached, it is difficult 
to  see  responses  being  confined  to  traditional  instruments  or,  for  that  matter,  traditional 
structures.  As  far  as  financial  stability  is  concerned,  the  analytics  supporting  the  use  of 
conventional  monetary  instruments  may  be  advancing,  but  there  is  still  a  strong  contrary 
view.  What  is  being  recognized  is  that,  even  though  these  instruments  may  contribute, 
prudential  measures  may  be  a  more  efficient  way  to  address  the  issue.  Further,  the  post-
crisis  recognition  of  systemic  risk,  based  on  inter-connectedness,  makes  the  case  for  
co-ordination on risk management, with clearly defined roles for different agencies.  
Third,  while  addressing  external  stability  in  general  terms  seems  to  be  becoming  an 
acceptable component of a broadened central bank mandate, the nature of the response will 
depend significantly on both the state of the domestic economy and global conditions. Also, 
short-term objectives may be in conflict with long-term ones, requiring some prioritization. 
Let me conclude with a quote from a recent speech by Ben Bernanke: “… the past two years 
have  demonstrated  the  value  of  policy  flexibility  and  openness  to  new  approaches.  
During the crisis, central banks were creative and innovative, developing programmes that 
played a significant role in easing financial stress and supporting economic activity. As the 
6 
 BIS Review 168/2010
financial  system  and  national  economies  become 
increasingly  complex  and 
global 
interdependent, novel policy challenges will continue to require innovative policy responses” 
(Bernanke, 2010). 
These  innovative  responses  need  to  manifest  on  three  fronts.  One,  broader  mandates  for 
central  banks  will  need  to  be  made  explicit  and  conditional  on  the  priority  of  the  core 
mandates. This should eventually lead to definitions and quantification of conditions in which 
the  broader  mandates  will  kick  in.  Two,  appropriate  instruments  need  to  be  dusted  off  or 
developed to ensure that broader mandates can be fulfilled. A single or a small number of 
traditional  monetary  instruments  cannot  be  expected  to  do  the  job.  Finally,  these  broader 
mandates may be more effectively pursued in a collective institutional framework, which will 
inevitably raise co-ordination challenges, which need to be addressed. I would like to thank 
the organizers once again for inviting me and thank you all for listening to me. 
References 
Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor (2010), “Monetary Policy 
after the Fall”, Paper presented at Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Annual Conference, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2010), “Emerging from the Crisis: Where Do We Stand?”, Remarks at the 
6th ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt. 
Ostry, Jonathan D, Atish Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash Qureshi, and 
Dennis  Reinhardt  (2010),  “Capital  Inflows:  The  Role  of  Controls”,  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
February. 
Poole,  William  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  Flexibility:  Solution  or  Problem?”,  Presentation  at 
First International Research Conference organized by Reserve Bank of India. 
Posen, Adam S (2010), “Do We Know What We Need to Know in Order to Lean Against the 
Wind?”,  Presentation  at  the  Cato  Institute  28th  Annual  Monetary  Conference  Panel  on  “Is 
Monetary Policy Responsible for Bubbles?”.  
Shirakawa,  Masaaki  (2010),  “Advanced  and  Emerging  Economies:  Two-speed  Recovery”, 
Bauhinia Distinguished Talk, Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre, Hong Kong SAR. 
Stark, Jurgen (2010), “Approaches to Monetary Policy Revisited – Lessons from the Crisis”, 
Keynote Speech at the 6th ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt. 
Subbarao,  D.  (2010),  “Financial  Crisis  –  Some  Old  Questions  and  Maybe  Some  New 
Answers”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, September, pp.1713–1722.  
Svensson, Lars E. O. (2010), “Monetary Policy After the Financial Crisis”, BIS Review 118, 
pp.1–6. 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 7
