Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Kisaragi-kai 
meeting, Tokyo, 4 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am privileged to have an opportunity to speak before such a large audience. Having said 
that, the timing of today’s speech has become somewhat uneasy for me. The Policy Board of 
the Bank of Japan has decided last week to bring forward the next Monetary Policy Meeting 
to  today  and  tomorrow  to  discuss  and  decide  the  principal  terms  and  conditions  for 
purchases  of  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts 
(J-REITs) with a view to starting such purchases promptly. Therefore, in my speech today, 
based on the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices released last week, I will talk about 
the developments in the global economy, and then mainly about Japan’s economic and price 
developments and the Bank’s “comprehensive monetary easing.” While I make clear at the 
beginning that there will be no information that implies the decision to be made at tomorrow’s 
Monetary Policy Meeting, I hope that my speech today will be of any use in enhancing your 
understanding on economies at home and abroad, as well as on the Bank’s monetary policy. 
I.  
Developments in the global economy 
The developments in the global economy since the failure of Lehman Brothers  
I will start with the developments in the global economy. 
The  global  economy  plunged  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008. 
Behind that economic downturn were two factors. The first factor was a panicky contraction 
of economic and financial activity due to the financial crisis triggered by the failure of Lehman 
Brothers. That brought about acute effects on the economy. The second factor, which could 
be  said  as  more  fundamental,  was  the  unwinding  of  various  excesses  that  had  been 
accumulated globally up to the mid-2000s mainly in the United States and Europe. That was 
a  disposal  process  of  excesses  such  as  excess  debt  in  the  household  sector,  excess 
production  capacity  in  firms,  and  impaired  assets  of  financial  institutions.  Namely,  the 
process of repairing and adjusting balance sheets. During the repair and adjustment process, 
spending  activity  of  each  economic  entity  will  be  restrained.  Consequently,  chronic 
downward pressure will be exerted on the economy for a protracted period. 
The global economy leveled out in the spring of 2009 and started to pick up, and that was 
mainly because the first-mentioned acute symptom settled. Thanks to liquidity provision by 
central  banks  and  measures  such  as  capital  injections  into  financial  institutions  by  the 
governments, the panicky contraction of economic and financial activity calmed down. With 
the settling of the acute symptom, the demand-boosting measures taken in each country in 
response to the financial crisis became further effective and firms’ moves toward inventory 
restocking progressed. As a result, the global economy has been growing at an annual rate 
close to 5 percent since the second half of 2009. 
However,  the  recovery  pace  of  the  global  economy  has  recently  been  slowing.  As  firms’ 
inventory restocking, which has been leading the recovery, has run its course, in advanced 
economies,  the  effects  of  various  demand-boosting  measures  have  been  waning.  For 
example, after the expiration of the homebuyer tax credits in June, the U.S. home sales have 
been  sluggish.  In  Japan,  new  passenger-car  registration  in  October  declined  by  about 
30 percent, on a year-on-year basis, following the last-minute significant increase in demand 
ahead  of  the  expiration  of  subsidies  for  purchasing  energy  efficient  cars.  Emerging 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 1
economies have been still growing at a high rate, but the pace of growth has started to slow 
somewhat.  That  slowdown  in  the  pace  of  growth  is  partly  attributable  to  the  fact  that,  in 
response to the increased upward pressure on general prices and residential house prices in 
accordance  with  rapid  economic  growth,  emerging  economies  have  been  making 
adjustments  to  their  accommodative  monetary  conditions.  However,  measures  to  restrain 
overheating are necessary policy responses from the perspectives of restraining overheating 
in economic activity and asset prices and ensuring sustainability of economic expansion. The 
Bank  judges  that  if  sustainable  growth  in  emerging  economies  is  to  be  secured  by  those 
measures, it will have favorable effects on the global economy in the long run.  
Future of the global economy 
While the pace of economic recovery has been somewhat slowing since the mid-year, the 
Bank judges that the recovery trend in the global economy will be maintained. That view is 
widely  shared  in  many  of  the  forecasts  of  international  organizations  and  the  private 
institutions.  For  example,  according  to  the  world  economic  outlook  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), the global economy is projected to grow at a relatively high pace of 
more than 4 percent from 2011. 
In  that  regard,  it  is,  above  all,  emerging  economies  that  are  expected  to  play  the  role  of 
leading the global economy. There are several major reasons why a continued high growth in 
emerging  economies  is  expected.  First,  it  can  be  pointed  out  that  there  has  been  strong 
domestic  demand  from  the  beginning  such  as  activation  of  consumption  activity  in 
accordance  with  the  improvement  in  living  standards  and  the  needs  for  establishment  of 
social infrastructure. A typical example is China. Urbanization has been rapidly progressing 
in  China,  and  the  urban  population  in  China  has  rapidly  increased  from  200  million  to 
600 million  in  the  past  30  years.  The  number  of  the  so-called  “million  cities”  in  Japan,  a 
country considered to have a high population concentration, was five in 1955, when the high-
growth period began, or twelve at present. In China, the number already reached 190 cities 
in 2008 and is expected to increase further in the future. Progress in urbanization generates 
massive  housing  constructions  as  well  as  demand  for  establishing  utilities  including 
electricity,  gas,  and  water.  The  fact  that  expressways,  which  correspond  to  the  total  road 
length of Japan’s expressways, have been built almost annually since 2005 is also a typical 
example  showing  the  great  demand  for  infrastructure  in  China.  Therefore,  emerging 
economies have, potentially, a capacity to achieve a relatively high growth rate. Second, it 
can  be  pointed  out  that  the  large-scale  accommodative  monetary  policies  in  advanced 
economies  have  led  to  an  increase  in  capital  inflows  to  emerging  economies,  thereby 
accelerated the economic expansion in emerging economies.  
Meanwhile, in advanced economies, the pace of recovery is likely to remain moderate for the 
time being, since those economies are burdened by the balance sheet adjustments. 
According  to  the  IMF’s  world  economic  outlook,  the  contribution  to  the  global  growth  was 
60 percent  by  advanced  economies  and  around  30  to  40  percent  by  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies  until  the  1980s  and  1990s.  The  relationship  between 
advanced  and  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  was  reversed  and  became 
30 percent  by  advanced  economies  and  70  percent  by  the  others  in  the  2000s,  and  the 
difference between the two groups of economies further widens in the projections for 2010 
and 2011. Since such marked difference in the pace of future economic recovery between 
advanced  economies  and  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  will  have  a 
significant  implication  from  a  viewpoint  of  achieving  sustainable  growth  of  the  global 
economy, I will explain again later. 
Uncertainty about the future of the global economy 
As  I  have  just  explained,  a  baseline  scenario  shared  by,  for  example,  the  Bank  and 
international organizations, is that the global economy is likely to maintain the recovery trend, 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2010
led  mainly  by  emerging  economies,  and  follow  the  sustainable  growth  path,  but  such 
projection is associated with some uncertainties. Here, taking also into account the focus of 
interest at recent international meetings, I will explain two points I think particularly important. 
One is the uncertainty about the outlook for advanced economies and the other is, amid the 
difference in the pace of recovery between advanced and emerging economies, the effects 
accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies will have on the global economy 
through capital flows. 
Let me explain the first point. 
As I mentioned at the beginning of the speech, from the second half of 2009 to early spring 
2010, when the acute symptom after the failure of Lehman Brothers settled and the economy 
was recovering rapidly, there were, from our point of view, somewhat optimistic views about 
the  future  of  the  economy  dominant  in  the  United  States  and  European  countries.  The 
forecasts  by  international  organizations  and  private  institutions  were  constantly  revised 
upward and U.S. and European stock prices were on an uptrend. When looking at the yield 
curve  of  interest  rates  in  the  U.S.  dollar  markets,  up  to  early  spring  2010,  it  factored  in  a 
possibility that the Federal Reserve will raise the federal funds target rate by the end of 2010. 
However,  since  the  summer  of  2010,  triggered  by  a  standstill  in  improvement  in  many 
indicators  of  the  U.S.  economy,  such  as  employment-  and  housing-related  ones,  a 
pessimistic view spread that the balance sheet adjustments in the households and financial 
institutions might continue for a considerable period and thus might substantially slacken the 
pace of recovery in the U.S. and European economies. 
The  fact  that  resolving  the  balance  sheet  problems  takes  time  is  exactly  what  Japan  has 
experienced since the 1990s. Therefore, many in Japan including the Bank have seemed to 
consider  that  the  pace  of  economic  growth  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  which  were 
burdened  by  balance  sheet  adjustments,  might  remain  moderate.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
dominant view in the United States has appeared to be more optimistic about the effects of 
the  balance  sheet  adjustments  compared  with  the  views  in  Japan.  Putting  aside  whether 
such  recognition  was  correct  or  not,  a  feeling  that  prompt  and  effective  policy  responses 
have  been  implemented  taking  into  account  Japan’s  experience  might  also  have  been 
behind such view. However, after looking at the ensuing sluggish developments in economic 
activity, concern whether the economy  might tumble into deflation or protracted stagnation 
has started to be felt.1 
Let me next explain the second factor that has induced uncertainty about the future of the 
global  economy,  namely,  amid  the  stark  difference  in  the  pace  of  recovery  between 
advanced  and  emerging  economies,  the  effects  of  accommodative  monetary  policies  in 
advanced economies on the global economy through, for example, capital flows and foreign 
exchange rates. 
In  many  advanced  economies,  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  has  been  sluggish  and 
inflation rates are projected to be lower than what is considered desirable. As a result, those 
countries have been conducting accommodative policies. However, as advanced economies 
at present are in the virtually zero interest rate environment while being burdened by balance 
sheet adjustments, aggressive monetary easing will not lead to an increase in bank lending 
and  thus,  in  that  regard,  stimulus  effects  on  the  domestic  economy  will  be  unlikely.  As  a 
result,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  accommodative  monetary  conditions  in  advanced 
economies have probably induced an excessive capital inflow to emerging economies and 
brought about risk-taking in those economies, and thus have become one of the reasons for 
                                                 
1   Also  see  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “Uniqueness  or  Similarity?  –  Japan’s  Post-Bubble  Experience  in  Monetary 
Policy Studies – ,” keynote address delivered at the Second IJCB Fall Conference entitled “Monetary Policy 
Lessons from the Global Crisis” hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, September 16, 
2010 (available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1009c.htm). 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 3
the overheating in those economies. It has also been pointed out by  emerging economies 
about a difficulty that, if they raise interest rates while advanced economies are continuing 
with  accommodative  monetary  policies,  capital  inflows  to  emerging  economies  will  further 
increase against the background of the interest rate differential, thereby offsetting the effects 
of measures taken to restrain overheating of the economy. 
There  have  also  been  various  discussions  concerning  the  policy  conduct  of  emerging 
countries.  For  example,  if  an  emerging  country’s  foreign  exchange  system  lacks  sufficient 
flexibility and its foreign exchange rate is maintained at low levels compared with economic 
fundamentals,  that  could,  together  with  the  effects  of  capital  inflows  from  advanced 
economies,  excessively  stimulate  economic  activity  in  that  emerging  country,  thereby 
resulting  in  generating  economic  and  financial  excesses  and  their  unwinding  over  time.  In 
such  a  case,  both  emerging  and  advanced  economies  would  be  affected  in  the  form  of 
destabilization  in  the  economy.  In  addition,  the  issue  of  correcting  unsustainable  current 
account  imbalances  has  been  discussed  as  a  global  challenge.  In  the  situation  where  the 
foreign exchange rates, which should serve as one of the adjusting valves to cope with such 
imbalances, lack flexibility, it could become a factor in delaying the necessary adjustments. 
At  the  G20  meeting  of  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  held  in  October  at 
Gyeongju, Republic of Korea, it was confirmed that, for the global economy, with an uneven 
pace of recovery among countries, to achieve a sustainable and balanced growth, not only 
efforts in macroeconomic policy but also those in regulation and structural reform would be 
necessary. The policy authorities in each country are required to carefully examine economic 
and price developments in each country or region and take necessary measures to achieve 
their  stability.  While  it  may  seem  to  stating  the  obvious,  I  emphasize  two  points  about  its 
implications. One is, the policy authorities in each country have, after all, responsibility for the 
stability of their own economy. The other is, due to the advancements in the globalisation of 
the  economy  and  financial  markets,  the  extent  to  which  each  country’s  economic  and 
financial conditions as well as policy conduct affect each other has increased. Thus, policies 
that are supposed to be carried out to maintain the stability of domestic economic activity and 
prices  need  to  be  implemented  by  recognizing  the  path  in  which  such  policies  affect  the 
global  economy  and  international  financial  markets  and,  in  turn,  affect  again  the  domestic 
economy.  It  seems  to  be  becoming  more  important  for  both  advanced  economies  and 
emerging economies to consider the stability of their own economies in carrying out policies 
while taking account of mutual spillover effects of their policies. 
Japan’s economic activity and prices 
II. 
Taking  into  account  the  developments  in  the  global  economy,  let  me  turn  to  Japan’s 
economic activity and prices. 
Current state of the economy 
On  the  back  of  an  increase  in  exports  and  production  due  to  the  recovery  in  overseas 
economies  and  the  boost  from  policy  measures  targeted  at  durable  consumer  goods, 
Japan’s  economy  has  been  improving.  Given  the  sharp  drop  after  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers,  the  pace  of  recovery  has  been  considerably  faster,  compared  with  that  in  the 
United States and Europe. 
However, Japan’s exports and production, which have been leading the improvement in the 
economy,  have  recently  been  slowing.  Exports  were  increasing  at  a  pace  of  more  than 
40 percent, on an annual basis, since the spring of 2009, but the pace of increase became 
moderate since the middle of 2010 due partly to the slowdown in overseas economies and 
an inventory adjustment in information-related goods, and exports have become more or less 
unchanged in the July–September quarter. The Bank judges that the current state of Japan’s 
economy is in the process of a gradual recovery following the rapid pickup since the spring of 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2010
2009,  but,  as  I  have  just  explained,  the  signs  of  improvement  have  been  weakening  due 
partly to the slowdown in the pace of increase in exports and production.  
Outlook for economic activity and prices, and associating risk factors  
What is important here is how we can view the future of economic activity that once slowed. 
The  Bank  released  last  week  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  the  so-called 
“Outlook Report.” To put the conclusion of the Report first, the Bank views that, in the second 
half of fiscal 2010, the pace of Japan’s economic recovery is likely to slow temporarily due to 
the factors such as the slowdown in overseas economies and the ending of the boost from 
policy measures targeted at durable consumer goods, as well as the recent appreciation of 
the  yen.  After  entering  fiscal  2011,  albeit  with  some  lingering  effects  of  the  yen’s 
appreciation, the economy is expected to return to the moderate recovery path, given that 
exports  are  projected  to  continue  increasing  as  the  growth  rate  of  overseas  economies  is 
likely to rise again, and that firms’ sense of excessive capital stock and labor is likely to be 
dispelled  gradually.  Thereafter,  in  fiscal  2012,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue 
growing at a pace above that in fiscal 2011, as the transmission mechanism by which the 
strength in exports and production feeds through to income and spending, will likely operate 
more effectively due to a continued relatively high growth in overseas economies, especially 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  Showing  that  in  term  of  the  midpoints  of 
Policy  Board  members’  projection,  Japan’s  economy  is  projected  to  grow  annually  at 
2.1 percent in fiscal 2010, 1.8 percent in fiscal 2011, and 2.1 percent in fiscal 2012. 
The  key  to  the  outlook  for  prices  is  not  only  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  but  also 
developments  in  people’s  inflation  expectations in  the  medium  to  long  term.  On  this  point, 
judging  from  various  surveys,  no  significant  change  has  been  observed  and  such  inflation 
expectations seem to have been stable. On that basis, the Bank considers that the year-on-
year pace of decline in the CPI excluding fresh food is expected to continue slowing as the 
aggregate supply and demand balance improves gradually. However, given that the drop in 
demand after the financial crisis was considerable and the pace of economic recovery has 
been  moderate,  the  pace  of  improvement  in  the  supply  and  demand  balance  is  likely  to 
remain moderate, and the timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI entering the 
positive territory is likely to be sometime in fiscal 2011. As the rate of growth for the fiscal 
year,  following  0.1  percent  in  fiscal  2011,  the  pace  of  growth  is  expected  to  increase  to 
0.6 percent  in  fiscal  2012.  While  taking  some  more  time,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to 
steadily move toward the sustainable growth path with price stability. 
The  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  is  associated  with  various  risk  factors.  In 
particular,  in  the  area  of  economic  activity,  there  are  some  upside  risks  including  faster 
growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  However,  amid  continued 
heightened  uncertainty  about  the  future,  especially  for  the  U.S.  economy,  attention  should 
also be paid to downside risks to Japan’s economy. Regarding the outlook for prices, there is 
a  possibility  that  inflation  will  rise  more  than  expected  mainly  due  to  an  increase  in 
commodity prices brought about by high growth rates in emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies, while there is also a risk that the rate of inflation will fall due, for example, to a 
decline  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  The  Bank  will  carefully  check, 
including  those  factors,  whether  Japan’s  economy  is  steadily  making  strides  to  the 
sustainable growth path with price stability. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Let me turn to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy, taking into account the developments 
in economic activity and prices at home and abroad. 
The Bank recognizes that Japan’s economy is faced with an extremely important challenge 
of emerging from deflation and returning to the sustainable growth path with price stability. 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 5
Based on that recognition, the Bank has been making utmost contributions as a central bank 
through  vigorous  policy  responses  based  on  the  three-pronged  approach  of  pursuing 
powerful  monetary  easing,  ensuring  stability  in  financial  markets,  and  providing  support  in 
strengthening the foundations for economic growth.  
In terms of pursuing powerful monetary easing, the Bank has lowered twice the policy rate, 
which was at the lowest level in the world at 0.5 percent even before the failure of Lehman 
Brothers. In addition, by increasing longer-term funds provision to financial institutions, the 
Bank has been influencing directly the interest rates of longer terms of 3-month and 6-month. 
As a result, Japan’s interest rates have been stable at extremely low levels, compared with 
those in the United States and Europe, and firms’ funding costs have still been declining. In 
terms of ensuring stability in financial markets, the Bank has been endeavoring to spread a 
sense of security on the funding front in financial markets through, for example, providing a 
large  amount  of  liquidity.  Moreover,  from  a  viewpoint  of  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic growth, and to support voluntary efforts by firms and financial institutions toward 
raising Japan’s productivity, the Bank prepared a framework for providing funds up to four 
years  at  a  low  interest  rate  equivalent  to  the  policy  interest  rate,  and  has  already  been 
implementing it. 
Having said that, as I explained earlier, the signs of improvement in Japan’s economy are 
likely to wane and the situation in which the pace of economic improvement remains slow is 
expected to continue for the time being. Uncertainty about the future, especially about the 
U.S.  economy,  has  also  been  high.  In  those  circumstances,  the  Bank  judged  that  it  has 
become  more  likely  that  the  timing  of  Japan’s  economy  emerging  from  deflation  and 
returning  to  the  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability  will  be  delayed,  and  at  the 
beginning  of  October  implemented  “comprehensive  monetary  easing”  to  further  enhance 
monetary easing in a front-loaded manner. In order to pursue further accommodative effects 
by  means  of  monetary  policy  under  the  situation  in  which  there  is  little  room  for  further 
lowering short-term interest rates, there is no way but to step into a new territory beyond that 
of traditional monetary policy and to employ a wide range of policy measures in the Bank’s 
policy toolkit, thereby enhancing policy effects. On the basis of such thinking, the Bank has 
decided to encourage a decline in longer-term market interest rates and a reduction in risk 
premiums and at the same time to implement the following three measures as a package. 
Change in the guideline for money market operations 
As  the  first  measure,  the  Bank  changed  the  guideline  to  encourage  the  uncollateralized 
overnight  call  rate  from  the  previously  set  “at  around  0.1  percent”  to  “at  around  0  to 
0.1 percent.” In the future, if further ample liquidity is provided through the implementation of 
the  asset  purchase  program  that  I  will  explain  later,  there  might  be  days  when  the 
uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  becomes  substantially  lower  than  0.1  percent.  To  meet 
the  purpose  of  lowering  longer-term  market  interest  rates  and  reducing  risk  premiums 
through comprehensive monetary easing, the Bank considered it effective to explicitly allow 
such swings in the overnight call rate. Moreover, it will also serve to show further clearly that 
the Bank has been adopting the virtually zero interest rate policy.  
From a viewpoint of achieving monetary easing effects, it should be noted that an excessive 
decline in the overnight rate could have adverse effects of inducing a decline in yield rates on 
investments of financial institutions and investors and a decline in margins on interest rates, 
thereby hampering the financial intermediation function. What the Bank is aiming at after all 
is  to  prepare  an  environment  in  which  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  will  be  exerted  to  a 
maximum extent. 
By  taking  into  account  such  viewpoints,  the  Bank  judges  that  the  current  combination  of 
“around  0–0.1  percent”  for  the  guideline  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  and 
0.1 percent for a complementary deposit facility is the most appropriate. Such combination of 
the target interest rate and interest rate on reserves has also been introduced overseas. In 
6 
 BIS Review 146/2010
the United States, the Federal Reserve has adopted the combination of 0 to 0.25 percent for 
the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  and  0.25  percent  interest  rate  for  financial 
institutions’ reserves. 
Clarification of the policy time horizon based on the “understanding of medium- to 
long-term price stability” 
As the second measure, the Bank clearly stated that it will continue the virtually zero interest 
rate policy until it judges that price stability is in sight.  
Longer-term interest rates are affected substantially by the market’s expectations concerning 
how short-term interest rates will evolve in the future. The measure taken this time aims at 
encouraging a decline in longer-term interest rates by influencing the market expectations on 
short-term interest rates developments through clarifying the Bank’s ideas of policy conduct, 
which has significant effects on the formulation of short-term interest rates.  
At the same time, the Bank also clarified that it will use the “understanding of medium- to 
long-term price stability” (hereafter “understanding”) as a criterion for judging whether price 
stability  is  in  sight.  The  “understanding”  is  the  level  of  inflation  rate  that  each  of  the  nine 
Policy Board members understands as being consistent with price stability over the medium 
to long term, and is now illustrated as “on the basis of a year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI, it falls in a positive range of 2 percent or lower, and the midpoints of most Policy Board 
members’ understanding are around 1 percent.”  
Two  effects  can  be  expected  from  the  second  measure.  First,  by  explicitly  showing  the 
medium- to long-term inflation rate that the Bank has in mind in conducting its policy, there 
would  be  effects  of  giving  the  people  an  indication  about  the  future  inflation  rate  and  of 
stabilizing  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  –  an  anchoring  effect.  Second,  by 
linking explicitly the medium- to long-term inflation rate deemed desirable with the conduct of 
monetary  policy,  there  could  also  be  an  effect  of  making  the  thinking  of  monetary  policy 
conduct clear. 
Those  views  are  common  to  the  so-called  inflation  targeting.  However,  inflation  targeting 
tends to often invite, partly due to its naming, the impression that policy will be conducted by 
merely focusing on the inflation rate. Being easy-to-understand is of course important, but, at 
the same time, it is necessary to avoid falling into the so-called “pitfall of easy-to-understand” 
by conducting monetary policy looking away from the complex structure of the economy. 
Among central bankers and academics, discussions have already evolved from discussions 
on  the  old-type  inflation  targeting  that  focuses  only  on  short-term  price  stability  to  the 
framework for “flexible inflation targeting,” in which flexibility in policy conduct is enhanced, 
and  countries 
toward 
implementing a flexible policy framework. For example, in England, while the annual rate of 
inflation based on the consumer price index is substantially higher than the inflation target of 
2 percent and has been hovering above 3 percent since January 2010, the Bank of England 
has  not 
further  enhancing 
accommodative monetary conditions. 
On  the  back  of  the  move  not  to  focus  too  much  on  short-term  price  stability  but  to  aim  at 
ensuring stability of economic activity and prices from a long-term perspective, there is bitter 
experience of the past at home and abroad. For example, during Japan’s bubble period in 
the second half of the 1980s, consumer prices had been extremely stable and the average 
year-on-year inflation rate of the five years was 1.0 percent. Also, through the mid-2000s in 
the run-up to the recent global financial crisis, an optimistic assessment has spread in the 
United States that the economy finally achieved an ideal combination of high growth and low 
inflation and a phrase “Great Moderation” has been widely used to express such a situation. 
However,  as  revealed  a  few  years  later,  just  when  the  phrase  was  used,  financial 
tightened  monetary  policy  but  rather  been  discussing 
targeting  have  been  shifting 
that  actually  adopted 
inflation 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 7
imbalances, such as an excessive rise in asset prices and excessive debt, which caused the 
recent global financial crisis were accumulating. 
In  that  regard,  the  Bank  introduced  a  framework  for  assessing  the  economic  and  price 
situation from two perspectives – a baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and 
prices, and risk factors and, on that basis, it conducts monetary policy. The framework was 
adopted by incorporating the merits of other countries’ policy conduct frameworks, including 
the aforementioned inflation targeting, and also paid due consideration to the demerits. And 
thus,  the  Bank  believes  that  its  policy  framework  is  a  more  advanced  one  for  monetary 
policy.  Based  on  such  line  of  thinking,  the  Bank,  in  clarifying  the  policy  time  horizon, 
confirmed  that  the  criterion  for  continuing  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  is  the 
“understanding of medium- to long-term price stability,” and the policy will be continued on 
condition  that  no  problem  will  be  identified  in  examining  risk  factors,  including  the 
accumulation of financial imbalances that could threaten economic and price stability from a 
long-term perspective as the conditions. 
Establishment of an asset purchase program 
The third measure is to establish a program for carrying out, for example, asset purchases.  
In  order  to  aim  at  a  decline  in  longer-term  market  rates  and  a  reduction  in  various  risk 
premiums, the Bank decided this time to purchase a variety of financial assets. Specifically, 
as  a  temporary  measure,  the  Bank  will  establish  a  program  on  its  balance  sheet  and 
purchase various assets, such as government securities, commercial paper (CP), as well as 
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). The sum 
of  those  assets  to  be  purchased  was  set  to  be  about  5  trillion  yen.  The  total  size  of  the 
program, including the fixed-rate operation, was set to be about 35 trillion yen.  
If  the  Bank’s  risk-taking  asset  purchases  could  activate  the  investment  stance  of  market 
participants and attract funds into the markets, it could work in the direction of reducing risk 
premiums. The Bank intends to begin the purchases as soon as possible. As mentioned in 
the beginning, the reason why the Monetary Policy Meeting was moved forward to today and 
tomorrow is to promptly discuss and decide on principal guidelines for the purchase of ETFs 
and J-REITs, which obtained the authorization by the government pursuant to the Bank of 
Japan Act, and to lay out a framework that can begin the purchases as soon as possible. 
The  measures  included  in  comprehensive  monetary  easing  are  extraordinary  ones  as 
monetary policy instruments of a central bank, and the Bank is fully aware of that. A policy 
measure to encourage a decline in longer-term interest rates and a reduction in various risk 
premiums will be implemented for the first time, and, in particular, a policy to purchase risk 
assets  by  a  central  bank  itself  shouldering,  for  example,  credit  risk  is  unprecedented  in 
central  bank  policies.  That  might  lead  to  taxpayers’  burden  in  case  the  purchases  should 
eventually  make  losses,  and  will  expand  the  extent  of  central  bank’s  involvement  in  micro 
resource  allocation  for  individual  industries  or  firms.  While  it  goes  without  saying  that  the 
Bank devises ways to minimize such adverse effects as much as possible, still it cannot be 
denied  that  the  asset  purchases  are  approaching  from  the  realm  of  traditional  monetary 
policy  of  liquidity  provision  to  the  realm  that  has  the  character  of  fiscal  policy  to  be 
shouldered by the government. The Bank has thoroughly considered a grave issue of to what 
extent  those  policies  should  be  pursued  based  on  a  central  bank’s  own  independent 
judgment in a democracy. Upon that consideration, the Bank has judged that, as a central 
bank which has been bestowed from the public the authority to create money, it is required 
as  a  responsibility  to  conduct  more  effective  policies,  if  they  can  be  devised,  in  a  flexible 
manner for the economic and financial stability. 
The  establishment  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  has  been  decided  on  the  Bank’s  own 
responsibility by taking into account such contradicting two factors and upon thorough insight 
into the economic and price situation. Therefore, as for the asset purchase, the Bank decided 
to bundle it into a program and manage separately so that not only the Bank itself but also 
8 
 BIS Review 146/2010
market participants and the public will be able to examine the operations conducted under 
the program and the effects and side-effects of the program.  
Those are the Bank’s thinking about the comprehensive monetary easing. In the future policy 
conduct, as described in the Outlook Report, I believe it is important to carefully examine the 
outlook for economic activity and prices, and take policy actions in an appropriate manner. 
Closing remarks 
Today I have explained the developments in the global economy and the domestic economy, 
as well as the conduct of monetary policy since the failure of Lehman Brothers. As I have 
been mentioning on various occasions, and I am sure that you have also been recognizing, 
in terms of the challenges for Japan’s economy, the response to a more medium- to long-
term challenge of a trend decline in growth potential is also critical, together with short-term 
and cyclical problems. In concluding my speech, I will briefly touch on that point. 
Looking back on Japan since the 1990s, the economic growth rate is on a declining trend, 
and the labor force has been declining after peaking in 1998 and the population started to 
decline from 2005. Such shift in demographics, especially the decline in the labor force, will 
have a significant impact on Japan’s economy like a body blow. That will be evident just by 
considering some issues such as whether there are prospects for any expansion in domestic 
markets, whether they can have stable employment and income in the future, and whether 
fiscal  conditions  are  sustainable.  If  anxiety  among  the  public  spreads  concerning  those 
issues, it will restrain the current households’ consumption activity and firms’ business fixed 
investment.  A  more  fundamental  background behind  stagnant  demand  over  a  long  period, 
and  the  phenomenon  of  deflation  under  an  output  gap  stemming  from  such  stagnant 
demand, could be ascribed to the weakening of medium- to long-term growth expectations.  
At  present,  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with  difficult  challenges,  and  thus  it  is  essential  to 
accurately  and  calmly  recognize  the  big  picture  of  Japan’s  economy.  Eventually,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  activity  of  private  firms,  which  are  the  central  player  of  the  economy, 
becomes spurred, and future growth expectations rise. On that point, in all ages, what blazed 
the economic path was the exertion of innovation by private firms. Innovation blazing a new 
area, in particular, does not emerge naturally nor being promoted by the efforts of specific 
firms  or  individuals.  Respective  and  consistent  efforts  by  each  firm  including  financial 
institutions will, while favorably influencing each other, lead to elevating Japan’s economy as 
a whole. As I noted earlier, if the root cause of the problem is the decline in the labor force, 
there are many issues that society should address, including the increase in the labor-force 
participation  rate  of  women  and  the  elderly  people.  In  any  case,  it  is  clear  that,  if  each 
economic entity considers institutions and practices as given and only takes an approach to 
pursuing optimization at a micro level for a continued existence of its own, it could lead to 
lowering  the  equilibrium  level  of  the  economy  and  is  unlikely  to  produce  the  dynamism  of 
Japan’s economic advancement. Of course, to bolster such vigorous activity of the private 
sector,  including  firms,  preparation  of  the  environment  by  the  public  sector  including  the 
government  will  be  important.  At  present,  the  government  is  making  efforts  to  increase 
growth  potential,  and  the  efforts  are  expected  to  pay  off,  combined  with  the  efforts  by  the 
firms. 
The Bank also continues to make utmost efforts. Since the second half of 1990s, the Bank 
has  been  hammering  out  new  various  policy  measures.  Looking  back,  those  measures 
seemed very innovative as suggested by the fact that the most of the policies introduced by 
the central banks in Europe and the United States after the global financial crisis had already 
been adopted by the Bank. On the quantity side, the Bank entered the low interest rate level, 
which is currently reached by the European and U.S. counterparties, in the middle of 1990s, 
and since then its balance sheet has been expanding substantially. That may be part of the 
reason why the Bank’s aggressiveness tends to have been underappreciated. However, in 
terms of the ratio of a central bank’s assets size to nominal GDP, the Bank’s ratio is bigger 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 9
than  that  of  central  banks  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  which  have  increased 
significantly through the recent financial crisis. The Bank is also the largest in terms of the 
extent of increase in the ratio after being faced with a low interest rate environment like the 
present.  On  the  quality  side,  the  Bank  has  been  introducing  new  measures  which  are  not 
seen in other countries, including a fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the 
foundations for economic growth this year. And this time, the Bank has taken a step further 
to encourage a reduction in longer-term market rates and risk premiums by asset purchases. 
The  success  of  that  measure  depends  on  whether  the  private  sector,  making  use  of  the 
accommodative  financial  environment  to  be  realized  due  to  the  measure,  tries  for  new 
challenges and whether an environment in which such a try is enabled is prepared. In that 
sense,  the  efforts  made  by  the  private  sector,  the  government,  and  the  central  bank  are 
essential. The Bank will continue to make contributions as a central bank so that the effects 
of  extremely  accommodative  monetary  policy  are  fully  exerted  and  will  lead  to  the 
development of Japan’s economy. 
10 
 BIS Review 146/2010
