Gill Marcus: The challenging global and domestic economic environment – 
implications for monetary policy and the economic outlook 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Wesgro 
Investor lunch, Cape Town, 19 October 2010. 
 Introduction 
The global crisis which erupted in 2008 is unfortunately still with us. Whereas it was relatively 
easy  to  get  unanimity  between  countries  with  respect  to  coordinated  responses  to  the 
severity  of  the  crisis,  it  is  proving  to  be  far  more  difficult  to  achieve  this  common  purpose 
during the current recovery phase.  
The recovery has been very mixed across countries and regions. The emerging markets in 
general, particularly those in Asia and Latin America, appear to be recovering strongly. By 
contrast, the US, the UK, the euro area (excluding Germany) and Japan are struggling to get 
growth going on a sustained basis. These countries’ attempts to reinvigorate their growth are 
having implications for emerging markets, leading to what the Brazilian Minister of Finance 
has recently described as a currency war.  
Although South Africa did not have a banking crisis, we nevertheless experienced the pain of 
recession  along  with  most  other  countries.  Similarly,  we  have  not  been  able  to  avoid  the 
fall-out  of  the  current  phase  of  the  crisis:  the  recent  global  developments  have  had  a 
profound  affect  on  the  domestic  economy  through  their  impact  on  trade,  capital  flows  and 
consequently the exchange rate.  
The  economy  has  emerged  from  recession,  but  it  is  a  fragile  recovery.  Unfortunately  our 
growth rates are not in line with those of many of the emerging market economies, but are 
more in line with those of the advanced economies. We need to face up to the challenges, 
not  all  of  which  are  external.  We  face  a  number  of  domestic  challenges,  requiring  a 
concerted and coordinated effort.  
In my talk today I shall address the challenges posed to the economy by these international 
developments  and  the  impact  on  monetary  policy.  By  way  of  conclusion  I  will  offer  some 
thoughts as to the type of structural or microeconomic reforms that are required to improve 
South  Africa’s  growth  and  competitiveness.  Many  of  the  problems  of  this  economy  are 
deep-rooted and require coherent structural reforms, and are not easily solved.  
Recent global developments  
During 2009 the global economy began to emerge from the worst financial crisis since the 
Great  Depression,  and  by  the  beginning  of  2010  there  was  wide-spread  optimism  in  the 
markets  that  the  extraordinary  steps  that  were  taken  by  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  to 
overcome the crisis would be reversed relatively soon. The focus at the time was about the 
appropriate pace and timing of these exit strategies. This optimistic view envisaged US policy 
rates being increased by the middle of 2010. There were, however, more pessimistic views 
which believed (and some still believe) that the risk of a double-dip recession was high.  
The current emerging consensus appears to be that while the risks of a return to negative 
growth are not trivial, the most likely outcome is for a protracted period of low growth in the 
advanced  economies  while  the  emerging  markets  are  seen  as  the  new  growth  engine.  In 
essence, we have emerged from the recession, but not from the crisis.  
The  reasons  for  the  poor  growth  outlook  vary  across  countries  and  regions.  In  the  United 
States, the consumer is still deleveraging in the face of a housing market that has not fully 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 1
corrected,  and  a  withdrawal  of  the  fiscal  stimulus.  In  the  euro  area,  the  replacement  of 
private credit and expenditure with state credit and expenditure resulted in a ballooning of 
fiscal deficits and debt ratios in a number of countries where debt to GDP ratios were already 
under pressure, particularly in southern Europe. Greece and Italy, for example, have debt to 
GDP ratios of 130 per cent and 118 per cent respectively.  
Pressure  from  the  markets  as  well  as  the  conditionalities  related  to  the  IMF-led  bail-out 
packages resulted in the implementation of austerity measures in a number of countries, and 
fiscal retrenchment became the order of the day at a much faster pace than was originally 
thought appropriate.  
Fiscal adjustment in Greece is planned to reduce the deficit from over 13 per cent of GDP to 
around 3 per cent of GDP in 2014, while in Spain the objective is to reduce the deficit from 
9,6  per  cent  of  GDP  to  3  per  cent  by  2013.  In  the  UK,  government  spending  cuts  for  the 
current fiscal year have averaged 25 per cent across departments. The danger with such an 
approach is that the adverse impact on growth could set in motion negative debt dynamics 
which would make the overall debt situation even worse. It has been suggested by Desmond 
Lachman  of  the  American  Enterprise  Institute,  that  the  Greek  austerity  programme  would 
result in growth contracting by between 15–20 per cent, leading to an increase in the debt to 
GDP ratio to 180 per cent.  
While there is general agreement around the risks of excessive debt, there is less agreement 
as to how much is excessive, and how quickly it should be reduced. As George Soros has 
recently argued, the premature pursuit of fiscal rectitude could wreck the recovery. At best it 
is  likely  to  cause  a  continuation  of  the  low  growth  scenario,  persistently  elevated  levels  of 
unemployment, and in the context of ageing populations in Europe, even further pressures 
on  the  fiscus.  The  current  social  unrest  being  observed  in  many  parts  of  Europe  is  an 
outcome of this.  
A  further  implication  of  these  developments  is  that  monetary  policy  becomes  the  main 
countercyclical policy instrument. With interest rates close to their zero bound in a number of 
countries, quantitative easing has continued. There are some concerns about the possible 
inflationary  consequences  of  the  current  policies  of  quantitative  easing,  namely  that  the 
injection  of  liquidity  will  ultimately  translate  into  higher  inflation  or  asset  market  bubbles. 
Some  point  to  the  gold  price,  which  has  reached  record  levels  in  recent  weeks,  as  an 
indication of the market expectations of future inflation.  
However long-term interest rates have remained extremely low in the advanced economies, 
an  indication  that  the  markets  do  not  expect  an  imminent  inflationary  outcome.  To  the 
contrary,  there  are  still  lingering  fears  of  deflation  in  the  US  and  Japan.  In  the  context  of 
persistently  wide  output  gaps  and  weak  household  consumption  expenditure,  global 
inflationary  pressures  emanating  from  the  advanced  economies  appear  to  be  benign.  A 
future challenge will be to withdraw this liquidity at a pace that will not derail the recovery, 
and at the same time minimise possible inflationary pressures.  
The monetary policy stances adopted in these countries imply abnormally low interest rates 
for longer, and expectations of the normalisation of interest rates have been pushed out to 
2012 or even 2013. The resultant increase in global liquidity has resulted in a surge of capital 
flows to emerging markets, which have higher growth rates, relatively higher interest rates 
and  favourable  fiscal  environments.  According  to  the  Institute  for  International  Finance, 
private capital flows to the emerging market economies are expected to total US$825 billion 
in 2010, up from US$581 billion in 2009. These flows are expected to be sustained at similar 
levels in 2011. Inevitably these flows have had implications for the exchange rates of many 
emerging markets, including South Africa.  
2 
 BIS Review 165/2010
The impact on the South African economy  
The South African economy reverted to positive growth in the second half of 2009. However, 
this growth has been relatively slow and below potential. Our expectation is that growth this 
year  will  be  in  the  region  of  2,8  per  cent,  increasing  to  3,2  per  cent  in  2011,  which  is  not 
sufficient to have a marked impact on unemployment. On the positive side, commodity prices 
have  improved  from  their  lows  during  the  crisis,  although  they  have  not  recovered  to 
pre-crisis levels.  
A  notable  exception  has  been  the  gold  price  which  has  almost  doubled  over  this  period. 
Unfortunately our mining industry has not been able to take advantage of this recovery, nor 
in fact did the sector respond to the pre-crisis commodity price boom.  
The  manufacturing  sector  remains  under  pressure  and  the  recent  high  frequency  data 
indicate  that  this  sector  is  likely  to  experience  continued  difficulties.  While  there  are 
indications that household consumption expenditure is recovering, it is still not clear to what 
extent these trends were temporarily boosted by the World Cup. Growth in gross fixed capital 
formation remains extremely weak, adding to the fragile growth outlook.  
What are some of the implications of the recent global developments for the South African 
economy?  One  third  of  our  manufactured  exports  go  to  Europe,  and  slow  growth  in  the 
region  could  affect  this  trade.  New  markets  need  to  be  found  in  other  parts  of  the  world, 
particularly in Asia, Latin America and other parts of Africa, where growth is generally higher.  
However,  the  more  pervasive  impact  on  the  economy  has  come  from  a  rapid  rise  in 
unemployment, the changing pattern of capital flows and the impact on the exchange rate, 
which has appreciated on a trade-weighted basis by about 7 per cent since the beginning of 
this year.  
The  increased  inflows  are  partly  a  result  of  a  positive  interest  rate  differential,  but  also  a 
result  of  South  Africa’s  relatively  favourable  fiscal  position.  Although  the  fiscal  deficit  was 
allowed to expand in a contracyclical way in response to the recession, the trend is firmly 
downward and is expected to be lower than the initial deficit estimates. The debt/GDP ratio, 
currently at around 32 per cent and expected to peak at around 40 per cent, also compares 
favourably with those of the advanced economies.  
Until recently, equity purchases by non-residents were the predominant form of capital inflow. 
Net bond purchases by non-residents were relatively small by comparison. For example, in 
the four years to 2007, net purchases of equities amounted to R220 billion, compared with 
net  bond  purchases  of  R34,5  billion.  In  2009  the  respective  net  purchases  amounted  to 
R75 billion  and  R15,5  billion.  During  the  latter  part  of  2009  this  pattern  of  flows  began  to 
change, in line with the changing pattern of global flows, and to date in 2010 non-residents 
have purchased R70,9 billion of bonds and R22,2 billion of equities.  
What has also changed is the nature of these inflows into bonds. A significant proportion of 
the inflows appears to be from pension funds and other asset managers who are investing in 
South Africa in search of higher yields. Unlike in the past when a large portion of inflows into 
bonds appeared to be speculative in nature and often did not involve actual currency flows 
as they were funded domestically, these new inflows involve real money and have a direct 
impact on the exchange rate.  
However, we have to bear in mind that these are not the only drivers of the exchange rate. 
Apart from these portfolio flows, we have seen reports of a number of high profile potential 
FDI inflows, a sign of confidence in the economy. Furthermore, a recent BIS survey showed 
that more than half of total rand turnover takes place offshore which also have an impact on 
the rand.  
There is no doubt that the rand is overvalued relative to its fundamentals, although the extent 
of the overvaluation is uncertain. The challenge is what can be done about it. There are no 
clear-cut or easy choices. All options involve significant costs and trade-offs, and there are 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 3
no guarantees that they will work. Direct intervention is expensive, and is not always effective 
under  current  extraordinary  circumstances.  Controls  on  capital  inflows  also  have  a 
questionable track record in terms of their effectiveness in reducing the amount of inflows, or 
the impact on the exchange rate. Some of these policies may be effective in the short run or 
in changing the composition and maturity of flows, but are less effective in the long run as the 
markets find ways of circumventing them.  
A number of countries have tried various means to lean against these inflows, with limited 
success.  In  July,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  reduced  its  purchases  of  euros  after  reporting 
losses  of  SF14  billion  related  to  intervention  activities.  These  activities  did  not  prevent  an 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. Recent Bank of Japan intervention amounting to trillions of 
Yen a day only had marginal short-term impacts on the exchange rate.  
Emerging  market  economies  have  also  tried  to  stem  the  tide  through  aggressive 
accumulation of reserves and through imposing taxes on inflows. Brazil imposed an inflow 
tax of 2 per cent, which was recently increased to 4 per cent. The impact on the exchange 
rate appears to have been short-lived, while bond rates increased to compensate investors 
for the tax. Last week Thailand imposed a 15 per cent withholding tax on non-residents who 
were previously exempt from this tax on bonds.  
While  we  clearly  recognise  the  problem,  the  solution  is  not  clear-cut.  The  costs  of 
intervention are not insignificant and involve serious policy choices. Nevertheless the Bank is 
engaging  with  the  National  Treasury,  and  we  are  examining  the  effectiveness  and 
appropriateness of what other countries are doing.  
Under  current  exceptional  circumstances,  where  we  are  experiencing  considerable  inflows  
– FDI, bonds and portfolio – we will act to alleviate some of the pressure on the exchange 
rate  by  purchasing  the  FDI  inflows  either  through  direct  transactions  or  from  the  market. 
Consequently  we  are  already  working  with  the relevant  parties  to  give effect  to  this.  Apart 
from possibly contributing to moderating current appreciation pressures on the exchange rate 
of the rand, such purchases are in keeping with our stated policy of building reserves. In the 
past  few  days  the  Bank  has  absorbed  the  foreign  exchange  inflows  related  to  the  Didata 
transaction.  
Although the exchange rate is posing problems for a number of sectors of the economy, we 
should ensure that we do not miss out on the possible advantages. South Africa, primarily 
through the state-owned enterprises Eskom and Transnet, but also with regard to rebuilding 
infrastructure  such  as  health 
facilities  and  equipment,  has  a  considerable  capital 
commitment.  Much  of  this  will  require  that  the  country  imports  specialist  and  capital 
equipment.  At  current  exchange  rates,  the  cost  of  such  purchases  could  be  considerably 
reduced.  Government  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  these  two  SOEs,  need  to  consider  ways  of 
front-loading some of these purchases to take advantage of the strength of the currency, and 
thereby considerably reduce the cost of the build/capital programme.  
Implications for monetary policy  
What are the implications for domestic monetary policy? Monetary policy is conducted within 
a flexible inflation targeting framework. By this we mean that although the primary objective 
of monetary policy is to keep inflation within the target range of 3–6 per cent, this is done with 
due regard to the impact of our policies on growth, employment and financial stability.  
Inflation is at a 5 year low, at 3,5 per cent, and we expect it to remain within the target range 
at  least  until  the  end  of  2012.  The  global  developments  have  had  a  favourable  impact  on 
inflation.  Not  only  is  global  inflation  low,  reducing  the  threat  of  imported  inflation,  but  the 
strong rand has also impacted positively on our domestic inflation outcomes. We have seen 
this effect very directly on petrol prices, where the higher international product prices have 
been  counteracted  to  some  extent  by  the  exchange  rate.  Since  September  2009,  the 
cumulative  moderating  effect  of  the  exchange  rate  on  domestic  petrol  price  increases  has 
4 
 BIS Review 165/2010
been  in  excess  of  50  cents  per  litre.  The  producer  price  index  also  shows  that  while  the 
headline  PPI  inflation  increased  by  7,8  per  cent,  the  imported  component  increased  by 
2,1 per cent.  
This  favourable  inflation  prognosis  has  allowed  us  to  reduce  interest  rates  to  their  lowest 
levels  in  about  30  years.  Our  real  interest  rates  are  also  low  by  comparison  with  recent 
experience.  Throughout  the  2000s,  depending  how  one  measures  real  interest  rates,  the 
average real policy rate was between 3 and 3,5 per cent. In the recent past this has declined 
to around 1,5 to 2 per  cent. Under the conditions outlined, monetary  policy is expected to 
remain relatively accommodative for some time, but contingent on changes in the outlook for 
inflation and the factors that impact on inflation.  
Where does the economy go from here?  
South Africa’s biggest internal challenge is unemployment, currently in excess of 25 per cent 
on the narrow definition. There is no doubt that addressing this must be the national policy 
priority. South Africa’s unemployment is of a structural nature, and not something that can be 
solved  by  interest  rates  or  the  exchange  rate  alone.  As  we  have  noted  on  numerous 
occasions,  interest  rates  can  have  a  cyclical  effect  on  growth  or  employment,  but  on  their 
own will not be able to  solve an inherently structural problem. It is incorrect to look at the 
interest  rate  or  the  exchange  rate  as  the  silver  bullet  that  will  solve  the  country’s  growth 
problems. The exchange rate is just one element in the story, and excessive focus on the 
exchange rate could result in the neglect of other factors that would constrain growth even 
with an appropriately valued exchange rate. To improve South Africa’s competitiveness and 
growth  prospects  requires  concerted  policy  coordination  across  government  departments. 
There are some obvious microeconomic reforms or initiatives that should be prioritised, and I 
will refer to only a few.  
A continued focus on infrastructure is essential. Because the World Cup is behind us, there 
should  not  be  a  decline  in  spending  on  infrastructure.  This  is  one  of  the  best  forms  of 
expenditure  that  can  be  undertaken.  It  is  investment  in  the  future  as  opposed  to  current 
consumption. It is productive, it provides jobs, and it helps alleviate constraints to growth and 
to exports.  
While there is a clear need to address the blockages affecting the mining sector, it does not 
help  to  increase  mineral  extraction  if  the  rail  infrastructure  is  unable  to  get  the  ore  to  the 
ports, and if the ports cannot cope with additional pressure. Our ports are reportedly amongst 
the  most  inefficient  and  expensive  in  the  world.  We  are  well  aware  of  the  need  for  the 
accelerated  build  plan  of  Eskom,  as  the  economy  cannot  grow  beyond  a  certain  capacity 
without hitting against electricity supply constraints. Currently the civil construction industry is 
an underperforming sector in the economy, and one experiencing significant job losses. This 
should not be the case.  
Skills development and education are key areas where structural reforms are required. This 
is  a  long  term  issue  where  formal  schooling  is  concerned.  But  skills  development  is  not 
confined  to  the  formal  school  or  academic  environment.  We  need  skilled  artisans,  yet  we 
have  far  too  little  by  way  of  apprenticeship  training.  There  remain  a  significant  number  of 
vacancies, which, if they were filled, could contribute to economic growth and job creation.  
The response to the recent crisis, when about one million jobs were lost, demonstrates that 
we  do  have  a  fair  amount  of  labour  market  flexibility.  However,  if  we  are  looking  at  job 
creation  as  a  priority  to  address  unemployment,  then  current  labour  legislation,  which 
extends  wage  determination  to  all  firms  in  a  particular  sector,  needs  to  be  examined 
regarding its effects on small and medium enterprises which should be a focus of growth and 
employment  creation.  At  the  same  time,  competition  policy  should  be  enhanced  to  reduce 
the occurrence of monopolistic pricing and other anti-competitive pricing policies.  
BIS Review 165/2010 
 5
Conclusion 
South Africa is one of a number of countries impacted upon by global economic events as 
the advanced economies attempt to emerge from the crisis. Unfortunately we have not been 
unscathed  by  these  developments.  In  the  short-term,  there  needs  to  be  coordination  of 
measures to alleviate the immediate pressures. While the Bank is ready to do what it can to 
alleviate the impact of the stronger currency, we need to recognise the limits to what can be 
done by the Bank alone in the face of these extraordinary events.  
The  various  forms  of  direct  intervention  on  their  own  will  not  suffice,  as  international 
experience has suggested. Consideration should be given to combining intervention policies 
with direct special targeted support measures for those sectors of industry that are hardest 
hit  by  the  exchange  rate  developments.  These  could  include  direct  subsidies  or  using  tax 
concessions to encourage continued production and/or the retention of employment. These 
are extraordinary times which call for extraordinary measures.  
From a longer term perspective, we must also ensure that these exogenous forces do not 
deter  us  from  introducing  necessary  structural  reforms  or  policies  that  will  stop  further  job 
losses and help improve the overall efficiency and competitiveness of the economy. Policy 
consistency and coordination is essential if we are to achieve a growing economy capable of 
absorbing the increasing number of unemployed people in the country.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 165/2010
