 Ignazio Visco: Rebalancing trade and capital flows 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Global 
Economic Symposium 2010, Istanbul, 29 September 2010. 
 The role of macroeconomic policies in the global crisis 
1.  
Policy responses to the global crisis have helped stabilize confidence and limit the threats of 
financial  instability,  but  at  the  cost  of  a  huge  accumulation  of  public  debt.  This  could 
potentially lead to a higher cost of borrowing if markets were to become concerned about its 
sustainability,  and  of  a  protracted  period  of  very  low  policy  interest  rates  and  abundant 
liquidity, which may end up fuelling new asset price bubbles, thus building up the conditions 
for the next crisis.  
In order to reduce the risk that again in the future a combination of distortions may lead to 
large  and  destructive  financial  crises,  it  is  essential  to  address  both  macroeconomic  and 
financial  policy  failures.  Important  changes  in  financial  market  regulation  and  banking 
supervision  are  already  being  introduced.  In  the  macroeconomic  area,  an  effort  is  being 
conducted to strengthen the coordination of economic policies in the context of the G-20.  
Beyond  exiting  from  exceptional  expansionary  policies,  the  global  economy  will  face  the 
challenge  of  adapting  to  an  extended  period  of  higher  private  saving  in  the  advanced 
economies, where the process of deleveraging is still at its early stages. A shift to a more 
sustainable global pattern of demand is needed, with important policy implications to facilitate 
this adjustment over the medium term. Policy frameworks should adjust to allow for stronger 
growth  in  private  demand  in  economies  with  substantial  external  surpluses  that  have 
accumulated  large  reserve  positions  over  the  past  several  years.  In  other  words,  the 
composition  of  global  demand  will  need  to  shift  in  order  to  deliver  strong,  sustained  and 
balanced  global  growth,  as  in  the  G-20  intendments.  Supply-side  policies  and  structural 
reforms will be important to support potential growth – which may have been damaged by the 
crisis.  
One  may  wonder  what  would  have  happened  to  the  global  economy  had  this  policy 
framework been implemented in due time. Such a counterfactual scenario has been studied 
by  Catte  et  al.  (2010)  who  show  that,  if  a  substantial  and  globally  coordinated  demand 
rebalancing had been undertaken in the early 2000s, internal and external imbalances would 
not have accumulated to the extent that they did (Catte, P., P. Cova, P. Pagano, and I. Visco 
(2010), “The role of macroeconomic policies in the global crisis”, Banca d’Italia Occasional 
papers, No. 69, July). In particular, the scenario considered contemplates tighter monetary 
and supervision policies in the United States and an increase in domestic demand in major 
surplus economies. The latter would have been the result of wealth effects obtained through 
productivity enhancements in the nontradable sector in advanced surplus economies and of 
policies aimed at directly rebalancing growth towards domestic demand – such as measures 
that reduce households’ precautionary savings and reforms of corporate governance which 
decrease  retained  earnings,  coupled  with  exchange  rate  appreciation  –  in  emerging 
economies. Even though it is difficult to say whether in that scenario the financial crisis might 
have been avoided, its propagation would likely have been less destructive, as both the US 
financial system and the global economy would have been less vulnerable to it. Specifically, 
US housing prices would not have expanded at the same pace as they did and the pattern of 
current accounts would have been better balanced.  
Overall, the results of such a counterfactual scenario highlight the complementarity of policy 
actions in deficit and in surplus countries with respect to the correction of both internal and 
global  imbalances.  Notwithstanding  announcements  about  the  importance  of  coordination 
and  cooperation  in  the  design  and  development  of  crisis  strategies,  in  practice,  countries 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 1
 have  proceeded  to  adopt  policies  that  appear  to  be  national  in  character.  Strengthening 
multilateral  coordination  to  mitigate  global  distortions  remains  a  priority.  The  issue  of 
cooperation  extends  beyond  the  design  and  implementation  of  stabilization  policies  and 
appears particularly relevant in managing exchange rate flexibility. 
Exchange rate flexibility and financial flows 
2.  
For  countries  in  surplus,  the  rebalancing  toward  domestic  demand  should  normally  be 
accompanied  by  an  exchange  rate  appreciation  to  help  re-direct  production  toward 
nontradables and part of the additional absorption toward imports. The consequent terms-of-
trade gains would help stimulate domestic consumption. In principle, an effective exchange 
rate appreciation can be achieved in different ways depending on the exchange rate regime. 
Greater  exchange  rate  flexibility  could,  for  example,  take  the  form  of  exchange  rate 
fluctuation within a moving (e.g. gradually appreciating) target band, defined with reference 
to either the dollar or a currency basket. It is possible to imagine a wide range of variants of 
this regime depending on the width of the band, the speed of appreciation, the composition 
of the basket and whether the margins of the band are “hard” or “soft”, as well as depending 
on the degree of pre-commitment to each of these parameters.  
In the case of China, for example, while the appropriate size of the renmimbi’s appreciation 
will  depend  on  considerations  of  macroeconomic  balance  in  the  context  of  the  ongoing 
demand  rebalancing,  the  degree  of  exchange  rate  flexibility  could  be  used  as  part  of  the 
authorities’ strategy for addressing the need to manage the effects of capital inflows while 
preserving domestic macroeconomic and financial stability. For countries facing large capital 
inflows,  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility  may  represent  the  most  effective  line  of  defence, 
reducing  the  need  to  accumulate  official  reserves.  The  main  challenge  posed  by  capital 
inflows for fixed-exchange-rate countries is to prevent them from feeding excessive growth in 
domestic credit, asset market booms and inflationary pressures, given the difficulty of fully 
sterilizing the domestic effects of reserve accumulation in a context of limited development of 
the internal financial market.  
While a crawling peg does not provide greater monetary autonomy than a fixed exchange 
rate (it may even require maintaining lower interest rates than those in the anchor currency), 
exchange  rate  flexibility  –  even  within  the  limits  of  a  fluctuation  band  –  introduces  a 
perception  of  two-way  exchange  risk,  which  should  help  discourage  one-sided  speculative 
bets on a renminbi appreciation. This buffering effect will be greater if the fluctuation band is 
sufficiently  wide.  Such  a  regime  would  allow  greater  leeway  for  an  autonomous  monetary 
policy:  a  rise  in  domestic  interest  rates  would  normally  be  associated  with  a  more 
appreciated exchange rate within the fluctuation band, and thus with greater scope for future 
depreciation; it would not, therefore, trigger capital inflows if the band is credible. 
A possible second line of defence in the face of excessive capital inflows, particularly  when 
these  are  a  structural  phenomenon,  could  be  greater  liberalization  of  capital  outflows.  This 
should be part of a broader process of fostering domestic financial development, both in order 
to ensure an efficient allocation of the country’s huge pool of savings and to support China’s 
increasingly globalized and sophisticated companies. Related to this broad project is also the 
objective of enhancing the role of the renminbi as an international currency. In this context, the 
introduction of some degree of exchange rate flexibility (possibly increasing over time) can be 
seen also as a way of gradually allowing domestic investors and firms to familiarize with the 
management  of  exchange  risk.  Here  the  interaction  with  financial  market  development  is 
important:  as  domestic  firms  and  banks  become  exposed  to  currency  risk,  they  need  to  be 
given access to markets where they can hedge against it. On the other hand, liquid derivative 
markets  are  unlikely  to  develop  unless  a  demand  for  hedging  exists.  At  the  same  time,  the 
development of deep and open markets in a broad range of renminbi financial instruments – an 
essential condition for China’s currency to take on a major international role – requires a switch 
of the monetary policy strategy from quantitative targets to the use of the interest rate and open 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 market  operations.  This  requires  financial  deregulation  and  the  development  of  a  liquid 
secondary market for government bills and bonds, so that the latter may act as a reference to 
price riskier private assets. 
Reserves and the international monetary system 
3.  
Over the past decade international reserve holdings have become increasingly concentrated 
in  the  hands  of  emerging  market  countries,  and  have  grown  well  above  traditional 
“precautionary” norms (e.g., in terms of months of imports or as a ratio to short-term external 
debt). As well, global reserves have remained concentrated in a few currencies, particularly 
the US dollar, whose share in global reserve assets far exceeds the share of the US in the 
global economy. These developments are a symptom of unsolved problems in the underlying 
international monetary system (IMS). 
Large-scale reserve accumulation has significant costs at both the national level (in terms of 
foregone  consumption  and  investment,  or  quasi-fiscal  deficits  incurred  when  reserve 
accumulation is financed or sterilized with debt offering higher yields) and the global level. 
Beyond  the  traditional  motives  for  holding  reserves  (such  as  smoothing  out  the  impact  on 
consumption of shocks or ensuring inter-generational equity for oil producers), recent large-
scale  reserve  accumulation  has  been  driven  by  two  main  factors:  (a)  growing  and  volatile 
capital  flows  –  and  the  related  need  to  insure  against  international  liquidity  shocks  for 
countries  with  an  only  limited  financial  intermediation  capacity;  and  (b)  the  absence  of 
automatic adjustment mechanisms in global imbalances – policies aimed at maintaining an 
undervalued exchange rate can persistently put off adjustment for surplus countries. As long 
as reserve issuing countries are willing to incur debt to purchase their imports, an export-led 
strategy leading to persistent current account surpluses and reserve accumulation remains a 
feasible policy option. However, as economies relying on undervalued exchange rates and 
demand  from  reserve  issuers  grow  larger,  a  purely  domestic  adjustment  for  the  reserve 
issuers becomes increasingly difficult.  
Both “precautionary” and “non-precautionary” reserves have a bearing with IMS stability, but 
require  a  different  treatment.  To  reduce  the  world  demand  for  precautionary  reserves,  the 
definition  of  benchmarks  to  gauge  the  adequacy  of  precautionary  reserves,  such  as  IMF 
guidance  on  “desirable”  ranges  of  precautionary  reserve 
levels  based  on  country 
circumstances,  could  be  helpful.  To  address  the  other  underlying  driver  of  reserve 
accumulation (capital flow volatility), countries could agree, also with the help of the IMF, on 
a new multilateral framework for managing capital flows. This framework should (i) cover all 
types of capital flows; (ii) specify the benefits of capital account liberalization under specific 
circumstances,  as  well  as  the  need  of  appropriate  measures  to  contain  excessive 
movements  if  and  when  necessary;  (iii)  discourage  systemic  countries  from  adopting 
comprehensive capital controls that may generate greater capital flow volatility elsewhere, or 
are  used  in  place  of  policy  measures  aimed  at  decreasing  global  current  account 
imbalances; and (iv) encourage countries to take concerted actions to limit volatility of capital 
flows. This would require substantial enhancement of financial data gathering at the national 
level, as well as more timely monitoring of capital flows at a supra-national level.  
Countries’  perceived  need  of  precautionary  reserves  is  not  entirely  independent  of  the 
amount  of  IMF  resources  they  can  count  on  in  case  of  trouble.  Substantial  progress  has 
been made in recent times, with the creation of a new precautionary facility for countries with 
sound  fundamentals  and  policy  frameworks  and  the  tripling  of  Fund  resources.  Further 
improvements  are  being  debated  to  encourage  the  use  of  IMF  precautionary  tools  and 
broaden the perimeter of their potential beneficiaries. Yet, as IMF lending remains attached 
to some form of “conditionality”, countries may still prefer accumulating reserves, which are 
available immediately and unconditionally. A more ambitious option would be to do without 
IMF conditionality, and allow the Fund to lend to solvent countries against collateral (in the 
form of high-quality assets possessed by the borrower), on a temporary basis and at penalty 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 3
 rates.  This  would  require  an  amendment  to  the  Fund’s  Statutes,  since  lending  against 
collateral is not currently allowed by the Articles of Agreement.  
The  search  for  incentives  to  reduce  “non-precautionary”  reserves  explained  by  one-sided 
foreign exchange intervention remains problematic, as IMS stability is likely to be of second 
order  importance  to  countries’  own  near-term  interests.  At  a  bare  minimum,  a  “shared 
understanding”  would  be  required  among  surplus  and  reserve  issuing  countries  on  the 
stability requirements of the system and on how their behaviour can undermine its stability. 
This  understanding  could  be  achieved  either  informally  –  at  the  G-20  level,  through  the 
“framework  for  strong,  sustained  and  balanced  growth”  –  or  in  a  more  institutionalized 
context for international cooperation such as the IMF. A concerted, non-coercive approach 
would  be  surely  preferable  to  one  based  on  “penalties”  (including  a  threshold  on  “excess” 
reserves or automatic taxes on persistent current account imbalances for reserve issuers). 
This approach should contemplate: (i) for reserve accumulating countries, a move towards 
flexible exchange rates and a significant reduction of foreign exchange intervention, or the 
abandonment of their pegs to national currencies; (ii) for reserve issuers, the adoption of a 
macroeconomic (fiscal) policy framework to sustain credibility of their currencies and the IMS 
as a whole. More ambitiously, steps could be taken to strengthen the global reserve system 
by  (iii)  enhancing  the  role  of  the  SDR.  This  said,  both  in  the  G-20  and  IMF  settings  the 
question remains as to how to make countries accountable ex post for the implementation of 
these understandings.  
A more diversified allocation of reserves among existing (or newly created) assets could, in 
principle,  reduce  global  and  individual  exposure  to  risks  stemming  from  economic  shocks 
and  policies  of  a  single  country,  and  provide  more  stable  stores  of  value  by  increasing 
reserve  issuers’  incentives  to  pursue  sound  policies.  Reserve  diversification  is  a  market-
driven process that is unlikely to evolve rapidly without active promotion of the official sector. 
In addition, in the absence of greater policy coordination between reserve issuers to manage 
their  exchange  rates  within  acceptable  ranges,  a  multi-polar  system  (with  several  reserve 
currencies  operating  as  broad  substitutes)  may  entail  greater  exchange  rate  volatility, 
especially in the transition phase. Thus, the diversification process should be managed in a 
smooth  and  transparent  way,  to  avoid  large  swings  unwarranted  by  economic  conditions. 
The  Fund  could  (i)  promote  greater  transparency  and  an  only  gradual  adjustment  in  the 
currency  composition  of  reserves,  (ii)  engage  with  potential  major  reserve  issuers  to  help 
remove the obstacles to a broader use of their currencies, and (iii) assist emerging market 
countries to pool and securitize part of their sovereign debt into a new composite asset, to be 
held as reserve asset by the members of the pooling arrangement.  
Finally,  and  certainly  more  open  to  discussion,  the  SDR  may  offer  a  number  of  potential 
advantages as a new element (if not a currency) of a multi-polar system. Being a basket of 
major  currencies,  it  diversifies  the  currency  and  interest  rate  risks  of  its  constituent 
currencies,  and  this  would  be  especially  important  to  cope  with  greater  exchange  rate 
volatility in a system with no dominant currency. Another advantage would be to align global 
“monetary conditions” (i.e., the reference rates off of which risky assets are priced) more with 
global conditions than with conditions in any single economy – all the more so if the basket 
were  broadened.  Finally,  if  countries  with  a  current  account  surplus  pegged  to  the  SDR 
basket rather than to a national currency, the currencies of deficit countries could depreciate 
vis-à-vis others in the basket.  
However, for the SDR to become a viable reserve currency, its supply should be increased 
significantly, and deeper and more liquid markets for this asset would be needed (currently 
there only exists an “official” market for SDRs). Over the years, SDR allocations have been 
regularly resisted by major IMF members. The development of a private SDR market would 
facilitate  the  process  of  diversifying  reserve  composition.  Moreover,  if  the  private  SDR 
market  were  sufficiently  liquid,  it  would  become  possible  to  carry  out  foreign  exchange 
intervention  directly  in  SDR.  This  might  encourage  countries  to  set  their  exchange  rate 
vis-à-vis the SDR rather than the dollar. It would take time to ensure that a liquid, broad and 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 diversified private market for the SDR develops, although the Ecu experience suggests that it 
could  also  prove  highly  successful.  An  important  limitation  that  needs  to  be  taken  into 
account,  however,  is  the  absence  of  a  lender  of  last  resort  in  SDR.  Market  agents  would 
always need to ultimately rely on the central banks issuing the four constituent currencies of 
the SDR basket. 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 5
