Jean-Claude Trichet: The continuing quest for reliable and timely statistics 
Opening address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
fifth  ECB  conference  on  statistics  “Central  bank  statistics:  what  did  the  financial  crisis 
change?”, Frankfurt, 19 October 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to welcome you, on behalf of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
to our biennial ECB statistics conference. I am delighted that the conference has once more 
attracted many distinguished participants from central banks around the world, European and 
international institutions, the financial sector, academia and the media.  
As many of you know, the conference was originally scheduled for April this year, but had to 
be  postponed  because  of  the  Icelandic  ash  cloud.  Making  a  virtue  out  of  necessity,  the 
conference  now  also  contributes  to  marking  the  first  World  Statistics  Day  tomorrow  on 
“twenty-ten-twenty-ten”. World Statistics Day has been designated by the General Assembly 
of  the  United  Nations  to  remind  us  all  of  the  importance  of  official  statistics  and  the  core 
values of service, integrity and professionalism. Also on behalf of Mr. Stark, I would like to 
invite  you  to  join  us  in  a  dedicated  ECB  event  tomorrow  afternoon,  to  celebrate  World 
Statistics Day.  
Two  years  ago,  I  concluded  my  address  before  this  conference  saying,  “European  policy-
makers need to have at their disposal a wide array of timely, high-quality statistics on which 
to  base  their  decisions”.  This  conclusion  has  been  fully  vindicated  by  the  financial  and 
economic  crisis,  both  globally  and  in  Europe.  The  necessary  strengthening  of  economic 
governance, particularly in the euro area, must go hand-in-hand with enhanced statistics.  
The ECB makes extensive use of a wide range of economic and financial statistics. The ECB 
is also a producer of selected European statistics for its own decision-making purposes and 
for the public at large. The European Parliament and Council have underlined the fact that 
European  statistics  are  developed,  produced  and  disseminated  by  both  the  European 
System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Statistical System (ESS).1 To minimise 
the reporting burden and enable the efficient development, production and dissemination of 
European statistics, it is important to reinforce the close cooperation between the ESCB and 
the ESS, and notably to foster the exchange of confidential statistical information between 
the two systems for statistical purposes.  
I  would  like  to  address  four  themes  today:  the  statistical  component  of  a  quantum  leap  in 
euro  area  economic  governance;  second,  recent  ECB  initiatives  to  enhance  European 
statistics;  third  statistical  information  for  macro-prudential  purposes;  and  fourth  European 
statistics as a possible model for global statistics.  
Statistical implications of a quantum leap in economic surveillance  
1. 
It  is  essential  to  strengthen  further  the  euro  area  dimension  of  surveillance  and  policy 
adjustment. In a speech three days ago,2 I reviewed the recent Commission proposals from 
                                                 
1  The European Statistical System is the partnership between the statistical authority of the European Union, 
namely the Commission (Eurostat), and the national statistical institutes and other national authorities in each 
Member State that are responsible for the development, production and dissemination of European statistics. 
“Global governance and euro area economic governance”, World Policy Conference, 16 October 2010. 
2 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 1
a euro area perspective and highlighted where we need more ambition still for the euro area, 
in order to safeguard the smooth functioning of our monetary union.  
Today,  I  would  like  to  outline  in  more  detail  what  we  need  in  terms  of  the  statistical 
implications  for  the  “quantum  leap”  that  is  needed  in  economic  surveillance.  There  are 
essentially three points.  
First,  the  reliability  of  the  general  government  statistics  underlying  the  Excessive  Deficit 
Procedure and the Stability and Growth Pact must be guaranteed when they come out. While 
the  government  finance  statistics  of  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  Member  States  is 
reliable, this does not yet apply to all of them. Yet as we are in a highly integrated union, we 
need reliable statistics not just from the majority of Member States – we need it from each 
and  everyone,  no  matter  how  large  or  how  small  the  country  is.  We  have  seen  that  the 
potential for loss of credibility affects the entire union. 
Therefore, in cases of data deficiencies, the recently amended powers of the Commission 
(Eurostat)  regarding  the  quality  assessment  of  statistics  in  the  context  of  the  Excessive 
Deficit  Procedure  must  be  applied  in  full.  This  is  best  documented  in  action  plans  to  be 
monitored  at  the  European  level.  Moreover,  in  terms  of  both  reliability  and  timeliness, 
government finance statistics would benefit in several countries from closer integration of the 
budget  process,  in  particular  among  different  parts  of  general  government.  Where  the 
planning,  execution  and  monitoring  of  public  budgets  is  a  well  integrated  process,  reliable 
government finance statistics are available almost without delay for decision-makers and the 
public  at  large.  Why  would  GDP,  which  is  an  economy-wide  concept,  be  available  in  a 
timelier manner than statistics on general government deficit and debt?  
My second point is that there should be mechanisms to ensure that governance and quality 
provisions  laid  down  in  the  European  statistics  Code  of  Practice  of  the  ESS3  are  fully 
adhered to. This is best achieved by reinforcing the binding nature of the European statistics 
Code  of  Practice  and  enshrining  its  minimum  standards,  in  particular  on  professional 
independence, in a European legal act. Simultaneously, the alignment of national statistical 
legislation  with  the  principles  of  the  Code  of  Practice  and  the  Regulation  on  European 
statistics4 should be accelerated.  
Third,  we  must  have  full  assurance  that  the  statistical  indicators  supporting  enhanced 
macroeconomic surveillance are robust and timely available. We must have assurance that 
indicators  –  such  as  international  indebtedness,  unit  labour  costs  and  other  indicators  of 
competitiveness  –  are  firmly  based  on  accepted  statistical  methodologies,  ideally  already 
legislated, and that the degree of estimation in compiling them is limited. Where compiled by 
the ESS, the European statistics Code of Practice should apply.  
These three points are absolutely essential and it is in the fundamental interest of all euro 
area  members  that  they  are  included  in  the  current  upgrade  of  the  economic  governance 
reform.  
Recent ECB initiatives to enhance European statistics  
2. 
Let me recall that the primary objective of the ECB is to maintain price stability, defined as 
euro area annual inflation below, but close to, 2% over the medium-term. It is worth noting 
that over the first 11¾ years of the euro, the average annual euro area inflation has been 
1.97%. The ECB is in its 12th year of existence and, as you see, its mandate is fully fulfilled. 
                                                
 
3  See http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/quality/documents/VERSIONE_INGLESE_WEB%20 
new%20links.pdf 
4  Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2009 on European 
statistics. OJ L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2010
Moreover, inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in 
line  with  the  ECB’s  objective.  This  has  been  an  outstanding  achievement  in  the  first  few 
years  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  –  and  it  is  an  achievement  to  which  European 
statistics have made an important contribution.  
In line with the allocation of responsibilities between the ESCB and the ESS for collecting, 
compiling  and  disseminating  European  statistics,  the  monetary  analysis  of  our  monetary 
policy strategy is mainly supported by statistics compiled by the ESCB5. In 2009 and 2010 
the ECB, supported by the national central banks of the Eurosystem, has been implementing 
two  ECB  regulations  on  enhanced  Monetary  Financial  Institutions’  balance  sheet  statistics 
and on securitisation vehicles.6 These regulations introduced reporting requirements for loan 
securitisations, in particular, and new statistics on the assets and liabilities of these vehicles. 
The aim is to compile more detailed monthly and quarterly data to be published for the first 
time in June 2011. In addition, new statistics on euro area money market funds and on other 
investment funds, including hedge funds,7 were released in December 2009. Following the 
adoption of the new ECB Regulation addressing banks’ interest rate statistics,8 the monthly 
banks’ interest rate statistics are now produced more quickly and are available already one 
month after the Governing Council’s monetary policy decisions. Further new and enhanced 
statistics are being compiled based on data already available at the national level, such as 
data  from  credit  registers  and  supervisory  data.  A  key  example  is  detailed  statistics  on 
insurance companies and pension funds, which are also expected to be published from June 
2011 onwards. As you can see, there is considerable and very tangible progress in the area 
of  monetary  and  financial  statistics.  All  these  developments  will  contribute  to  enhanced 
monetary analysis and are also available for in-depth financial stability analysis.  
The economic analysis of our monetary policy strategy benefits from much more consistent 
statistics  on  the  euro  area  balance  of  payments.  The  size  of  the  statistical  discrepancy  in 
balance of payments statistics has been decreasing substantially in recent years. The quality 
of these statistics has also improved, in particular by drawing on the Centralised Securities 
Database (CSDB),9 Phase 2 of which went live in spring 2009. The CSDB also supports the 
compilation of investment fund statistics, the residual maturity of government debt securities 
and  new  statistics  on  securitisation  vehicles.  The  ECB  will  publish  the  results  of  the  third 
wave of the joint ECB and European Commission survey on the access to finance of small 
and medium-sized enterprises in the euro area later this week, and fieldwork is being carried 
out for the Eurosystem survey on household finance and consumption.  
The  flagship  of  the  cooperation  between  the  ESCB  and  the  ESS  on  European  statistics 
remains the quarterly euro area accounts. These provide a consistent statistical framework 
for  the  ECB’s  monetary  and  economic  analysis,  both  for  transactions  and  balance  sheets. 
The  euro  area  accounts  are  also  widely  used  in  the  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review.  The 
main  challenge  remains  more  timely  delivery,  no  later  than  90  days  after  the  end  of  the 
                                                 
5  An  updated  overview  of  all  available  ECB  statistics  has  recently  been  published  in  “ECB  statistics:  an 
overview”. See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecbstatisticsanoverview/2010en.pdf. 
6  Regulation (EC) No 25/2009 of the ECB of 19 December 2008 concerning the balance sheet of the monetary 
financial institutions sector (Recast) (ECB/2008/32) OJ L 15, 20.1.2009, p. 14; and Regulation (EC) No 24/2009 
of  the  ECB  of  19  December  2008  concerning  statistics  on  the  assets  and  liabilities  of  financial  vehicle 
corporations engaged in securitisation transactions (ECB/2008/30) OJ L 15, 20.1.2009, p. 1. 
7  Regulation (EC) No 958/2007 of the ECB of 27 July 2007 concerning statistics on the assets and liabilities of 
investment funds (ECB/2007/8) OJ L 211, 14.8.2007, p. 8. 
8  Regulation  (EC)  No  290/2009  of  the  ECB  of  31  March  2009  amending  Regulation  (EC)  No  63/2002 
(ECB/2001/18) concerning statistics on interest rates applied by monetary financial institutions to deposits and 
loans vis-à-vis households and non-financial corporations (ECB/2009/7) OJ L 94, 8.4.2009, p. 75. 
9  See  “The  ‘Centralised  Securities  Database’  in  brief”,  available  at  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ 
centralisedsecuritiesdatabase201002en.pdf. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 3
reference  quarter.  The  ECOFIN  Council  supports  this  timeliness  objective10  and  it  is  my 
expectation that the ESCB and the ESS will achieve it by 2014 as currently planned.  
In addition to the European statistics provided by the ESCB, the ECB relies, for the purposes 
of its monetary policy and particularly for its economic analysis, on a wide range of economic 
statistics provided by the ESS. They include, in particular, the Principal European Economic 
Indicators  that  are  endorsed  by  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  (EFC)  through  its 
Status  Reports  on  Information  Requirements  in  EMU.  These  annual  reports  are  prepared 
jointly by Eurostat and the ECB’s Directorate General Statistics.11  
Statistical information for macro-prudential purposes  
3. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  statistical  information  for  macro-prudential  purposes.  The  upcoming 
launch  of  the  ESRB  and  the  entire  ESFS  including  the  three  European  Supervisory 
Authorities will have important statistical implications. When developing the statistical support 
needed  for  the  ESRB,  we  may  distinguish  between  the  “input”,  the  “throughput”  and  the 
“output” of the statistics function.  
Let me start with the core of the task, which is the “throughput” – namely the compilation of 
statistical information. All statistics on the financial institutions, financial markets and financial 
market  infrastructures  of  the  EU  as  a  whole,  including  sufficiently  granular  breakdowns, 
depend first and foremost on a sizeable team of statisticians who are well-versed in the legal 
provisions  to  be  observed,  trained  and  experienced  in  the  economic  and  financial  stability 
requirements, knowledgeable about the statistical concepts and methodology related to data 
on the financial system, familiar with the IT infrastructure to be applied, and used to cross-
border cooperation in a European and international environment.  
Such a team has been built and maintained by the ECB and the national central banks of the 
EU to provide European financial and economic statistics for monetary policy purposes. In 
addition, the ESCB statistics function offers sophisticated tools, such as statistical databases, 
internationally agreed standards and data transfer formats, registers of financial institutions, 
tested procedures for handling confidential data, and an array of proven methodologies and 
software for collecting and compiling financial statistics.  
The “output” comprises a large number of statistical deliverables needed to support the work 
of the ESRB. Much work still needs to be done and it is appropriate that the final statistical 
framework for the macro-prudential oversight of the financial system will be decided by the 
ESRB. I would like to distinguish between four main types of statistical deliverables.  
The first is macro-financial information relating to the macroeconomic environment, financial 
market data and information on financial market infrastructures.  
The  second  is  macro-prudential  information  on  regulated  and  unregulated  financial 
intermediaries. This comprises sufficiently granular aggregated micro-prudential information 
across  countries  and  financial  sectors,  as  well  as  individual  information  on  large  financial 
intermediaries.  
The third type of statistical deliverable is information on exposures to counterparties, which 
will  draw, 
in  particular,  on  a  securities  holdings  database  containing  data  on  a 
security-by-security basis, and will be supported by the CSDB. Detailed and reliable data on 
securities  issues  and  holdings  are  indispensable  to  any  systemic  risk  assessment.  The 
CSDB would be best complemented by a public reference data utility providing standardised 
                                                 
10  ECOFIN Council conclusions on EU statistics of 4 November 2008 and on 10 November 2009. 
11  See also the article entitled “Update on developments in general economic statistics for the euro area”, in the 
February 2010 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2010
information  on  instruments  and  entities  that  would  be  operated  on  the  basis  of  an 
international agreement.  
The fourth type of statistical deliverable is ad hoc information obtained via one-off surveys 
where  it  is  undisputed among  statisticians  that  only  regular  and  tested  data  flows  that  are 
connected to the internal accounting systems of reporting agents limit the reporting burden 
with a lasting effect, and produce a timely and reliable output.  
Concerning  the  “input”  –  namely  the  collection  of  data  –  the  reporting  burden  of  financial 
institutions  could  be  reduced  by  improving  processes  to  ensure  that  information  is  only 
reported once. One example of this streamlining is the use of supervisory data to compile 
macro-financial  statistics.  Here,  the  ECB  and  the  Committee  of  European  Banking 
Supervisors  (CEBS)  have  published  a  bridging  manual  aligning  the  ECB’s  monetary  and 
financial statistics requirements with the supervisory reporting templates developed by CEBS 
and have created a relational database identifying similarities and differences between the 
two frameworks.12  
It is even more important to reach a common understanding on the regular flow of data from 
the reporting agents in the EU financial system, via national and European databases, to the 
ESRB. In this context, I also welcome the fact that the ECB and CEIOPS13 are working on an 
optimised usage of the future data reporting by the insurance sector under the Solvency II 
Directive14.  Clearly,  there  is  a  difference  between  the  use  of  confidential  micro-data  for 
statistical purposes and their use for policy purposes. This distinction is respected in the day-
to-day business of any developed statistics function. To achieve detailed agreements on the 
flow  of  data,  I  count  of  a  very  fruitful  cooperation  between  the  three  future  European 
Supervisory Authorities and their predecessors, CEBS, CEIOPS and CESR15 with the ESRB 
preparatory  Secretariat  recently  established  at  the  ECB  and  our  Directorate  General 
Statistics. The statistics departments of the national central banks of the EU Member States 
are involved via the ESCB Statistics Committee.  
European statistics as a model for global statistics  
4. 
The financial crisis not only had an impact on individual economies and groups of countries; 
it  also  had  a  global  dimension.  The  Group  of  Twenty  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors (G20) now has a much more important role than it did before the financial crisis. It 
established  a  Working  Group  on  Reinforcing  International  Cooperation  and  Promoting 
Integrity in Financial Markets that called on the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB) to explore information gaps and propose ways to strengthen 
data  collection.  The  report  of  the  IMF  and  the  FSB,  entitled  “The  Financial  Crisis  and 
Information Gaps”16, makes 20 high-level recommendations to address the measurement of 
risks in the financial sector, international financial linkages and the vulnerability of economies 
to shocks, as well as the communication of official statistics and was endorsed by the G20 in 
November 2009. I am pleased that this report was produced with significant input from the 
ECB.  
                                                 
12  “MFI  balance  sheet  and  interest  rate  statistics  and  CEBS’  guidelines  on  FINREP  and  COREP”, 
February 2010. 
13  Committee on European Insurance and Occupational Pension Supervisors (CEIOPS). 
14  Directive  2009/138/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  the  taking-up  and  pursuit  of  the 
business of insurance and reinsurance (Solvency II) (recast) OJ L 335, 17.12.2009, p. 1. 
15  Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR). 
16  See http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_091107e.pdf. 
BIS Review 137/2010 
 5
As new collections of data from reporting agents will be required in most G20 economies to 
close information gaps, a multi-year programme, combined with an appropriate governance 
framework and sustained policy support, is needed to implement the recommendations. The 
G20  have  therefore  received  an  action  plan  in  June  2010,  detailing  the  recommendations 
and timetables for their implementation. This action plan was welcomed recently also by the 
International Monetary and Financial Committee of the IMF Board of Governors.  
Although the need for more comprehensive and more comparable statistics extends beyond 
the G20 economies, the G20 have volunteered to set an example. Because of the economic 
importance of the G20 economies, their data are sufficient to compile reliable and timely key 
world  aggregates,  such  as  quarterly  GDP,  within  two  months  of  the  end  of  the  reference 
quarter. Experience in the euro area confirms the traditional statistical paradigm that more 
aggregated  data,  such  as  euro  area  or  world  aggregates,  are  more  reliable  than  their 
component data.  
Comparable statistics are important in a globalised world in which decision-makers and the 
public  at  large  need  to  focus  not  only  on  their  own  economy,  but  also  on  key  partner 
economies. I welcome the development of the Principal Global Indicators (PGIs) that will be 
comparable  for  the  G20  economies,  including  the  euro  area,  and  which  are  similar  to  the 
Principal European Economic Indicators for Economic and Monetary Union. The PGI website 
maintained by the IMF17 is supported by six other international organisations, including the 
ECB.  
financial  statistics 
that  are  mutually  consistent, 
Conclusions  
Let  me  conclude.  Evidence-based  decision-making  in  modern  economies  is  unthinkable 
without  statistics.  This  applies  a  fortiori  to  monetary  and  financial  stability  policies.  The 
financial  crisis  has  revealed  information  gaps  that  we  have  to  close  while  also  preparing 
ourselves  for  future  challenges.  This  is  best  achieved  through  creating  a  wide  range  of 
economic  and 
thereby  eliminating 
contradictory  signals  due  to  measurement  issues.  The  main  aggregates  must  be  both 
reliable and timely, and, in a globalised world, they should be comparable across countries 
and economies.  
Reliability  and  timeliness  are  key  for  statistics,  but  may  seem  to  be  conflicting  objectives. 
This is more the case in the short-term, as the production frontier for compiling statistics can 
be  enhanced  in  the  medium  term  by  a  higher  degree  of  automation.  The  effective  and 
efficient  collection,  compilation  and  dissemination  of  European  statistics  requires  a  well 
developed  statistical  infrastructure,  including,  most  importantly,  a  team  of  skilled  and 
experienced  statisticians  familiar  with  European  and  international  cooperation.  I  take 
tomorrow’s World Statistics Day as an occasion to remind all of us of the importance of high-
quality statistics. They are central to the foundations of public and private sector decision-
making throughout our societies. 
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                
 
17  See  http://financialdatalink.sharepointsite.net/default.aspx. 
6 
 BIS Review 137/2010
