 Ric Battellino: Economic developments 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  
to  the  Committee  for  Economic  Development  of  Australia  (Western  Australia),  Perth,  
18 November 2010. 
 Introduction  
After having held official interest rates steady for five months, the Reserve Bank earlier this 
month  tightened  monetary  policy  a  little  further.  The  background  to  that  decision  and  the 
reasons for it are set out in the quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy and the monetary 
policy minutes of the Board meeting that have subsequently been released. My talk today will 
focus  on  that  material  and  outline  some  of  the  issues  that  are  likely  to  shape  economic 
developments over the next few years.  
Global economy 
I will start with the global economy because, as always, this forms an important backdrop to 
understanding developments here in Australia.  
The  world  economy  is quite  divided  at  present.  The  United  States,  Europe  and  Japan  are 
struggling to recover from the effects of the financial crisis, while emerging Asian economies, 
and to a lesser extent Latin America, are growing strongly (Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
The  US  economy  clearly  lost  momentum  around  the  middle  of  the  year,  with  GDP  growth 
slowing to an annual rate of about 2 per cent over the June and September quarters. This is 
below potential. Our reading of more recent data is that they have been a bit stronger, but 
nonetheless  consumer  confidence  remains  low,  the  housing  and  labour  markets  remain 
weak, and the repair of household balance sheets still has quite a way to run.  
 BIS Review 153/2010 
 1
 Basically, the US household sector is in very poor shape.  
One of the features of the US economy that has changed over the past 50 years or so is that 
households are now bearing more of the brunt of recessions than used to be the case, and 
businesses  are  bearing  less.  After  each  downturn,  it  has  taken  progressively  longer  for 
employment to regain its peak (Graph 2).  
Graph 2 
 Even after the 2001 downturn, which was relatively mild in terms of GDP, it took about four 
years for employment to recover to its earlier peak. The current downturn has been much 
more severe, with employment falling by 6 per cent from peak to trough and the recovery in 
jobs  so  far  being  quite  tepid.  It  is  therefore  clearly  going  to  be  some  time  yet  before 
employment regains its pre-crisis levels.  
Weak labour market outcomes, of course, mean subdued growth in household income, and 
the  combination  of  job  losses  and  low  income  growth  has  led  to  a  big  rise  in  mortgage 
foreclosures.  Almost  one  in  twenty  houses  that  are  mortgaged  in  the  United  States  is  in 
foreclosure. This is a very high figure (Graph 3).  
2 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 Graph 3 
Household wealth has fallen sharply. Measured relative to household income, it is back to 
the levels of the late 1980s, so a large amount of wealth has been wiped out (Graph 4).  
 Graph 4 
At the same time, household gearing has risen sharply, with housing debt now equal to about 
55 per cent of the value of the US housing stock.  
 BIS Review 153/2010 
 3
 Understandably, the reaction of households to all this has been to stop borrowing, cut back 
on spending and increase savings, all of which means that US households are not going to 
be the driving force of the global economy that they were for much of the period since the 
mid 1990s.  
The US corporate sector, on the other hand, is in pretty good shape.  
Profits have recovered strongly and the arrears rate on loans to US corporates has peaked 
at  a  level  that  is  quite  moderate  by  historical  standards;  it  is  no  higher  than  in  the  2001 
recession, which, as I have noted, was quite mild (Graphs 5 and 6).  
Graph 5 
Graph 6 
  4 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 Also,  holdings  of  cash  by  US  corporations  are  at  record  levels  –  almost  US$1½  trillion  or 
equivalent to over 20 per cent of corporate debt (Graph 7). This means that US corporations 
are in a strong position to increase investment when confidence returns.  
Graph 7 
 The US Federal Reserve has been maintaining official interest rates close to zero since late 
2008 but, despite this, the economy has remained sluggish. The Fed has therefore tried to 
use other instruments to stimulate economic activity.  
These  measures  generally  fall  under  the  heading  of  “quantitative  easing”.  They  involve 
expanding  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  through  the  purchase  of  securities,  with  payment  for 
those securities being made by giving banks extra deposits at the Fed. The Fed has roughly 
tripled the size of its balance sheet since the financial crisis began, to over US$2,000 billion. 
Earlier this month, it foreshadowed it would be prepared to purchase another US$600 billion 
of Treasury securities by next June, if circumstances warranted it (Graph 8).  
Graph 8 
BIS Review 153/2010 
  5
 The objectives of these operations are to put downward pressure on market interest rates, so 
as  to  encourage  households  and  businesses  to  borrow,  and  to  provide  banks  with  extra 
liquidity,  so  as  to  encourage  them  to  lend.  As  noted,  however,  US  households  have  little 
appetite  for  debt  at  present,  US  corporations  are  flush  with  cash  and  have  little  need  to 
borrow, and banks appear to be quite happy to leave their extra liquidity on deposit at the 
Fed, rather than lend it. US banks are currently holding about 8 per cent of their assets on 
deposit with the Fed, while their loans to households and businesses are falling (Graph 9).  
Graph 9 
 These outcomes are typical of what happens in the wake of a financial crisis, as it takes a 
long time for households, businesses and banks to repair the damage done to their balance 
sheets and regain confidence to borrow or lend again. This often means a prolonged period 
of sub-par growth.  
In Europe, growth on average has been around trend over the past year, but there is a wide 
divergence  in  the  performance  of  countries.  Germany  is  doing  well,  benefiting  from  earlier 
economic reforms and Chinese demand for German capital goods, but, at the other extreme, 
Greece and Ireland are experiencing very deep recessions. Economic tensions have been 
building within the euro area, driven by earlier widening differentials in competitiveness. Unit 
labour  costs  in  Greece,  for  example,  have  risen  by  about  25  per  cent  relative  to  those  in 
Germany since the euro came into existence.  
Government debt problems are also probably at their most acute in Europe. The facility set 
up  by  European  governments  in  May  this  year  to  provide  financing  to  smaller  European 
countries  seemed  for  a  time  to  lessen  market  concerns  about  sovereign  debt  levels. 
However, the situation has deteriorated noticeably again in recent weeks, as markets again 
question the capacity of some countries to sustain their current debt levels.  
On the other hand, as I mentioned, Asia is a bright spot in the global economy. The region 
bounced  back  very  strongly  from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  economic  activity  in  all 
emerging  Asian  economies  has  substantially  surpassed  pre-crisis  levels.  Several  central 
banks in the region have recently been tightening policy settings, but generally policy settings 
in  Asia  are  still  quite  expansionary.  Some  commentators  are  concerned  that  the  recent 
6 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 tightening might lead to excessive slowing in economic growth, particularly in China, but this 
seems unlikely while ever policy settings are still on the expansionary side. In fact, economic 
activity in China recently appears to have picked up again.  
Inflation could become a significant policy issue in Asia if growth remains strong. There are 
already  early  signs  of  rising  inflationary  pressures,  particularly  in  food  prices.  Some  Asian 
economies are also experiencing very strong rises in house prices, reflecting the favourable 
economic and financial climate (Graph 10).  
Graph 10 
 Overall, the outcome for global economic growth over the past year has been strong. When 
the figures for 2010 come in, they are likely to show that the world economy grew by around 
4¾ per cent, a rate that is noticeably above trend (Graph 11). Most forecasters are expecting 
that the growth of the global economy over the next couple of years will be slower than in 
2010, though probably at a pace that is close to trend.  
Graph 11 
BIS Review 153/2010 
  7
 There  are,  of  course,  risks  to  these  outcomes  arising  from  some  of  the  issues  I  have 
mentioned.  In  the  developed  economies,  the  concerns  are  mainly  about  downside  risks. 
What is worrying people is that the capacity of the authorities in most developed economies 
to deal with any renewed economic slowdown would be limited, due to the fact that policy 
settings  are  already  at  extremes.  In  Asia,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  easier  to  see  risks  of 
overheating.  
Commodity prices 
The  growth  of  the  world  economy  that  has  occurred  over  the  past  year  has  resulted  in  a 
significant  lift  in  the  prices  of  commodities.  The  prices  of  the  two  commodities  of  most 
importance to Australia – iron ore and coal – have been especially strong, and have again 
risen in recent weeks (Graph 12).  
Graph 12 
 As a consequence, Australia’s terms of trade – the ratio of export prices to import prices – 
have surpassed the 2008 peak, and are pretty much at unparalleled levels. The increase in 
the  terms  of  trade  over  the  past  year  has  added  around  $25  billion  to  the  Australian 
economy.  
The question is: how long will this last? At the Reserve Bank, we have for some time been 
forecasting  a  gradual  decline  in  the  terms  of  trade  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  on  the 
assumption that the supply of commodities will increase and that demand will slow a little, in 
line  with the  assumed  slowing  in the  global  economy.  This  continues  to  be  our projection, 
though recent commodity price outcomes have caused us to revise up our forecasts.  
Beyond the next couple of years, it is hard to predict what will happen. Both China and India, 
however, are going through a phase of their development that is very intensive in the use of 
steel.  In  the  past,  other  countries  have  taken  up  to  20  years  to  move  through  this  phase 
(Graph 13). It is likely that China, and more particularly India, will have strong demand for 
steel for quite some time yet.  
This, of course, would be a very favourable global environment for the Australian economy.  
8 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 Graph 13 
 The Australian economy 
Let me now turn to the Australian economy.  
As you know, our economy recovered relatively quickly from what was a shallow downturn 
following the global financial crisis, and over the past year has grown around its trend rate of 
3¼ per cent (Graph 14).  
Graph 14 
BIS Review 153/2010 
  9
 Domestic  demand  has  grown  substantially  faster  than  this  –  about  5¼  per  cent  –  due 
importantly to growth in public spending, though this is moderating now.  
Consumer spending has grown by a little below trend over the past year. It seems that even 
though  consumer  confidence  is  high,  consumers  remain  cautious  in  their  spending.  The 
household  saving  ratio  has  picked  up  noticeably  from  the  low  levels  it  fell  to  earlier  this 
decade. As we have said before, a period of consolidation by Australian households, after 
10–15 years of fairly robust increases in spending and gearing, is probably no bad thing.  
Investment in new dwellings has increased over the past year, though growth in the number 
of dwellings is still falling short of growth of the population. As a result, rental markets are 
tightening,  with  vacancy  rates  falling  and  rents  rising  at  a  solid  pace.  At  the  same  time, 
however, households now seem to be less inclined to increase their gearing in order to trade 
up to better housing. Auction clearance rates have fallen back to around long-run average 
levels and house prices have been relatively flat over recent months (Graph 15). This is in 
keeping  with  the  more  financially  conservative  approach  that  Australian  households  have 
taken  recently.  These  trends  are  probably  most  pronounced  here  in  Perth,  which  is  going 
through a period of adjustment after the euphoria of 2006 and 2007.  
Graph 15 
 Business  conditions  are  generally  around  average  levels,  although  there  are  clear 
differences across sectors. Business investment is at a high level, particularly in the mining 
sector, and information published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, as well as our own 
liaison  with  companies,  suggest  that  it  will  pick  up  sharply  further  over  the  next  couple  of 
years  (Graph  16).  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  vital  role  played  by  our 
office here in Perth, led by Virginia Christie, in helping us understand what is going on in the 
mining industry. And, of course, I would like to thank those many businesses that regularly 
make time available to talk to Virginia and her team.  
10 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 Graph 16 
 One  segment  of  business  investment  that  remains  weak,  however,  is  non-residential 
building. Following large increases in gearing and commercial property prices in 2006 and 
2007,  the  commercial  property  market  has  since  deleveraged  and  prices  have  fallen.  The 
bulk of that adjustment is probably now over, though the availability of finance for commercial 
property development remains very tight.  
Employment has grown strongly over the past year and the unemployment rate has fallen 
back to a range of 5–5½ per cent, which historically has indicated a degree of tightness in 
the labour market. Other indicators, however, suggest that the overall labour market may not 
be as tight as suggested by the unemployment rate.  
The  financial  side  of  the  economy  remains  subdued.  Household  credit  is  growing  at  a 
moderate pace while business credit remains soft. That softness is largely in relation to large 
borrowers; lending to small businesses has increased at an annual rate of about 5 per cent 
over the first nine months of 2010 (Graph 17).  
Graph 17 
BIS Review 153/2010 
  11
 We have spent a fair amount of time at the Bank looking at the question of why business 
credit is so soft. It is clear that banks had tightened lending standards sharply following the 
onset of the global financial crisis, which no doubt contributed to the slowdown in business 
lending. This has been most acute in the area of commercial property, where there has been 
a sharp cutting back, particularly by foreign-owned banks.  
More recently, there are signs that banks are becoming more willing to lend, at least in areas 
other  than  commercial  property,  but  demand  for  loans,  in  aggregate,  is  not  very  strong.  It 
seems  that  the  investment  that  is  taking  place  in  Australia,  particularly  in  the  case  of  the 
mining  sector,  is  largely  being  financed  outside  the  banking  sector,  either  from  retained 
earnings, direct investment from overseas or capital market raisings.  
The exchange rate is also clearly having an impact on business conditions. It has risen to 
post-float highs recently, although the real effective exchange rate remains below the levels 
recorded in the resources boom of the early 1970s (Graph 18).  
Graph 18 
 A  rise  in  the  exchange  rate  is  a  natural  consequence  of  a  resources  boom  and,  at  the 
aggregate level, is helpful in allowing the economy to adjust. Nonetheless, some sectors of 
the economy are adversely affected. A notable example at present is the tourism industry, 
where there has been a sharp increase in the number of Australians travelling abroad rather 
than  taking  holidays  domestically.  This  is  having  a  severe  effect  on  traditional  holiday 
destinations in Queensland, areas which are also suffering from overbuilding in the pre-crisis 
years.  Given  this  double  impact,  it  is  not  surprising  that  these  areas  are  currently 
experiencing  among  the  highest  rates  of  unemployment  in  the  country.  The  Bank  is 
monitoring developments in these areas closely.  
The outlook 
While there are differences between sectors and between regions, the Australian economy 
overall is doing well. We expect that the economy will continue to grow at a solid pace over 
the next couple of years, with growth picking up to an above-trend rate towards the end of 
this period. This will be accompanied by further increases in jobs and falls in unemployment.  
12 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 With the economy now having grown more or less without interruption for about 20 years, it 
is understandable that spare capacity is limited. This means that the economy cannot grow 
much  above  its  potential  rate  without  causing  a  rise  in  inflation.  With  a  large  amount  of 
money  continuing  to  flow  into  the  country  over  the  next  couple  of  years  as  a  result  of  the 
resources boom, the challenge will be to manage the economy in a way that keeps economic 
growth on a sustainable path, with inflation contained. This is what the Bank is trying to do.  
At present, inflation is broadly in the middle of the target range (Graph 19). Over the medium 
term, though, as growth of the economy picks up, the pressures on inflation are more likely to 
be  upward  than  downward.  This  is  reflected  in  the  forecasts  the  Bank  recently  published, 
which see inflation tending to rise after a period of near-term stability.  
Graph 19 
For this reason, the Board of the Reserve Bank decided at its meeting earlier this month that 
it would be prudent to make an early, modest tightening to guard against such an outcome. 
This  is  consistent  with  the  forward-looking  approach  to  monetary  policy  that  the  Bank  has 
been  following  for  close  to  20  years  now,  and  which  on  balance  has  helped  to  keep  the 
economy on a sustainable path. 
 BIS Review 153/2010 
 13
