Jean-Claude Trichet: How to better protect the euro area against financial 
instability – Interview in La Stampa 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in La Stampa, 
Italy, conducted by Mr Stefano Lepri, 14 October 2010. 
 Mr President, is the crisis of the euro over? 
I interpret your question as applying more to financial stability in the euro area than to the 
euro  itself.  I  do  not  think  there  has  been  a  crisis.  The  euro  is  the  single  currency  of 
330 million  people  and  enjoys  a  high  degree  of  confidence  among  investors  and  savers 
because it has delivered price stability remarkably well over the last 11½ years. What we had 
was a situation in which a number of countries had not respected the Stability and Growth 
Pact.  These  countries  have  now  engaged  in  policies  of  fiscal  retrenchment  that  were 
overdue.  They  have  to  implement  vigorously  these  policies  which  are  decisive  for  the 
preservation and consolidation of financial stability in Europe. 
But, from now on, the rules must be strengthened. 
It was necessary to fully respect the letter and the spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact. We 
have made that point constantly over the last years. On top of that, the Governing Council of 
the ECB – with Mario Draghi, the Governor of the Banca d’Italia – calls for a “quantum leap” 
– a very, very significant improvement – as regards fiscal surveillance inside the euro area. 
We  must  also  engage  in  surveillance  of  monopolies  and,  in  particular,  of  relative 
competitiveness  and  of  current  account  imbalances.  To  that  end,  we  must  exploit  the 
possibility  of  secondary  legislation  under  the  current  Treaties  to  the  maximum  extent 
possible. 
Even by imposing automatic sanctions? France, Italy and some other countries would 
prefer not to. 
For  us,  the  proposals  of  the  European  Commission  move  in  the  right  direction.  But  more 
ambitious  reforms  are  needed.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  we  know  now  that  it  is  very 
important to engage in quasi-automatic sanctions, and with an accelerated procedure, with 
the  countries  that  break  the  rules.  If  we  want  the  euro  area  to  better  protect  itself  against 
financial instability, room for discretion in applying the rules must be reduced. Sanctions must 
be possible in the early stages of macroeconomic surveillance. 
If this is not a common, it is a collective economic policy. But is it necessary to add a 
new rule on debt levels? In Italy some are afraid a swift debt reduction – 2.75 points 
each year in our case, under the current Commission proposals – would be too heavy 
for the country. 
There is already a debt rule in the Maastricht Treaty! And experience demonstrates that it is 
necessary to enforce it, because excessive debt might trigger instability. A simple calculation 
shows  that,  assuming  an  inflation  rate  of  below  2%,  but  close  to  2%,  as  in  the  ECB’s 
definition  of  price  stability,  and  a  reasonable  average  yearly  real  GDP  growth  rate  –  for 
instance, slightly over 1% – a balanced budget – which is the “normal” position according to 
the Stability and Growth Pact – might reduce the debt outstanding as a proportion of GDP by 
more than 3% each year for a debt level of around 120% of GDP. By the way, the IMF also 
says a reduction of public debt in a number of advanced economies is urgent.  
A balanced budget is the objective of the Stability Pact, but some euro area countries 
have never even come close. And the IMF,  while recommending debt consolidation, 
admits it will be very painful in the early years. 
BIS Review 136/2010 
 1
We  must  take  fully  into  account  the  confidence  channel.  When  a  country  moves  in  the 
direction of fiscal soundness, this is not only good for growth from a medium and long-term 
perspective, but it might also be beneficial for growth in the short term. Because it enhances 
confidence in segments of the economy that had lost some of their confidence, and that is 
good  for  consumption,  investment  and  job  creation.  People  would  not  engage  in  more 
consumption, entrepreneurs would not invest actively, and savers would not be forthcoming if 
fiscal stability was impaired or threatened. 
Other choices could be painful. The Bundesbank President, Axel Weber, some days 
ago hinted that a rise in interest rates could not be as far away as markets seem to 
think. 
As  you  know,  I  never  comment  on  remarks  made  by  fellow  members  of  the  Governing 
Council. What is important, of course, is that there is only one single currency; there is one 
Governing Council, only one monetary policy decision, and one President, who is also the 
porte-parole of the Governing Council. 
At  the  last  ECB  press  conference,  I  said  very  clearly  that  current  interest  rates  are 
appropriate. The needle in our compass is price stability – annual inflation of less than 2% 
but close to 2% – and on this we have a very, very remarkable track record: a yearly average 
price  increase  of  1.97%  in  the  11½  years  that  the  ECB  has  been  in  charge  of  monetary 
policy.  And  thanks  to  this  credibility,  inflation  expectations  are  extremely  well-anchored  for 
the next five and ten years in line with our definition of price stability.” 
Would you say yourself that the non-standard measure of buying government bonds 
on the secondary market – designed to support euro area countries in trouble – did 
not work and so has to be scrapped very soon, as one of your colleagues says?  
No! This is not the position of the Governing Council, with an overwhelming majority. This 
non-standard measure, like all other such measures, was designed to help restore a more 
normal functioning of our monetary policy transmission mechanism. And we are withdrawing 
all the liquidity, euro for euro, that is supplied through this programme. 
As  regards  euro  area  countries  in  trouble,  what  is  the  position  of  the  ECB  on  what 
happens  when,  three  years  from  its  inception,  the  EFSF  expires?  Can  a  permanent 
resolution mechanism be put in its place? 
We have said clearly that considerably strengthened fiscal and competitiveness surveillance, 
as  we  are  calling  for,  is  the  appropriate  instrument  with  which  to  minimise  the  risk  of 
recurrent fiscal crisis. However, if the risk of debt crisis were to become relevant despite the 
previous measures, a crisis management framework could be useful. It would have to rely 
upon  very  strong  policy  conditionality  and  reinforce  incentives  for  pre-emptive  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic adjustment. 
Some  economists  think  that  a  too  long  period  of  low  interest  rates  can  endanger 
financial  stability.  It  seems  that  new  financial  bubbles  are  growing  in  the  emerging 
markets.  Some  politicians,  such  as  Italy’s  Treasury  minister  Giulio  Tremonti,  say 
speculation is rife again, as strong as ever. 
The  remarks  of  Giulio  Tremonti  are  always  stimulating.  As  regards  the  ECB,  we  have 
demonstrated in the past that we are very keen not to embark on policies that would foster 
volatility  and  financial instability.  The  euro  area  countries can  count  on  the  ECB  to  deliver 
price stability and to solidly anchor inflation expectations, a necessary condition for financial 
stability, even if it is not a sufficient condition. I am sure this preoccupation is shared by all 
the central banks in the world. It is striking to see the extent to which confidence in central 
banks and in their capacity to deliver stability is important in our democracies. Central banks 
are, by construction, devoted to stability, they are medium and long term-oriented and they 
are independent. I think these are some of the reasons why the new systemic risk boards are 
close to them on both sides of the Atlantic. 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2010
In  other  words,  you  trust  Ben  Bernanke  will  not  risk  a  heavy  depreciation  of  the 
dollar? 
On  exchange  rates  I  will  say  that  excess  volatility  and  disorderly  movements  in  exchange 
rates always have adverse implications for economic and financial stability. And I consider it 
very  important  that  the  US  authorities  also  recently  confirmed  their  long-standing  position 
that  a  strong  dollar  vis-à-vis  the  other  major  floating  currencies  is  in  the  interests  of  the 
United States. 
But cooperation in the G20 is at a very low point. The United States will perhaps create 
even more liquidity; China refuses a substantial appreciation of the yuan. Between the 
selfish policies of the two great powers of today, Europe risks the euro becoming too 
strong. 
I responded already on the United States. On the emerging economy currencies, I would say 
that  at  the  Toronto  summit  emerging  economies  agreed  to  undertake  reforms  to  enhance 
exchange  rate  flexibility.  It  is  the  case  for  all  of  them,  including  for  China,  which  has 
confirmed the will to engage in such reforms, as it signalled last June. 
BIS Review 136/2010 
 3
