Glenn Stevens: Cross-currents in the global economy 
Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Australian 
Industry Group’s Annual National Forum, Canberra, 25 October 2010. 
 Introduction 
The topic the AIG had proposed for this session was “The Australian Economy to 2020”. That 
would of course involve forecasting up to 10 years ahead. That’s a rather risky proposition 
because forecasts are very hard to make. It might be safer, especially for a central banker, 
not to look forward at all!  
The  way  I  want  to  start  is  by  looking  back  10  years.  This  may  serve  as  something  of  an 
admonition  to  be  circumspect  in  making  forecasts.  But  identifying  some  big  trends  in  the 
Australian economy over the intervening period – one or two of which were quite unexpected 
a  decade  ago  –  may  contain  some  indications  of  issues for  us  to  be  aware  of  in  the  next 
decade.  A  couple  of  the  trends  that  are  readily  observable  also  point  to  some  current 
challenges in global economics and finance, and it is these to which I shall turn in the second 
part of these remarks.  
2000 – the year that was … 
A decade ago, Sydney had just hosted the 2000 Olympic Games. The city of Melbourne had 
hosted  a  meeting  of  the  World  Economic  Forum.  There  were  some  wonderful  sporting 
moments for Australians in the Games, though the Games are perhaps remembered for their 
logistical  success  as  much  as  for  the  medal  tally.  The  WEF  meeting  is  perhaps  most 
remembered for the protests, which turned ugly.1  
But  these  events  should  also  be  remembered  as  occurring  at  the  height  of  the  dot-com 
mania and its obsession with the “new economy”. Australians were told by more than one 
prominent  visitor  that  year  that  we  lived  in  an  “old  economy”,  with  the  implication  that  we 
needed to shift towards the production of IT goods. Blue-sky valuations were being applied to 
companies that had not, at that point, earned a single dollar of profit (and many never would). 
The Australian dollar was slumping.  
The Economist magazine remarked that:  
“… As Sydney was presenting the new face of modern Australia to the world, the 
currency  markets  were  giving  a  different  verdict.  At  the  end  of  the  games’  first 
week, the Australian dollar fell to a record low of 53.63 cents against its American 
namesake. … The Australian dollar’s fall is partly explained by the greenback’s 
remarkable  strength  …  But  it  also  reflects  a  continuing  belief  among  financiers 
and potential investors that Australia has yet to complete the transition from being 
an  old  economy,  based  on  natural  resources,  to  a  new  economy  fired  by 
information and other technology.”2  
Other examples could be given.  
                                                 
1   A Google search seems to turn up numerous references to the various protests and protest groups, but not all 
that much in the way of what was actually said at the Forum. Whether that reflects an ephemeral discussion or 
the nature of news reporting is difficult to gauge. 
2   “Australia’s game still to win”, 28 September 2000. 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 1
As we now know, the dot-com bubble had actually started to deflate by the time those words 
were  printed.  The  NASDAQ  share  index  had  already  fallen  by  about  25  per  cent  from  its 
early 2000 peak. By early in 2001 the US Federal Reserve would be cutting interest rates as 
the US economy went into recession. The new economy – the latest (but not the last) in a 
long line of new paradigms – still had a business cycle after all. The Australian dollar would 
fall further in 2001, reaching a low point of about US48 cents in early April. Some felt that it 
might fall as far as US30 cents. More than any other single economic indicator, this particular 
price was often taken as a summary statistic for economic health.  
In 2000, some people were making the point that, in the old versus new economy stakes, it 
was probably in the use of information technology, rather than in the production of IT goods, 
that the gains would be greatest. On that score Australia ranked highly.3 Or they made the 
point  that  Australia  would  probably  do  best,  in  its  production  structure,  to  stick  to  its 
comparative advantages in minerals or agriculture or various services.4 But it was hard going 
trying to make sensible points against the barrage of market and media commentary.  
Ten years on, though, it does not seem to have been to Australia’s disadvantage not to have 
built  a  massive  IT  production  sector.  On  the  contrary,  the  terms  of  trade  are  at  a  60-year 
high,  the  currency  just  about  equals  its  American  counterpart  in  value  and  we  face  an 
investment build-up in the resources sector that is already larger than that seen in the late 
1960s  and  that  will  very  likely  get  larger  yet.  In  the  area  of  information  technology, 
meanwhile,  the  pace  of  change  continues  to  be  rapid:  prices  continue  to  fall,  profits  have 
proved  very  hard  to  come  by  and  a  number  of  prominent  names  from  2000  have 
disappeared. It is still better, it seems, to be a user than a producer of IT.  
The point of saying all this is not to poke fun at those whose prognostications a decade ago 
turned out to be wide of the mark. Anyone who has to forecast for a living has, from me, a 
degree  of  sympathy.  The  point  is  simply  that  forecasting  is  very  hard  and  that  the  latest 
conventional wisdom often turns out to be just a passing fashion. We might add that market 
pricing, at some points in time, may not be much better than that, even though markets tend 
to get it roughly right on average.  
Long-term trends 
Having given that caution, it is worth recounting just a few of the trends we can observe over 
the past decade or longer. The increased borrowing of the household sector was one such 
notable trend. It had already been under way for nearly a decade by 2000, but kept going for 
the best part of another decade after then. I have said before that this probably won’t be a 
feature  of  the  next  decade.  We  are  seeing  more  caution  in  borrowing,  and  the  rate  of 
household saving from current income, while still low, has risen over recent years. It follows 
that some personal and business strategies that did well in the earlier period of households 
gearing up probably won’t do as well in the future.  
Other trends have been a continuation of developments that had already been under way for 
a long time. For example, as a share of the economy, services have continued to rise, while 
manufacturing  and  agriculture  have  declined.  Those  sorts  of  trends,  in  broad  terms,  are 
pretty common to advanced economies.  
Mining’s share of output had changed little since the mid 1980s, but has picked up noticeably 
over recent years. This seems likely to continue in the near term at least, so we are seeing a 
                                                 
3   See Macfarlane I, “Talk to World Economic Forum Asia Pacific Summit Melbourne”, 11 September 2000 and 
The Australian Financial Review, “Whither the new economy?”, 6 March 2000. 
4   See Harcourt T, “Should we worry about the IT deficit?” <http://www.austrade.gov.au/Should-we-worry-about-
the-IT-deficit-/default.aspx>, 16 October 2000. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2010
faster pace of change in the relative sizes of industries than we had seen for a number of 
years. Formal metrics of the extent of structural change in the industry composition of GDP 
have  increased  but  do  not,  at  this  point,  show  it  to  be  outside  the  range  of  previous 
experience.5 That could well change, though, given the size of the resources sector build-up 
that appears to be under way.  
Looking at the trade accounts, we can see that the share of resources in exports has risen 
very  significantly  over  the  past  decade  while  those  of  the  manufacturing,  agricultural  and 
services components have declined. This is not to say that the absolute values of exports 
for  the  latter  sectors  have  fallen  since  2000  –  indeed  services  exports  have  grown  quite 
strongly – but the rise in resource exports has well and truly outpaced everything else, as a 
result of both volume and price rises.  
It is in the destinations of exports, however, that we see perhaps the most striking changes 
over the space of a decade. As it happens, the weights in the Reserve Bank’s trade-weighted 
measure of the value of the Australian dollar were updated just a few weeks ago. In the most 
recent year, the overall weight on the Chinese currency rose by 4 percentage points. That 
was  quite  a  large  movement  in  a  single  year  but  it  is  just  the  latest  manifestation  of  a 
profound trend. Stepping back, it is apparent that there has been a striking further orientation 
in trade towards the Asian region since 2000.6 The table below tells the story.  
Australia’s merchandise exports by destination 
Per cent share of total, financial years 
                                                   
5   Connolly  E  and  C  Lewis  (2010),  “Structural  Change  in  the  Australian  Economy”,  RBA  Bulletin,  September, 
pp 1–9. 
6   The data show shares based on  exports of goods. The text also refers to trade in goods unless otherwise 
stated. 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 3
A decade ago, Japan was far and away the largest export destination for Australian goods. 
The United States was second, South Korea and Europe tied for third and China came sixth 
after  New  Zealand.  Today,  Australia’s  top  goods  export  destinations  are,  in  order,  China, 
Japan, Korea and India – accounting for some 58 per cent – followed at some distance by 
the  United  States,  New  Zealand  and  the  euro  area,  all  closely  bunched,  accounting  for  a 
further 13 per cent or so between them.  
Given the ongoing shift in the world economy’s centre of gravity towards Asia, the direction of 
this change is not at all surprising. Many countries would be seeing the weight of their trade 
shifting in the same direction as ours. One of the reasons for the strong performance of the 
German  economy  this  year,  for  example,  has  been  the  strength  of  demand  for  high-end 
manufactured products in Asia. For Australia, though, it is a powerful phenomenon.  
Now this is just the exports side. When we consider both imports and exports – and indeed 
when  we  include  trade  in  services  –  the  United  States  and  Europe  remain  important  for 
Australia (though less so than China these days).  
The United States and Europe – along with New Zealand – also continue to account for a 
large  proportion  of  Australian  investment  abroad  and  are  the  source  of  the  vast  bulk  of 
foreign investment into Australia. In fact, the share of outward Australian investment going to 
Asia has actually fallen slightly since 2000.  Moreover, financial developments in the major 
economies, and especially the United States, are still very important drivers of capital flows, 
and of shifts in financial and business sentiment.  
So there are still important links to the major economies. I am not arguing for “de-coupling”, if 
by  that  idea  is  meant  that  somehow  the  north  Atlantic  countries  have  ceased  to  have  a 
significant impact on the global economy, or no longer matter to us. Everything is connected, 
and economic events in the north Atlantic countries still matter greatly. 
But trends in those countries are leavened to no small degree by developments in the Asia-
Pacific region, which is progressively becoming both larger and more capable of exerting a 
degree of independent influence over its own economic performance. It used to be said that 
when  the  United  States  sneezed,  Asia  caught  a  cold.  Recently  it  seems  that  the  United 
States  has  contracted  pneumonia,  while  Asia  sneezed  and  caught  a  bad  cold,  but  then 
recovered pretty quickly. Even in the financial field, the size of offshore investments by Asian 
official holders has become quite important, including for the Australian dollar. And while the 
stock of cross border investment between Asia and Australia remains small compared with 
that  between  Australia  and  the  United  States  or  Europe,  that  is  surely  in  the  process  of 
changing.  
The  point  of  all  this  is  not  to  say  that  somehow  Australia  has  been,  or  will  be,  “saved”  by 
China or Asia. The emergence of Asia is to our advantage, if we respond to it correctly. But 
there is no free ride from the global or regional economy and there never will be. Nor is it to 
deny that a country’s own policies, for better or worse, and followed over a long period, also 
make a significant difference to its economic outcomes. There is no escaping responsibility 
to keep our own house in order.  
The  point,  rather,  is  that  we  ought  to  take  more  than  a  passing  interest  in  events  in  our 
region,  and  in  the  conduct  of  economic  policies  in  our  region,  and  not  just  those  in  the 
countries that once completely dominated the global economy, but no longer do.  
This brings me to the issue foreshadowed in my title.  
Cross-currents in the global economy 
At the risk of over-using a clichéd term, the global recovery has been very much a two-speed 
one.  The  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  Japan  and  some  continental  European 
economies  saw  deep  downturns  in  output,  and  have  to  date  experienced  only  weak 
recoveries that have left the level of output well below its previous trend and unemployment 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2010
much higher than normal (Graph 1). In the United States in particular there is a very troubling 
increase  in  the  duration  of  unemployment,  which,  with  its  likely  atrophy  of  skills,  does  not 
bode well for future growth.  
In Asia outside of Japan and in Latin America, economies have traced out the more classic 
“v-shaped”  path.  In  east  Asia  excluding  Japan,  the  level  of  real  GDP  is  well  above  its 
previous  peak.  It  follows  that  most  of  these  economies  are  likely  to  experience  some 
moderation in the pace of growth, from something well above trend, to something more like 
trend. This is normal after a rapid recovery.  
Graph 1 
 This difference in performance between large parts of the emerging world and the core of 
what  we  could  call  the  “established”  world  of  industrialised  economies  leaves  the  global 
economy poised at a critical juncture. In Asia, capacity utilisation has more or less recovered 
and  growth  will  moderate.  Many  of  the  old  industrial  countries,  in  contrast,  still  have  large 
volumes  of  idle  capacity  and  are  searching,  with  increasing  urgency,  for  ways  to  increase 
their  growth.  But  they  are  having  trouble  increasing  their  own  demand.  So  we  face  a 
slowdown  of  some  degree  in  global  growth  at  a  time  when  substantial  spare  capacity 
remains in the global economy. The “global imbalances”, so called, have persisted, and have 
a new dimension: there is an imbalance in the location of spare capacity in the world.  
What could be done to foster a better outcome for everyone?  
There has been an increasing focus on exchange rates of late, with talk of “currency wars” 
and  so  on. My  view  is  that  more  flexibility  of  exchange  rates  in key  emerging  countries  in 
Asia – including China, but not only China – would be part of a more balanced outcome.  
But exchange rate flexibility alone isn’t enough. Changes in exchange rates don’t themselves 
create  global  growth,  they  only  re-distribute  it.  Unless  the  exchange  rate  changes  were 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 5
accompanied by more expansion in demand globally, we would not have solved the problem 
of excess capacity, we would only have relocated it. The additional step needed is stronger 
domestic  demand,  compared  with  what  would  otherwise  have  occurred,  in  the  countries 
whose currencies would appreciate in such circumstances.  
Of  course  there  should  be  room  for  this  given  that  the  higher  exchange  rate  would,  other 
things equal, help to dampen inflation. In principle, at least, this looks like a potential “win-
win” outcome. The appreciating countries could enjoy faster growth in living standards than 
otherwise, while the weaker countries whose currencies were moving lower would get some 
stimulus to aid their recovery.  
There  are,  however,  some  complications.  A  number  of  Asian  countries  have  been 
experiencing  worrying  increases  in  property  prices.  Low  interest  rates  and  easy  financial 
conditions  have  contributed  to  this.  Arguably  domestic  financial  conditions  in  these  cases 
need to be tighter, not looser. So it is not clear that monetary policy would be the best option 
to boost domestic demand. That said, allowing exchange rates to appreciate more quickly 
would probably help to dampen increases in asset prices.  
What about more expansionary fiscal policies as the way of increasing domestic demand? 
Many, though not all, Asian countries would have some scope for that, given the long record 
of  fiscal  prudence  and  low  public  debt  levels.  But  these  countries  are  very  unlikely  to  do 
things that would seriously impair their fiscal position in the long run. Hence my suspicion is 
that fiscal action, if it came, would be only modest.  
Some argue that structural changes are needed to lower national saving rates in countries 
like  China.  Such  changes  could  involve  a  shift  in  the  distribution  of  national  income  away 
from  state  enterprises  to  households,  who  are  thought  more  likely  to  spend  it,  a  better 
developed social safety net, and so on. In all likelihood these sorts of changes will occur over 
time. But structural change is rarely a rapid process.  
So I think we should be realistic about how much difference exchange rate flexibility would 
make to the unbalanced nature of growth in the global economy, at least over a time horizon 
of just a few years. It is definitely part of the answer (and it is surely in the interests of the 
countries with closely managed rates to accept more flexibility), but it is no panacea.  
A full resolution of the imbalances will take time. It will involve more far-reaching changes to 
very deep-seated attitudes to saving, which remain very different across the regions of the 
world. As incomes in Asia continue to rise, saving rates will probably decline over time, but 
only gradually. Meanwhile, aggregate saving rates in America and Europe will have to rise 
over time, given the extent to which financial obligations have grown relative to likely future 
income,  particularly  on  the  public  side.  The  key  question  is  whether  these  two  trends,  in 
opposite directions, will occur at the same pace, or not.  
Good policies can certainly help the world get to a better solution than might otherwise occur. 
But  even  with  good  policies,  it  is  likely  to  be  a  slow  grind  out  of  the  current  difficulties  for 
some countries. We probably have to accept that global growth was unsustainably fast in the 
few years prior to the crisis, that too much capacity of certain types was built up in the wrong 
places, that spending in some countries ran too far ahead of permanent income and that a 
period  of  adjustment  and  structural  change  cannot  be  avoided,  even  under  ideal  policy 
settings.  If  that  is  so,  then,  in  all  countries,  an  emphasis  on  accepting  the  need  for 
adjustment  generally  –  not  just  in  exchange  rates  but  in  economic  policies  and  structures 
across the board – is key.  
Conclusion 
Economies are not static machines. They are a complex and dynamic combination of actors, 
all  continually  seeking  to  adapt  to  changing  conditions.  That  is  one  reason  that  economic 
6 
 BIS Review 139/2010
outcomes are very hard to predict, and why I am circumspect about predicting “Australia to 
2020”.  
Looking  to  the  long  run,  we  probably  can  make  a  few  very  general  observations,  but  not 
much  more.  Real  income  per  head  has  generally  been  on  an  upward  trend  in  industrial 
economies  for  the  past  250  years,  with  occasional  setbacks.  Most  likely  that  will  continue 
(albeit that some major countries will take some time to recover their income levels of three 
years ago). As a broad observation, and definitely not as a precise forecast, we might expect 
that  a  decade  from  now  Australia’s  per  capita  GDP  will  probably  be  roughly  15  per  cent 
higher in real terms than it is now, give or take a few percentage points. The economic policy 
arguments,  by  the  way,  will  all  be  about  what  policies  might  gain  or  lose  those  few 
percentage points.  
In 2020, there will probably be, at a rough guess, an extra couple of million people working, 
compared with today’s 11.3 million. But exactly how all those people working will earn their 
living and go about their work is considerably less predictable. A good proportion of those 
13 million-plus  jobs  will  be  in  firms  that  don’t  yet  exist.  Some  will  be  in  industries  or 
occupations that barely exist as yet. And no one can give you a blueprint for which areas will 
succeed and which will not, any more than the pundits a decade ago, at the height of the 
“new economy” fad, could foresee the shape of Australia’s economy today.  
Succeeding  in  the  future  won’t  ultimately  be  a  result  of  forecasting.  It  will  be  a  result  of 
adapting to the way the world is changing and giving constant attention to the fundamentals 
of improving productivity. That adaptability is as important as ever, in the uncertain times that 
we face.  
BIS Review 139/2010 
 7
