Már Guðmundsson: Economic situation and outlook and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a breakfast 
meeting of the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavík, 5 November 2010. 
 Mr./Madame Chairman, honoured guests, 
The  Iceland  Chamber  of  Commerce  has  a  long  tradition  of  holding  a  breakfast  meeting 
shortly after the Central Bank has  published its new  macroeconomic and inflation forecast 
early each winter. This year and last year, the publication of that forecast has coincided with 
the  announcement  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  interest  rate  decision.  The  Central 
Bank welcomes this initiative. It is important to be able to explain monetary policy decisions 
as  fully  as  possible,  and  this  meeting  has  always  been  a  good  opportunity  to  do  so.  It  is 
particularly  important  at  this  juncture,  when  monetary  policy  is  formulated  under  unusually 
complex circumstances. 
Effective, forward-looking monetary policy is always complex, of course, as it is formulated 
under  conditions  of  uncertainty  about  the  current  situation  and  future  prospects  for  the 
economy. But in our case, three new factors are added to an already complex situation. First 
of all, there is great uncertainty about the effect of monetary policy measures on the financial 
markets  and  the  real  economy  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  Second,  there  is  the 
question of the relative weight of exchange rate stability, as is emphasised in the Stand-By 
Arrangement  with  the  IMF,  and  forward-looking  monetary  policy,  which  aims  to  anchor 
inflation expectations and attain the inflation target while combating the slack in the economy. 
The  third  complicating  factor  is  the  interplay  between  monetary  policy  and  plans  to  lift 
restrictions on capital outflows. 
But before I turn to these questions, I would like to discuss the current outlook and future 
prospects for the Icelandic economy. I believe we are at economic crossroads, as we have 
taken considerable strides towards stability, whereas robust recovery has been elusive. 
First,  let  us  consider  the  signs  of  stability.  External  imbalances  have  vanished.  The 
staggering  current  account  deficit  from  the  upswing  years  has  turned  into  a  sizeable 
underlying surplus, which excludes interest that has been accrued by the estates of the failed 
banks  but  will  only  be  paid  in  part.  The  underlying  current  account  surplus  supports  the 
exchange rate, but the capital controls do so as well. The króna stopped falling in mid-2009 
and has needed no support from foreign exchange market intervention since early November 
2009. So far in 2010, the króna has appreciated by over 12% in trade-weighted terms. Since 
the end of August, the Central Bank has actually been leaning in the other direction and has 
bought about 3 b.kr. worth of foreign currency. This is not a large amount, of course, but a 
modest  beginning  can  grow  into  something  large,  and  it  will  be  possible  to  step  up  the 
purchases when foreign currency inflows increase from current levels. 
The  stability  and  subsequent  appreciation  of  the  króna  have  played  a  leading  role  in  the 
recent disinflation episode, with inflation falling from 18% in early 2009 to 3.3% in October 
2010. Excluding tax effects, inflation measures only 2.6%, which is very close to the Central 
Bank’s inflation target. Headline inflation now looks set to reach the inflation target by the end 
of  this  year.  But  the  slack  in  the  economy  has  also  played  a  major  role,  as  has  cautious 
monetary policy relative to the circumstances. It is emphatically not a given that this progress 
should be made, and spare capacity in the economy does not produce price stability by itself, 
as innumerable examples illustrate, the most dramatic among them the runaway inflation in 
Germany’s Weimar Republic and, more recently, Zimbabwe. It was therefore necessary to 
achieve exchange rate stability and bring inflation expectations down towards the target. This 
could  not  have  happened  if  the  Central  Bank  had  complied  with  the  wishes  of  those  who 
went furthest in demanding a sudden, steep, and untimely interest rate cut. But in spite of all 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 1
this, interest rates have fallen significantly. The Central Bank’s effective policy rate has fallen 
from 18% (the seven-day collateralised lending rate) at the beginning of 2009 to the current 
4½% (the average of the current account rate and the maximum CD rate), and is now at an 
all-time low in the nearly 50-year history of the Central Bank of Iceland. 
Progress has also been made in improving Iceland’s external liquidity position by expanding 
the  foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  reduces  concerns  about  the  Treasury’s  ability  to 
service  its  foreign  debt in  coming  years.  Repurchases  of  the  Treasury’s  foreign  debt  have 
also helped. The foreign exchange reserves exclusive of short-term obligations could quickly 
grow to over 3 billion euros, if Iceland draws in full on the loans contingent upon the third IMF 
review and when payments on the Avens agreement and the sale of Danish bank FIH are 
remitted.  In  comparison,  the  Icelandic  Treasury’s  payments  of  instalments  and  interest  on 
two bond series maturing in 2011 and 2012, less repurchases, amount to 1.1 billion euros. 
This  positive  development  explains  the  relatively  upbeat  outlook  of  foreign  bankers  and 
analysts towards Iceland, as could be discerned at the annual meetings of the IMF. It also 
explains why the CDS spread on sovereign debt has fallen in recent months and now lies 
below that of the European countries whose public debt problems have dominated business 
media recently. But we have to do better if Icelandic companies are to gain access to foreign 
credit  markets  on  acceptable  terms.  Iceland’s  sovereign  CDS  spread  is  higher  than  the 
underlying fundamentals warrant, and positive developments in the next few months could 
make quite an impact on it. Credit rating agencies and others have given us a clear indication 
of  which  factors  are  most  important:  reducing  uncertainty  about  domestic  financial 
institutions, resolving the Icesave dispute, and demonstrating signs of economic recovery. 
But where do we stand? Has the turnaround begun? According to the forecast published by 
the  Central  Bank  last  Wednesday,  it  has:  seasonally  adjusted  GDP  is  projected  to  have 
grown between the second and third quarters of this year. This assumption is supported by 
various high-frequency indicators such as groceries turnover and payment card turnover. As 
the  chart  shows,  we  assume  that  this  trend  continued  in  the  current  quarter,  although  we 
expect growth to be somewhat less. In examining the chart, however, the viewer should bear 
in mind that quarterly GDP figures are quite volatile and measurements can show a small 
contraction  in  individual  quarters,  even  though  such  a  dip  would  not  be  considered  to 
constitute an economic recession in the conventional sense. 
But  in  connection  with  the  economic  outlook,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  consumer 
confidence  appears  to  have  taken  a  bit  of  a  dive  in  the  past  few  weeks  (see  Chart  2), 
concurrent  with  the  beginning  of  the  legislative  session  in  early  October  and  the 
demonstrations that took place at the time. While one hopes that the situation will reverse 
quickly, this decline underlines the fragility of the recovery and the fact that the “attitudinal 
crisis” could have an unwarranted negative impact on economic developments in the months 
to come. 
According to the Central Bank’s forecast, GDP will continue to grow in the medium term. It is 
expected to grow by around 2% year-on-year in 2011, 2.7% in 2012, and 3% in 2013. This 
will  suffice  to  reduce  unemployment  beginning  in  Q2/2011,  as  unemployment  generally 
begins  to  decline  somewhat  after  output  growth  has  begun  to  recover.  Unemployment  is 
forecast to taper off steadily throughout the forecast horizon, falling to 3% by 2013. 
As I mentioned earlier, underlying inflation is already very close to target. According to the 
Bank’s new baseline forecast, inflation will reach the target by the end of 2010. Due to the 
spare capacity in the economy and the expectation of further (albeit modest) appreciation of 
the  króna,  inflation  will continue  to subside,  falling  below  2%  around mid-2011.  It  will  then 
rise  slowly  and  return  to  target  towards  the  end  of  the  current  forecast  horizon,  which 
extends until Q4/2013 (see Chart 3).  
But these are “only forecasts”, as it were, and uncertainties are more numerous and more 
prominent  than  in  the  average  year.  External  factors  could  change  the  scenario,  but  the 
authorities  could  also  have  either  a  positive  or  a  negative  effect  on  matters.  The  new 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2010
Monetary  Bulletin  lists  a  variety  of  uncertainties.  For  example,  output  growth  could  be 
hindered by a number of factors: a setback in global recovery, further delays in the energy-
intensive industrial projects that have been on the drawing board, or cutbacks in household 
consumption resulting from consumers’ deciding to save more and improve their net asset 
position more quickly than in the baseline scenario. The negative effects of the last of these 
will subside over time, however, and in a small, open economy like Iceland’s, the longterm 
effect should be positive. On the other hand, output could grow more than in the baseline 
forecast,  particularly  if  risk  premia  on  Icelandic  financial  assets  decline  significantly  in  the 
near  future,  foreign  credit  markets  open  up  to  Iceland  again,  foreign  direct  investment 
increases, and overall business investment becomes stronger. 
But these are big “ifs.” The roughly 3% output growth currently forecast for 2012 and 2013 is 
quite acceptable in the average economic climate. But projected growth for 2011 and 2012 is 
weak in view of the sizeable slack in the Icelandic economy. Furthermore, the foundations 
are not strong enough, as the contribution of external trade to output growth is negative and 
investment  will  be  far  below  the  historical  average,  even  if  it  increases  significantly  from 
current levels. 
According to the forecast, exports of goods and services will increase by a scant 1% in 2011, 
followed by 2% annual growth in 2012 and 2013, even though the real exchange rate will be 
notably below its historical average throughout the period. 
Total investment will amount to just under 13½% of GDP in 2010, while business investment 
will be about 9%. Over the period 1980-2009, total investment averaged 22% of GDP, while 
business investment averaged 13% of GDP. This year’s total investment ratio is the lowest 
since World War II. The ratio of business investment to GDP has been lower than in 2010, 
however: in 1945, in 1993-1995, and in 2009. Even in 2013, at the end of the forecast horizon, 
investment will be only about 18% of GDP, which is below the 20% needed to maintain 3% 
output growth in the long run. 
This development in the level of investment is not inconsistent with the experience of other 
countries with a high pre-crisis investment ratio. Nonetheless, it is cause for some concern, 
and  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  these  will  be  “only  forecasts”,  for  nothing  is  inevitable  in 
such matters. In speeches I have given in the recent past, I have emphasised that, although 
the interest rate level has certainly affected the investment level, it is probably far from being 
the most important determinant, particularly with interest rates as low as they are right now. I 
think  other  factors  are  much  more  influential,  such  as  post-crisis  risk  aversion,  uncertainty 
about  demand  and  operating  environment,  reduced  access  to  foreign  credit,  and  impaired 
corporate  balance  sheets.  These  hurdles  must  be  overcome,  and  they  are  one  of  the 
reasons that it is so important that progress be made in corporate debt restructuring. 
But let us now turn to monetary policy. The Central Bank’s interest rates have been lowered 
significantly over a short period of time, mostly because inflation has subsided rapidly and 
inflation  expectations  have  followed  suit.  Interest  rates  had  to  fall  accordingly  in  order  to 
prevent the real interest rate from rising, which would have been quite unfortunate given the 
spare capacity in the economy. For the same reason, attempts have been made to lower real 
interest rates without jeopardising exchange rate stability and the inflation target. 
As I mentioned earlier, Central Bank interest rates are at an all-time low. Nonetheless, the 
Monetary Policy Committee is of the opinion that there is still some room for further rate cuts 
if  the  króna  remains  stable  and  inflation  continues  to  subside  as  forecast.  The  MPC 
emphasises,  however,  that  the  upcoming  removal  of  capital  controls  creates  uncertainty 
about just how much room there is to reduce interest rates. The breakeven inflation rate on 
Government bonds, as measured by the Central Bank, has declined since the 3 November 
interest rate decision, and the five-year breakeven rate is now broadly in line with the Bank’s 
inflation  target.  Shorter-term  expectations  could  fall  even  further  in  the  near  term,  as  the 
Bank’s forecast projects that inflation will fall below 2% in 2011. Based on this measure, the 
effective real policy rate is now 2-2½%. This is below the pre-crisis equilibrium real interest 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 3
rate, and probably lower than the rate that will prevail once the economy has normalised. But 
while  we  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  business  cycle,  it  is  appropriate  that  real  interest  rates 
should be well below long-term levels. Nonetheless, it is clear that, as interest rates fall, there 
will be less scope for further rate cuts. At present, however, I think we have not reached the 
bottom of the interest rate cycle. 
Let  us  turn  now  to  the  capital  controls.  When  we  begin  to  lift  controls  on  capital  outflows, 
sometime  after  March  2011,  the  exchange  rate  will  lose  the  support  the  controls  have 
provided. If all of the capital controls were lifted today, the exchange rate would probably fall 
sharply. But no such plan is in the offing. On the contrary: work will be done to create the 
conditions  for  removal  of  the  controls  without  necessarily  causing  a  marked  drop  in  the 
exchange rate. 
The liberalisation strategy publicised in August 2009 specified three conditions for removal of 
the  controls:  1)  macroeconomic  stability,  including  credible  measures  to  ensure  fiscal 
sustainability  and  declining  inflation;  2)  a  sound  financial  system;  3)  sufficient  foreign 
exchange reserves. The financial system soundness requirement has not yet been met, but 
the other two are relatively well in place. But why were these conditions chosen? They were 
chosen because they are essential if risk premia on Icelandic financial assets are to fall to 
any  significant  degree.  In  general,  the  lower  such  risk  premia  are,  the  greater  the  interest 
rate  differential  with  abroad,  and  the  lower  the  exchange  rate  is,  the  more  favourable  the 
conditions for lifting controls of this type. This is because the exchange rate is supported by a 
larger  risk-adjusted  interest  rate  differential  and  expectations  of  currency  appreciation  are 
more likely to outweigh expectations of depreciation. In my opinion, all of the conditions for a 
marked decline in risk premia should be in place in the next few months. Inflation will also fall 
somewhat further in the near future. Consequently, I am of the opinion that plans to lift the 
capital controls do not change the fact that there is still some room for further reduction of 
interest rates. 
Last  Wednesday,  in  connection  with  the  Bank’s  interest  rate  announcement,  I  issued  a 
statement on the capital controls. There is no reason to repeat it in full here, as it is available 
on the internet, but the thrust of it is that no broad-based steps will be taken to lift controls on 
capital outflows until March 2011 at the earliest, and before that is done, a revised financial 
account liberalisation strategy will be publicised. The intervening months will be used to lay 
the  foundations  for  potential  liberalisation.  To  all  appearances,  the  statement  was  well 
received, and bond market yields fell markedly thereafter. 
As I said at the beginning of my speech today, monetary policy implementation is unusually 
complex at present. This is equally true of monetary policy communication, the presentation 
and  explanation  of  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  communication  is  simpler  when  it  is 
possible  to  ignore  the  exchange  rate  apart  from  its  effect  on  inflation,  but  an  imminent 
systemic  change  such  as  financial  account  liberalisation  adds  to  the  complexity.  Yet  it  is 
important to realise that the problems inherent in such a systemic change will be solved only 
to  a  limited degree  with  improved  communication.  The  uncertainty  is  real,  and  the  Central 
Bank  cannot  create  more  certainty  than  it  faces  itself.  Experience  shows  as  well  that  the 
market can get ahead of itself even if monetary policy communication is in good order. 
A number of factors indicate that, to some extent, the market misunderstood the Monetary 
Policy Committee’s August statement. We must learn from such occurrences, of course, and 
try to do better in the future. Some appear to have interpreted that statement to mean that 
plans  to  lift  the  capital  controls  have  been  abandoned  temporarily  –  even  for  a  period  of 
years – and that this is why interest rates were lowered as much as they were. But to my 
mind  the  interest  rate  cut  had  more  to  do  with  rapidly  declining  inflation  than  increased 
uncertainty  about  financial  account  liberalisation,  although  such  uncertainty  did  of  course 
exist.  The  statement  was  made  before  the  September  Supreme  Court  judgment  on 
exchange  rate-linked  loans  and  before  it  came  certain  that  the  third  review  of  the  IMF 
programme was not going to be unduly delayed. The court judgments and IMF review were 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2010
in place by the MPC’s September meeting, however, and as a result, the substance of the 
September  statement  was  different  as  regards  the  conditions  for  liberalisation.  But  it  was 
conditions that had changed, not the policy.  
As  the  chart  shows,  developments  in  Government  bond  yields  in  August  and  September 
have a bubble like pattern that is often described as going down the stairs and coming up on 
the lift (or vice versa, if one considers price rather than yield). It is likely, then, that factors in 
addition  to  the  MPC  statements  were  at  work  here.  These  could  include  unusually  large 
leveraged  positions,  the  structure  and  effectiveness  of  the  market,  and  a  typical  bubble 
phenomenon  featuring  extreme  tension  right  before  the  bubble  bursts.  For  its  part,  the 
Central Bank will investigate what happened and draw the appropriate lessons from it. But 
this could be useful for others as well. At all events, if market participants are interested in 
leveraged speculation on the duration of the capital controls, they are free to engage in it. But 
if  they  do,  it  is  their  choice  and  their  responsibility.  The  removal  of  the  capital  controls  is 
certainly further off than many observers thought earlier this fall, but a delay of several years 
is not in line with announced intentions. 
In closing, I wish to say this: A great deal of progress has been made towards establishing 
stability, and monetary policy has played a large role in that process. At present, the task at 
hand is to create a strong foundation for lasting output growth and reconnect Iceland to the 
global  capital  markets.  Monetary  policy  will  have  less  of  a  role  in  these  matters,  but  the 
Central Bank will have a sizeable role in restoring Iceland’s connection with global markets. 
This  applies  both  to  participating  in  entering  foreign  credit  markets  and  to  formulating  a 
regulatory  framework  for  more  prudent  external  financial  relations  than  Iceland  had  before 
the crisis. But that is a subject for another occasion. 
Thank you. 
 
 BIS Review 158/2010 
  5
 6 
   BIS Review 158/2010
  BIS Review 158/2010 
 7
