 Axel A Weber: Global imbalances – causes and challenges 
Introductory  remarks  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  
at  the  international  conference  “20  Years  of  Technical  Central  Bank  Cooperation”,  
Eltville, Hesse, 28 October 2010. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am highly delighted to welcome you to this notable conference at the Bundesbank Training 
Centre in Eltville. Central bankers and other officials from 42 countries have gathered here 
today  to  discuss  various  experiences  and  common  challenges.  I  would  like  to  thank 
Mr Thomas Gierenstein and Mr Jürgen Sterlepper as well as their team for organising this 
conference. 
We  are  holding  it  to  celebrate  20  years  of  technical  central  bank  cooperation  within  the 
Bundesbank.  While  the  Bundesbank  has  always  been  available  to  provide  foreign  central 
banks  with  technical  assistance,  the  momentous  events  of  the  early  1990s  prompted  the 
Bank to institutionalise this kind of work. 
It  was,  in  particular,  Hans  Tietmeyer,  my  pre-predecesssor  and  Vice-President  at  the  time 
who  was  quick  to  grasp  the  far-reaching  importance  of  those  historic  events  for  central 
banking:  the  fall  of  the  Iron  Curtain,  the  collapse  of  the  communist  regimes  in  central  and 
eastern Europe, the subsequent transformation in those countries from a planned economy 
to a market economy as well as the break-up of the Soviet Union and the resulting formation 
of new, independent states. Many of those states had to start from scratch in establishing 
their own national central banks. All things considered, there was a major and vital need for 
central bank cooperation. 
Hence, in the first few years of its existence, the activities of the Bundesbank’s “Technical 
Central  Bank  Cooperation”  were  very  much  focused  on  the  process  of  restructuring  the 
banking system in those countries. This meant transforming formerly state-owned banks into 
a  two-tier  banking  system  consisting  of  an  independent  central  bank  and  profit-oriented 
commercial banks. 
Later  on,  activities  were  concentrated  on  helping  central  and  east  European  countries  to 
navigate their way to the European Union. Seminars at the time were aimed, in particular, at 
the smooth integration of the accession countries’ central banks into the European System of 
Central Banks. After this phase was successfully concluded with those countries’ accession 
to the EU, Central Bank Cooperation widened its scope in terms of its geographical reach 
and  activities.  In  the  era  of  globalisation,  cooperation  among  central  banks  has  generally 
become much closer. This is, of course, especially true of cooperation among major central 
banks. But, given the importance of price stability, a well-functioning banking system and, let 
us  remember,  central  bank’s  macroeconomic  expertise  as  a  useful  asset  for  other  central 
government  bodies,  we  also  consider  it  important  to  engage  in  a  constant  exchange  of 
expertise and knowledge with central banks of developing and emerging countries.  
Most recently, the financial crisis has significantly affected the activities of Technical Central 
Bank Cooperation – all the more so as the Bundesbank is a valued partner in dialogue in this 
regard.  In  terms  of  its  geographical  scope,  the  activities  of  our  Central  Bank  Cooperation 
currently cover EU accession and candidate countries, successor states of the former Soviet 
Union, central Asia and China. Furthermore, the Bundesbank is committed to continuing its 
support  for  the  Federal  President’s  programme  “Partnership  with  Africa”.  In  sum,  it  is  in 
contact  with  almost  90  central  banks  –  many  of  which  are  represented  today  at  this 
conference. Of course, the Bundesbank is not the only supplier in this field. We are therefore 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 1
 especially  pleased  to  welcome  members  of  the  counterparts  of  our  own  Technical  Central 
Bank Cooperation from the ECB and other central banks of the ESCB who are also attending 
this conference. 
Admittedly,  exporting  our  “central bank  philosophy”  is  a  major  motive  behind  our  efforts  in 
this domain. Many of you will agree with me that central banks have become both the most 
modern and most reliable public institutions in many developing, emerging and transformation 
countries.  The  Bundesbank  will  therefore  continue  to  actively  cooperate  with  its  partner 
central banks. The first 20 years of the Bundesbank’s Technical Central Bank Cooperation 
are a story of success and I am confident that the story will go on. 
Global imbalances 
2. 
Globalisation and, therefore, greater macroeconomic interconnectedness have increased the 
wealth  of  nations.  Nevertheless,  over  the  past  decade,  globalisation  has  also  been 
accompanied by growing current account and financial imbalances. While the financial crisis 
has  been  associated  with  a  narrowing  of  imbalances,  recent  data  suggest  that  this 
development  has  started  to  go  into  reverse,  at  least  partially.  In  view  of  their  global 
importance, I would like to focus my remarks today on these global imbalances, and I am 
looking forward to discussing these issues with this global forum afterwards.  
Current account imbalances are not a bad thing per se. On the contrary, from the viewpoint 
of a single national economy there may be good reasons for temporary surpluses or deficits. 
A surplus or deficit merely reflects a discrepancy between domestic savings and investment. 
For  countries  with  an  ageing  population  like  Germany,  it  is  a  matter  of  rationality  to  save 
more  than  to  invest  domestically  since  the  number  of  investment  projects  with  good 
prospects is declining, whereas households want to maintain their level of consumption in old 
age. Similarly, countries that export an exhaustible resource would be well advised to invest 
some of the proceeds abroad so that future generations can benefit from the resources as 
well.  Current  account  surpluses  will  therefore  fade  out  over  the  medium  to  long  term  and 
probably  eventually  turn  into  deficits,  as  the  accumulated  net  foreign  assets  are  gradually 
reduced. 
On the other hand, countries that are catching up on economic development usually invest 
more  than  they  save.  Given  a  wide  variety  of  investment  opportunities  but  scarce  capital, 
they rely on foreign inflows of funds. In such cases, temporary current account imbalances 
are fundamentally unobjectionable.  
By allowing economies to separate domestic absorption from output – which is, by definition, 
not possible in closed economies – current account imbalances are welfare-enhancing since 
consumption  is  smoothed  over  time  and  because  capital  flows  from  economies  with  net 
savings  to  countries  where  the  marginal  return  on  investment  is  higher.  This,  however, 
requires a productive use of the capital inflows in the deficit countries. Overall welfare will be 
adversely affected, for example, if capital inflows mainly fuel a speculative housing bubble. It 
has  now  become  obvious  that  unproductive  use  of  foreign  capital  was  widespread  in  the 
years  prior  to  the  financial  crisis  and  that  several  countries  have  been  living  beyond  their 
means.  
Regarding the debate on whether global imbalances were among the causes of the financial 
crisis,  I  do  not,  however,  consider  them  to  have  triggered  the  crisis.  Rather,  I  think  that 
deficiencies in the financial system were at the core of the crisis, whereas global imbalances 
intensified and accelerated the resulting chain of events.  
Indeed, many of the persistent high current account positions that have emerged over the 
past  decade  are  neither  benign  nor  sustainable.  The  large  U.S.  deficit  is  due,  first  and 
foremost, to low national savings. On the other hand, the current account surpluses of major 
emerging economies are, to a significant degree, the outcome of exchange rate policies that 
helped  merchandise  exports  to  grow.  Rather  than  investing  the  financial  surpluses 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 domestically,  China,  in  particular,  continues  to  accumulate  substantial  foreign  exchange 
reserves – mainly denominated in US dollars. Whilst this may possibly be not irrational from 
the  surplus  country’s  point  of  view,  it  is  partly  responsible  for  making  the  global  economy 
more vulnerable to adverse shocks.  
The  recent  financial  and  economic  crisis  has  caused  a  sharp  decline  in  current  account 
positions.  The  U.S.  current  account  deficit  –  which  in  absolute  terms  is  still  largest  of  the 
world  –  decreased  significantly  from  6.0%  of  GDP  in  2006  to  2.7%  in  2009.  The  Chinese 
surplus,  which  peaked  in  2007  at  10.6%,  will  go  down  to  4.7%  this  year  according  to  the 
most recent IMF projections. However, in contrast to the U.S. current account deficit, which 
the  IMF  expects  to  increase  only  slightly  over  the  next  years,  the  Chinese  surplus  –  in 
absolute terms the largest – is projected to re-increase significantly, to nearly 8% of GDP in 
2015.  The  current  account  surpluses  of  oil-exporting  countries,  which  more  than  halved 
owing to lower oil prices, are also expected to re-increase, although nowhere near to the pre-
crisis  levels.  In  the  case  of  China  and  the  oil-exporting  countries,  the  recent  narrowing  of 
current  account  positions  was  due  mostly  to  cyclical  adjustment.  In  the  United  States, 
however, cyclical factors have played a less important role with regard to the recent decline 
than permanent factors such as a structural upward shift in the private savings ratio. 
The  current  account  of  the  euro  area  has  been  quite  balanced  over  the  past  decade  and 
continues  to  be  so.  The  position  deteriorated  slightly  and  turned  negative  in  2008. 
Nevertheless, it is fluctuating around 0% and is not forecast to increase significantly over the 
coming  years.  Therefore,  the  euro  area  and  its  economies  have  not  contributed  to  global 
imbalances. This overall figure, however, masks economic divergences within the euro area.  
Large and persistent current account deficits in a number of countries on the geographical 
periphery of the euro area are the result of a combination of strong growth in demand, higher 
than average inflation and deteriorations in price competitiveness during the first decade of 
monetary union. Hence, the underlying distortions that led to these external imbalances were 
mainly domestic in nature – unsustainable developments, as was recently revealed by the 
financial and economic crisis. While their impact on global imbalances is rather limited, major 
macroeconomic imbalances within the euro area have proven to be a hazard for the single 
currency area as a whole. 
When  it  comes  to  correcting  intra-euro  area  macroeconomic  imbalances,  the  bulk  of 
structural  adjustments  has  to  be  undertaken  by  the  deficit  countries  themselves  as  it  was 
there  that  domestic  developments  became  unsustainable  in  the  years  prior  to  the  crisis. 
Although the crisis has led to a correction that is not just cyclical, including a cooling-off of 
housing  markets,  it  is  of  great  importance  for  the  euro-area  economy  that  the  adjustment 
process in the deficit countries continues. Against this background, compensatory measures 
taken by euro-area countries with current account surpluses, like wage increases or a more 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  stance,  would  be  neither  necessary  nor  helpful.  Furthermore,  it 
has  to  be  stressed  that  Germany’s  current  account  surplus,  for  example,  is  the  result  of 
decentralised  market  processes.  This  is  an  important  difference  between  EMU  surplus 
countries and some emerging economies where a market-driven correction of imbalances is 
significantly hampered by policy interventions. 
To  sum  up,  as  the  underlying  causes  of  global  imbalances  are  mainly  still  operative, 
imbalances are continuing to pose risks to the global economy and are incompatible with the 
G20’s  goal  of  strong,  balanced  and  sustainable  growth.  The  financial  and  economic  crisis 
has not removed global rebalancing from the global policy agenda. Pre-crisis policy advice is 
still  largely  relevant.  While  global  rebalancing  may  have  become  even  more  challenging 
 –  even  more  so  as  major  economies  have  not  yet  fully  digested  the  recent  crisis  –  it  is 
encouraging that global leaders have acknowledged the importance of the issue. 
The G20 “Framework for strong, sustainable and balanced growth” is a sometimes tedious, 
but important advance in this regard. In contrast to the multilateral consultations that were 
held  in  2006  and  2007,  the  G20  commitments  are  backed  by  the  leaders  and  include  all 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 3
 major  stakeholders.  Furthermore,  the  Mutual  Assessment  Process  could  provide  the 
opportunity  for  exerting  peer  pressure  among  members,  which  is  considered  to  be  more 
effective than institutional surveillance.  
Still, we should not rely too much on the effectiveness of the framework itself. At the end of 
the day, it is up to the national authorities to implement the necessary measures in order to 
reduce imbalances.  
Emerging  surplus  countries  as  well  as  oil-exporting  countries  should  pursue  measures  to 
increase domestic demand. In some cases, in particular China, it is a well-known fact that 
more  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes  would  help  redirect  growth  from  export  to  stronger 
domestic demand. At the Toronto Summit, emerging surplus economies agreed to undertake 
reforms  to  enhance  exchange  rate  flexibility.  Market-oriented  exchange  rates  that  reflect 
underlying  economic  fundamentals  contribute  to  global  economic  stability.  Therefore,  the 
recent appreciation of the Chinese renminbi is a welcome further step towards appropriate 
valuation.  
Higher  exchange  rate  flexibility  should,  however,  be  supplemented  by  structural  reforms, 
especially as their positive impact is more sustainable. In the case of China, this includes, for 
example, measures to reduce precautionary household saving by improving social security 
or measures to strengthen corporate finance. 
The advanced G-20 states have pledged to halve their public deficits by 2013 and to stabilise 
their  debt  ratios  by  2016.  The  deficit  countries  among  them  have  committed  themselves, 
beyond  budget  consolidation,  to  supporting  private  savings,  to  strengthening  their  export 
sectors and to maintaining open markets. In the United States, private savings have already 
increased, whereas the public deficit is still high. Budget consolidation will be challenging but 
will be good for the U.S. and help rebalance the global economy. 
The  surplus  countries,  in  turn,  have  committed  themselves  to  strengthening  domestic 
sources  of  growth,  in  particular  by  implementing  structural  reforms  depending  on  national 
circumstances.  Germany  is  a  case  in  point.  Comprehensive  and  sometimes  painful  labour 
market  reforms  have  helped  to  make  the  labour  market  significantly  more  flexible.  The 
dividend  from  these  structural  reforms  was  a  robust  labour  market  during  the  downturn, 
implying comparatively robust private consumption. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate has 
gone  back  down  below  its  pre-crisis  level  and  economic  growth  is  increasingly  based  on 
domestic demand. Boosting demand by means of further macroeconomic stimulus measures 
would, however, be inappropriate and, at least in the case of Germany, highly procyclical. 
Conclusion 
3. 
Let me conclude. 
Global imbalances still pose significant risks to the global economy. The unwinding of global 
imbalances is therefore one of the major challenges on the global policy agenda. It is a joint 
task of surplus and deficit, of advanced and emerging economies.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 153/2010
