Petar Goshev: Opening of the Joint Public Information Center of the 
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia and the World Bank 
Address by Mr Petar Goshev, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at the opening of the Joint Public Information Center of the National Bank of the Republic of 
Macedonia (NBRM) and the World Bank, Skopje, 16 December 2010. 
 Dear Ms. Lilia Burunchuk, Director of the World Bank Office in Skopje, 
Dear Mr. Alexander Tieman, IMF Resident Representative for the Republic of Macedonia, 
Your Excellencies, 
Dear guests, 
Dear ladies and gentlemen! 
Please allow me to greet you and express my pleasure that today we have the opportunity 
to attend two important events. The first, which we will gladly enjoy for a longer period of 
time  –  the  official  opening  of  the  Joint  Public  Information  Center  of  the  NBRM  and  the 
World Bank. And the second, the presentation of the Annual Regional Report of the IMF, 
an event which is always extremely interesting because it is an analysis made by a high-
caliber institution, such as the IMF. 
Dear guests, 
The  partnership  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  and  the  World  Bank  lasts  for  nearly  two 
decades. Good results of this partnership are evident. The partnership by definition rests on 
the benefit for both parties, i.e. for all who gathered together in achieving a goal. I do not 
know which of the two sides, benefited more from the cooperation between the World Bank 
and the Republic of Macedonia. 
But I strongly believe that the cooperation with the World Bank has played (and still plays) 
very important financial and advisory role in strengthening the institutional capacities of our 
country and in boosting the economic development. 
The amount of capital invested by this institution in the Republic of Macedonia is known, in 
the years when it was most important to us, when our access to other sources of funds was 
incredibly difficult and much more expensive. 
Reforms that were and still are implemented in our country with the assistance of the World 
Bank  are  well  known: 
tax  system,  pension  system, 
decentralization, increasing competitiveness, etc. The positive role of the World Bank in the 
issues  that  are  extremely  important  for  us  is  clear,  and  we  call  it  by  the  common  name  – 
structural  reforms,  a  set  of  issues  without  whose  advancement  we  would  not  have 
approached  the  doors  of  the  Euro-Atlantic  integrated  systems.  I  think  that  for  that 
contribution,  i.e.  the  result  of  our  partnership  with  the  World  Bank  we  should  use  every 
opportunity to say thank you. 
Working  together  on  the  structural  reforms,  many  of  our  institutions,  members  of  the 
administration, and even politicians became acquainted with the best practices in the world in 
many important areas of the economy, and in general the organization of work, important for 
improving the quality of life. In fact, the World Bank has always emphasized the importance 
of knowledge, the necessity of continuous training – a key part of the educated workforce for 
creating jobs and economic growth. 
An additional argument are the targeted investments aimed at improving the quality of the 
educational process in the Republic of Macedonia and taking actions to facilitate the access 
of Macedonian citizens to the best global expertise. The importance of investment in human 
judiciary,  health  care, 
the 
BIS Review 175/2010 
 1
capital,  as  economists  say,  or  in  the  so-called  social  capital,  according  to  sociologists,  is 
unquestionable. 
Within  that  platform,  within  the  slogan  –  learn  continuously  to  progress  continuously,  the 
cooperation between the National Bank and the World Bank has produced a nice event, a 
good product: logistical support for the process of increasing the knowledge. This logistical 
support is called: Joint Public Information Center of the NBRM and the World Bank. Today, 
we  are  practically  announcing  its  official  opening.  Its  primary  function  is  to  promote 
awareness  of  the  Macedonian  public  about  the  work  of  the  World  Bank,  through  the 
dissemination of information and documentation of the Bank, and to provide access for the 
Macedonian citizens to extensive collection of contemporary professional literature. In fact, 
this center is another public information service of the World Bank in Macedonia, along the 
Depository  Library,  which  operates  within  the  Faculty  of  Economics,  “Ss.  Cyril  and 
Methodius”  University  in  Skopje.  Located  within  the  NBRM  Library,  the  Center  provides 
access  to  over  400  publications  of  the  World  Bank,  electronic  access  to  the  World  Bank 
databases,  as  well  as  a  specifically  authorized  direct  access  to  the  electronic  World  Bank 
library, with a possibility to browse over 6,000 copies of professional literature. What makes 
this  Center  additionally  useful  for  the  public  is  that,  within  the  cooperation  with  NBRM,  it 
simultaneously  provides  the  external  users  with  an  access  also  to  the  National  Bank 
publications,  in  the  form  of  annual  reports  and  working  papers,  and  to  the  professional 
literature that the NBRM Library has at its disposal. The access to all publications, as well as 
to  the  World  Bank  statistical  database  is  open  for  all  interested  users  in  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, because of which this Center can bear the epithet of a rich trove of knowledge, 
which is waiting to be used. 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  live  in  an  era  of  extraordinary  dynamic  changes.  An  era,  where  the  already  learned 
things outdate in no time, or become insufficient, while the crisis once again showed that the 
enigmas  are  far  more  numerous  than  the  axiomatic  truths.  That  is  the  reason  that  the 
investments in learning should be ongoing.  
As a Central Bank, we make constant efforts for knowledge improvement and elevation of 
the scientific and research capacity, not only within the Bank, but wider, as well. Therefore, in 
the  previous  years,  we  have  organized  numerous  work-shops  on  many  current  topics, 
international conferences, and our employees lecture in several faculties in the country. Also, 
four years ago, we introduced the Annual Reward for Young Researchers, which has proved 
to be a very successful example, followed by other institutions, as well.  
Today’s  opening  of  the  Joint  Public  Information  Centre  is  another  contribution  to  the 
upgrade  of  the  scientific  and  research  profile  of  the  Central  Bank,  which  has  been 
established  and  developed  very  hard  all  these  years,  in  parallel  with  the  operational 
portfolio of the basic functions of NBRM: determining and implementation of the monetary 
policy,  the  banking  sector  supervision,  the  financial  stability  support,  ensuring  smooth 
functioning of the payment system, and above all, realization of the ultimate objective of the 
NBRM’s monetary policy – the price stability. 
I  believe  that  with  the  opening  of  this  Center,  we  open  another  channel  for  knowledge 
dissemination,  which  will  be  additional  stimulus  for  the  scientific  and  research  activity.  I 
believe that the Center will also serve for further deepening of the NBRM and World Bank 
cooperation, inter alia, also in the domain of organization of forums and debates on various 
current topics, as well as in the providing of foreign expertise, comparing the domestic with 
the international experience. 
Dear friends, 
We are glad that this library will join the libraries the American journalist Carl T. Rowan calls 
“knowledge food”, saying also that “the knowledge has liberated much more people than any 
war made in the entire history”.  
2 
 BIS Review 175/2010
We  are  pleased  that  also  with  this  Library,  we  enable  a  lot  of  people,  either  younger  or 
elderly, to give one of the most beautiful gifts – the book, for which the writer Garrison Keillor 
says that “it is the only gift you can constantly open, again and again”. We are glad that we 
are opening another such possibility.  
I sincerely hope that the opening of this Library will be welcomed by the scholars and wider 
public in the Republic of Macedonia. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 175/2010 
 3
