Ardian Fullani: Brief overview of key topics and the appropriate 
macroeconomic policy response 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission with the Ministry of Finance and the Bank 
of Albania, Tirana, 3 November 2010. 
 Dear Mr. Minister, 
Dear Mr. Bell, 
Dear media representatives, 
It is a pleasure for me to appear before you today following a week of intensive and fruitful 
discussions  to  present  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  position.  Allow  me  first  to  underline  that  the 
meetings held broadly confirmed the conclusions provided in our last monetary policy report 
and the Bank of Albania’s outlook regarding its future performance.  
In what follows I will provide a brief overview of our opinions, dwelling upon the key topics of 
discussion: current and expected economic developments; risks and related concerns, and; 
the appropriate macroeconomic policy response.  
The  Albanian  economy  had  a  positive  performance  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2010, 
expressed in positive growth rates and improved key parameters of macroeconomic stability. 
In turn, the recovery has been reflected in contained and downward inflation rates, improved 
current account deficit, lower budget deficit and relative sustainability of public debt figures. 
These developments contributed to fully restoring confidence in the banking system, lowering 
the  interest  rates  and  the  risk  premiums,  enhancing  the  exchange  rate  sustainability  and 
improving  the  liquidity  and  financial  sector’s  balance  sheet  indicators.  The  analysis  of 
economic growth factors suggests that foreign demand for Albanian products and services 
provided the major contribution, while domestic demand remains dampened and continues to 
suffer the heightened uncertainty about the future outlook and the tighter lending conditions. 
Monetary and fiscal policies have been prudent aiming at creating appropriate conditions for 
a  stable  economic  development.  In  practical  terms,  this  has  materialized  in  greater 
orientation of fiscal policy towards the preservation of long-term public debt sustainability. In 
the meantime, monetary policy has been more stimulating.  
As  I  noted  in  the  presentation  of  conclusions  on  the  quarterly  monetary  policy  report,  this 
performance is expected to persist in the coming period as well. Macroeconomic stability and 
the  improved  banking  system’s  balance  sheets  have  created  the  proper  preconditions  for 
inducing consumption and investment in economy further.  
However,  it  has  to  be  acknowledged  that  several  important  challenges  lie  ahead  for  the 
country’s  development.  In  the  short  run,  the  correction  of  fiscal  behaviour  requires  greater 
private sector’s contribution to economic growth. This implies a more realistic consumer and 
business  behaviour  in  their  consumption  and  investment-related  decisions,  and  greater 
financial  support  from  the  banking  system.  This  need  becomes  even  more  critical 
considering the expected performance of foreign demand. The positive tendency of Albanian 
exports is expected to persist in 2011, but their contribution to economic growth will be more 
moderate.  This  performance  will  call  for  the  generation  of  domestic  forms  of  aggregate 
demand,  along  the  same  lines  as  described  above.  In  the  long  run,  the  persistence  of 
structural reforms remains a priority for stimulating the economic growth rates.  
The Bank of Albania has constantly called for the restructuring of the Albanian economy and 
the need for a new economic growth model. It should be an export-oriented growth model 
and it should create a more favourable environment for promoting foreign direct investment 
BIS Review 175/2010 
 1
at  home.  Increasing  economic  growth  potential  is,  among  others,  a  necessity  against  a 
background of steady employment growth and lower unemployment figures.  
The Bank of Albania has been consistent and transparent about the targeted macroeconomic 
policy approach. We have requested and welcomed the re-orientation of fiscal policy towards 
bringing the budget deficit down and keeping the public debt level in check. The successful 
borrowing via the issuance of Eurobond is a positive signal for the Albanian economy and it 
will help finance public sector’s activity with foreign currency in the short-run. On the other 
hand, the quotation of the Albanian sovereign debt in the international markets will require 
greater  commitment  in  order  to  maintain  appropriate  parameters  of  fiscal  sustainability. 
Pursuing these principles in 2011 budget and in the medium-term public finance framework 
would be the first right step in this regard.  
Keeping  inflation  under  control  will  continue  to  guide  our  monetary  policy  judgment  and 
decision-making on interest rates and the liquidity conditions in economy. Without prejudice 
to  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability,  we  have  been  and  remain  firmly  committed  to 
providing  the  possible  monetary  stimulus  to  bolster  economic  growth.  Lastly,  we  are 
scrutinizing  the  options  of  supporting  this  goal  with  prudent  regulatory  measures  to  be 
adopted in full concordance with financial stability at home.  
2 
 BIS Review 175/2010
