Stanley Fischer: Lessons from the crisis 
Address by Mr Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the annual conference of 
the Association of Banks in Israel, Tel Aviv, 30 November 2010. 
 The Governor of the Bank of Israel delivered remarks today at the annual conference of the 
Association of Banks in Israel in Tel Aviv. An abstract of his address follows: 
I would like to congratulate the banking system for having returned to profitability and growth 
and  for  posting  outstanding  balance  sheets  by  international  standards.  This  is  immensely 
important not only for the banking system but for the Israeli economy at large. 
The  global  economy  appears  to  have  weathered  the  worst  of  the  crisis,  but  the  economic 
world in which we live remains very complicated because different countries are recovering 
from  the  crisis  at  different  speeds.  The  United  States,  and  a  fortiori  several  European 
countries,  are  still  finding  it  difficult to  rebound  and  grow,  whereas  many  countries  in  Asia 
and Latin America are growing at handsome rates. Let us not forget that the decoupling that 
we see today was not visible when the crisis began. In the first months, we saw the collapse 
of  trade  in  many  countries,  affecting  the  entire  global  economy.  Today,  however,  we  do 
observe this decoupling as countries in the West, of all places – the destinations of most of 
Israel’s exports – have encountered difficulties. 
The Bank of Israel began writing a document describing how the crisis was confronted and 
how  its  lessons  were  learned,  and  next  year  the  Bank  will  be  organizing  an  international 
conference of central banks on the lessons of the crisis. The main lesson – as we see clearly 
today and has long been clear – is that the countries most affected by the crisis are those in 
which the crisis was not only macroeconomic but also financial – the United Sates, Ireland, 
and Iceland, to name only three. Countries that sustained no crisis in their financial systems 
recovered relatively quickly; Israel and many countries in eastern Asia fall into this group. As 
stated,  however,  the  global  environment  remains  complicated  and  we  must  beware  of 
complacency. 
Another  lesson  relates  to  the  origin  of  a  very  large  number  of  financial  crises  in  the  real-
estate  industry.  The  United  States  is  a  conspicuous  example  of  this,  of  course.  Another 
example is Ireland, which conducted an excellent economic policy except for one thing – its 
policymakers did not apply adequate supervision to their banking system and, among other 
things,  the  effect  of  the  real-estate  market  on  it.  By  implication,  financial  supervision 
generally,  and  Israel’s  banking  supervision  particularly,  must  remain  vigilant  in  supervising 
the banking system generally and the mortgage-lending industry specifically. The structure of 
Israel’s mortgage-lending market is different today than it had once been, and it is important 
to understand the risks that exist today, address them, and avoid complacency arising from 
the thought that this market was once considered especially stable. 
The Bank of Israel is duty-bound by law to maintain financial stability in the economy at large. 
In  this  context,  the  concept  of  macroprudential  supervision  –  supervision  of  stability  at  the 
macro level – has been mentioned recently. This concept means that even if the situation in 
any particular market or financial institution may look good, systemic problems that endanger 
overall stability may exist. In the U.S., for example, people thought that the subprime market 
was relatively small and that Lehman Brothers’ balance sheet was not especially big. Both of 
them, however – the subprime market and Lehman Brothers – ultimately dealt the system a 
very grave blow when they collapsed. 
The  Bank  of  Israel  has  already  taken  macroprudential  steps  in  regard  to  the  real-estate 
market and the Government has taken measures that should increase housing supply. At the 
moment,  there  are  indications  –  no  more  than  indications  –  that  the  housing  market  is 
leveling off. Current data from various sources are painting contrasting tableaux; we need to 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 1
wait for the situation to become clear. If we find that real-estate prices are continuing to rise 
rapidly, we will have to take additional measures. We are also concerned about the growing 
use of nonbank credit to finance property investments in Eastern Europe. Complacency, as 
stated, is highly dangerous in this context. Even if no financial institution has collapsed in the 
current  crisis  in  Israel,  we  should  remember  that  it  was  a  damn  close  run  thin.  We  were 
forced,  for  example,  to  unfurl  a  safety  net  for  the  pension  funds  during  the  crisis,  some 
domestic corporate bonds had to the reorganized, and so on. 
One  cannot  rely  on  the  regulators  only.  The  key  to  a  safe  banking  system  is  risk 
management at every bank and every financial institution individually. We need to remember 
that bad loans are issued in good times. 
An  important  part  of  learning  the  lessons  from  the  crisis  takes  place  at  the  international 
institutions. The center of gravity in the global economy is shifting from west to east and this 
finds expression at the international agencies as well. These entities engaged, for example, 
in  developing  systematic  bankruptcy  mechanisms  for  insolvent  banks,  mechanisms  for  the 
approval of senior executives’ remuneration, etc. 
I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  outgoing  Supervisor  of  Banks,  Mr.  Rony  Hizkiyahu,  for  his 
excellent  work  in  coping  with  crises.  He  is  leaving  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  in 
much better condition than he had found it. We thank Rony for his important contribution to 
Israel’s  financial  system  and  economy.  Much  work  awaits  his  successor,  David  Zaken. 
David, you will have to continue the processes that Rony began and then continue to plot the 
course in your own way. You have the personal credentials to succeed in the very difficult 
and important task that you have taken upon yourself. I wish you success. 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2010
