Norman T L Chan: Hong Kong’s role in China’s reform and opening 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
4th  Annual  China  Bankers  Forum  2010:  “Global  banking  –  restructuring  and  reform”, 
Shanghai, 17 September 2010. 
 I am very pleased to be invited to attend the Annual China Bankers Forum 2010 today. 
The  concepts  of  economic  globalisation  and  financial  globalisation  have  been  around  for 
decades. Yet, without the reform and opening up of China in the last 30 years and the rapid 
development  of  China’s  economy  which  forms  a  major  part  of  the  global  economy, 
globalisation would merely be a concept without important implications. Nowadays, the scale 
of the economy of China has exceeded US$5 trillion and China has surpassed Japan as the 
world’s second largest economy. However, when the reform and opening up policies were 
initiated in 1979, how many of us could ever forecast that China would be able to develop 
from a poor country to its current state? In 1979, the GDP of China was US$260 billion, with 
per-capita income of US$270; many of the daily consumables were in  significant shortage 
and had to be allocated by the rationing system. At present, per-capita income of China is 
US$3,700, which is 14 times the level in 1979; and per-capita income in large cities, such as 
Shanghai, Shenzhen and Beijing, even reaches as high as US$10,000. China can now be 
regarded as having entered a “moderately affluent” stage. 
Some  said  that  the  development  in  the  last  three  decades  was  a  miracle  and  was  almost 
incredible. Instead, I would describe it as a “world-shaking” development. Having encountered 
enormous difficulties and challenges at every single stage of reform and opening up, China, 
as the country with largest population in the world, managed to carry out an unprecedented 
transformation from a planned economy to a market economy. As there was no precedent to 
learn from, China could only rely on its own efforts and took one step at a time. 
Hong Kong has played an extremely important and irreplaceable role during the process of 
China’s reform and opening up. At the initial stage of opening up, China focused on attracting 
foreign investors to set up manufacturing factories. Hong Kong manufacturers were the first 
to  move  their  operations  to  Mainland  China.  In  the  past 30  years,  Hong  Kong  has  always 
been the largest source of direct investment in the Mainland. In 2009, Hong Kong invested 
US$46 billion in China, accounting for one half of the total foreign investment in the country. 
In  the  course  of  investing  in  China,  not  only  has  Hong  Kong  injected  capital  but,  more 
importantly, it has introduced skills in production and management. In the past decade, the 
Mainland  projects  in  which  Hong  Kong  invested  have  gone  through  some  significant 
changes.  The  focus  has  been  shifted  from  investment  in  the  manufacturing  industry  to  a 
range of diversified and multi-dimensional investments that include investment in all kinds of 
service industries. With regard to trades, Hong Kong continues to serve as the major channel 
for  the  rest  of  the  world  to  access  Mainland  China.  Notwithstanding  the  decrease  in  the 
proportion  of  China’s  exports  of  goods  going  through  Hong  Kong,  our  role  as  the 
intermediate  hub  for  trading  has  never  been  diminished.  Nowadays,  the  offshore  trade 
conducted through Hong Kong and the re-export trade of Hong Kong still accounts for 30% 
of China’s total trade volume. 
And what kind of role has Hong Kong been playing in the reform and modernisation of the 
banking  system  in  China?  Can  you  recall  the  difficult  times  in  the  1990s?  In  1994,  China 
implemented  the  significant  reform  of  the  exchange  rate  system  and  introduced  the 
unification of the official and swap exchange rates. At the same time, transformation of state-
owned banks into commercial banks started. Due to various reasons related to the history 
and the system of Mainland banks, the bad debt ratio of the banking system was very high. 
The International Monetary Fund once estimated that the total bad debt in China’s banking 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 1
system reached RMB2.3 trillion, accounting for 23% of the total loans of the banking system 
and 19% of the GDP. At that time, many people were not optimistic about the prospect of 
China  because  they  thought  the  reform  of  the  banking  system  would  unlikely  be  able  to 
succeed. If the reform failed, not only would economic growth slow down, the entire system 
of reform and opening up may also collapse. Nonetheless, China managed to stand firm and 
implemented the system reform step by step. The critical stages of the reform included the 
transformation of the top four state-owned banks into joint-stock commercial banks and the 
subsequent listing of these banks to raise and replenish capital and to elevate the reform of 
governance,  accountability,  risk  management,  staff  employment  and  transparency  of  the 
banks to a new height. It was not at all easy to overcome such a hurdle. In 2005 and 2006, 
the Bank of China, the China Construction Bank and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of 
China were successfully listed in Hong Kong, raising a total share capital of US$36 billion. 
During this period, the stock markets in the Mainland witnessed a relatively difficult time. The 
listing of domestic enterprises was subject to more restrictions. And at this critical moment, 
Hong Kong fulfilled this historical mission for our nation by playing an irreplaceable role in 
and  making  significant  contribution  to  the  reform  of  the  banking  system  in  China.  We  can 
imagine that, should the listing of the Bank of China, the China Construction Bank and the 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China be delayed, no one knows to what extent would the 
progress of the reform of China’s banking system be affected with the outbreak of the global 
economic  crisis  in  2008.  In  July  this  year,  the  Agricultural  Bank  of  China  was  also 
successfully  listed  in  Shanghai  and  Hong  Kong  simultaneously.  Although  the  market 
sentiment  had  turned  cautious,  the  Agricultural  Bank  successfully  raised  US$12  billion  in 
Hong  Kong.  The  total  proceeds  raised  from  the  offering  of  its  A  and  H  shares  exceeded 
those of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, making it the world’s largest IPO. In 
the  past  20  years,  the  Hong  Kong  stock  market  has  raised  over  US$300  billion  for 
enterprises on the Mainland.  
The reform and modernisation of the financial system in China is an important cornerstone 
for the continuous, rapid and stable economic development of our nation. The reform of the 
financial  system  involves  the  gradual  relaxation  of  restrictions  on  capital  accounts,  the 
gradual move towards free convertibility of RMB and the adoption of the same practices by 
the Mainland and international capital markets. However, moving too fast or moving in the 
wrong  direction  in  the  course  of  reform  may  bring  high  risk  and  great  damage  to  China. 
Therefore, China has to implement the reform gradually and take one step at a time. In the 
future reform of the financial system of China, Hong Kong will shoulder important missions in 
a number of aspects.  
First, Hong Kong banks that establish branches in the Mainland and invest in the financial 
institutions  in  the  Mainland  will  not  only  bring  in  capital  but  also  transfer  the  advanced 
management  skills  and  experience  of  Hong  Kong,  which  are  conducive  to  enhancing  the 
awareness and standard of governance and risk management of banks in China. In addition, 
Hong  Kong  will  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  the  regulatory  standard  of  Mainland 
financial institutions through regulatory co-operation, technological exchanges and staff visits 
between the regulatory bodies in Hong Kong and on the Mainland. 
Secondly,  with  the  expansion  and  diversification  of  international  trade  and  investment 
activities  in  China,  Mainland  financial  institutions  (particularly  banks)  have  to  expand  and 
engage in cross-border and overseas businesses. However, banks on the Mainland have to 
be  cautious  when  “going  global”  because  the  operating  environment,  legal  and  regulatory 
requirements and staff employment system of the Mainland market are very much different 
from those of the overseas markets. Therefore, Hong Kong acts as a suitable “window” or 
“springboard”. Many Mainland banks, such as the Bank of China, have a long history in Hong 
Kong and have accumulated much operating experience. These banks are generally trusted 
and welcomed by the Hong Kong people due to their pragmatic ways of doing business. In 
1996,  the  total  asset  of Mainland  banks  in  Hong  Kong  was HK$870  billion,  accounting  for 
11% of the total assets of banks in Hong Kong. In 2009, the total asset of Mainland banks in 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2010
Hong  Kong  increased  to  HK$2  trillion,  accounting  for  19%  of  the  total  assets  of  banks  in 
Hong Kong. More and more Mainland banks plan to expand their business or establish their 
branches in Hong Kong as they recognise that there is no other place like Hong Kong that 
offers  a  suitable  and  world-class  operating,  regulatory,  legal  and  professional  environment 
and serves as the springboard and bridge for Mainland banks and financial institutions to “go 
global”.  This  is  also  why  the  majority  of  overseas  direct  investment  from  China  is  made 
through Hong Kong. In the past decade, overseas direct investment from China has been on 
the rise and reached US$56 billion in 2008, of which 70% was invested in Hong Kong or in 
other countries through Hong Kong.  
Thirdly, Hong Kong may play a role in promoting RMB as an international currency as well as 
in  promoting  the  circulation  of  RMB  outside  the  Mainland.  Since  there  have  been  many 
discussions  and  coverage  of  this  topic  recently,  I  am  not  going  to  elaborate  here. 
Nevertheless I would like to emphasise that Hong Kong is an international financial centre 
and with the implementation of the “one country two system” policy, Hong Kong is closely 
linked  to  the  Mainland  in  history,  culture,  and  the  flow  of  people,  goods,  capital  and 
information, distinguishing us from all other places outside China. Hong Kong also enjoys the 
advantage  of  being  a  “first  mover”.  We  began to  develop personal  RMB  business  in  2004 
and  started  to  develop  RMB  bond  market  in  2007.  During  this  period,  Hong  Kong  has 
established a highly efficient and secure RMB  settlement platform and  payment system. It 
explains  why  the  offshore  RMB  business  in  Hong  Kong  has  grown  by  leaps  and  bounds 
within just a year after the introduction of the cross-border RMB trade settlement in July last 
year.  RMB  services  for  all  types  of  enterprises  as  well  as  personal  financial  and  wealth 
management  RMB  products,  including  insurances,  investment  products  and  funds,  have 
been launched one after another and have been welcomed by the public and investors. Hong 
Kong can play a part in expanding and deepening RMB offshore business by serving as the 
“window”, “testing ground” and “firewall” for RMB’s internationalisation and make important 
contribution  to  the  gradual  relaxation  of  restrictions  on  capital  accounts  in  China  and  the 
gradual move towards free convertibility of RMB.  
I would like to emphasise that China has made remarkable achievements with its reform and 
opening  up  in  the  past  30  years  and  Hong  Kong  has  made  major  and  irreplaceable 
contributions in numerous aspects in the process. After we have reviewed the past, we will 
have  to  look  forward  to  the  future.  I  believe  that  under  the  principle  of  “one  country  two 
system”, Hong Kong will continue to contribute to the continuous development of China, the 
modernisation of its financial system, and its linking to the international markets, helping to 
develop China as a fully “moderately affluent” community. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 3
