 David Miles: Leverage and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Miles,  Member  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  at  The  Economic  and  Social  Research  Institute/Foundation  for  Fiscal  Studies 
(ESRI/FFS) conference, Dublin, 12 October 2010. 
 I would like to thank Jing Yang and Gilberto Marcheggiano for research assistance and to colleagues at the Bank 
of England for helpful comments. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other 
members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
You do not need me to stand here in Dublin this morning and tell you what profoundly difficult 
economic times we are going through. As an elderly New York friend of mine enquired of me 
recently when I offered such a thought “for such pearls we need economists?” I feebly replied 
that  knowing  how  much  of  a  mess  you  were  in  was  of  some  use  and  (with  rather  more 
confidence) that thinking how you get out of the mess was something economics could help 
with. Today I want to talk about setting monetary policy as we emerge from one mess and 
how we can reduce the chances of getting into another one. I am going to focus on the UK 
but I think much of what I say has relevance here in Ireland and beyond. 
That it has been a very bad mess is clear. From the onset of the financial crisis that started 
towards the end of 2007 real output in the UK has fallen about 10% relative to the upward 
path it might have been expected to follow. In Ireland the fall in economic activity has been 
greater: the level of output is about 13% lower than at the end of 2007; if one had expected 
growth of 3% a year – significantly lower than the average in the preceding 10 years – output 
is now more than 20% below where it seemed likely to be. 
I want to ask two questions about monetary policy prompted by the financial crisis and the 
resultant recession. First, should we fundamentally re-think the inflation targeting framework 
for monetary policy? Is the focus on a target for consumer price inflation flawed? This is a 
long-term issue. 
There is a second, in some ways more immediate, question. How should monetary policy be 
set now in what I hope it is not too optimistic to call the aftermath of the financial mess? In 
considering that issue I will be talking specifically about the UK, as befits a member of the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at the Bank of England. 
I want to start with the longer-term issue of the appropriate goals of monetary policy. 
The goals of monetary policy 
If one looks at the 10 years leading up to the onset of the crisis – which were also the first ten 
years of the Bank’s MPC – the outcomes for inflation and for aggregate economic growth in 
the UK were good. Inflation was – by historical standards – very low, very stable and close to 
the  target.  That  had  not  been  achieved  at  the  expense  of  unusually  low  growth  or  high 
unemployment.  In  Ireland  growth  had  been  much  stronger  and  inflation  a  bit  higher.  The 
aggregate  outcomes  looked  good  in  both  countries  (Charts  1–4).  In  the  UK  there  was  a 
strong  consensus  that  having  monetary  policy  directed  at  hitting  an  inflation  target  was 
sensible and that it had been successfully implemented. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 1
   
But  if  you  now  view  the  mess  that  we  are  dealing  with  after  the  financial  crisis  as 
substantially reflecting monetary policy decisions, you would take a completely different view 
of how well policy had been run. 
The charge is that policy in the UK was inappropriate given the huge build-up in many asset 
prices,  and  particularly  in  debt,  or  leverage.  The  fact  that  monetary  policy  could  be  very 
successful in terms of hitting an inflation target – and in the UK it was1 – but not prevent a 
very serious financial crisis, and one that has been followed by much more variable inflation, 
is taken by many as a clear demonstration that the inflation-targeting framework is flawed. 
Monetary policy, the argument goes, must be directed at a wider set of goals than controlling 
consumer price inflation – a set of goals that includes the preservation of financial stability. 
Those who advocate using monetary policy to help preserve financial stability usually argue 
that preventing, or at least countering, asset price booms is the most effective means to that 
end. For a clear statement of this view see, for example, Wadhwani (2010). 
I want to make three points about this argument. First, that not all episodes of rapid asset 
price inflation – followed by substantial price falls – are disruptive to the wider economy. But 
when  big  asset  price  rises  are  accompanied  by  very  sharp  increases  in  debt  they  very 
frequently are followed by bad economic outcomes. Second, that monetary policy is not the 
most  effective  tool  to  prevent  rapid  and  simultaneous  build-ups  in  both  debt  and  in  asset 
prices. Third, that a much more direct and effective tool to counter a potentially dangerous 
                                                 
1  
Inflation in the ten years from 1997 to 2007 never moved more than 1% from the Bank of England’s inflation 
target. 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 build-up in debt is limits on the debt-to-asset ratios of financial institutions – that is limits to 
leverage, or capital requirements. 
Let me try to justify these three claims. 
Reinhart  and  Reinhart  (2010)  document  the  facts  around  the  most  serious  economic 
dislocations  in  modern  economic  history.  They  show  that  big  dislocations  are  almost 
invariably  preceded  by  large  increases  in  the  amount  of  debt  in  the  economy.  It  is  the 
combination of very substantial rises in asset prices and in debt that has often proved toxic. 
Sharp  rises,  and  subsequent  falls,  in  asset  prices  which  have  not  been  preceded  (and 
fuelled)  by  large  rises  in  debt  have  been  less  disruptive.  The  contrast  between  the  fallout 
from the sharp falls in equity prices in the early 2000s and the fallout from declining asset 
prices – most notably US house prices – at the end of the decade is revealing. The run-up in 
stock  prices  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  (“the  dot.com  bubble”)  was  an  equity  market 
phenomenon  and  the  investment  activity  it  fuelled  and  reflected  was  equity  financed.  The 
American stock market lost nearly half of its value between March 2000 and July 2002. The 
fall in asset values wiped out a great deal of the financial wealth of holders of equity, but it 
did  not  bankrupt  large  financial  institutions  and  the  knock-on  effect  on  the  wider  economy 
was  limited.  In  contrast,  the  falls  in  asset  values  that  became  serious  in  2007  have  been 
followed by financial crises and recessions that have been exceptionally severe in countries 
where the build-up in debt had been great. The easing of monetary policy in the wake of the 
recent financial crises has been greater than in the wake of the equity crash of 2001 – both in 
the US and elsewhere. But the economic outcomes have been dramatically worse.  
A  key  difference  here  is  that  property  price  rises  –  unlike  big  rises  in  equity  prices  –  are 
invariably accompanied by big increases in debt. So when property prices fall they are more 
likely  to  create  solvency  problems  –  and  funding  problems  associated  with  heightened 
solvency risks – than when equity prices fall. My colleague Adam Posen recently presented 
evidence that big falls in equity prices in themselves generally do much less damage than big 
falls  in  house  prices.  He  found  that  the  average  output  loss  after  real  estate  booms 
cumulates to over 5% of GDP over five years, and in 75% of cases at least 2% of output is 
lost. For equity price booms and busts, there is no output loss on average over five years, 
and following them only 25% of economies experience a loss of more than 4% (Posen 2009).  
What  has  happened  to  the  hedge  fund  sector  during  this  crisis  is  also  illuminating.  In 
Q4 2007,  total  assets  held  by  hedge  funds  were  around  $5500bn,  and  aggregate  equity 
capital  (or  what  the  industry  refers  to  as  assets  under  management,  AUM)  was  around 
$2000bn. This implies that the hedge fund sector had an average leverage of around 2.8, 
compared to typical banking sector leverage ratios at that time of 30 or more. By Q1 2009, 
the hedge fund sector had experienced trading losses of around $1000bn amounting to one 
fifth  of  their  total  assets  (He,  Khang  and  Krishnamurthy,  2010),  a  scale  that  would  have 
wiped out almost all banks given their leverage. Yet many hedge funds have survived. And 
none has been bailed out with taxpayers’ money. Because hedge funds have so much lower 
gearing, or leverage, than banks they have been able to absorb much bigger falls in asset 
values.  Close  to  3,000 hedge  funds  have  closed,  that  is  liquidated,  since  mid-20072  –  but 
they have done so with a quiet whimper rather than with an alarming bang. 
Falls in the value of assets that hit the wealth of institutions – but not their existence – do 
much less damage than falls that wipe out firms and cause bankruptcy. So sharp asset price 
variability,  per  se,  is  not  the  most  serious  problem.  It  is  the  combination  of  (and  the 
interrelation  between)  high  debt  –  or  leverage  –  and  variability  in  asset  prices  that  is 
problematic.  
                                                 
2  
“Global Hedge Fund Industry Report”, Hedge Fund research Inc, Q2 2010. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 3
 I  believe  that  an  important  way  to  help  preserve  financial  stability  is  to  have  policy 
instruments  directed  at  debt  gearing  (or  leverage)  and  to  be  used  in  the  light  of  what  has 
happened to asset values. The aim would be to avoid a situation where gearing has gone up 
a lot alongside asset values so that subsequent falls in those values threaten the solvency of 
institutions and of individuals. But I believe it is unlikely that monetary policy – which most of 
the time means variations in the short-term nominal interest rate – is the most natural tool to 
use to achieve this. 
The reason is that – even when we set aside the issues about how effective interest rates 
can  be  in  controlling  asset  prices  and  what  effect  on  consumer  price  inflation  and  activity 
their use for that end would be – monetary policy tools are likely to be pretty poor at affecting 
gearing and leverage. And the main reason for this is that changes in the level of interest 
rates do not obviously alter incentives to use debt relative to equity. It is likely that factors 
other than the level of interest rates most influence the relative attractions of debt and equity: 
risk  premia,  the  tax  code,  regulations  (most  obviously  rules  on  maximum  gearing).  Higher 
interest rates will mean that the return that needs to be promised by the issuer, and expected 
by the provider of funds, needs to be higher. That will affect the cost of funds in general; it is 
not so clear how – if at all – it affects the relative cost of debt finance to non-debt finance. 
Indeed it is possible that the attractiveness to those seeking funds of debt relative to equity is 
greater  at  higher  interest  rates.  This  is  because  interest  payments  are  tax  deductible 
whereas dividends are not. The scale of that subsidy to debt gets bigger as debt payments 
rise, which will happen as interest rates rise. 
A more formal version of this story goes like this: Suppose that nominal interest payments by 
issuers  of  debt,  paying  an  interest  rate  r,  are  deductible  against  corporation  tax  (levied  at 
rate tc)  but  that  returns  on  equity  paid  by  issuers  have  to  come  from  post-tax  income. 
Assume  that  all  nominal  returns  received  by  holders  of  debt  and  equity  are  taxed  at  a 
common  rate  –  a  single  rate  that  is  charged  on  interest  received,  dividends  and  nominal 
capital gains. Because all receipts of income from financial claims are taxed at the same rate 
then  the  payments  that  need  to  be  made  by  companies  on  debt  and  equity  would,  on 
average, need to be the same (because we ignore risk considerations). But companies can 
deduct  interest  payments  against  tax  which  means  that  the  cost  advantage  of  debt  over 
equity to the company is measured by the nominal interest rate multiplied by the corporate 
tax rate – r x tc. This is increasing in the nominal interest rate. In this case, all else equal, the 
tax consideration is likely to lead to an increase in leverage when the nominal interest rate is 
higher.  
This is not meant to be a realistic model – in fact it isn’t even a model, it is simply a set of 
stark  assumptions.  But  it  illustrates  why  using  interest  rates  to  try  to  control  leverage  –  at 
least for companies – may not be at all effective. And I believe that high leverage has been at 
the centre of the financial problems of recent years. 
Bean et al (2010) provide some evidence on the impact of monetary policy – that is interest 
rates – on credit and asset prices. They find that monetary policy has some effect on asset 
price inflation, but little on bank lending. For example, in a counter-factual experiment using 
vector  auto-regressions,  they  estimate  that  for  the  US  if  policy  rates  had  started  rising  in 
2003 and peaked at around 7.5% in late 2006, then the peak of the real house prices would 
have been around 7.5% lower; real credit growth would have been just 3% lower by the end 
of 2006. For the United Kingdom, if Bank Rate would have been around 7% from the end of 
2004 to mid-2007, real house prices would have been around a fifth lower at the end of 2006, 
while the stock of real credit would have been only 4% lower, trivial compared to the almost 
50% increase in the stock of credit seen over the period. 
Leverage and financial stability 
The  fundamental  problem  in  the  financial  crisis  was  that  the  ability  of  many  highly-geared 
financial institutions to withstand substantial – but by no means unprecedented – falls in the 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 value of their assets was rightly perceived to be low. Much of the debt of the highly leveraged 
institutions  was  wholesale  funding  –  some  of  which  proved  footloose  when  there  was 
increased concern about asset values. It was reasonable to have concerns over the strength 
of banks because leverage was so high. Between 2005 and 2007 major UK banks – which 
were  by  no  means  the  most  highly  geared  –  had  leverage  ratios  that  averaged  slightly 
above 30. The highest ratios – and this was for major banks – were close to 60 (Chart 5–6). 
By leverage I mean total bank assets (netted for derivatives and minus cash at the central 
banks  and  goodwill)  relative  to  shareholder  equity  (also  net  of  goodwill  and  excluding 
minority interest). So true equity capital was often barely 2% of total assets. 
 
  
The vulnerability that high gearing brought to financial institutions meant that even relatively 
modest  falls  in  asset  values  triggered  concerns  about  solvency  that  in  turn  led  to  funding 
problems that threatened to be – and in some cases became – self-fulfilling as sources of 
funding  dried  up  and  some  assets  needed  to  be  sold  because  they  could  no  longer  be 
financed. It has not been the declines in asset values in the recent financial crisis that have 
been unprecedented (charts 7–14) – it is the scale of bank leverage and financial problems 
in the banking sector. Equity prices fell by up to 35% in the UK and 45% in the US during the 
current financial crisis. During the previous century both countries had experienced similar 
falls, at least four and three times respectively. Investment grade corporate bond yields in the 
UK and US rose by over 300bps in the twelve months to October 2008; both countries had 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 5
 experienced at least three similar episodes within the last hundred years. Falls in residential 
property  prices  in  the  UK  have  not  been  exceptional  –  though  the  falls  in  commercial 
property values have been, as have declines in US house prices. 
 
  6 
 BIS Review 133/2010
  
At the risk of over-simplifying – I would say that declines in asset values leading up to (and 
during)  the  financial  crisis  have  generally  been  on  the  scale  of  a  once-in-every-25-year 
event; but the financial mess has been (at least) on a once-every-century scale. Had gearing 
of financial institutions – and specifically of banks – not been so high (Chart 15) the strains 
that falls in asset value brought would surely have been substantially lower, as would have 
been the falls in asset values themselves. 
 BIS Review 133/2010 
 7
   
A bad equilibrium path for the financial sector – or in more everyday language a vicious cycle – 
is much more likely to exist in a world where financial firms that hold large amounts of risky 
assets, such as banks, have small equity cushions. The smaller bank capital is the greater will 
be  the  concern  over  bank  solvency  from  a  given  fall  in  the  value  of  bank  assets.  That  can 
trigger a drying up in funding for banks causing a sale of some bank assets that drives their 
values lower, exacerbating the concerns about the ability of banks to survive. There need be 
nothing  irrational  about  this  process.  Indeed,  there  are  many  examples  of  bad,  but  rational, 
equilibrium paths that markets – and whole economies – can follow.  
The  idea  that  this  is  news  to  economists  who  use  formal  models  expressed  in  maths  is 
completely wrong-headed. Yet there is a current view that economists who use mathematical 
models  to  analyse  outcomes  where  people  behave  rationally  are  always  led  to  the 
Panglossian  conclusion  that  things  will  work  out  just  fine.  It  would  come  as  a  surprise  to 
those who hold this view that two of the most famous economic articles in the last forty years 
which are routinely taught to economics undergraduates – by George Akerlof (1970) and by 
Diamond  and  Dybvig  (1983)  –  draw  entirely  non-Panglossian  conclusions  from  formal 
(mathematically expressed) models of collective rational behaviour. 
I was struck by a trivial example of where a bad equilibrium path can lead on a recent visit to 
the US. I opened the mini bar in my hotel room to find it empty save for a small slip of paper. 
Here is what it said: 
“A personal note to you.... 
We have made a renewing change to our heavenly guest rooms.  
Our refreshment centers will no longer be pre-stocked. 
Please be aware the refreshment center cooler is not intended as a refrigeration device” 
The empty-mini-bar equilibrium is not a good one. How do you get there? I think the story is 
this: mini-bar prices are high; they are high because some people conveniently tend to forget 
how  much  they  may  have  used  their  mini-bar  when  they  come  to  pay  the  bill  and  that 
forgetfulness gets worse the higher are prices; but then the mini bar prices need to be even 
higher as the forgetfulness seems to get worse. This vicious cycle ends up with mini bars 
that are empty save for a “personal note to you”. 
Good economic policies can help prevent bad equilibria and reduce the chances of vicious 
circles. For banks, I believe the most direct way to do this is to prevent an initial (limited) fall 
in the value of assets triggering sharply higher concerns about their solvency. It seems to me 
8 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 2.  
the natural way to do that is to make sure they can withstand falls in asset values by having 
sufficient  loss-absorbing  capital  rather  than  to  expect  monetary  policy  –  moves  in  interest 
rates – to substantially reduce asset price variability, much of which might be warranted. The 
short-term  nominal  interest  rate  is  a  very  blunt  instrument  to  use  to  try  to  limit  gearing  of 
financial  institutions.  Capital  requirements,  and  explicit  limits  on  gearing,  are  more  direct 
means to control leverage. 
This is why I think the direction of the policy emerging from the Basel III process – which will 
put in place higher capital requirements on banks – is right. It is also why time-varying limits 
on gearing of financial firms – limits that might vary with asset prices and with the economic 
cycle – are likely to be useful in helping maintain financial stability.  
I  believe  that  is  a  much  more  fruitful  way  forward  than  abandoning  inflation  targeting.  But 
while I think this is plausible, the case is not proved. Simply because they are a more direct 
means to control leverage does not prove that capital requirements or limits to gearing are a 
far  more  effective  tool  to  preserve  financial  stability  than  changing  interest  rates.  Indeed 
there are at least two situations where the use of capital controls and limits on gearing might 
not be a very effective means of maintaining financial stability, namely if either:  
1.  
the  link  between  an  institution’s  leverage  and  its  robustness  to  real  (or  imagined) 
risks to the value of its assets were very weak.....OR... 
there were great sensitivity of the overall cost of funding to changes in equity capital – 
so that requiring an institution to hold much more capital came at a very high price.  
If  either  of  these  things  were  true  it  would  strengthen  the  case  for  using  monetary  policy 
directly to help preserve financial stability. But I think there is strong evidence that neither of 
these things are very likely. 
The only reason why a financial firm’s leverage (the ratio of assets to equity capital) would be 
irrelevant to robustness is if that equity were not truly loss-absorbing or if it was already so 
large relative to assets that the chances of losses being that great becomes virtually zero. 
But  in  fact  bank  equity  capital  that  is  truly  loss  absorbing  has  been  10%  or  less  for  most 
banks, and generally a great deal less. That is certainly not so high that chances of losses 
this  big  are  of  negligible  probability.  Value-at-Risk  (VAR)  models  might  have  suggested 
otherwise.  But  those  models  have  weaknesses  that  reflect  the  difficulty  of  accurately 
assessing risks. 
Assessing the probabilities of losses on bank assets is not easy. Many bank assets are not 
marketable – or only became so a few years before the crisis. And where prices do exist, 
using  their  recent  volatility  and  assuming  price  changes  follow  a  normal  distribution  is 
unlikely to be reliable. Yet that is what most VAR models do (or at least did).  
We do have long runs of data on total incomes for economies – that is GDP. Since the value 
of  bank  assets  –  most  of  which  are  loans  –  ultimately  depends  upon  the  incomes  of 
households and companies, variability in GDP is at least some guide to variability in their true 
value. Analysing changes in annual GDP for a large sample of countries over long periods 
reveals two characteristics: changes in annual GDP do not follow a normal distribution (they 
have much bigger chances of extreme movements) and the chances of big falls are much 
greater  than  the  chances  of  big  rises  (there  is  clear  downwards  skew).  The  table  below 
shows the proportion of occasions when annual GDP fell by various amounts in one year3. 
The sample is for around 40 (mainly developed) countries and in many cases goes back well 
over 100 years creating a total sample size of annual observations of around 4000.  
                                                 
3   For details see “What should equities and bonds be worth in a risky world”, by David Miles, Vladimir Pillonca 
and Melanie Baker, Morgan Stanley research paper, September 2005. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 9
   
In  thinking  about  variations  in  the  value  of  the  assets  held  by  a  bank  with  a  diversified 
portfolio  of  loans  then  variation  in  real  aggregate  income  is  arguably  a  much  better  guide 
than volatility in particular asset classes (eg property, equities). In some simple asset price 
models the real value of assets which are a claim on a stream of income is proportional to 
aggregate incomes (see, for example, Barro 2006). If we use that as a rough rule of thumb 
the Table suggests that occasions when generalised falls in real asset values might be 5% or 
more  occur  roughly  once  every  15  years.  Falls  in  value  in  excess  of  10%  might  be  about 
once every 40 year events. Declines of 15% or more are once-every-80-year events. This 
suggests that banks would need far more capital than has been usual in recent years to be 
truly robust. 
Why bank capital might not be expensive? 
Of  course  if  having  quite  substantially  more  capital  generated  much  higher  cost  in 
intermediating funds through banks – and there are no close alternatives for bank financing – 
that extra robustness would come at a high price. But calculations undertaken by the Bank of 
England  (2010),  the  BIS  (2010)  and  academics  (Kashyap  2009,  and  Admati  et  al  2010) 
suggest this is not the case. It is worth considering why. 
A natural way to gauge the cost of higher capital requirements on banks is to estimate how 
much lower economic activity – GDP – might be as a result. I want to illustrate the cost of 
higher capital for banks using a very similar method to that used in the studies mentioned 
above. The calculation proceeds in steps. First, estimate how much the average interest rate 
charged by banks would have to increase to recoup any cost of an increase in their equity 
financing relative to use of debt. Then estimate how much a rise in the cost of borrowing from 
banks might change the required rate of return (or cost of capital) of investors. Finally use a 
production  function  to  estimate  the  impact  of  such  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  capital  on 
desired capital and output. We can then express the cost of having banks hold more equity 
capital in terms of the present value of all future falls in output. This is the methodology used 
in the calculations reported in the Bank of England’s 2010 Financial Stability Review (FSR). 
Those calculations were based on conservative assumptions – understandably so, for fear of 
under-estimating  the  cost  to  the  wider  economy  of  imposing  substantially  higher  capital 
requirements on banks. I will start from that FSR baseline estimate of the present value of 
output lost as a result of a 1pp increase in the capital ratio, which is 4.25% of current annual 
GDP.  That  estimate  becomes  very  substantially  smaller  if  we  make  less  conservative 
assumptions  and  allow  for  several  offsetting  impacts  from  banks  holding  more  capital. 
Specifically: 
1.  
Allowing for a partial offset because as a bank holds more equity capital, its equity 
becomes less risky, and therefore requires a lower return. (A Modigliani-Miller effect – 
which  I  will  assume  is  not  zero  but  only  30%  as  big  as  it  would  be  under  perfect 
markets) 
Allowing  for  the  value  to  the  government  of  the  extra  tax  revenue  received  as  a 
result of banks having more equity capital which is less tax sheltered than is debt.  
2.  
10 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 3.  
4.  
Allowing  for  a  somewhat  lower  use  of  bank  funding  for  investment  than  in  the 
baseline. 
Allowing for a lower sensitivity of investment and the capital stock to a rise in the 
cost of funds to non-financial firms. 
Table  2  shows  how  rapidly  the  estimated  long-run  economic  cost  of  requiring  higher  bank 
capital falls as we sequentially allow for each of these offsets. 
 
   
I conclude from this that the long-run costs of having banks hold more capital is likely to be 
small – plausibly it is negligible. If that is so then the benefits of having much more robust 
banks would far exceed its costs. 
If it is right that the benefits of raising capital requirements to much higher levels far outweigh 
their economic cost, how we did we get into a situation that bank capital was so low relative 
to total assets? I think this is because banks and regulators came to believe capital was very 
costly. In particular the Modigliani-Miller (M-M) offset (that equity becomes less risky, and so 
less expensive, as gearing falls) was ignored. A failure to understand the exact details of the 
M-M  theorem  is  of  course  understandable  –  it  is  a  theoretical  result  and  one  which  was 
originally described in an academic article. But it was – and remains – surprising to me that 
the most basic bit of the story – that if a bank has less debt gearing then the volatility of the 
returns on its equity will be lower and that this will have an impact on the required rate of 
return on it – seems to have been largely ignored by many people running banks4. Anyone 
                                                 
4   Merton Miller (1995) makes the essential point  with typical clarity: “And dearly, if a bank  were earning only 
8 percent on average on its loan portfolio, financing that portfolio with 12 percent money wouldn't make a lot of 
sense. But the cost of equity is not a fixed number; it's a function that depends both on the risk of the firm's 
earning  assets  and  the  degree  of  leverage  in  the  firm's  capital  structure. The  12  percent  figure  I  quoted  is 
merely  one  point  on  that  function  reflecting  the  average  business  risk  and  average  leverage  position  of 
American equities. But for any firm with less than average systematic risk and less than average leverage, the 
cost of equity would be lower; and at zero leverage, much lower, perhaps as low as say 6 percent. At that rate, 
even  an  all-equity  bank  with  an  expected  return  on  assets  of  only  8  percent  would  not  only  be  viable,  but 
would presumably sell for a 1.3 premium over book value..... An essential message of the M & M Propositions 
as applied to banking, in sum is that you cannot hope to lever up a sow's ear into a silk purse. You may think 
you can during the good times; but you'll give it all back and more when the bad times roll around...... I can't 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 11
 who says “equity capital is very expensive to a bank” appears not to understand this. It might 
be  fine  for  most  people  not  to  understand  this  –  just  as  it  is  fine  that  most  people  do  not 
understand what tensile strength materials need to have to be suitable to build a bridge with. 
But it is not fine if those that run banks, or regulate them, don’t understand it, any more than 
if engineers who design bridges don’t know about the strengths of building materials. 
In retrospect I believe a huge mistake was made in letting banks come to hold much less 
equity capital – relative to un-weighted assets – than was normal in earlier times. To my mind 
this was because regulators and governments bought completely the view that “equity capital 
is scarce and very expensive” – which in some ways is a proposition remarkable in its total 
incoherence  (as  shown  with  clarity  and  precision  by  Admati,  De  Marzo,  Hellwig  and 
Pfleiderer (2010) and with wit and humour by Merton Miller (1995)). 
I believe there is a need to break out of the way of thinking that leads to the “equity is scarce 
and expensive” conclusion. That would help us get to a situation where it will be normal to 
have banks hold very much more capital that had been assumed in recent decades to be 
acceptable. And that change would be a return to the past. 
Having higher bank capital will make the job of monetary policy (which has now to deal with 
the  after-effects  of  massive  instability  in  financial  markets)  much  easier.  Using  limits  on 
gearing to help maintain financial stability and monetary policy to help maintain price stability 
is an efficient allocation of instruments to goals.  
But it makes little sense to expect this extra bank capital to be in place immediately. Curbing 
lending and dealing with a debt-fuelled asset price boom is not the problem for today. Higher 
capital needs to be in place by the time that does emerge as a problem. The difficulty today 
is  one  that  monetary  policy  must  address  –  this  is  to  balance  the  risks  of  removing  the 
stimulus from the expansionary monetary policy too soon, starving a recovery while it is still 
immature, against the risk of allowing inflation and inflation expectations to become stuck at 
above  the  target  level.  Balancing  those  risks  in  the  UK  is  not  easy.  That  is  the  issue  the 
Monetary Policy Committee at the Bank of England faces today and the one I now want to 
explore. 
The immediate monetary policy problem 
The financial crisis dealt a huge blow to the financial infrastructure in most of the developed 
world. In the UK, and here in Ireland, the financial system came close to total breakdown. It 
was not so much that virtually no-one thought this sort of thing would happen. It was worse 
than  that;  virtually  no-one  thought  this  sort  of  thing  could happen.  But  it  did  happen.  As  a 
result  the  supply  of  credit  to  businesses  and  to  households  was  –  and  continues  to  be  – 
seriously affected. The confidence of businesses and households has been severely dented. 
Fiscal deficits have exploded; private sector investment has imploded.  
Whatever the aftermath of this event is – and we will not know that for many years – I very 
much doubt it will be a normal cyclical recovery after a downturn. If we were facing a typical 
pattern of cyclical fluctuations of the sort we have often seen over the past 60 years – albeit 
a  bit  more  bumpy  –  then  I  think  the  time  to  remove  some  of  the  extraordinary  monetary 
stimulus  would  already  have  come.  In  the  UK  inflation  is  above  the  target  level  –  despite 
some  recent  falls,  inflation  is  around  1  percentage  point  above  the  2%  target  level. 
Employment has been rising and so has GDP. If that clearly meant we were on the upswing 
of a typical cycle then I do not think that keeping interest rates at effectively zero and holding 
on to a stock of £200 billion of assets bought to ease monetary conditions further would be 
right. 
                                                                                                                                                      
help  smiling  at  complaints  from  bankers  about  their  capital  requirements,  knowing  that  they  have  always 
imposed even stronger requirements on people in debt to them.” 
12 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 But  to  me  this  does  not  seem  like  the  typical  recovery  phase  following  an  above  average 
cyclical downturn. A typical downturn is not one in which the financial sector all but stopped 
working  for  a  while.  A  typical  cycle  for  the  UK  is  not  one  in  which  the  exchange  rate 
depreciates by about 25% ahead of the downturn. 
UK inflation now sits uncomfortably above the target (see Chart 2). But I believe that this tells 
us  rather  little  about  the  cyclical  position  of  the  economy  or  where  inflation  will  be  in  the 
future. Underlying forces that were created by the financial crisis and that would themselves 
keep inflation low have been offset by other factors that have kept inflation above target for 
much of the past year. These factors are well known but it is important not to forget the likely 
scale of their impact. Around one quarter of the goods that enter the basket for calculating 
the  UK  CPI  are  imported.  The  25%  depreciation  seen  since  2007  would  –  given  that 
imported goods and services account for around a quarter of the consumer price basket – 
add a bit above 6% to the level of the CPI. Over a three-year-period that would generate 2% 
a year higher inflation. We have also seen the VAT rate cut and then increased. When the 
cut was having its largest impact on the annual rate of inflation last year the CPI inflation rate 
fell to 1.1%. The subsequent rise in VAT at the start of this year has helped push inflation 
back  above  the  target  by  about  the  same  amount.  At  the  start  of  next  year  there  will  be 
another VAT rate increase – and that is likely to keep inflation above the target a bit longer. I 
am not blasé about that. That is why I said that I thought we face a risk in the UK of not doing 
enough to bear down on inflation. But there is also a risk of tightening monetary policy too 
soon. This second risk is one that I would consider small if it were clear that the economy 
was on typical upswing of the sort of cycle we used to think normal. But I do not see many of 
the signs that are usual in a normal upswing. Typical features of the early stage of strong 
cyclical  upswing  would  be  rapid  growth  in  lending  and  in  the  money  supply,  signs  of 
emerging  shortages  in  capacity  across  several  sectors,  wage  pressures  moving  up,  and 
indicators  of  household  and  business  confidence  moving  steadily  higher.  Neither  the 
aggregate statistics on the state of the economy, nor surveys, nor the discussions that I have 
had with businesses across the UK, are consistent with this.  
Consider  what  has  happened  to  wages  in  the  UK  –  which  for  many  firms  are  the  most 
significant  element  of  costs  and  are  an  indicator  of  underlying,  domestically  generated 
inflation pressures. Over the whole period from the mid 1990s to the onset of the financial 
crises UK-wide aggregate wage settlements fluctuated in a narrow band around 3.5%. Those 
settlements were consistent with inflation outcomes that stayed very close to the target set 
for  the  Bank  of  England.  Whole-economy  annual  wage  settlements  have  now  fallen  to 
around  1.5%  –  well  below  both  the  current  rate  of  inflation  and  below  the  inflation  rate 
thought likely over the next year (see Chart 16). 
So these are not normal times, which is why there is a risk that monetary policy is normalised 
too quickly. There is also a risk that that monetary policy is left too loose too long. If only one 
of those risks existed we should certainly have set monetary policy too tight or too loose. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 13
   
I think it is entirely plausible that after the economic turmoil of the past few years the risks of 
inflation being appreciably above or appreciably below the target level a few years ahead are 
higher than before. That is what the probability judgements made in the MPC’s Inflation Report 
show. Chart 17 shows that in August the MPC thought it a rather low probability event that in 
3 year’s time the rate for inflation would be within ½ of 1% of the target. There was thought to 
be a near 80% chance  that inflation would be either  above  2.5%  or below 1.5% –  with risk 
either side being roughly equal. 
Since the financial crisis actual inflation has also become much more variable. Between 1997 
and 2007 the annual rate of inflation was within 0.5% of the target for 66 months out of 132 – 
50% of the time. Since the start of 2008 inflation has been within that range for only 30% of 
the time. Most of the time it has been above 2.5%; but it has not been all one way traffic – for 
some of last year inflation was below 1.5%. 
It is inconceivable that you can get monetary policy exactly right. After the event we will have 
a better idea of which way we got things wrong. It is a near certainty that four or five years 
from now the monetary policy that is set over the next year will, with the benefit of hindsight, 
look very likely to have been too loose or too tight. Many then will talk about the big mistake 
the MPC made in late 2010 and the first part of 2011. If we tighten too quickly it will be a 
story  of  “myopic  MPC  learnt  nothing  from  events  of  2008”;  if  growth  and  inflation  look 
stronger than I now think is the most likely outcome it will be “MPC completely failed to see 
what was obvious to nearly everyone – that inflation was out of control”. But the only sensible 
thing to do is to look at all the evidence we have today, and balance the risks.  
References 
Admati, A, DeMarzo, P., Hellwig M, and Pfleiderer P. (2010) “Fallacies, Irrelevant Facts, and 
Myths  in  Capital  Regulation:  Why  Bank  Equity  is  Not  Expensive”.  Stanford  University 
Working Paper No. 86. 
Akerlof,  George  A.(1970),  “The  Market  for  ‘Lemons’:  Quality  Uncertainty  and  the  Market 
Mechanism”.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  84(3),  pp.  488–500,  1970.  Bank  of  England 
(2010), Financial Stability Review, June 2010, page 58–60. Bank for International Settlement 
(2010), “An Assessment of the Long-term Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity 
Requirements”. 
14 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 Barro (2006), “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century” by Robert Barro, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121, no.3 
Bean, C., Paustian, M., Penalver, A., and Taylor, T.(2010), “Monetary Policy after the Fall”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Annual Conference, Jackson Hole, 2010.  
Diamond DW, Dybvig PH (1983). “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”, Journal of 
Political Economy, 91 (3): pp 401–19.  
He,  Z,  I  Khang  and  A  Krishnamurthy  (2010):  “Balance  Sheet  Adjustment  during  the  2008 
Crisis”, IMF Economic Review, pp 1–39.  
Kashyap  ,K.,  Stein,  J.  and  Hanson,  S  (2010).  “An  Analysis  of  the  Impact  of  ‘Substantially 
Heightened’ Capital Requirements on Large Financial Institutions”, Working Paper.  
McGuire, P M. and Tsatsaronis, K (2008), “Estimating Hedge Fund Leverage”, BIS Working 
Paper No. 260. 
Miller,  M  (1995).  “Do  the  M-M  Propositions  Apply  to  Banks?”,  Journal  of  Banking  and 
Finance, vol 19, pp 483–489. 
Modigliani, F.; Miller, M. (1958). “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of 
Investment”. American Economic Review 48 (3): 261–297.  
Reinhart and Reinhart (2010), “After the Fall”, NBER Working Paper 16334.  
Wadhwani, S (2010) “What Mix of Monetary Policy and Regulation is Best for Stabilising the 
Economy”, The Future of Finance, London School of Economics. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 15
