Yves Mersch: European lessons to be drawn from the crisis to improve 
global financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the 
54th Congress of the International Association of Lawyers (Union Internationale des Avocat, 
UIA), Istanbul, 31 October 2010. 
 Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Three years after the first turbulences occurred on the interbank markets, it is apparent that 
they marked the beginning of the most severe crisis since the end of World War II. As the 
crisis  is  not  yet  over,  we  still  lack  the  perspective  of  setting  up  a  comprehensive  list  of 
lessons  from  the  crisis.  Nonetheless,  I  thank  the  International  Association  of  Lawyers  for 
inviting me to share my views on this issue.  
In my speech, I will highlight the causes of the financial crisis, the political responses, and the 
likely consequences. In particular I will make clear, that policy responses cannot be applied 
globally but need to take into account the structure and special features of an economic area. 
As a member of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) I will elaborate 
on the European experiences and challenges and the role of monetary policy in particular. 
However, what I will say should not be interpreted in the context of the future monetary policy 
decision of the Governing Council next Thursday. You might recall that my colleagues and I 
are in our purdah period.  
first 
tried 
the  U.S.  government 
failure  appeared  when 
Causes of the crisis 
Let me start with an overview of the causes of the financial crisis, giving examples of market 
and  government  failures,  referring  to  an  excellent  analysis  by  Guillermo  de  la  Dehesa, 
Chairman of the Centre for Economic Policy Research (bold mine):  
“The 
to  encourage  wider 
homeownership by households, allowing every American family to be entitled to mortgage 
loans,  regardless  of  their  income  level  or  their  ability  to  pay,  thus  creating  a  problem  of 
“adverse selection”. […] 
The second failure occurred in the originated and securitized subprime mortgages market, 
both  in  terms  of  government  regulation  and  supervision.  On  the  one  hand,  the  majority  of 
mortgages  were  not  originated  by  the  banks  but  by  agents  and  brokers  working  on 
commission, who were not regulated and who were only required to obtain an administrative 
local  state  permit  to  sell  financial  products.  Therefore,  their  main  objective  was  to  sell  a 
mortgage  to  a  family  and  charge  a  commission  without  much  effort  to  verify  whether  the 
mortgage holder could pay it. […]  
The third major failure was that many banks that were securitizing mortgages and selling 
them believed that they had removed their risk burden – an idea that ultimately proved not 
always to be right. […] In other words, the banks were creating a parallel, off-balance-sheet 
banking  system  that  would  take  short-term  resources  and  invest  them  in  long-term  risky 
assets that were neither regulated nor subject to supervision.  
The managers of many of these special vehicles were buying the same structured products 
based on subprime mortgages. Through this vehicles, they were taking on the same risk that 
bank had intended to transfer by securitizing and selling them to a third party. 
If the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank had forced the banks to reintroduce 
the securities into their balance sheets (which they never should have removed in the first 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 1
place), the banks would have consumed regulatory capital that they did not have. This would 
have resulted in an even greater credit crunch that what ultimately occurred. 
What is most significant is that, were it not for these vehicles and the parallel banking system 
created, there would be no other reasons to explain why a problem that originated in the U.S. 
mortgage securitization system was able to spread in such a way to the European banks. 
The fourth incomprehensible failure needs to be attributed to the way investors themselves 
have  behaved.  These  investors  were  managing  very  large  bank,  pension,  and  insurance 
asset portfolios or hedge funds and were supposed to have accumulated a high degree of 
expertise in investing (as high as the fees they charged). […] How was it possible that so 
many of theses sophisticated investors were buying these structured products with a AAA or 
AA  rating  without  being  able  to  understand  their  content  due  to  the  huge  mathematical 
complexity  of  their  structures?  The  only  explanation  is  that  they  bought  these  products 
because they were more profitable than the traditional AAA- or AA-rated assets, which is in 
itself an oxymoron in terms of finance theory. 
The  fifth  failure  both  in  market  and  governments  was  associated  with  the  credit  rating 
agencies  that  assess  the  default  risks  associated  with  financial  assets  that  are  issued, 
bought and sold in the markets. […] These credit agencies are also privileged in that they 
cannot be legally prosecuted. That is, they have no legal or administrative responsibility (like 
auditors have) over the ratings they give because of the protections they enjoy under the first 
amendment of the U.S. Constitution; their employees are considered to be merely “financial 
reporters” that are exercising their “freedom of expression”. 
After  1970,  the  agencies  were  funded  by  the  issuers  and  sellers  of  bonds  or  structured 
products who they are supposed to monitor and rate, thus creating a large conflict of interest: 
On  the  one  hand,  the  bond  issuers  can  decide  not  to  contract  an  agency  if  they  get  a 
provisional rating that they consider to be low, and can attempt to contract with another that 
will give a higher rating, since they know what rating they will receive before they make a 
decision. 
The  sixth  major  failure  during  the  2008–09  financial  crisis  was  committed  by  the  banks 
themselves  and  other  financial  entities  when  they  failed  to  effectively  carry  out  their  main 
responsibility  of  serving  as  an  intermediary  between  the  savings  of  depositors  and  the 
investments of investors in an economic system. […]The reason the financial system exists 
is based exclusively on its capacity to compile and analyze information. 
For both depositors and investors, this kind of activity demands a very high level of trust in 
the  accuracy  and  quality  of  the  information  and  advice  provided  by  the  financial 
intermediaries. If this level of trust is broken, as was the case during the 2008–09 financial 
crisis, it can ultimately paralyze the activities of the financial intermediaries and the markets, 
generate  uncertainty,  and  eventually  cause  panic,  producing  a  run  on  the  banks  and 
paralyzing markets, leading to serious negative consequences for the overall economy. 
Four characteristics make banks key players in a market economy:  
First: billions of payments requiring transfers of funds are carried out by the banks every day. 
They run the payment systems that underpin economies transactions.  
The second characteristic is that banks and other financial intermediaries borrow short from 
depositors or other savers and lend long to investors, subsequently incurring interest rate, 
term  mismatching,  and  counterparty  risks  that  make  them  highly  vulnerable  to  any  abrupt 
change  in  economic  conditions.  Therefore,  they  are  a  public  service  that  takes  important 
risks. 
The third is that these entities undertake very important and necessary tasks for the success 
of the economy by channelling resources from the savers to the investors and by transferring 
the risk from those who cannot afford to take them to those who are willing to assume them. 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2010
The fourth is that banks are needed to ensure effective implementation of monetary policy. 
Monetary policy is the most relevant economic policy for softening the impact of economic 
fluctuations and cycles and for maintaining price stability.  
The seventh serious failure was in economic banking: A new economic theory surged based 
on two hypotheses: “rational expectations” and “efficient and complete markets”. Theses new 
theoretical developments were the intellectual basis of the rise of a new political trend toward 
financial deregulation. 
Also in some area monetary policies were aimed at maintaining low interest rates, resulting 
in two huge bubbles in a single decade, the 2000 dot-com and 2007 financial and real estate 
bubbles. 
The eighth failure relates to banking supervision. On most cases, the largest bank failures 
and the most expensive bail outs have coincided with countries where the supervisor was not 
the central bank, but the governments. […]  
The  ninth  significant  problem,  associated  with  market  failure  is  that  many  banks  failed  to 
manage their risk appropriately and sufficiently. Sometimes, as mentioned, it is because of 
pressures  from  the  shareholders  to  get  a  higher  return  on  equity;  and  sometimes  it  is 
because of the executive remuneration system which encourages greater risk taking. Other 
times it is because the executives believed that their long term financing would remain cheap 
since basic interest rates would continue to be low. […] Good risk management begins with 
the basic rules of common sense and caution, not with complex models taken from physics. 
The  tenth  market  and  regulatory  related  failure  has  been  the  enormous  development  of 
bilateral  or  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets,  for  both  foreign  exchange  and  loan 
interest rates, that have reached never-before-seen historic levels. […]  
The  eleventh  failure  was  the  shortcomings  of  the  Basel  II  Accord  allowing  increased 
leverage in larger banks. 
The  twelfth  and  final  failure  detected  in  the  2008–09  financial  crisis  is  the  moral  hazard 
created by the prominence of banking systems that are “too big and too interconnected too 
fail”  or  “too  big  to  be  saved”  because  they  can  create  a  systemic  crisis  in  national  and 
global  banking  networks  with  very  serious  economic  consequences  for  the  entire  world 
economy.  The  large  banks  and  their  networks  that  know  they  will  be  bailed  out  by 
governments if ever faced with solvency issues have an incentive to take on greater risk than 
a bank or intermediary that fails with no entity to save it.”1  
In a nut shell: these shortcomings jointly allowed the entire financial industry to book profits 
too  early,  too  easily  and  without  proper  risk  adjustment.  At  the  same  time  they  covered  a 
process of excessive indebtedness in the private and financial sector.  
The tensions increased and erupted in the financial crisis that started in the summer of 2007, 
deteriorating  severely  in  September  2008  when  the  former  US  investment  bank  Lehman 
Brothers collapsed pushing the global economy to the edge of the abyss.  
Political responses 
The financial crisis and the subsequent economic downturn have called for unprecedented 
policy responses by both fiscal and monetary authorities worldwide.  
                                                 
1   See de la Dehesa, Guillermo (2010): Twelve Market and Government Failures Leading to 2008–09 Financial 
Crisis, Occasional Paper No 80, Group of Thirty, Washington DC. 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 3
Differences in the economic and financial structures and the political set up of the Euro area 
compared to the United States led to different specific measures – aiming at achieving the 
same goals, however. Let me elaborate on these structural differences:  
– 
First,  the  economic  structures  of  the  Euro  area  and  the  United  States  differ  a  lot. 
Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  for  example,  play  a  dominant  role  in  the 
European  economy.  Moreover,  the  public  sector  represents  bigger  parts  of  the 
European  economy,  and  is  a  major  player  in  the  ownership  structure  of  certain 
banks. Overall, the economy in the Euro zone is less flexible than in the US. Wages 
and prices are slower to adjust. Let me provide an example from my  “home turf”. 
Prices  change  rather  infrequently  in  the  Euro  area.  On  average  it  takes  retailers 
13 months  to  reprice  their  products.  According  to  surveys,  it  is  11  months  for 
producers. In the United States, comparable figures indicate durations of less than 
7 months and slightly more than 8 months respectively. 
Whereas this lower flexibility might be a disadvantage to benefit from positive supply 
side  shocks  like  technical  innovations,  during  the  time  of  a  crisis  this  European 
“sluggishness”  offered  some  protection  against  an  overshooting  of  negative 
expectations leading to a deflationary spiral. 
Second,  there  are  also  profound  differences  in  their  financial  structures.  The 
differences in the composition of funding sources for non-financial corporations are 
striking.  Europe’s  small  and  medium-sized  firms  have  no  direct  access  to  capital 
markets but need loans to finance their activities. In the Euro area bank financing 
accounts for roughly 70 % of firm’s total external financing. In the United States, by 
contrast,  firms  rely  to  a  much  larger  extent  on  market-based  sources,  which 
represent  80  %  of  total  external  financing.  Also,  universal  banking  is  the 
predominant business model in continental European banking compared to the US 
which  –  before  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis  –  were  characterized  by  specialised 
investment banks.  
  In its fight against the crisis the ECB always has taken account of this particular structure of 
the euro area economy. To be effective, the applied measures of the ECB concentrated on 
the banking sector and the provision of liquidity. In the US, by contrast, the Fed focused on 
capital markets and bought assets outright on debt capital markets – an appropriate strategy 
given the reliance on capital markets of US companies rather than on bank loans. 
The  ECB’s  focus  on  the  banking  sector  applied  to  all  three  stages  of  the  crisis  from  the 
European perspective 
– 
Abundant  liquidity  provision  when  tensions  in  the  money  market  first  occurred  in 
August 2007.  
Unprecedented rate cuts from October 2008 on, when the economy slipped into a 
deep  recession.  To  support  the  supply  of  credit  to  the  real  economy  the  ECB 
additionally  employed  some  unconventional  measures  to  alleviate  the  funding 
pressures in the banking sector.  
Intervening in certain market segments to ensure the functioning of the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy when sovereign debts markets came under severe 
pressure in Mai 2010. 
  These bold and innovative measures helped to sustain financial intermediation in the euro 
area. Moreover, it maintained the availability of credit for households and companies. At the 
same time they have been compatible with the ECB’s primary mandate of maintaining price 
stability over the medium term.  
4 
 BIS Review 144/2010
Longer term objectives 
Sound financial sector 
Beyond the crisis, the financial sector must become more resilient, the massive debt burden 
has to be eroded and new excesses in indebtedness must be prevented the financial, the 
private  and  public  sector.  The  de-risking  of  the  financial  industry  and  the  deleveraging  of 
excessively  indebted  private  households  and  countries  are  the  long  term  objectives  for  a 
sustainable financial and economic system.  
Regulation and supervision of the financial sector have to reduce the probability of institution 
failure. Higher quantity and quality of capital, minimum liquidity requirements and leverage 
limits,  as  demanded  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  aim  to  improve  the 
banking  sector’s  ability  to  absorb  shocks  arising  from  financial  and  economic  stress, 
independent of the source.  
However, the current proposals for new capital and liquidity rules ignore the importance of 
bank credit as the dominant means of finance in the Euro area, the basically well functioning 
system of universal banks on this side of the Atlantic.  
Although it is important to call for sound liquidity risk management and robust capital buffers, 
it seems awkward to target deposits and loans of banks as major threats to financial stability 
given the experience of the crisis. The universal banks in continental Europe, which rely on 
deposits as a major source of finance, were more diversified with retail and corporate lending 
operations  and  fund  management  than  their  US  counterparts.  Their  solid  deposit  base 
provided stability to the system as a whole. 
By  contrast,  the  “originate-to-distribute  model”  pushed  forward  risky  and  opaque  products, 
which  were  at  the  epicentre  of  the  subprime  crisis.  Only  those  European  banks  got  into 
trouble  that  embarked  into  investment  banking  activities  or  had  bought  toxic  assets  on  a 
large  scale.  But  the  crisis  also  revealed  weaknesses  of  business  models  based  on  public 
sector support or public financing.  
The additional ratio for systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) can be questioned 
in so far as it sanctions the traditionally larger banks of continental Europe. Such large banks 
are unpopular in the US – without being necessarily more risky. 
The  negative  consequences  of  Basel  III,  that  sanctions  bank  loans  as  relatively  risky  and 
illiquid, imposing higher capital requirements and haircuts, are threefold:  
– 
The  formerly  stable  universal  banks  of  continental  Europe  would  be  pushed  into 
riskier  activities  when  the  margins  of  lending  to  smaller  and  medium  sized  firms 
were diminishing due to regulatory requirements.  
The new rules lead to comparative disadvantages to the European banking system. 
The US banks rely more on fees than on deposits. The global playing field will be tilt. 
As the real economy is mainly financed by the banking system, financing conditions 
for  companies  without  access  to  the  capital  markets  would  tighten  and  trigger  a 
negative impact on economic growth. 
  As the former IMF head and Governor of the French Central Bank, Jacques de Larosière, put 
it  recently:  “The  cruel  irony  is  that  the  banking  system  model  that  most  favours  financial 
stability and economic growth could be the chief victim of the new framework.” 
A remaining challenge is to regulate and supervise the shadow banking system. Moreover, it 
has  to  be  made  sure,  that  Basel  III  will  be  implemented  at  the  time  in  all  jurisdictions  to 
guarantee a level playing field. As we know, this was not the case for the Basel II rules. 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 5
Institutional reform 
Also, on the institutional level reform is necessary. Here again, a one-fits-all-answer will not 
be  appropriate.  The  US  did  consolidate  its  highly  fragmented  regulation  regime.  Banking 
there is regulated at both the federal and state level. Depending on a banking organization’s 
charter-type  and  organizational  structure,  it  may  be  subject  to  numerous  federal  and  state 
banking regulators. 
Europe  also  has  to  overcome  national  fragmentation  in  this  respect.  Despite  some  initial 
temptations  for  re-segmentation  of  prudential  competences,  the  response  will  be  at  the 
European and at the EU27 level. It will consist of the implementation of new concepts and 
institutions aiming at de-risking the financial industry. Liquidity monitoring through a monthly 
liquidity coverage ratio and a yearly net stable funding ratio will be complemented by macro 
prudential surveillance in a European System Risk Board closely associated with the General 
Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  The  US  equivalent  to  this  Systemic  risk  Board 
recently held its inaugural meeting. 
Three European Agencies for banking, securities markets and insurance start with a mostly 
coordination  function,  but  have  certain  evolutionist  competence  clauses  in  their  statutes. 
They have to walk the narrow line between cross border activities of banks and integration of 
markets  on  the  one  hand  and  competences  remaining  at  national  levels  like  deposit 
guarantee  schemes,  resolution  procedures,  and  insolvency  legislation,  i.e.  everything  that 
pertains to the tax payer who remains fiercely protected by national governments despite the 
spill-over effects of cross border activities, on the other hand. 
To tackle these effects through a potential 351 bilateral Treaties in so many areas among 
27 member states, can hardly be seen as a stable equilibrium in decision making nor a level 
playing field for economic activities in a single area.  
The  new  institutional  set-ups  at  EU  level  therefore  face  some  of  the  same  problems  we 
experience  within  the  Euro-area.  The  ultimate  goal  will  however  be  the  same:  foster 
economic welfare through integration of markets and market players.  
Fiscal challenges 
Learning from recent experience, we have to examine carefully the role of excessive debt. 
After collapse of Lehman brothers in September 2008 the accumulation of private debt was 
suddenly stopped, but the problem of excessive indebtedness was not solved. Fiscal rescue 
packages,  the  impact  of  automatic  stabilizers,  and  the  necessary  support  of  the  financial 
system led to a significant increase in public leverage to levels unprecedented in peacetime. 
Government debt in the euro area will have grown by more than 20 percentage points from 
2007  to  2011.  The  equivalent  figures  for  the  US  and  Japan  are  between  35  and 
45 percentage points. Debt-to-GDP-ratios are approaching 90% in Europe, 100% in the US 
and the UK, and 200% in Japan. 
The debt burden must be eroded and new excesses in indebtedness have to be prevented. 
This  holds  particular  for  the  Euro  zone  because  a  single  monetary  policy  needs  to  be 
supported by sound public finances. 
Fiscal  and  macroeconomic  surveillance  need  to  be  empowered.  The  recent  discussions 
within the European Council show a lack of ambition compared to the already timid proposals 
of the Commission; although the designed new fiscal framework might speed up a faster and 
broader-based imposition of sanctions on countries that do not comply with the SGP rules. 
It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  European  Parliament  will  revert  to  an  automatic  sanction 
mechanism. Indeed, it should be possible to start with some sanctions even before a country 
breaches the 3%-of-GDP rule, thus strengthening the preemptive side of the framework. 
6 
 BIS Review 144/2010
Concluding remarks 
Having stabilized the global economy over the last three years, the current challenge is to 
return  on  a  path  of  increased  stability.  This  will  have  distinct  consequences  for  the  global 
economy. 
Given the massive debt burden that has to be eroded, the industrialized world will experience 
lower growth potentials. On top, the necessary reduction of debt will lead to slower growth 
rates  in  the  short  term  as  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  the  deleveraging  process. 
Sustainable, longer-term growth, however, can only be reached when fundamental economic 
imbalances are tackled and structural reforms are initiated. In Europe, more ambitions and 
commitment by political leaders are needed.  
Stricter rules and higher capital requirements for the financial industry will make the system 
stronger  and  healthier.  But  effective  regulation  also  requires  on-the-ground  supervision 
based on competence and proximity. Rules appropriate for the marked based model should 
not  be  applied  to  the  heterogeneity  of  the  European  system.  As  the  economy  in  the  Euro 
area  is  largely  based  on  the  availability  of  bank  loans  any  regulatory  change  must  take 
account of that. Otherwise, continental banks might suffer from competitive disadvantages. 
As a consequence financing conditions for the real economy might deteriorate, dampening 
growth and job creation. 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 7
