Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Growth prospects for the Nigerian economy 
Convocation  lecture  by  Mr  Sanusi  Lamido  Sanusi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  
Nigeria,  at  the  Igbinedion  University  Eighth  Convocation  Ceremony,  Okada,  Edo  State,  
26 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Nigeria’s economic aspirations have remained that of altering the structure of production and 
consumption patterns, diversifying the economic base and reducing dependence on oil, with 
the  aim  of  putting  the  economy  on  a  part  of  sustainable,  all-inclusive  and  non-inflationary 
growth. The implication of this is that while rapid growth in output, as measured by the real 
gross domestic product (GDP), is important, the transformation of the various sectors of the 
economy  is  even  more  critical.  This  is  consistent  with  the  growth  aspirations  of  most 
developing  countries,  as  the  structure  of  the  economy  is  expected  to  change  as  growth 
progresses. 
Successive governments in Nigeria have since independence in 1960, pursued the goal of 
structural changes without much success. The growth dynamics have been propelled by the 
existence and exploitation of natural resources and primary products. Initially, the agricultural 
sector, driven by the demand for food and cash crops production was at the centre of the 
growth process, contributing 54.7 per cent to the GDP during the 1960s. The second decade 
of independence saw the emergence of the oil industry as the main driver of growth. Since 
then,  the  economy  has  mainly  gyrated  with  the  boom-burst  cycles  of  the  oil  industry. 
Government  expenditure  outlays  that  are  dependent  on  oil  revenues  have  more  or  less 
dictated the pace of growth of the economy. Looking back, it is clear that the economy has 
not actually performed to its full potential particularly in the face of its rising population.  
In  general,  economic  growth  and  population  growth  rates  are  very  close  that  the  margin 
cannot  induce  the  required  structural  transformation  and  economic  diversification.  The 
Nigerian  economy  has  grossly  underperformed  relative 
to  her  enormous  resource 
endowment  and  her  peer  nations.  It  has  the  6th  largest  gas  reserves  and  the  8th  largest 
crude oil reserves in the world. It is endowed in commercial quantities with about 37 solid 
mineral types and has a population of over 150 million persons. Yet economic performance 
has been rather weak and does not reflect these endowments. Compared with the emerging 
Asian countries, notably, Thailand, Malaysia, China, India and Indonesia that were far behind 
Nigeria  in  terms  of  GDP  per  capita  in  1970,  these  countries  have  transformed  their 
economies and are not only miles ahead of Nigeria, but are also major players on the global 
economic arena. Indeed, Nigeria’s poor economic performance, particularly in the last forty 
years,  is  better  illustrated  when  compared  with  China  which  now  occupies  an  enviable 
position as the second largest economy in the world. In 1970, while Nigeria had a GDP per 
capita of US$233.35 and was ranked 88th in the world, China was ranked 114th with a GDP 
per capita of US$111.82. 
The major factors accounting for the relative decline of the country’s economic fortunes are 
easily identifiable as political instability, lack of focused and visionary leadership, economic 
mismanagement and corruption. Prolonged period of military rule stifled economic and social 
progress, particularly in the three decades of 1970s to 1990s. During these years, resources 
were  plundered,  social  values  were  debased,  and  unemployment  rose  astronomically  with 
concomitant increase in crime rate. Living standards fell so low, to the extent that some of 
the best brains with the requisite skills to drive the developmental process left in droves to 
other nations, and are now making substantial contributions to the economic success of their 
host countries.  
BIS Review 166/2010 
 1
However, since 1999, the country returned to the path of civil democratic governance and 
has sustained uninterrupted democratic rule for a period of 11 years. This in itself is a great 
achievement  and  gives  reason  for  hope  in  a  country  that  has  been  burdened  with  almost 
three decades of military rule. It has provided an opportunity to arrest the decline of the past 
and provide the launch pad for the take-off into an era of sustainable and all-round economic 
development. The successive civilian administrations since 1999 have committed to tackling 
the  daunting  challenges.  Economic  growth  has  risen  substantially,  with  annual  average  of 
7.4 per  cent  in  the  last  decade.  But  the  growth  has  not  been  inclusive,  broad-based  and 
transformational.  Agriculture  and  services  have  been  the  main  drivers  of  growth.  The 
implication of  this  trend  is  that  economic  growth  in  Nigeria  has  not  resulted  in  the  desired 
structural changes that would make manufacturing the engine of growth, create employment, 
promote  technological  development  and  induce  poverty  alleviation.  Available  data  has  put 
the  national  poverty  level  at  54.4  per  cent.  Similarly,  there  has  been  rising  unemployment 
with  the  current  level  put  at  19.7  per  cent  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  (NBS). 
Furthermore, the country lags behind her peers in most human development indicators. For 
example, while China and Thailand are on the 5th and 22nd positions, respectively, on the 
2009 Global Hunger Index, Nigeria was ranked 46th. This can be traced largely to the huge 
infrastructure deficit, rising insecurity, mass corruption and widespread poverty. 
Problem statement 
1.2 
In the light of the poor performance of the economy since independence despite the huge 
mineral, material and human endowment, as well as the accelerating dynamics of the global 
economy,  what  are  the  prospects  of  the  economy  in  the  short-to-medium  term?  In  other 
words,  can  the  Nigerian  economy  move  from  the  historical  sluggish  growth  trends  to  a 
vibrant  growth  path  that  can  transform  the  structure  of  the  economy  and  enable  her  to 
attainment  the  vision  enunciated  under  Vision  20:2020  and  launch  her  into  the  league  of 
advanced economies? 
Objectives and structure of the paper 
1.3 
This lecture, therefore, seeks to examine the growth prospects for the Nigerian economy in 
the short-to-medium-term perspective, in the light of its relatively poor economic performance 
since  independence  and  her  abundant  natural  and  human  resources.  Following  this 
introduction,  section  2  shares  some  thoughts  on  economic  development,  while  section  3 
reviews  the  Nigerian  economy  in  perspective,  through  policy  regimes  to  the  nature  and 
structure  of  the  economy  and  performance  trends.  The  challenges  facing  the  Nigerian 
economy are discussed in section 4, while the economic prospects are discussed in section 
5. Section 6 concludes the lecture.  
Some thoughts on growth and development 
2. 
Every  nation  strives  for  development.  Economic  progress  is  merely  a  component  of 
development  but  development  goes  beyond  pure  economics.  In  an  ultimate  sense, 
development  must  encompass  more  than  the  material  and  financial  side  of  people’s  lives. 
Development  is,  therefore,  a  multidimensional  process  involving  the  reorganization  and 
reorientation  of  the  entire  economic  and  social  systems.  In  addition  to  improvements  in 
incomes  and  output,  it  typically  involves  radical  changes  in  institutional,  social  and 
administrative structures, as well as in popular attitudes and in many cases even customs 
and beliefs.  
The  post  World  War  II  literature  on  economic  development  has  been  dominated  by  four 
major and, sometimes, competing strands of thought: (a) the linear-stages- of-growth model, 
(b)  theories  and  patterns  of  structural  change  (c)  international  dependence  revolution,  and 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2010
(d)  the  neoclassical,  free-market  counterrevolution.  I  will  review  each  of  these  in  what 
follows.  
The  stages  of  growth  model  of  development,  was  advocated  by  an  American  economic 
historian W.W. Rostow (1960). He propounded that it was possible to identify all societies, in 
their economic dimensions, as lying within one of five categories: the traditional society, the 
preconditions for take-off into self-sustaining growth, the take-off, the drive to maturity and 
the age of high mass consumption. He further stated that one of the principal strategies of 
development necessary for take-off was the mobilization of domestic and foreign savings to 
generate  sufficient  investment  to  accelerate  economic  growth.  This  view  assumes  that 
domestic and foreign savings only are sufficient for growth. The theory was supported by the 
Harrod-Domar  model  (1939;  1946)  which  demonstrated  that  countries  with  higher  savings 
ratio are expected to grow faster than those with lower rates and that the main obstacle to or 
constraint  on  development  is  the  relatively  low  level  of  new  capital  formation  in  most 
developing  countries.  In  practice,  however,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  mechanisms  of 
development  embodied  in  the  theory  of  stages  of  growth  do  not  always  work.  This  is  not 
because savings and investment are not a necessary condition for growth but because they 
are not a sufficient condition. Savings and investment will propel growth if and only if such 
other  conditions  as  integrated  commodity  and  developed  financial  (money  and  capital) 
markets, highly developed infrastructure, well-trained and educated workforce, the motivation 
to succeed, and an efficient government bureaucracy/institutions, etc. are prevalent. 
The proponents of the structural change model instead, focus on the mechanism by which 
underdeveloped  countries  transform  their  economies  from  a  heavy  emphasis  on  the 
traditional subsistence agriculture to a more modern, more urbanized and more industrially-
diverse  manufacturing  and  service  economy.  One  of  the  earliest  best  known  theoretical 
models of development that focused on this was W. Arthur Lewis (1950). According to the 
Lewis  model,  the  underdeveloped  country  consists  of  two  sectors:  a  traditional,  over 
populated  rural  subsistence  sector  characterized  by  zero  marginal  labour  productivity, 
implying that some labour could be withdrawn from the sector without loss of output, and a 
highly-productive  modern  urban  industrial  sector  into  which  labour  from  the  subsistence 
sector is gradually transferred. Critics of this model however, observe that in the absence of 
a  set  of  interrelated  changes  in  the  economic  structure  of  a  country,  transition  from  the 
traditional economic system to a modern one would be impossible, notwithstanding the huge 
accumulation of capital, physical and human resources. Structural change involves virtually 
all  economic  functions,  including  the  transformation  of  production  and  changes  in  the 
composition of consumer demand, international trade and resource use. 
The Lewis model has also been criticized on grounds of the unrealistic nature of some of its 
assumptions. In the first place, it is unrealistic to assume that the rate of labour transfer and 
employment creation in the industrial-sector is proportional to the rate of the industrial sector 
capital  accumulation.  Much  as  it  is  plausible  to  assume  that  the  faster  the  rate  of  capital 
accumulation, the higher the growth rate of the modern sector and the faster the rate of new 
job  creation.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  the  profits  in  the  modern-sector  are  invested  in 
more sophisticated labour-saving capital equipment rather than just duplicating the existing 
capital as is implicitly assumed in the Lewis model. Again the assumption that surplus labour 
exists in the rural areas while there is full employment in the modern sector is unrealistic as 
contemporary research indicates that there is little general surplus labour in rural areas. In 
the same vein, the assumption of a competitive modern-sector labour market that guarantees 
the  continued  existence  of  constant  real  urban  wages  up  to  the  point  where  the  supply  of 
rural  surplus  labour  is  exhausted  is  unrealistic.  One  striking  feature  of  the  urban  labour 
market  and  wage  determination  in  almost  all  developing  countries  is  the  tendency  for  the 
wages to rise substantially over time both in absolute terms and relative to the rural areas 
even  in  the  presence  of  open  modern-sector  unemployment  and  low  or  zero  marginal 
productivity in agriculture. Institutional factors such as labour unions’ bargaining power, civil 
service  wage  scales,  and  multinational  corporations’  employment  practices  constitute 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 3
distortions  in  the  labour  markets.  In  all,  when  one  considers  the  labour  saving  bias  of  the 
modern  technological  transfer,  the  existence  of  substantial  capital  flight,  the  widespread 
dearth of trained rural surplus labour, the prevalence of urban surplus labour, the Lewis two 
sector  model,  though  very  valuable  as  an  early  conceptual  framework  for  development 
process,  requires  considerable  modification  to  fit  the  reality  of  contemporary  developing 
nations. 
Given the failure of the Lewis model to meet the challenges of the realities of contemporary 
developing  countries,  the  International-Dependence  Revolution  model  which  relies  on  the 
belief  that  developing  countries  are  beset  by  institutional,  political  and  economic  rigidities, 
both domestic and international, and are caught in a dependent and dominance relationship 
with  rich  countries.  There  are  three  streams  of  thought  within  this  general  approach:  the 
neoclassical  dependence  model,  the  false  paradigm  model  and  the  dualistic 
development  thesis.  The  neoclassical  dependence  model  attributes  the  existence  and 
continuance  of  underdevelopment  primarily  to  the  historical  evolution  of  a  highly  marginal 
international  capitalist  system  of  rich  country-poor  country  relationships.  It  states  that  the  
co-existence of rich and poor nations in an international system dominated by such marginal 
power  relationships  between  the  centre  (the  developed  countries)  and  the  periphery  (the 
LDCs)  renders  efforts  by  poor  nations  to  be  self-reliant  and  independent  difficult  and, 
sometimes,  even  impossible.  It  went  further  to  state  that  certain  groups  in  the  developing 
countries, including landlords, entrepreneurs, military rulers, politicians, merchants, salaried 
public officials and trade union leaders, who enjoy high incomes, social status and political 
power, constitute a small elite ruling class and work to perpetuate the international capitalist 
system  of  inequality.  The  false-paradigm  model  which  attributes  under-development  to  the 
faulty and inappropriate advice provided by well-meaning but often uninformed international 
“experts” from developed country assistance agencies and multinational donor agencies. 
The Dualistic-Development Thesis postulates that the world is made up of dual societies, of 
rich nations and poor nations and, in developing countries, pockets of wealth within broad 
areas of poverty. This concept of dualism embraces four key arguments: 
i. 
Different  sets  of  conditions  of  which  some  are  “superior”  and  others  “inferior”  can 
co-exist in a given space; 
This coexistence is chronic and not merely transitional;  
The degrees of superiority or inferiority do not show any  signs of diminishing, but 
have an inherent tendency to increase; and  
The  interrelations  between  the  superior  and  inferior  elements  are  such  that  the 
existence of the superior elements does not pull up the inferior ones.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
These theories and many others like them are not without their shortcomings but, as is usual 
of  theories,  they  are  merely  representations  of  reality  and  not  reality  itself.  The  critical 
message  from  them  is  that  development  is  multidisciplinary  and  that  notwithstanding  their 
shortcomings,  each  of  them  still  captures  some  aspects,  at  least,  of  the  challenges  of 
contemporary developing countries. Developing countries can be categorized into the stages 
of  development  proposed  by  W.  W.  Rostow  but  that  fact  does  not  guarantee  the  highest 
growth rate to any country that mobilizes the most savings and investment. The Lewis model 
emphasizes  structural  transformation  which  admittedly  is  a  challenge  to  many  developing 
countries.  However  the  assumption  on  the  surplus  labour  in  the  rural  area  and  that  of 
automatic  employment  for  such  labour  from  the  agricultural  sector,  the  quality  of  labour, 
notwithstanding,  is  unrealistic.  The  International-Dependence  Revolution  emphasizes  the 
dependence of poor countries on their rich counterparts both with respect to financial aid and 
technical support. At least the recent global meltdown has shown that there is some benefit 
in not always following the advice of the “experts”. In all, therefore, for a developing country 
most of the models are important but the selection of which to apply in a particular economy 
should be done with great caution. 
4 
 BIS Review 166/2010
3. 
Nigerian economy in perspective 
Policy regimes 
3.1 
The  Nigerian  economy  has  undergone  series  of  changes  over  time  with  different  policy 
regimes.  Prior  to  1986,  a  medium-term  “development  plan”  was  adopted  as  a  major 
framework  for  developing  and  restructuring  the  economy.  The  First  National  Development 
Plan, 1962–1968, was developed to put the economy on a fast growth path. The plan gave 
adequate priority to agriculture and industrial development as well as training of high-level 
and  intermediate  manpower.  However,  the  disruptions  to  economic  activities  during  the 
period  later paved  way  for  broader economic  policies  for  reconciliation  and  reconstruction. 
Thus,  the  Second  National  Development  Plan,  1970–1974,  was  launched  primarily  to 
reconstruct and rehabilitate infrastructure that had been damaged during the civil war. Thus, 
the  government  invested  a  lot  of  resources  into  the  construction  and  rehabilitation  of 
infrastructure as well as improving the incomes of the people. 
The Indigenization Decrees of 1972 and 1974 put the commanding heights of the Nigerian 
economy  in  the  hands  of  Nigerians  within  the  context  of  nationalism.  The  Third  National 
Development Plan, 1975–1980, was designed under a more favorable financial condition of 
huge oil revenues that accrued to the nation from the mid-1970s. However, the execution/ 
Implementation of the Fourth National Development Plan, 1981–1985, was affected by the 
collapse  of  the  international  oil  prices.  In  1982  the  government  introduced  the  Economic 
Stabilization Act as an immediate reaction to dwindling oil earnings and major external sector 
imbalances.  This  was  aimed  at  reducing  government  expenditure  and  conserving  foreign 
reserves in order to improve the country’s balance sheet. It was however found that there 
was need for a more fundamental reform to compliment the austerity measures. In 1986, the 
government  accepted  the  International  Monetary  Fund-sponsored  Structural  Adjustment 
Programme  (SAP).  The  SAP  aimed  at  removing  cumbersome  administrative  controls  and 
creating a more market-friendly environment underpinned by measures and incentives that 
would  encourage  private  enterprise  and  more  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  One  might 
argue the SAP recorded some measure of success. However, some of the gains of the SAP 
were eroded following the increased spate of policy reversals between 1988 and 1989. 
Up  to  1990,  the  economy  witnessed  some  gains  which  were  associated  with  increased 
deregulation  and  liberalization  in  economic  management.  However,  owing  to  policy 
slippages,  there  was  a  reversal  of  trends  in  major  macroeconomic  aggregates  thereafter, 
resulting from policy reversals and inconsistencies. Generally, frequent policy inconsistencies 
and reversals that characterized the period under review created distortions in the economy 
and  were  further  compounded  by  external  shocks,  including  the  external  debt  overhang. 
Overall,  SAP  failed  to  realize  the  goals  of  creating  wealth  and  promoting  sound  economic 
development as most of the policies were terminated prematurely or reversed out rightly. 
The  experimentation  with  deregulation  and  liberalization  was  truncated  in  1994  with  the 
advent of a military government. Thus, the Federal Government reregulated the economy, by 
capping  exchange  and  interest  rates  due  to  high  nominal  interest  rates  that  reached  an 
all-time high of 48.0 per cent in commercial banks and 60.0 per cent in non-bank financial 
institutions. These rates were in turn driven by the high rates of inflation at 48.8 per cent in 
1992 and 61.3 per cent in 1993. As there was no clear economic strategy for the rest of the 
decade, the monetary policy implementation became ineffective to check expansionary fiscal 
operations.  In  addition,  weak  institutions  and  an  unfriendly  legal  environment  reduced  the 
benefits that would have accrued to the economy. However, the scenario changed in 1999, 
with  the  return  of  democratic  governance  in  the  country.  Democratic  governments  have 
introduced  series  of  reforms  that  were  aimed  at  redressing  the  distortions  in  the  economy 
and  to  restore  economic  growth  following  the  period  of  economic  decline.  In  2004  the 
government’s economic agenda was formally launched and tagged the National Economic 
Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS). 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 5
3.1.1 
Within  the  context  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  (CBN),  a  medium-term  policy  framework 
adopted  since  2002  was  to  free  monetary  policy  implementation  from  the  problem  of  time 
inconsistency and minimize over-reaction to temporary shocks. However, periodic amendments 
are  constantly  made  to  the  policy  guidelines  in  the  light  of  developments  in  the  financial 
markets  and  performance  of  the  economy.  Thus,  in  2005,  some  new  reforms  were 
introduced as “amendments and addendum” to the 2004/2005 monetary policy circular. Even 
though,  emphasis  on  techniques  and  instruments  to  achieve  these  objectives  continually 
changed over the years, the authority has continued to sanitize and restructure the financial 
sector. Thus, in 2004 the banking sector consolidation was initiated aimed at recapitalizing 
the banks and ensuring a sustainable and stable financial system that would support the real 
sector of the economy.  
3.1.2  On-going banking sector reforms 
Perhaps, a pertinent question to ask at this juncture is: why we have embarked on another 
banking  sector  reform  four  years  after  the  previous  one  was  begun.  The  recent  global 
financial  crisis  strained  the  gains  that  were  made  in  the  Nigerian  financial  services  sector 
from the 2004/2005 banking sector consolidation. The experience in the industry, however, 
followed the global trends. The global financial crisis adversely affected the Nigerian financial 
services  sector,  particularly  the  banking  sector.  Indeed,  a  section  of  banking  industry  was 
badly affected as some banks were in grave condition and faced liquidity problems, owing to 
their significant exposure to the capital market in the form of margin loans and share-backed 
lending,  which  stood  at  about  N900.0  billion  as  at  end-December,  2008.  The  amount 
represented  about  12.0  per  cent  of  aggregate  credit  of  the  industry  or  31.9  per  cent  of 
shareholders’ funds. Furthermore, in the wake of the high oil prices, a section of the industry 
that was extensively exposed to the oil and gas sector was also badly affected. As at end-
December,  2008,  banks’  total  exposure  to  the  oil  industry  stood  at  over  N754.0  billion, 
representing  over  10.0  per  cent  of  the  industry  total  and  over  27.0  per  cent  of  the 
shareholders’ funds. 
The excessive exposure resulted in some weaknesses, notably liquidity problems, exhibited 
by  some  of  the  banks  towards  the  end  of  2008.  As  part  of  its  liquidity  support,  the  CBN 
Discount  Window  was  expanded  in  October  2008  to  accommodate  money  market 
instruments such as Bankers’ Acceptances and Commercial Papers. As at June 2009, the 
banks’ 
the  Expanded  Discount  Window  (EDW)  was  over 
N2,688.84 billion, while the outstanding commitments was over N256.0 billion, most of which 
were owed by less than half of the banks in operation. When the CBN closed down the EDW 
and,  in  its  place,  guaranteed  inter-bank  placements,  it  was  observed  that  the  same  banks 
were the  main net-takers under the guarantee arrangement, indicating that they  had more 
deep-rooted 
identified  eight 
interdependent factors as the main origin of the crisis in the banking sector. These include:  
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Sudden capital inflows and macroeconomic instability  
Poor corporate governance and character failure 
Lack of investor and consumer sophistication 
Inadequate disclosure and lack of transparency 
Critical gaps in regulatory framework and regulations  
Uneven supervision and enforcement 
Weaknesses within the CBN 
Weaknesses in the business environment 
liquidity  problems.  Further 
total  commitment  under 
investigation  by 
the  CBN 
6 
 BIS Review 166/2010
It  was  against  this  background  that  the  CBN  moved  decisively  to  strengthen  the  industry, 
protect  depositors  and  creditors’  funds,  safeguard  the  integrity  of  the  industry  and  restore 
public confidence. In that regard, the CBN replaced the chief executives/executive directors 
of  the  banks  identified  as  the  source  of  instability  in  the  industry  and  injected  the  sum  of 
N620.0  billion  into  the  banks  in  an  effort  to  prevent  a  systemic  crisis.  Arrangements  were 
also  made  to  recover  non-performing  loans  from  banks’  debtors,  while  guaranteeing  all 
foreign credits and correspondent banking commitments of the affected banks. Furthermore, 
the  Bank  proposed  the  establishment  of  the  Asset  Management  Corporation  of  Nigeria 
(AMCON). The AMCON Act was passed by the National Assembly and signed into law by 
the President. The AMCON as a resolution vehicle is expected to soak the “toxic assets” of 
the  banks.  Members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  AMCON  have  also  been  cleared  by  the 
Senate while the Board itself has been inaugurated and held its first meeting to chart the way 
forward towards the attainment of its mandate. 
The CBN is also collaborating with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the 
Nigerian  Stock  Exchange  (NSE)  to  reduce  the  cost  of  transactions,  particularly  bond 
issuance so as to diversify funding sources away from banks, as well as attract more foreign 
portfolio  investors  into  the  sector.  Efforts  are  also  being  intensified  towards  strengthening 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  and  enhancing  monitoring  of  the  operations  of  the 
deposit money banks (DMBs) to ensure that they remain safe, sound and healthy. 
To  further  engender  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  enhance  customer 
protection, the CBN established the Consumer and Financial Protection Division to provide a 
platform  through  which  consumers  can  seek  redress.  In  the  first  three  months  of  its 
operation,  about  600  consumer  complaints  were  received  by  the  Division  which  was  a 
manifestation of the absence of an effective consumer complaints resolution mechanism in 
banks. The CBN has also issued a directive to banks to establish Customer Help Desks at 
their  head  offices  and  branches.  In  addition,  the  CBN  has  commenced  a  comprehensive 
review  of  the  Guide  to  Bank  Charges  with  a  view  to  making  the  charges  realistic  and 
consumer friendly. Furthermore, the Consumer and Financial Protection Division is expected 
to  commence  a  programme  of  consumer  education  and  enlightenment  and  is  also 
collaborating  with  the  Consumer  Protection  Council  on  the  review  of  the  Consumer 
Protection Council Act No. 66 of 1992, to regulate and enforce discipline in the market. 
The CBN has taken steps to integrate the banking system into the global best practices in 
financial  reporting  and  disclosure  through  the  adoption  of  the  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) in the Nigerian Banking Sector by end 2010. This is expected to 
enhance  market  discipline,  and  reduce  uncertainties  which  limit  the  risk  of  unwarranted 
contagion. The CBN is also, closely collaborating with other stakeholders like the Nigerian 
Accounting  Standard  Board  (NASB),  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  (FMF),  NDIC,  SEC,  and 
NAICOM; PENCOM, Federal Inland Revenue Service (FIRS), and the Institute of Chartered 
Accountant of Nigeria (ICAN), among others, towards ensuring a seamless full adoption of 
IFRS  in  the  Nigerian  banking  sector  by  2012.  These  efforts  are  being  pursued  under  the 
aegis  of  the  Roadmap  Committee  of  Stakeholders  on  the  Adoption  of  IFRS  in  Nigeria 
inaugurated by the NASB and facilitated by the World Bank. 
The  universal  banking  (UB)  model  adopted  in  2001,  allowed  banks  to  diversify  into  non-
banking financial businesses. Following the consolidation programme, banks became awash 
with  capital,  which  was  deployed  to  multiples  of  financial  services.  In  effect,  the  laudable 
objectives  of  the  UB  model  were  abused  by  operators,  with  banks  operating  as  financial 
supermarkets  to  the  detriment  of  core  banking  practices.  To  address  the  observed 
challenges,  the  CBN  has  reviewed  the  UB  model  with  a  view  to  refocusing  banks  to  their 
core activity of intermediation. Under the new model, banks would not be allowed to invest 
their capital or depositors funds in non-bank subsidiaries, while banks with such investments 
would be required to either divest or spin-off the businesses to holding companies that will be 
licensed by the CBN as other financial institutions. The three classes of deposit money banks 
being proposed are: International banks, National banks and Regional banks.  
BIS Review 166/2010 
 7
In  addition  to  the  reforms  in  the  banking  sector,  the  CBN  has  also  focused  attention  in 
facilitating economic development in Nigeria through its developmental role and in recognition 
of the fact that the financial sector needs to support real sector activities to enhance the future 
prospects of the Nigerian economy. In this regard, the CBN has taken the lead in the financing 
of  the  real  sector  and  infrastructure  projects,  and  enhancing  credit  to  the  real  sector.  A 
N500.0 billion  fund  was  established  out  of  which  N300  billion  is  for  power/infrastructure  and 
aviation  sectors  and  N200.0  billion  for  the  refinancing/restructuring  of  banks’  existing  loan 
portfolios to manufacturers/SMEs. Also, a N200 billion Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) 
Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  was  created  to  complement  the  earlier  N200  billion  Commercial 
Agricultural Fund for loans to farmers. Thus far, the CBN has released over N190.0 billion out 
of which N130.0 billion has been disbursed, out to the manufacturers/SMEs at a fixed rate of 
7% through the Bank of Industry (BOI) and deposit money banks. 
Nature and structure of the Nigerian economy 
3.2 
Nigeria  is  the  single  largest  geographical  unit  in  West  Africa.  It  occupies  a  land  area  of 
923,768 square kilometers and lies entirely within the tropics with two main vegetation zones; 
the  rain  forest  and  Savannah  zones,  reflecting  the  amount  of  rainfall  and  its  spatial 
distribution. 
Structurally,  the  Nigerian  economy  can  be  classified  into  three  major  sectors  namely 
primary/agriculture and natural resources; secondary – processing and manufacturing; and 
tertiary/services sectors. The economy is characterized by structural dualism. The agricultural 
sector  is  an  admixture  of  subsistence  and  modern  farming,  while  the  industrial  sector 
comprises  modern  business  enterprises  which  co-exist  with  a  large  number  of  micro-
enterprises  employing  less  than  10  persons  mainly  located  in  the  informal  sector.  The 
agricultural  sector  has  not  been  able  to  fulfill  its  traditional  role  of  feeding  the  population, 
meeting  the  raw  material  needs  of  industries,  and  providing  substantial  surplus  for  export. 
Indeed, the contribution of the sector to total GDP has fallen over the decades, from a very 
dominant  position  of  55.8  per  cent  of  the  GDP  in  1960–70  to  28.4  per  cent  in  1971–80, 
before rising to 32.3, 34.2 and 40.3 per cent during the decades 1981–90, 1991–2000 and 
2001–2009,  respectively  (Table  1).  The  fall  is  not  because  a  strong  industrial  sector  is 
displacing agriculture but largely as a result of low productivity, owing to the dominance of 
peasant  farmers  and  their  reliance  on  rudimentary  farm  equipment  and  low  technology. 
Another feature of the sector is under-capitalization which results in low yield and declining 
output, among others. 
Table I 
Sectoral contributions to GDP 
The  industrial  sector  comprises  the  manufacturing,  mining  (including  crude  petroleum  and 
gas)  and  electricity  generation.  Prior  to  independence  in  1960,  the  Nigerian  economy  was 
mainly agrarian. On attainment of independence, the Nigerian government embarked on the 
 8 
 BIS Review 166/2010
into  an 
the  country 
transforming 
industrial  economy.  The  Nigerian 
programme  of 
manufacturing  sub-sector  is  made  up  of  large,  medium  and  small  enterprises,  as  well  as 
cottage and hand-craft units. In spite of spirited efforts made to boost manufacturing output 
and various policy regimes, manufacturing has not made any significant contribution to the 
growth  of  the  economy.  Industry  as  a  whole  contributed  only  11.3  per  cent  of  the  GDP  in 
1960–70,  growing  significantly  in  the  next  two  decades  to  a  high  of  41.0  per  cent  in  
1981–1990,  owing  largely  to  the  crude  petroleum  and  gas  production  during  the  decades. 
The contribution contracted to 38.6 per cent in the 1990s and further to 29.4 per cent during 
2001–2009.  These  numbers,  in  fact,  belie  the  poor  contribution  of  the  manufacturing  sub-
sector  to  aggregate  output  in  Nigeria  compared  with  its  peers  in  Asia  and  Latin  America. 
Indeed,  the  contribution  of  the  manufacturing  component  has  on  average  been  below 
5.0 per cent in the last two decades. Even the relatively high contribution of oil sector to the 
industrial  sector  contribution  is  being  driven  largely  by  crude  production  and  not  by  the 
associated “core industrial” components like refining and petrochemicals. The contribution of 
wholesale  and  retail  trade  and  services  has  more  or  less  remained  stable  while  that  of 
building and contribution rose sharply from 5.3 per cent in the 1960s to 8.3 per cent in the 
1970s, but fell consistently, thereafter, to 1.8 per cent during 2001–2009. During and some 
few  years  after  SAP,  the  main  manufactured  exports  were  textiles,  beer  and  stout,  cocoa 
butter, plastic products, processed timber, tyres, bottled water, soap and detergents as well 
as iron rods. However, some of these products have disappeared from the export list owing 
to poor enabling environment. 
The  components  of  the  mining  sub  sector  in  Nigeria  are  crude  petroleum,  gas  and  solid 
minerals.  Prior  to  the  advent  of  petroleum  minerals  such  as  coal  and  tin  were  the  main 
mineral exports. However, with the emergence of crude oil, the relative importance of solid 
minerals diminished. Indeed, since the 1970s, the largest mining activity has been crude oil 
production, which became dominant in terms of government revenue and export earnings. 
Lately the production of gas has gained increased attention, as the export potential of gas 
has reduced the dominance of crude oil. 
Performance trends 
3.3 
The average growth rate of real GDP, which was 5.9 per cent in the period 1960–70, rose to 
8.0 per cent in 1971–73 (Table 2). The Nigerian economy expanded rapidly, as oil production 
and export rose phenomenally. However, activities in the service sub-sector were relatively 
modest  even  though  marketing  and  advertising,  which  covers  distributive  trade,  lagged 
behind. The average GDP growth rate later dropped to 3.2 per cent during 1976–80. This 
level  was  sustained  in  the  period  1982–90  following  improved  performance  in  agricultural 
and industrial sub-sectors. 
Table 2 
Average growth rate of real GDP 
(Percentages) 
 BIS Review 166/2010 
 9
Suffice it to state that GDP responded favorably to the economic adjustment policies of the 
eighties during which the SAP and economic liberalization were adopted. Thus, annual GDP 
grew from a negative 0.6 per cent in 1987 to 13.0 per cent in 1990. However, the average 
growth rate of real GDP dropped to 1.9 per cent during 1991–1998. This was in spite of the 
favorable  developments  in  the  agricultural  and  services  sub-sectors  of  the  economy.  Real 
GDP  growth  rate  rebounded  to  8.3  per  cent  during  the  period  1999–2007,  reflecting 
improved  economic  policy  of  NEEDS  era.  Despite  the  decline  in  real  GDP  growth  rate  to 
6.3 per cent in the period 2008–2009, the major drivers remained agriculture, wholesale and 
retail  trade, and  services  sectors.  Indeed,  the  last  decade has  been  a  period  of  rebirth  as 
affirmed by almost all macroeconomic indicators (Table 3). But the growth rate has not been 
high enough to push down the poverty profile. 
Table 3 
Selected macroeconomic indicators 
 In  deed,  the  Nigerian  economy  has  not  experienced  remarkable  transformation  and 
restructuring.  Equally  important  is  the  indication  that  since  1999,  Nigeria  has  become  a 
trading  outpost  for  goods  produced  elsewhere  with  little  domestic  transformation  of  the 
output of primary sectors by the secondary sector. This is particularly so since the Nigerian 
agriculture is really peasantry and the high contributions of tertiary sector to output suggest 
that the sector is not really servicing the Nigerian economy but, indeed, the economies of her 
trading  partners.  Thus,  the  Nigerian  economy  is  still  dominated  by  the  primary  sector, 
followed  rather  closely  by  the  tertiary  sector  with  the  contribution  of  the  secondary  sector 
remaining  insignificant.  Little  wonder  the  diversification  index  remained  below  0.4  per  cent 
through the review period, the barrage of reforms notwithstanding. 
The Nigerian economy is import dependent with very little non-oil exports. It relies heavily on 
crude  oil  and  gas  exports  with  other  sectors  trailing  far  behind.  For  example,  crude  oil 
accounts  for  about  90  per  cent  of  foreign  exchange  earned  by  the  country  while  non-oil 
exports account for the balance. The economy is, therefore, susceptible to shocks in the oil 
industry.  In  recent  times,  these  shocks  have  been  caused  by  either  developments  in  the 
International  crude  oil  market  or  the  restiveness  in  the  Niger  Delta  region  of  the  country. 
Agriculture and other mining (besides oil and gas) have been abandoned to the rural poor. 
Economic and social infrastructure, especially power is grossly dilapidated. The power sector 
10 
 BIS Review 166/2010
is  generally  recognized  as  a  binding  constraint  on  Nigerian  economy.  Poor  corporate 
governance, both in the public and private sectors have led to high incidence of corruption 
and inequity in income distribution. 
Table 4 
Composition of Nigerian exports 
Table 5 
Composition of exports in selected developed  
and developing countries 2000 
 BIS Review 166/2010 
  11
A  review  of  the  statistics  from  comparable  countries  shows  that  the  share  of  primary 
commodities  in  total  exports  is  20.0  percent  for  Malaysia,  24.0  per  cent  for  India, 
12.0 per cent for China. For developed countries it is 17 per cent for Britain and America and 
9  per  cent  for  Japan.  In  Nigeria,  the  primary  sector  contributes  99  percent  of  exports  with 
only 1.0 per cent coming from the secondary sector. 
Growth drivers 
3.4 
In Nigeria, Agriculture dominates the primary sector, which dominates the entire economy. 
The population of the country has grown by about 150.0 per cent between 1963 and 2006, 
approximately 3.75 per cent per annum. A simple calculation shows that for the per capita 
income  to  remain  the  same  as  in  the  1960s,  every  sector  of  the  economy  should  at  least 
have  grown  by  the  same  percentage.  But  the  agricultural  sector  –  the  mainstay  of  the 
economy – has declined in its contribution to the GDP, manufacturing has declined, building 
and  construction  has  also  declined,  while  the  wholesale  and  retail  trade  as  well  as  the 
services  sectors  have  remained  almost  the  same  as  in  the  1960s.  Applying  the  Harrod-
Domar model, this implies that assuming a capital-output ratio of 5.0 per cent and a savings 
ratio of 15.0 per cent, the economy would grow at 3.0 per cent. Of course, the savings ratio 
depends  on  the  difference  between  the  population  growth  rate  and  the  growth  rate  of  the 
GDP (the economy). Table 2 shows an average growth rate of real GDP of 5.3 per cent in 
the period 1960–2009. If the average population growth rate of 3.8 is deducted from 5.3, we 
are left with a GDP growth rate of 1.5 per cent out of which no meaningful savings can be 
made. In effect, the economy has not been growing in real terms over the years. For Nigeria 
to  make  a  quantum  leap,  the  economy  has  to  grow  by  at  least  double  digit  rates  for  a 
sustained period of time.  
Challenges facing the Nigerian economy 
4. 
The  picture  painted  above  is  a  consequence  of  many  challenges  facing  the  Nigerian 
economy. In what follows, I will discuss these challenges in greater detail. 
Nigeria  is  a  mono-product  economy  with  the  bulk  of  government  revenue  coming  from  oil 
exports which is susceptible to shocks in the international oil market. Moreover, many other 
solid minerals with which the country is richly endowed with remain generally untapped. More 
fundamentally, the economy has disproportionately relied on the primary sector (subsistence 
agriculture and the extractive industry) without any meaningful value addition. In light of this, 
the  little  growth  recorded  in  the  economy,  thus  far,  has  been  without  commensurate 
employment,  positive  attitudinal  change,  value  reorientation,  and  equitable 
income 
distribution,  among  others.  These  could  be  attributed 
leadership,  poor 
implementation of economic policies, weak institutions, poor corporate governance, endemic 
corruption, etc. The challenge, therefore, is how to deploy/manage the receipts from the oil 
and  gas  exports  to  achieve  the  highest  value  for  money  in  the  economy;  develop  on  a 
sustainable  basis,  the  many  untapped  solid  minerals;  improve  agricultural  productivity  by 
cultivating more of the available arable land with improved technology; process and preserve 
primary produce with the aim of increasing value addition; manufacture the basic durable and 
non-durable  goods  needed  by  Nigerians  and  the  West  African  sub-region,  market  and 
ultimately  looking  at  export  such  goods  and  sustain  manufacturing  by  providing  the  core 
industries; and remain competitive by developing and improving on the investment climate of 
the  country.  These  challenges  have  remained  largely  unresolved  owing  to  the  myriad  of 
problems: 
i. 
Macroeconomic challenges: The Nigerian macroeconomy is still characterized by 
structural rigidities, dualism and the false paradigm model. Generally, the sectors of 
the  economy  are  in  silos  to  the  extent  that  the  primary  sector  does  not  relate 
meaningfully  with  the  secondary  sector  and  the  same  for  the  secondary  and  the 
tertiary sectors. Agricultural produce end up as final consumer goods as only a small 
to  poor 
12 
 BIS Review 166/2010
quantity  is  processed  or  used  as  raw  materials  for  local  manufacturing  industries. 
Also, the produce of the extractive industries are exported in their raw forms without 
local value addition. Given the higher incomes in the oil and gas sub-sector of the 
extractive industry, attention is concentrated there to the almost total neglect of the 
mainstream  economy.  Consequently,  the  economy  is  broken  into  the  very  rich 
(relying on the oil and gas industry) and the very poor (relying on the mainstream 
economy)  with  almost  a  complete  vacuum  in-between  these  two.  The  false 
paradigm model also plays out in the economy in the sense that while the few very 
wealthy group clamour for relevance in the context of “expert” advise, the very poor 
suffer from ignorance, disease and malnutrition. Thus, there is no structural change 
and,  hence,  the  attitudinal  changes  expected  of  economic  transformation  are 
absent.  
Infrastructural challenges: one The main challenges’ facing the economy is poor 
economic and social infrastructure: bad roads, erratic power supply, limited access 
to portable water and basic healthcare, and much more. Building a vibrant economy 
or  restoring  growth  to  a  sluggish  economy  takes  resources.  To  ensure  long-term 
growth  and  prosperity,  Nigeria  must  use  its  resources  wisely,  invest  in  advanced 
technology  and  rebuild  the  infrastructure  without  which  the  economy  will  not  gain 
from  the  “power  of  productivity”.  A  nation  enjoys  higher  standards  of  living  if  the 
workers can produce large quantities of goods and services for local consumption 
and extra for export. The deficiencies in the economy lead to low productivity, poor 
quality products and non-competitiveness in the global market place. 
Poor  institutions  and  corporate  governance:  Another  important  challenge  to 
sustainable  economic  growth  in  Nigeria  is  lack  of  effective  institutions  and  good 
governance. These factors have been hindering various efforts and reforms of the 
government  to  stimulate  economic  growth  for  sustainable  development  in  Nigeria. 
The prevalence of weak institutions and poor corporate governance as well as poor 
ethical standards in most public and private organizations, hinder the attainment of 
the  goals  of  economic  policies  in  the  country.  Poor  corporate  governance  has 
adversely  affected  the  quality  of  institutions  to  the  extent  that  public  and  private 
institutions  are  used  for  selfish  interests,  thereby,  making  regulation  and  law 
enforcement ineffective. 
Corruption challenges: Although corruption is a global scourge, Nigeria appears to 
suffer particularly from it. Everyone appears to believe that the nation has a “culture 
of corruption”. Over the years, Nigeria has earned huge sums of money from crude 
oil, which appears to have largely gone down the sinkhole created by corruption. In 
an article, “Oil giant that runs on grease of politics,” Nigeria was described as a rich 
nation  floating  on  oil  wealth  “but  almost  none  of  it  flows  to  the  people”  (San 
Francisco Chronicle, March 11, 2007). Corruption has denied Nigerians the value of 
the  petro-dollar  that  has  accrued  to  the  country  over  the  years.  The  failure  of 
infrastructure,  political  and  ethical  standards  as  well  as  moral  and  educational 
standards can easily be traced to corruption.  
Low quality of education: Education is an important factor in economic growth and 
development.  But  the  nation’s  educational  system  has  been  facing  myriad  of 
challenges, which prevent the country from achieving its economic objectives. The 
problems  include  inadequate  funding  and  planning  and  management,  inadequate 
infrastructure, 
inadequate 
commitment  on  the  part  of  students  and  teachers,  among  others.  All  these  have 
combined  to  hinder  the  production  of  a  high  quality  work  force  to  propel  the 
economy  (UNESS  for  Nigeria:  2006–2015).  As  Dike  (2006)  noted,  the  state  of  a 
nation’s educational sector, among other things, determines the economic health of 
the nation. 
irrelevance  of  curricula 
industrial  needs,  and 
to 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 13
vi. 
vii. 
investment  and  even  managerial  capabilities.  Thus, 
The  Dutch  disease:  Since  the  oil  price  boom  of  the  early  1970s,  the  country 
abandoned  the  agricultural  and  industrial  sectors  of  the  economy  to  the  old  and 
weak. Both the public and private sectors of the economy concentrate their efforts in 
the  oil  and  gas  industry  to  the  extent  that  the  mainstream  economy  is  denied 
funding,  requisite 
the 
mainstream  economy  has  become  uncompetitive  globally  while  the  country  has 
turned  into  a  trading  outpost  for  foreign  companies.  This  has  hindered  the  much-
needed transformation of the economy in the last four decades. 
Poor investment climate: The consequence of all that have been said above is the 
poor 
the  economy 
uncompetitive. In the absence of adequate infrastructure (power, roads, water, etc.) 
the  cost  of  doing  business  in  the  country  remain  high,  forcing  to  neighboring 
countries even companies that had existed in Nigeria for upwards of four decades. 
that  has  rendered 
investment  climate 
the  economy 
in 
telecommunications  and 
Prospects for the economy 
5. 
Having reviewed the growth performance of the Nigerian economy and the challenges facing 
it,  the  next  appropriate  question  to  address  is  whether  the  prospects  are  bright  for  the 
economy. The answer to this question depends on the policies articulated for the medium-to-
long  term  and  the  seriousness  with  which  they  are  implemented.  Indeed,  it  has  been 
projected that by the year 2050, Brazil, Russia, India and China, usually referred to as the 
BRIC countries, would have a combined economy that is bigger than the group of six (G6) 
industrialized countries – USA, Japan, Germany, UK, France and Italy. In addition, in 2005 
“Global Economics” Paper No. 134 published a list of eleven countries that could have the 
BRIC  effect  and  achieve  global  economy-giant-status  by  2025.  The  countries  include: 
Bangladesh,  Egypt,  Indonesia,  Iran,  Mexico,  Nigeria,  Pakistan,  Philippines,  South  Korea, 
Turkey and Vietnam. In the projection of Goldman Sachs, only about 11 countries may have 
bigger  economies  than  Nigeria  by  2050.  It  is  clear  that  the  Nigerian  economy  has  great 
potential; all that is required is a policy framework that can jump-start it. Nigeria can leverage 
on its sizeable population, with a relatively highly-educated and enterprising workforce and 
its richly endowed economic potentials: physical, human and natural resources. Nigeria is the 
8th  largest  producer  of  crude  petroleum  in  the  World  and  has  the  6th  largest  deposit  of 
natural gas in the World. Therefore, the potentials in the oil and gas sectors, agriculture and 
manufacturing, 
the  growth 
prospects of the country. Nigeria is also a major growth pole in the West African sub-region 
and the African continent, and so has enormous geo-political and strategic advantage that if 
leveraged upon would foster growth.  
Having said this, economic growth, especially in a developing country like Nigeria, must be 
people-oriented.  Therefore,  pro-poor  policies  and  those  that  improve  on  the  welfare  of  a 
majority  of  the  people  should  be  emphasized.  In  this  connection,  in  the  light  of  the 
contribution  of  the  agricultural  sector  to  the  growth  of  the  real  GDP,  developments  in  the 
sector are likely to impact the people the most. Therefore, to realize the full potentials of the 
agricultural sector, the value-chain of the sector has to be explicitly targeted for growth. Thus, 
while  food  production  is  improved  through  improved  utilization  of  fertilizers  and  improved 
seedlings,  implying  greater  research  efforts,  further  mechanization  of  the  sector  should  be 
pursued.  This  is  likely  to  enable  the  release  of  surplus  labour  from  the  sector  without 
sacrificing  food  security.  Processing  is  another  level  of  the  value-chain  that  has  been 
abandoned over the years. It will not only encourage the farmers to produce without fear of 
organic wastes or price decline, it would also excite research and development in the sector 
as well as foster entry into international markets. These efforts have to be complemented by 
appropriate  trade  and  tariff  policies  that  would  protect  the  local  operators  from  unhealthy 
competition  from  abroad.  Already  a  lot  of  efforts  have  been  made,  including  those  by  the 
Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  aimed  at  improving  the  funding  of  the  sector  at  affordable  costs. 
Among  the  newest  financing  incentive  to  agriculture  is  the  Nigeria  Incentive  –  based  Risk 
Sharing framework for Agricultural lending. 
tourism,  among  others  brighten 
14 
 BIS Review 166/2010
This  model  of  financing  agriculture  is  different  in  many  ways  from  the  current  financing 
models which have not yielded the desired impact of making adequate credit available to the 
sector.  NIRSAL  is  a  demand  driven  credit  facility  rather  than  the  current  supply  driven 
funding. It would adopt a value chain approach to lending as banks would be free to choose 
which  part  of  the  value  chain  they  would  be  interested  in  lending  to.  It  would  build  the 
capacity  of  the  banks  to  engage  and  deliver  loan,  reduce  counterpart  risks  facing  banks 
through innovative crop insurance products, reward performance in agricultural lending, and 
would be managed with performance based incentives. NIRSAL would be tailored along the 
already developed model of the Impact Investing Fund for African Agriculture (IIFAA) based 
on Nigeria’s financial and agricultural development requirements. It would pool together the 
current  resources  in  CBN’s  agricultural  financing  schemes  and  other  investors  funds  and 
transfer these into the five components of the programme but managed outside of the CBN. 
In other words, existing agricultural support frameworks like CACS, ACGS, ACSS and NAIC, 
etc would be assessed, modified and integrated into five components. 
Specifically, the objectives of the programme include:  
 
Stimulate innovations in agricultural lending; 
Encourage banks that are lending to the sector; 
 
 
Eliminate state dependency by banks for deploying loanable funds to agriculture; 
Leverage DMBs balance sheet for lending into agriculture; and  
 
Ensure risk sharing approach that will build a business approach where banks share 
 
in the risk of lending to the sector. 
In  achieving  these  objectives,  there  would  be  five  integrating  components  to  ensure 
increased  bank  credit  to  the  agricultural  sector,  ensure  systemic  change  and  reward 
performance  based  on  evidence  using  market  driven  incentives.  These  five  pillars  would 
work together in an integrative way to change the way banks lend to agricultural sector. The 
five  major  components  of  this  programme  are:  Risk  Sharing  Facility  (RSF),  Insurance 
Component (IC), Technical Assistance Facility (TAF), Bank Incentive Mechanism (BIM) and 
Agricultural  Bank  Rating  System  (ABRS).  Thus,  agriculture  can  grow  by  as  high  as 
12.0 per cent  or  more  in  the  near-term  and  beyond,  if  appropriate  environment  and 
incentives are put in place, along with the funding needs of the sector. 
The  industrial  sector  also  has  great  potential  for  growth.  The  major  challenge  is  adequate 
infrastructure, especially power. The Central Bank of Nigeria has also taken a bold step in 
this regard in addition to the efforts of the Federal Government. While efforts are made to 
revive the ailing core industries (iron and steel, petrochemicals, aluminium, etc.), the small 
and medium industries should be encouraged to venture into the production of the basic non-
durable  goods  needed  by  the  teaming  population  in  Nigeria  and  in  the  sub-region.  The 
industrial research institutes have many findings that need to be commercialized. The solid 
minerals  sub-sector  also  should  be  opened  up  for  more  aggressive  exploitation.  The  link 
between  the  oil  and  gas  industry  and  the  rest  of  the  economy  should  be  strengthened 
through  a  more  effective  implementation  of  the  local  content  policy.  Industry,  especially 
manufacturing, would, thus, be able to contribute as much as 16.0 per cent to GDP and the 
solid  mineral  sub-sector  20.0  per  cent  in  the  near-to-medium  term  from  7.9  per  cent  and 
12.8 per cent in 2009, respectively. The oil and gas industry can be grown through its greater 
integration with the rest of the economy. Gas utilization at both the industrial and domestic 
fronts can be expanded while utilization for power generation is further encouraged by the 
establishment of more thermal power plants. Far reaching reforms in the Petroleum Industry 
will help to enhance the gains from the oil and gas industry. Sustained peace in the Niger 
Delta area would guarantee that Nigeria’s OPEC quota is met at the current price. Thus, the 
contribution  of  the  oil  and  gas  industry  to  the  economy  may  recover  from  negative 
1.33 per cent in 2009 to positive 4.0–5.0 per cent in the near-to-medium term. 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 15
With improvements in the agricultural and industrial sectors and the resultant improvement in 
household incomes, the building and construction sector and the wholesale and retail trade 
sectors would blossom and contribute as high as 24.0 and 22.0 per cent to the GDP in the 
near-to-medium  term  from  12.3  and  11.3  per cent  in  2009.  The  services  sector is  another 
source  of  life  for  the  Nigerian  economy.  The  telecommunications  sub-sector  continues  to 
drive that sector. Improvements in power supply would increase the output of the sector. The 
local  content  of  the  sector  can  also  be  improved  upon.  Nigerians  are  already  gaining 
knowledge in the area and inclusion of more of the aspects of technology in school curricula 
would  help  to  deepen  knowledge  and  value  addition  to  the  industry.  Thus,  this  sector  can 
grow  by  up  to  45.0  per  cent  in  the  near-to-medium  term  from  34.2  per  cent  in  2009.  The 
transport sub-sector is another sub-sector that appears to have been abandoned. However, 
in  the  recent  past,  the  government  has  stepped  up  efforts  towards  its  revival.  It  can, 
therefore, increase its contribution to the GDP from 2012 and beyond.  
The positive outlook that has been painted above, however, is predicated on the sustained 
implementation  of  the  various  reform  initiatives  that  have  been  articulated  for  the  various 
sectors  of  the  economy  and  the  programmes/policies  enunciated  in  the  Vision  20:2020 
document. Rehabilitation of the dilapidated infrastructure and development of new ones are 
an integral part of the reforms that should drive future prosperous Nigerian economy. In the 
event  that  the  sectoral  targets  are  achieved  in  the  near-to-medium  term  and  beyond,  the 
GDP is capable of growing by up to 13.0 per cent per annum during this period, from the 
2009 level of 6.7 per cent. Once the economy is able to jump-start, it is likely to boom, given 
massive  resources  that  are  currently  lying  idle  and  untapped.  Furthermore,  we  should  not 
discount the influence of the political environment in the whole process of launching Nigeria 
into league of industrialized nations by 2020. 
In summary, this growth prospect can be achieved and sustained if:  
 
 
The balance of trade is persistently positive, as it has been in the last five years; 
External reserves can be substantially built up to boost the credit worthiness of the 
economy and attract foreign investment;  
Efforts  are  sustained  to  maintain  peace  in  Niger  Delta  to  boost  crude  oil  and  gas 
output; 
Electricity  supply  is  increased  to  15,000–25,000  Mwh  between  now  and  2020,  to 
boost manufacturing capacity utilization and activities in other critical sectors; 
The banking sector reforms and efforts to resolve liquidity challenges are sustained 
to channel credit massively to the real sector of the economy;  
Government sustains the current reforms in the various sectors of the economy to 
achieve rapid growth and development; 
We increase agricultural output barring adverse weather conditions, with continued 
implementation  of  various  government  programmes,  especially  preserving, 
processing and marketing activities;  
We sustain the growth in the services sector, by increasing the local content of the 
industry and by expanding the tele-density of the country;  
We deregulate the downstream petroleum sub-sector and encourage the setting up 
of private refineries; 
Diversify  the  economy  away  from  primary  products  and  away  from  crude  oil  and 
natural gas; 
Improve other key economic and social infrastructure; and  
Sustain the subsisting democratic governance. 
         16 
 BIS Review 166/2010
The global environment for development has changed quite significantly in recent years, with 
the  rapid  growth  in  world  trade,  capital  flows  and  information  and  communications 
technology.  Nigeria  can  benefit  from  these  changes  by  providing  a  more  conducive 
investment climate in the country.  
Conclusion 
6. 
The  prospects  for  growth  in  Nigeria  are  very  bright  going  by  the  achievements  recorded 
during the last ten years and the current reforms in the various sectors. However, for Nigeria 
to  consolidate  these  economic  gains  and  move  higher  in  the  frontlines  of  growth  and 
development,  it  must  deepen  reforms  that  improve  human  capital,  promote  high-quality 
public  infrastructure,  and  encourage  competition.  The  pillars  to  sustain  this  consolidation 
must  include  a  firm  fiscal  policy,  transparent  fiscal  operations,  development-oriented 
monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies,  strengthening  of  the  financial  sector  and  strict 
adherence to the rule-of-law and respect for the sanctity of contract as well as commitment to 
fighting corruption and corrupt practices. In all of these, Nigeria has opportunity for progress. 
We must break away from the past to deliver a new Nigeria that the future generations of 
Nigerians would be proud of. Our electoral process must not only be credible, but must be 
seen  to  be  credible,  since  robust  economic  performance  necessarily  requires  a  robust 
political environment to happen. 
I thank you all for your attention. 
References 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
in 
(1990) 
the  Nigerian  Economy  
Inter-Industry  Linkages 
Ajakaiye,  D.  O 
1973–1977, NISER Monongraph Series No 2 NISER, Ibadan. 
Central Bank of Nigeria Annual Report and Statement of Accounts, CBN, Abuja. 
Ernest C. A. Ndukwe: Telecommunications as Catalyst for a Modern Industrialized 
Nigeria. 
Felix  O.  Ayadi,  et  al:  Structural  Adjustment,  Financial  Sector  Development  and 
Economic Prosperity in Nigeria. 
Harrod,  R.F.  and  E.D.  Domar,  (1946)  “Capital  Expansion,  Rate  of  Growth  and 
Employment”, Econometrica, 14, April. 
Mankiw,  N.  G.  (2001);  Principles  of  Microeconomics  (2nd  edition),  Fortworth: 
Harcourt CollegePublishers. 
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) 2010 Issues. 
NCEMA: Structural Adjustment Programme in Nigeria: Technical Proposal. 
Ndekwu  E.C  (NISER):  The  Financial  System’s  Role  in  Resource  Mobilization  and 
Investment: Analysis of Financial Deepening in the Nigeria’s Financial Sector. 
Oresotu,  F.  O.(1992):  Interest  Rates  Behaviour  under  Performance  of  Financial 
Reforms-The Nigerian Case”, CBN Economic and Financial Review, Vol. 30, No. 2, 
109–129. 
Sen A. (1999), Development as Freedom, New York: Anchor Books (see Chapters 
1–3), pp.36–37. 
Shabbir  Cheema,  G.  (April,  2004),  ‘from  public  administration  to  governance:  the 
paradigm shift in the link between government and citizens.’ Paper presented at the 
6th Global Forum on Reinventing Government, with a theme, Towards Participatory 
and Transparent Governance, 24–27 May 2005. 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 17
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
United Nations Development Programme, Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented 
World, New York, Human Development Report 2002.  
United  Nations  Development  Programme,  Governance  for  Sustainable  Human 
Development: A UNDP Policy Paper, New York, UNDP, 1997. 
United  Nations  Development  Programme,  Corruption  and Governance,  New  York, 
UNDP, 1997. 
Victor E.D. “Governance and Challenges Facing the Nigerian Economy: Is Jonathan 
The Answer”. 
______  (1992)  “Growth,  Structure  and  Linkages  in  the  Nigerian  Economy”  in 
Obadan  M.  I.  and  Ajakaiye  D.  O.  (ed)  Nigerian  Economic  Development,  National 
Center for Economic Management and Administration (NCEMA), Ibadan. 
Zayyad, H. R.: Privatization and Commercialization in Nigeria. 
18 
 BIS Review 166/2010
