Ewart S Williams: Governance, regulation and financial crime prevention 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  2010  Regional  Forum  “Governance,  Regulation  and  Financial  Crime 
Prevention”, Port-of-Spain, 9 August 2010. 
 I would like to thank the sponsors, the International Governance and Risk Institute for inviting 
me to provide some opening remarks to what should be a most stimulating forum, given the 
impressive array of presenters. 
Your seminar theme is about “financial crime prevention” and while many of your sessions 
would be on money laundering and terrorist financing, I am pleased to see that the forum will 
cover other areas of financial crime. 
I  would  like  to  make  some  brief  comments  on  some  aspects  of  corporate  financial  crime 
which appear to be on the increase in Trinidad and Tobago. I will also say something about 
anti-money laundering efforts here in Trinidad and Tobago. 
For  convenience,  financial  crime  is  defined  to  cover  any  non-violent  crime  resulting  in 
financial loss. This definition will easily cover fraud on the public, credit card fraud, improper 
self-dealing,  stock  market  manipulation  and  other  breaches  of  fiduciary  trust.  Money 
laundering is clearly an important category of financial crime. 
Obviously, I will look at the issue from my vantage point as regulator.  
The  recent  massive  destruction  of  financial  wealth  in  the  US  and  Europe  (most  notably 
ENRON and WorldCom but there were others) raised the profile of corporate financial crime. 
In the last two years or so, we have been introduced by Madoff and Stanford. What all of 
these have in common is a breach of fiduciary trust whereby depositors or investors were 
bilked  of  considerable  sums  by  unscrupulous  operators  who  were  reckless  with  other 
peoples’ money, driven by greed and self-dealing. 
In  recent  years,  we  in  the  Caribbean  have  had  our  own  high  profile  examples  of  financial 
crime, of various levels of sophistication.  
Some of you may remember the “Fantasy Tours” a pyramid scheme which collected more 
than  TT$100  million  in  a  year  before  its  inevitable  collapse.  A  similar  scheme  in  Jamaica, 
PLUS,  is  estimated  to  have  raked  in  between  US$100-500  million.  There  was  one  in 
Grenada reported to have cost investors an estimated US$30 million. 
It is worth noting that both in Trinidad and Tobago and Jamaica, it was not only the lower-
income  or  the  financially  naïve  that  were  caught  in  the  net.  In  fact,  several  people,  who 
considered themselves financially astute and who should have known better were also drawn 
in and swindled of their savings. 
But  the  principle  of  baiting  depositors  with  unreasonably  high  rates  of  return  is  not 
confined to pyramid schemes but from time to time can also be found in the formal financial 
sector. Over the years, a few institutions, in various branches of the financial sector, have 
sought to increase market share by offering significantly higher than market interest rates, 
which cannot be sustained by the returns from their asset portfolios. They are then forced to 
attract new deposits to meet maturing liabilities – a process that is not sustainable. This is 
what is called a ponzi scheme and it is a serious financial crime. This modus- operandi 
contributed  to  the  demise  of  several  finance  houses  in  the  1980s.  Some  institutions 
have experimented with the model since, also with disastrous consequences for depositors 
and policy-holders. 
The  evolution  of  the  financial  sector  toward  conglomerate  structures  has  increased  the 
opportunities for financial crime, particularly if the various units of the conglomerate are not 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 1
than 
invested  according 
operated  at  arm’s-length.  What  happens  sometimes  is  that  depositors’  funds  are  used  to 
sustain  unprofitable  businesses,  rather 
to  acceptable  risk 
management practices. This type of operation (a kind of self dealing) has sometimes resulted 
in significant losses for the depositors and constitutes a financial crime. 
And then there are the more common practices that many individuals face in their lifetime. 
The unscrupulous insurance agent or investment fund manager who deliberately promises 
an unsuspecting client, more than could be delivered; who tells you that your principal is 
guaranteed when it is not; who tells you that your premiums will never increase when the fine 
print says otherwise: the insurance company which refuses to pay your claim even though 
you  kept  up  with  your  premiums.  All  these  are  financial  crimes  even  though  they  are 
commonly not recognized as such.  
It  is  almost  always  argued  that  these  kinds  of  financial  crimes  occur  because  of  weak 
financial regulation. Sometimes this is true, though it is only part of the story. It is true that, 
for the most part, our financial legislation has not kept pace with the evolution of the financial 
system and with the increasing sophistication of those who seek to commit these crimes. It is 
perhaps  true  that  rather  than  the  light  touch  approach,  our  regulatory  regimes  should  be 
more aggressive, more pro-active, more interventionist.  
However, in the final analysis, updated legislation, more rules and even tighter regulation are 
not sufficient to prevent most types of financial crime. In the US, notwithstanding the most 
updated legislation and the most efficient regulation, Madoff and Stanford happened.  
International experience, as well as experience here at home, suggests that strengthening 
corporate  governance  is  critical  to  combating  financial  crime.  A  corporate  environment  in 
which there is an effective system of controls and where management is accountable to their 
Boards  and  Boards  accountable  to  their  shareholders  is  one  in  which  financial  fraud  and 
other financial crimes will be less likely to flourish. Good corporate governance serves as an 
early warning system to corporate and financial abuse. The fact that many of our firms are 
not  listed,  and  are  private  or  family  partnerships  does  not  remove  the  need  for  good 
governance.  
Every  financial  institution  operating  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  will  extol  the  virtues  of  good 
governance, even when their actual operations may indicate otherwise. It is time that good 
governance ceases to be the background noise and becomes the main music. Checks and 
balances are needed to rein in excesses, including financial crime and these controls must 
be exercised at all levels, at the level of the Board, the management and very importantly, at 
the level of the external auditor.  
A few words about money laundering … 
I fully agree with the important focus it has been given in this forum because I am convinced 
that we, in Trinidad and Tobago, need to take our anti-money laundering efforts up several 
notches. 
The  reality  is  that  as  the  advanced  countries  tighten  their  anti-money  laundering  regimes, 
criminals  could  be  expected  to  target  small  countries  like  ours,  which  have  less-robust 
defenses. 
To  our  credit,  we  have  embarked  on  a  comprehensive  program  to  upgrade  our  financial 
infrastructure in general and our anti-money laundering regime in particular. We have a new 
Financial Institutions Act; we are close to introducing new legislation for the insurance and 
the credit union sectors and we have brought in money remitters under the central bank’s 
purview. 
In the last few months, we have brought our AML/CFT regime closer in line with international 
requirements. Our immediate challenge is to ensure that there is effective enforcement of the 
existing  measures  and  to  broaden  the  regulatory  perimeter  for  AML/CFT  to  non-financial 
businesses and professions such as lawyers, accountants and real estate agencies.  
2 
 BIS Review 165/2010
You are going to hear all you need to know about financial crime and anti-money laundering 
during the course of this very impressively-designed forum. Make full use of the knowledge 
that  you  will  acquire  and  on  your  return  to  your  work-place  share  what  you  have  learnt. 
Financial crime including anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing is not only for the 
regulator; it is everybody’s business and we all need to do our part if we are to reduce its 
incidence. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 3
