Masaaki Shirakawa: Revisiting monetary policy 
Comments by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the International 
Monetary Fund / European Central Bank / Federal Reserve Bank (IMF/ECB/FRB) High-Level 
Conference  “Rethinking  Central  Banking”,  Session  1:  Which  central  bank  policy  areas 
warrant a rethink, Washington DC, 10 October 2010. 
 Introduction 
Let me first thank the organizers, the IMF, the ECB and the Fed for organizing this timely 
seminar.  The  crisis  and  continuing  adjustment  process  is  clearly  pushing  for  a  rethink  of 
multiple aspects of central bank policy. The seminar is divided into three sessions and there 
are  separate  sessions  on  macro-prudential  policy  and  financial  stability.  I  will  focus  my 
remarks on monetary policy, but since central bank policy must be discussed in its totality, 
please forgive me for slightly venturing into areas covered in the following sessions.  
Lean or clean 
The experience during and after the crisis has, I believe, given a rather clear direction with 
regard to the “lean or clean” debate, if I may borrow the words of my friend Bill White.1 In 
other  words,  the  issue  is  “should  monetary  policy  lean  against  the  wind  to  prevent  the 
emergence of bubbles or should it simply clean up the mess after the bubble has burst?” The 
prevailing view before the crisis was that monetary policy should focus on price stability and 
rather than trying to prevent bubbles, monetary policy should step in aggressively to mop up 
the mess after it has burst.  
Certainly monetary policy has been effective in reducing the macroeconomic impact from the 
initial  shocks  caused  by  the  bursting  of  the  bubble.  Many  central  banks  in  advanced 
economies have brought down interest rates close to zero to support economic recovery this 
time.  Unconventional  measures,  such  as  the  large  scale  purchases  of  assets,  have  been 
introduced  as  well,  in  order  to  support  malfunctioning  financial  markets.  These  measures 
have  certainly  helped  to  stave  off  a  global  depression.  Clearly  without  such  innovative 
measures  by  central  banks,  the  situation  would  have  been  much  worse.  However,  the 
magnitude of the economic downturn, the loss of jobs, and the declining pace of economic 
recovery in the major economies, highlight that the cost of allowing bubbles to develop is so 
large that the “clean-up” strategy by itself is insufficient. Actions to prevent the accumulation 
of financial imbalances are also necessary.  
Now let me look at this issue from the “leaning” side. The question would be, “what is the 
relationship  between  low  interest  rates  or  long  periods  of  accommodative  monetary  policy 
and the emergence of bubbles?”  
Here it is important to keep in mind the behavior of market participants as Professor Rajan 
has  argued  previously.2  Institutional  investors,  in  many  cases,  develop  their  investment 
strategies  targeting  a  nominal  rate  of  return,  taking  into  consideration  past  experience. 
Insurance firms and pension funds often commit to a fixed rate of return to policy holders. 
Since  investment  manager  fees  are  linked  to  the  size  of  assets  under  management, 
managers  would  aim  to  raise  nominal  rates  of  return  to  attract  customers.  These  lead  to 
search  for  yield  tendencies  or  a  more  active  risk  taking  stance  in  a  low  interest  rate 
                                                 
1   See White (2009). 
2   This paragraph draws on Rajan (2010, ch. 5). 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 1
environment,  and  in  the  build-up  to  the  recent  crisis,  supported  the  growth  of  sub-prime 
related securitization with high ratings and surprisingly high nominal returns. Investors had 
either knowingly or unknowingly taken on large credit and liquidity risk. Such behavior had 
been amplified in the low interest rate environment where liquidity was plentiful. “Tail risks” 
which were hard to detect in such an environment were piling up in investor portfolios and 
financial institution balance sheets.  
Another  element  that  would  strengthen  such  activity  would  be  the  expectation  that  a  low 
interest  environment  and  accommodative  monetary  policy  would  continue.  This  would  be 
influenced by multiple elements such as economic conditions, inflation expectations and the 
central bank policies. Since the 1990s, inflation targeting was introduced in many countries 
as a framework to enhance transparency and accountability of monetary policy. This helped 
to anchor inflation rates as well as inflation expectations. At the same time, due to the design 
of this framework, markets and economists began to narrowly focus on the output gap and 
inflation  rate  in  assessing  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy.  In  a  stable  inflation 
environment, this tended to create search for yield tendencies by heating the expectation that 
very low interest rates will continue.  
Arguments against leaning against the wind 
There  are  various  arguments  against  the  view  that  monetary  policy  should  play  a  role  in 
leaning against the wind. Let me raise two here. 
One argument would be that it is difficult to detect asset price related bubbles. The counter 
argument would be that higher asset prices per se are not the problem, but rather the build-
up of imbalances such as excessive leverage and maturity mismatches which are interlinked 
with  the  large  rise  in  asset  prices  are  the  problem.  Central  banks  with  access  to  micro 
information of individual financial institutions which enables them to effectively monitor both 
economic  and  financial  conditions,  are  in  the  best  position  to  detect  such  imbalances  and 
certainly need to consider what policy actions they can take.  
A second argument would be that imbalances such as excess leverage would be best dealt 
with  through  supervisory  and  regulatory  measures.  The  use  of  micro-prudential  tools  is 
certainly called for. But that does not rule out the use of monetary policy. In the Japanese 
experience,  when  the  Bank  of  Japan  used  to  conduct  window  guidance  many  years  ago, 
there  was  also  the  academic  debate  on  whether  it  alone  can  be  effective  in  curtailing 
excessive  bank  lending.  The  conclusion  was  that  in  a  very  loose  monetary  environment, 
arbitrage  behavior  would  weaken  the  effects  of  window  guidance.  On  the  other  hand, 
monetary policy on its own could not complete the job. It would become more effective when 
monetary policy and micro-prudential policies are used in a complimentary fashion.3 
Challenges in leaning against the wind 
I do acknowledge that there are also challenges even if we were to agree that central banks 
should lean against the wind. 
What conditions need to be fulfilled so that the central bank can effectively lean against the 
wind? Certainly the central bank will need to be independent in making its assessment that 
unsustainable imbalances are building up in the economy and that it may be necessary to 
take away the punch bowl in the midst of the party. However, formal independence would not 
be  sufficient.4  A  broad  social  consensus  would  be  necessary.  There  would  need  to  be  an 
                                                 
3   See also Shirakawa (2010a). 
4   What responsibility a central bank should bear in democratic society is discussed in Shirakawa (2010b). 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2010
understanding that if financial imbalances were allowed to build-up, for example through a 
rise  in  asset  prices  and  increase  in  leverage,  the  social  and  economic  cost  of its  collapse 
would be substantial, and thus pre-emptive policy measures to cool such actions would be 
appropriate and necessary. Without such a broad consensus, it would be quite difficult for the 
central bank or any other public authority to embark on policy measures to take away the 
punch bowl, which will be quite unpopular in the short run.  
Another  challenge  would  be  how  to  frame  monetary  policy,  especially  in  the  public  policy 
debate.  The  importance  of  the  framing  effect  should  not  be  underestimated.  The  phrase 
“inflation targeting” has had both a positive and negative effect on the public understanding 
of monetary policy and as a result on its implementation.5 It has enhanced the transparency 
and  accountability  of  monetary  policy  in  many  countries  and  has  helped  improve  public 
awareness of the price stability goal of monetary policy. However, looking back to the period 
as the bubble accumulated, I have the impression that a literal and narrow understanding of 
“inflation targeting” going beyond its original intention gradually took hold. Though perhaps 
not  acknowledged,  this  began  to  constrain  the  flexible  implementation  of  monetary  policy 
based  on  overall  macroeconomic  and  financial  conditions.  Once  a  narrow  understanding 
becomes engrained in the public mind, it will be quite difficult for the central bank to move 
beyond this narrow boundary and to act flexibly to an evolving situation, such as a situation 
where  imbalances  which  could  harm  long-term  growth  may  be  accumulating,  although  the 
inflation rate itself is stable. That is why the Bank of Japan has introduced a framework which 
incorporates  the  positive  elements  of  inflation  targeting  while  trying  to  avoid  the  possible 
pitfalls.  We publish  a  numerical  definition  of  price  stability  which  we  call  “understanding  of 
medium-  to  long-term  price  stability”,  and  in  order  to  avoid  the  possible  pitfalls,  adopted  a 
framework based on two perspectives. Under the first perspective, we assess whether the 
main scenario for the future path of the economy and prices over a two year time horizon is 
consistent  with  price  stability  while  achieving  sustainable  growth.  Under  the  second 
perspective,  we  examine  various  upside  and  downside  risks  associated  with  the  main 
scenario. A more extended time horizon is also assessed. As the experience of the bubble 
and  its  burst  shows,  we  need  to  consider  an  event  with  low-probability  but  extremely  high 
costs.  
A third dimension is the global aspect of monetary policy. The developments before and after 
the  crisis  have  reconfirmed  the  extent  of  globalization  of  the  world  economy  and  financial 
system.  Although  monetary  policy  is  only  one  aspect,  monetary  conditions  especially  in 
major  currency  areas  influence  the  behavior  of  market  participants  and  thus  global  capital 
flows.  
For example, during the credit bubble period till 2007, the current account imbalance for the 
euro  area  was  quite  small,  that  is  to  say,  investments  and  savings  in  the  region  were 
generally  balanced.  However,  the  increase  in  gross  cross-border  lending  during  the  mid-
2000s by the banking sector was quite dramatic. The increase in lending was substantial not 
only toward eastern and central Europe but also to Asia, and European banks have become 
the largest overseas creditors. The yen carry trade was also a form of large capital flows. In 
the  traditional  treatment  of  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  the  bank  lending 
channel was mostly a domestic phenomenon. Now the global transmission effects through 
international active banks and global investors cannot be ignored. This in turn will likely have 
an effect on the policy decisions of central banks around the globe. This is probably another 
area  where  further  study  and  discussions  are  warranted  within  the  central  banking 
community.  
                                                 
5   See also Shirakawa (2010c). 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 3
York, 
of  New 
Economic  Club 
References 
Rajan, Raghuram G., Fault Lines, Princeton University Press, 2010. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Revisiting  the  Philosophy  behind  Central  Bank  Policy,”  Speech  at  
April 
the 
at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1004e.htm). 
________,  “Future  of  Central  Banks  and  Central  Banking,”  Opening  Speech  at  2010 
International Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of 
Japan, May 26, 2010b (available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1005a.htm). 
________,  “Roles  for  a  Central  Bank  –  Based  on  Japan’s  Experience  of  the  Bubble,  
the  Financial  Crisis,  and  Deflation  –,”  Speech  at 
the  
(available  at 
Japan  Society  of  Monetary  Economics,  September  26,  2010c 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1009f.htm). 
White, William R., “Should Monetary Policy “Lean or Clean” ?,” Globalization and Monetary 
Policy Institute Working Papers No. 34, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 2009. 
the  2010  Fall  Meeting  of 
(available 
2010a 
22, 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2010
