Paul Tucker: Financial crisis and G20 financial regulatory reform –  
an overview 
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  Korean  G20  Presidential  Committee  Conference,  Seoul, 
3 September 2010. 
 Being a Western financial official, one comes to Asia with some humility in truth. This has 
been a financial crisis born and bred in the Western world, but inflicted throughout the world.  
That  makes  it  all  the  more  important  that  Korea  and  the  other  countries  in  Asia  and 
elsewhere in the emerging market world are involved in the reform efforts. The reforms are 
not simply going to be cooked up in the West where the problems were bred. In Korea, you 
have  to  play  a  really  important  leadership  role,  especially  in  steering  us  through  the  next 
couple of months.  
Much  of  the  work  towards  the  Leaders  summit  is  being  handled  in  the  Financial  Stability 
Board. And here is a very brief overview of what is going on in the FSB contribution to the 
G20 effort, under the following headings: 1) surveillance; 2) bank capital and liquidity; 3) too 
big to fail; 4) capital markets; 5) incentives; and finally the regulatory perimeter.  
Surveillance of the system  
1.  
Very obviously this was a crisis that was not spotted – in the most important sense of being 
prevented – ahead of time.  
People  did  issue  warnings  about  developing  leverage  in  the  system  and  accumulating 
macroeconomic imbalances. But no one acted to make the financial system more resilient to 
those  vulnerabilities.  This  was  not  just  an  intellectual  failure,  as  is  widely  discussed  and 
recognized now. It was also partly a failure of machinery.  
The FSB has been encouraging new machinery to survey and head off risks. The FSB itself 
has  created  a  vulnerabilities  group.  It  is  probably  the  least  prominent  part  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Board’s  effort  to  date,  but  it  could  have  enduring  significance  over  the  years  and 
decades. It is paralleled in various regions.  
Europe is setting up a Systemic Risk Board, which will be supported by the ECB but involve 
all  of  the  EU.  The  USA  is  setting  up  a  Systemic  Oversight  Council;  and  in  the  UK,  the 
government  is  establishing  a  macroprudential  Financial  Policy  Committee  in  the  Bank  of 
England. Maybe something is needed in Asia, too. Martin [Wolf] talked about complacency; 
for the machinery I have described to make any difference, people will have to stick to it year 
in and year out.  
Supervision of individual firms  
2.  
One of the things that should not be neglected is that the severity of this crisis was as great 
as  it  was  partly  because  a  large  handful  of  individual  massive  firms  failed  due  to  poor 
management and weak balance sheets.  
Part of the solution lies, therefore, in much better microprudential supervision and regulation 
of  individual  firms.  The  Basel  Committee  has  had  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking 
Supervision  for  some  considerable  time  now.  But,  going  beyond  that,  the  FSB  has 
encouraged  and  is  sponsoring  an  exercise  on  effective  supervision  of  SIFIs,  Significantly 
Important Financial Institutions.  
BIS Review 148/2010 
 1
A remarkable fact is that although the style of banking supervision varies enormously across 
the world, almost nothing seems to have been done to get to the bottom of the question of 
which approaches are the more effective – having an army of on-site examiners, such as for 
example in the United States; or relying on offsite analysis, which tends to be the pattern in 
much of Europe.  
An exercise led by Julie Dickson for the Financial Stability Board is producing an evaluation 
of what is needed to supervise the largest firms in the world effectively. The idea is that that 
will either get encapsulated in an FSB code or in a re-draft of the Basel Core Principles for 
Effective Supervision.  
to  overhaul 
Capital and liquidity  
financial  sector  and  excessive  maturity  mismatch.  We  need 
3.  
The third element is capital and liquidity. Virtually all crises have at their root over leverage in 
the 
the 
corresponding policy instruments –capital and liquidity requirements.  
On  liquidity,  Basel  is  introducing  an  accord  for  minimum  liquidity  requirements  for  the  first 
time; this is about a quarter of a century after it was first contemplated and so rather overdue, 
but  therefore  very  welcome.  There  is  an  awful  lot  of  debate  around  this  still.  Many  in  the 
industry  –  in  the  banking  industry  –  have  been  resisting  it.  But  this  will  happen.  It  will  lay 
down  minimum  standards  for  banks  to  hold  some  resiliently  liquid  assets  and  about  the 
funding of illiquid assets.  
To date, much more prominent has been the work on capital. Although there has been some 
dilution of the proposals from a few months ago, real substantive progress is being made in 
reforming  the  minimum  standards  and  in  introducing  various  buffers,  taking  into  account 
credit  cycle  conditions  and  the  circumstances  of  SIFIs.  The  key  element  of  the  overall 
package is that “capital” will mean capital. The world of hybrid instruments – pretending to be 
so-called capital instruments but which in fact cannot truly absorb losses in a going concern 
– should become more or less a thing of the past. The Bank of England would like it to be 
completely consigned to the past. Only equity can absorb losses.  
For  that  reason,  in  calculating  regulatory  capital,  deductions  from  capital  should  really  be 
from equity. As part of the emerging compromise, there will be some derogations from that, 
but the derogations should be transparent. Markets should learn to evaluate bank’s capital 
adequacy on the basis of what is made transparent about the makeup of that capital.  
The  other  really  key  change  will  come  in  stages  –  partly  in  the  package  this  autumn  and 
partly during next year and beyond – which is reducing the pernicious regulatory arbitrage 
that  has  existed  between  “banking  book”  capital  requirements  and  “trading  book”  capital 
requirements. Far too many instruments that were held in the trading book were subject to 
low  capital  requirements  but  actually  could  not  be  traded,  leaving  values  exposed  to  big 
swings in liquidity premia. This was a fatal design flaw in the existing regime, and it is one 
which  I  hope  should  be  fixed  over  the  next  year  or  so  though  the  Basel  Committee’s 
“fundamental review of the trading book”.  
Too big to fail  
4.  
At the centre of the reform effort in the FSB work is “Too Big To Fail.” If one of the largest 
firms in the world got into trouble right now, in almost every country in the world we would not 
be able to cope with its demise other than through fiscal support.  
This is completely unacceptable.  
If there is one thing that I think unites the members of the G20 – at the political level and at 
the  official  level  –  it  is  that  this  will  be  consigned  to  the  past.  We  will  re-introduce  market 
discipline back into the financial system, which really means re-introducing capitalism back 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2010
into the heart of capitalism. The acid test has to be whether, for every financial institution in 
the world, it could be resolved if it faces distress in a way that does not disrupt the flow of 
essential financial services to the economy and without state solvency support. That is the 
single goal in this area. When achieved, it can transform the global financial system more 
than anything else.  
It’s  not  for  me  to  set  out  the  ideas  today  (Svein  will  do  so  later),  but  there  are  ideas 
developing  that  I  believe  will,  in  at  least  some  key  centres,  become  concrete  policies  for 
putting  losses  in  the  largest  firms  in  the  world  not  just  onto  shareholders  but  onto  their 
unsecured, uninsured creditors rather than onto taxpayers. I would expect that over time to 
lead to adjustments in the business models and organization of the most significant firms in 
the world. What’s more, on the whole, I think they will welcome that.  
Capital markets  
5.  
The  next  element  of  the  reform  programme  is  capital  markets.  Too  much  of  the  reform 
debate has probably revolved around banks, both in response to this crisis and in response 
to earlier crises. We live in a world where financial intermediation does not just go via banks 
and insurance companies, but it goes via capital markets and the vast array of institutions, 
investors and issuers that the capital markets encourage into existence.  
I will highlight just two key changes on this front. One, there is a determination that a lot more 
OTC (over-the-counter) derivative activity will go through central counterparties, rather than 
being settled bilaterally. This can have enormous benefits in terms of laying down standards 
for  collateralisation,  valuations,  and  ensuring  transparency  of  what  is  going  on  in  those 
markets.  There  is  a  residual  question  about  how  much  of  that  activity  should  go  via 
exchanges or via other trading platforms. That’s something which I doubt will be completely 
resolved this year. I think it will remain part of the G20 and the FSB agenda going into next 
year. But it is a very important part.  
Another key element of changing capital markets is much greater transparency around, and 
much reduced reliance on, credit rating agency ratings. One of the problems in global capital 
markets has been that too many investors and banks have given up on reaching their own 
view on borrowers and on instruments, but have effectively subordinated their own judgment 
to the judgment of credit rating agencies. The FSB is sponsoring and leading work in order to 
reduce the extent to which credit rating agency ratings are inscribed into, or embedded in the 
regulatory fabric of our capital markets.  
Incentives  
6.  
The sixth thing is incentives. The issue that gets most attention here is compensation or pay, 
on which the FSB issued a code. The essence of that is that more pay should be deferred. I 
would  add  that  perhaps  part  of  deferred  compensation  should  be  in  the  form  of  a  debt 
contract, so that the managers and workers in large firms eventually become creditors of the 
firm and so they themselves have the same risks as other debt holders. That works only if we 
can develop resolution regimes leaving debt holders taking risks in our largest firms. So that 
comes back to whether or not we can resolve the largest firms in an effective way and so can 
reintroduce market discipline through that route.  
Concluding remarks  
7.  
Let me conclude with something on shadow banking.  
Martin [Wolf] talked about the grave problems that are present in the global financial system 
through global imbalances. I completely agree. To the extent that we do not solve the global 
BIS Review 148/2010 
 3
imbalances problem, our financial system will need to be more resilient than otherwise. That 
must be understood.  
Global capital flows are one of the givens of the world that we will continue to live in. The 
other  given,  in  my  view,  is  regulatory  arbitrage.  The  biggest  misjudgment  that  our 
predecessors made in the 1980’s and 1990’s was to underestimate the ferocious ability of 
capitalism to arbitrage regulatory rules. That will not change. Therefore, whatever rules we 
put in place now, capitalism will find ways around them.  
An important element of the reforms therefore has to be a much greater consciousness of 
regulatory arbitrage and a willingness to do something about it. This must not mean charging 
after  windmills.  It  means  identifying  where  something  is  happening  that  could  threaten 
stability  from  outside  the  regulated  sector,  and  being  prepared  to  move  the  perimeter  of 
regulation  in  those  circumstances.  The  authorities  must  be  more  interested  in  shadow 
banking. That is something that the FSB, I believe, should focus on next year. 
I hope that brief overview of the FSB’s work can help our deliberations and exchanges today.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2010
