Rasheed Mohammed Al-Maraj: Corporate governance lessons to be 
learned from the global financial crisis 
Keynote  address  by  HE  Rasheed  Mohammed  Al-Maraj,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Bahrain,  at  the  Gulf  Cooperation  Countries  (GCC)  Board  of  Directors  Institute  –  Senior 
Director Workshop, Manama, 2 November 2010. 
 Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It gives me great pleasure to be with you here this evening and to have the opportunity of 
addressing such a distinguished audience. The events of recent years have certainly pushed 
the issue of corporate governance to the top of the agenda, both for business leaders and for 
regulators. It is an indication of the importance that is attached to this subject that so many of 
you have found the time in your busy schedules to participate in this workshop. 
It will probably not surprise you that my theme this evening will be the lessons that can be 
learned  from  the  global  financial  crisis  for  corporate  governance.  I  plan  to  talk  about  what 
lessons the financial crisis has for banks and the extent to which these might also be applied 
to firms and businesses in other industries and sectors. 
Unfortunately,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  provided  many  illustrations  of  failures  of 
corporate governance. There is a common pattern in the financial institutions that have failed 
since the summer of 2007. The Chief Executive was a dominant figure who made sure that 
he alone took all important decisions. There was no culture of open debate and discussion 
among senior management, with the result that other members of the board of directors did 
not feel able to challenge the Chief Executive’s decisions. Many bank boards lacked banking 
experts. Individuals were recruited to the board of banks for their connections rather than for 
their knowledge of the banking industry and their ability to ask the right questions. 
I am sure you will agree that these practices are undesirable in any type of corporation. Any 
business that is run this way is unlikely to succeed. But because of the special position of 
trust  that  banks  hold,  these  failures  have  affected  far  more  people  than  just  their 
shareholders, creditors or employees. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, an international grouping of bank regulators 
drawn from the G20 countries, has recently revised its detailed guidance on the corporate 
governance of banks in the light of the crisis. In October it issued a set of 14 Principles for 
Enhancing Corporate Governance in Banks that up-dates its earlier guidance on this subject. 
Many  of  the  Principles  set  out  by  the  Basel  Committee  seem  to  me  to  be  of  general 
application to all firms, and not just the banks. So I thought it would be helpful to discuss the 
relevance of a few of them. 
First of all, with respect to board practices, the Basel Committee states that the board has 
overall  responsibility  for  a  bank,  including  its  business  and  risk  strategy  and  financial 
soundness in governance. This might appear to be a statement of the obvious, but it is worth 
thinking about what this implies for boards of directors. 
Perhaps the most important consequence, as the Basel Committee states, is that the board 
must  pay  attention  to  the  long-term  interests  of  the  institution  and  to  those  of  all  stake-
holders,  including  depositors  and  creditors.  In  other  words,  good  corporate  governance 
means not focusing on short-term returns to shareholders, but concentrating on what is in the 
best long-term interests of the company. This will often involve taking into account not only 
the interests of the owners, but also the interests of creditors, employees, and other stake-
holders. It requires to the board to take a broadly balanced view of its responsibilities and to 
think of the long-term and not just of the next quarter’s results. 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 1
The Basel Committee also recommends that there should be a clear distinction between the 
responsibilities of the board and those of senior management. While the board takes overall 
responsibility for the direction of the business, the senior management should ensure that a 
bank’s  activities  are  consistent  with  the  business  strategy,  risk  appetite  and  policies 
approved  by  the  board.  An  especially  important  responsibility  of  senior  management  is  to 
ensure that there are appropriate systems for managing risk, including a comprehensive and 
independent risk management function. 
The importance of an independent risk management function is something clearly underlined 
by  the  financial  crisis.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  some  banks  did  not  give  the  risk  management 
function the stature and authority that it needs. Rather than being treated as an integral part 
of the business, risk management and compliance were seen as overhead costs which were 
a  distraction  from  profit  generation.  Risk  managers  lacked  the  direct  access  to  the  board 
which would have given them the ability to challenge the Chief Executive and other senior 
managers. Accordingly, the Basel Committee recommends that banks should appoint a Chief 
Risk  Officer  who  should  be  a  senior  executive  with  independence  and  authority  who  is  in 
overall charge of a bank’s risk management functions. 
This Principle is also of general relevance to other types of businesses. Think, for example, 
of  the  experience  of  BP  during  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  oil  spill  earlier  this  year.  Subsequent 
investigations  into  the  company  have  shown  that  risk  management,  and  planning  for 
contingencies  such  as  a  major  oil  spill,  did  not  carry  a  high  priority  with  the  BP  senior 
management who regarded it as an unnecessary overhead expense. The result was the near 
collapse  of  the  company  after  suffering  billions  of  dollars  in  losses,  which  a  stronger  risk 
management framework might have helped to prevent. 
The third, and final issue which I would like to  discuss this evening concerns compensation 
practices. As I am sure you are aware, a major contributory factor to the financial crisis was 
that  the  staff  of  financial  institutions  were  rewarded  for  short-term  risk-taking.  The  incentive 
structures created by bonuses paid over a limited time horizon encouraged traders to focus on 
short-term profitability and financial engineers to design new financial instruments that could 
generate immediate profits, while the risks were pushed off to some indefinite future date. 
In its Principles the Basel Committee recommends that the board should review the design 
and  operation  of  the  compensation  system  and  monitor  it  to  ensure  that  it  operates  as 
intended. Compensation should be effectively aligned with prudent risk-taking, including the 
time horizon over which risks materialize and should also be symmetric with risk outcomes. 
This  last  statement  means  that  compensation  practices  should  avoid  paying  out  large 
bonuses  on  the  basis  of  short-term  profits,  when  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  transaction 
could  result  in  significant  losses  to  the  firm  in  two  or  three  years’  time.  Bonuses  should, 
therefore, reflect the overall financial impact of a transaction, the results of which may not be 
known for several years. 
As  with  the  other  Principles,  this  one  is  also  of  general  relevance.  All  firms,  and  not  just 
banks, need to avoid a situation in which their compensation practices reward employees for 
taking  excessive  short-term  risks.  This  is  not  to  say  that  bonus  systems  are  undesirable. 
They  clearly  have  a  role  to  play  in  providing  incentives  to  employees  to  perform  well  and 
reduce  the  fixed  element  in  employee  compensation,  thus  giving  more  flexibility  in  cost 
control. But remuneration systems need to balance risks and rewards. 
The  common  theme  through  each  of  the  issues  I  have  talked  about  this  evening  is  the 
importance of avoiding short-termism. The conclusion with which I would like to leave you 
this  evening  is  that  the  greatest  risk  to  a  business  arises  from  an  exclusive  focus  on  the 
short-term,  whether  it  is  the  next  quarter’s  results  or  an  employee’s  end-of-year  bonus. 
Successful businesses are those that plan for the long-term, that understand the risks of their 
industries and sectors, and which invest and build for the future. High standards of corporate 
governance are an essential mechanism to ensure this long-term perspective. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2010
