Norman T L Chan: Latest developments of renminbi business in  
Hong Kong 
Briefing  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  
on  the  latest  developments  of  renminbi  (RMB)  business  in  Hong  Kong,  Hong  Kong  SAR, 
23 December 2010. 
 Good  afternoon.  Today  I  would  like  to  provide  an  update  on  the  latest  developments  of 
renminbi (RMB) business in Hong Kong.  
With the strong support from the Central Government and the relevant Mainland authorities, 
the development of RMB business in Hong Kong has been encouraging this year. Significant 
growth  and  progress  have  been  seen  in  various  areas,  including  cross-border  trade 
settlement, deposits, bond issuance and the introduction of financial products in the second 
half of this year. 
The total amount of RMB deposits increased markedly from RMB 60 billion at the end of last 
year  to  RMB  220  billion  in  October  and  RMB  280  billion  in  November  this  year.  Of  these 
deposits,  those  from  personal  customers  amounted  to  RMB  120  billion,  with  a  total  of 
2.2 million accounts and an average deposit size of RMB 54,000. Deposits from corporate 
clients amounted to RMB 160 billion at the end of November, with 117,000 accounts and an 
average deposit size of RMB 1.3 million.  
Conversion arrangement for trade settlement in 2011 
Following the substantial expansion of the geographical coverage of the cross-border RMB 
trade settlement scheme in June this year, the amount of cross-border RMB trade settlement 
has grown rapidly, from a monthly average of about RMB 4 billion in the first half of the year 
to about RMB 30 billion each month in August and September, and close to RMB 68 billion in 
October.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  amount  of  RMB  purchased  by  the  Participating 
Authorized  Institutions  (Participating  AIs)  through  the  Clearing  Bank  in  the  China  Foreign 
Exchange  Trading  System  in  Shanghai  increased  notably  in  October,  and  the  conversion 
arrangement  concerned  was  suspended  in  late  October.  In  response,  the  HKMA  promptly 
introduced a number of measures, and the RMB market in Hong Kong has been operating 
orderly and smoothly to date.  
As regards the conversion arrangement for 2011, after discussions with the People’s Bank of 
China  (PBoC),  the  HKMA  consider  appropriate  to  introduce  certain  refinements  to  the 
arrangement for the conversion of RMB conducted by Participating AIs for their customers in 
relation to cross-border trade settlement. Before going into the specific refinements, I would 
like to elaborate the background of the arrangement for the conversion of RMB conducted by 
Participating AIs through the Clearing Bank in Shanghai: 
(1) 
First, RMB funds flowed into Hong Kong through trade payments or other channels 
will  become  RMB  deposits  in  Hong  Kong,  and  these  RMB  funds  can  be  used, 
deployed or exchanged freely into other currencies in the market in accordance with 
the  applicable  laws  and  regulations  in  Hong  Kong.  This  is  the  main  premise  of 
developing  an  RMB  offshore  market  in  Hong Kong.  In  other  words,  the  exchange 
rate and interest rate of RMB are to be determined by the supply and demand of 
RMB  funds  in  the  Hong  Kong  market.  As  the  offshore  and  onshore  markets  are 
segregated,  it  is  not  unusual  that  the  pricing  may  be  different  between  the  two 
markets.  
BIS Review 175/2010 
 1
(2) 
Secondly,  we  should  look  at  the  actual  supply  and  demand  of  RMB  funds  in  the 
Hong  Kong  market  this  year.  At  the  end  of  November,  the  total  amount  of  RMB 
deposits in Hong Kong reached RMB 280 billion. This means that Hong Kong has 
accumulated  a  substantial  pool  of  RMB  funds  which  can  meet  the  market’s  daily 
demand. Regarding cross-border trade settlement, in the first 11 months this year, 
payments  from  the  Mainland  to  Hong  Kong  amounted  to  RMB  180  billion  while 
payments from Hong Kong to the Mainland amounted to RMB 50 billion, resulting in 
a net inflow of RMB 130 billion to Hong Kong. These RMB funds remain in Hong 
Kong and constitute a main source of supply in the local RMB market. Of the RMB 
50 billion paid from Hong Kong to Mainland enterprises, only about RMB 10 billion 
was obtained by conversion in Shanghai through the Clearing Bank. In November 
alone,  the  payment  from  Hong  Kong  to  the  Mainland  under  the  trade  settlement 
scheme reached RMB 22 billion. However, as the arrangement for conducting RMB 
conversions  in  Shanghai  was  suspended,  enterprises  in  Hong  Kong  could  only 
purchase  RMB  funds  from  the  Hong  Kong  market.  Given  the  abundant  supply  of 
RMB funds in the local market, the pricing of RMB funds in the Hong Kong offshore 
market  and  that  in  Shanghai  were  quite  close  to  each  other,  with  the  differential 
between the two staying within 300 pips for most of the time in recent weeks. This 
shows that the offshore pool of RMB funds in Hong Kong is serving the function of 
supplying RMB funds to meet the demand from local enterprises, such that there is 
no  need  to  rely  heavily  on  the  onshore  conversion  window  in  Shanghai  for  trade 
settlement. 
in  Shanghai  serves  a 
supplementary  rather  than  the  main  source  of  RMB  funds  for  trade  settlement 
purpose.  
the  conversion  window 
In  other  words, 
In order to further promote the steady development of the RMB market in Hong Kong, the 
following refinement measures will take effect from January next year:  
(1) 
Participating AIs can square their positions with the Clearing Bank when there is a 
shortfall  of  RMB  arising  from  conversions  with  customers  for  cross-border  trade 
settlement transactions. In other words, Participating AIs should first utilise the RMB 
trade  proceeds  purchased  from  their  customers  to  satisfy  requests  for  RMB 
conversions  for  trade  settlement  transactions  before  purchasing  RMB  through  the 
Clearing Bank in Shanghai. 
Participating AIs can only purchase RMB through the Clearing Bank in Shanghai for 
their customers in relation to trade transactions due for payments to the Mainland 
within three months. The HKMA and the PBoC estimate that the demand for RMB 
conversion in Shanghai would be within RMB 4 billion in the first quarter of 2011. 
The volume of conversion will be assessed and appropriately adjusted after the first 
quarter taking into consideration the actual circumstances. 
In  order  to  maintain  a  steady  supply  of  RMB,  the  HKMA  will,  as  a  standing 
arrangement,  provide  RMB  funds  of  RMB  20  billion  through  its  currency  swap 
arrangement with the PBoC, for cross-border RMB trade settlements. 
Given the restrictions in the convertibility of RMB, Participating AIs are required to 
limit  their  RMB  net  open  positions (whether  net  long  or  net  short)  to  10%  of  their 
RMB assets or liabilities. 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Participating AIs’ credit risk exposure to the Clearing Bank 
In  their  letter  to  the  HKMA  in  November,  the  Hong  Kong  Association  of  Banks  raised  the 
issue of credit limit against the background of an increasing amount of RMB deposits being 
placed  by  Participating  AIs  with  the  Clearing  Bank  as  the  RMB  business  in  Hong  Kong 
continued to expand and deepen. The HKMA and the PBoC have held discussions about this 
issue, and it is considered that the issue could in principle be resolved by the Participating 
2 
 BIS Review 175/2010
AIs establishing custodian accounts with the Clearing Bank. This means that the RMB funds 
will be placed with the PBoC Shenzhen Branch through the Clearing Bank as a custodian to 
overcome the issue of credit limit. We will further discuss with the PBoC, the Clearing Bank 
and  Participating  AIs  on  the  details  of  such  an  arrangement  including  the  related  legal 
documents  and  operational  procedures.  It  is  hoped  that  the  arrangement  can  be 
implemented soon early next year. 
Conclusion 
I believe that next year will be a crucial year for the development of offshore RMB business 
in Hong Kong. We have made very good progress this year. Along this positive trend, and 
with the number of Mainland enterprises eligible for the cross-border RMB trade settlement 
scheme  increased  substantially  to  67,000  recently  and  with  the  refinements  that  we  are 
going to introduce, I am confident that the offshore RMB market in Hong Kong will continue 
to develop progressively in the coming year, both in terms of the depth and breadth of the 
market and product development. Four Hong Kong banks have been approved to participate 
in  the  Mainland’s  interbank  bond  market,  and  the  applications  by  a  number  of  banks  are 
being processed by the Mainland authorities. This will provide a channel for the circulation 
and  capital  preservation  for  the  RMB  funds  in  Hong  Kong.  Meanwhile,  we  have  just  been 
informed  that  HKMA’s  eligibility  for  investing  in  the  Mainland’s  interbank  bond  market  has 
been approved by the PBoC. We are working closely with the PBoC on the implementation 
arrangements. 
Finally, to further promote the development of the RMB offshore business in Hong Kong, the 
HKMA is making preparations for overseas roadshows with the financial industry, focusing 
on locations which have growing trade and investment flows with the Mainland. We believe 
that with our joint efforts, Hong Kong will be able to play its role as an RMB offshore market 
to  the  fullest,  thereby  promoting  and  supporting  the  nation’s  increasing  cross-border  trade 
and investment activities while enhancing and consolidating the status of Hong Kong as an 
international financial centre. 
BIS Review 175/2010 
 3
