 Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The single euro payments area – where do we 
stand? 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at 
the  European  Payments  Council  offsite  meeting,  Brussels, 
14 October 2010. 
 In 1970 the first blueprint for a monetary union – the Werner report – was presented. Almost 
twenty years later, the Delors Committee report shaped the way to the start of Stage One of 
the European Monetary Union in 1990. In 1999, the European Central Bank was established 
and the euro coins and banknotes followed in 2002. The euro came a long way. 
The  logical  next  step  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  single  cash  instrument,  is  the 
introduction  of  single  non-cash  payment  instruments  facilitating  greatly  payments  in  euro 
across the single currency area and beyond.  
Obviously, the euro was not realized in one day. But once introduced, it became our currency 
replacing the currencies of the participating member states. The same should apply to SEPA. 
We  cannot  assume  implementation  over  night  but  we  do  not  have  another  30  years  to 
complete the euro introduction. Hence, SEPA payments instruments (SCT and SDD) must 
become  the  payments  instruments  for  euro  payments  fully  replacing  national  legacy 
instruments.  
Since  the  publication  of  the  sixth  SEPA  progress  report  in  November  2008,  a  number  of 
major milestones have been reached in the SEPA project. For instance, the launch of SEPA 
direct  debits  in  November  2009  has  made  cross-border  direct  debit  payments  possible  for 
the  first  time.  By  1  November  2010  the  reachability  of  payment  accounts  for  SEPA  direct 
debits will be legally ensured across the EU. This will allow the effective use of SEPA direct 
debits throughout Europe. The governance structure of SEPA has been improved with the 
creation  of  the  SEPA  Council,  which  further  formalises  the  involvement  of  high-level 
representatives of consumers, retailers, corporations and SMEs in the SEPA dialogue at the 
European level. Progress has also been observed in the transposition and implementation of 
the Payment Services Directive and in standardisation. However, there are also areas where 
developments have been unsatisfactory and greater efforts are required. In some of these 
areas, much still needs to be done in order to further integrate the euro area retail market. 
A regulation setting an end date for migration to SEPA 
There is a need for a realistic but ambitious end date to be set for migration to the SEPA 
credit transfer and direct debit schemes in order to reap the full benefits of SEPA. 
Although  the  potential  benefits  of  the  SEPA  project  are  substantial,  migration  to  SEPA 
cannot be described as fully successful yet. 
In August 2010 only 9.3% of all euro area credit transfers were processed as SEPA credit 
transfers, and only a share of well below 1% of all euro area direct debits were processed as 
SEPA direct debits. 
On the positive side, in November 2010 adherence and reachability will be ensured for the 
SEPA  direct  debit  scheme,  as  banks  will  be  legally  obliged  to  be  reachable.  A  number  of 
public administrations have committed themselves to migrating their payments to SEPA by 
the end of this year. 
Still, this will not be sufficient to achieve critical mass as regards migration to SEPA and will 
not, therefore, bring about a significant increase in the rate of migration. 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 1
 There  are  several  reasons  why  migration  to  SEPA  has  been  slow:  the  prevailing  market 
uncertainty;  the  difficult  economic  climate;  potential  disadvantages  for  “first  movers”  in  a 
network industry; and resistance to migrating fully from legacy to SEPA payment systems in 
the absence of a commitment to a specific end date. 
Two years ago, the banking community was unanimous in calling for an end date to be set 
for migration to SEPA by means of EU-wide legislation. 
Having a regulation is one thing. However, appropriate communication and services for end 
users are also required. The negative perception of the IBAN and BIC standards in Germany 
could have been avoided by means of appropriate communication and measures that make 
the transition easier. 
Multilateral  interchange  fees  for  the  SEPA  direct  debit  scheme  have  proven  to  be  a 
controversial issue that is difficult to resolve, and a long-term financial business model for the 
SEPA direct debit scheme still needs to be established.  
I hear the industry’s legitimate calls for legal certainty on this issue. Whilst much has been 
done  to  provide  clarity  under  the  competition  rules,  the  requirement  of  a  case-by-case 
analysis  under  these  rules  may  still  substantially  delay  the  true  achievement  of  a  level 
playing field. Maybe this is one of the issues where the best way to obtain clarity is not by 
self regulation nor competition enforcement, but precisely within the framework of the legally 
binding rules themselves? 
As  regards,  the  migration  end  date  itself,  the  ECB  still  has  a  preference  for  two  different 
migration end dates for the SEPA credit transfer and direct debit schemes. On the basis of 
an assessment of the migration efforts deemed necessary, the ECB preferred migration end 
date for the credit transfer scheme would be November 2012. As a logical consequence of 
this, the ECB would envisage an end date of November 2013 for the direct debit scheme. 
However,  the  actual  end  date  for  migration  to  SEPA  will  be  determined  by  the  European 
Council and the European Parliament by means of the co-decision procedure. 
Overall, not having a regulation is not an option. We all look forward to the upcoming draft 
legislative proposal by the European Commission and we hope that the proposal is published 
as soon as possible. 
2. 
Towards a competitive European payment card market 
2. 
Calls for an additional European card scheme 
The SEPA card framework developed a few years ago presents three ways of establishing a 
card scheme that achieves the overall objective of citizens being able to use the scheme’s 
cards anywhere in the euro area. This could be achieved by: 
1. 
replacing  a  national  scheme  with  an  international  scheme  (assuming  the  latter 
complies with the principles of SEPA); 
developing a payment card scheme covering the entire euro area, either by means 
of alliances with other card schemes or through expansion;  
co-branding with an international card scheme. 
3. 
The Eurosystem expressed reservations regarding the first and third options. It was felt that 
the first option – the “replacement strategy” – would lead to a situation where Visa Europe 
and MasterCard progressively became the sole providers of card payment services offered 
by banks in the euro area. 
The third option – “co-branding” – was deemed less favourable because it would perpetuate 
the existing situation, where schemes are protected from competition by national borders. If 
the  majority  of  schemes  were  to  opt  for  co-branding  and  this  situation  were  to  become 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 permanent, the market would remain highly fragmented. SEPA customers would not benefit 
from  economies  of  scale  or  competition.  National  schemes  would,  in  all  probability,  retain 
national  business.  Cross-border  transactions  would  be  effected  only  through  Visa  Europe 
and Mastercard. 
Instead,  the  Eurosystem  expressed  a  preference  for  the  emergence  of  an  additional 
European  card  scheme.  This  was  the  position  of  the  Eurosystem  four  years  ago,  and  it 
remains its position today. 
There is a clear risk of the vast majority of the national card schemes – some of them rather 
efficient  as  they  are  –  leaving  their  market  share  to  Visa  Europe  and  Mastercard  and 
competition being reduced to a duopoly. This would mean less choice, less competition, and 
less European governance. 
Therefore, an additional European card scheme can have a lot of benefits. Three initiatives 
are  currently  under  way  with  a  view  to  creating  an  additional  European  card  scheme:  the 
Euro  Alliance  of  Payment  Schemes  (EAPS),  Monnet  and  PayFair.  Further  initiatives  are 
obviously not excluded. 
It seems that the development of a proper financing model is probably the most important 
issue from banks’ point of view.  
And here again, uncertainty about multilateral interchange fees is considered an obstacle to 
any progress in this field. The criticism that there is a lack of clarity in this area does not fully 
recognise the commitments made recently by MasterCard and Visa Europe on multilateral 
interchange  fees.  One  should  also  recognise  that  the  European  as  well  as  national 
competition authorities have already provided some guidance.  
However, here too, regulation might provide a solution of last resort and a possibility to look 
at the business model in the context of other business rules and market circumstances that 
presently stand in the way of an effective market providing efficient services against optimal 
prices to consumers and other customers. 
Overall,  I  believe  that  an  additional  European  scheme  –  safe  and  efficient  as  the  best 
performing existing ones – is a necessary element of an integrated and competitive market.  
Separating card schemes from processing entities  
The concept of separating schemes from processing entities is one of the core elements of 
SEPA  to  guarantee  open  access.  The  SEPA  credit  transfer  and  direct  debit  schemes  are 
built on this principle. This concept should be applied in the card market, too. 
Indeed, banks should have a range of options to choose from as regards the processing of 
card payments.  
The  separation  of  schemes  from  processing  entities  has  many  dimensions,  comprising 
operational, informational, financial/accounting, commercial and legal separation. 
Major efforts need to be made by individual schemes in order to achieve effective separation 
in these various domains. 
Three things are needed in the area of card processing. 
1. 
First,  the  processing  of  card  transactions  should  use  the  same  set  of  message 
standards as the processing of direct debits and credit transfers (i.e. the ISO 20022 
standard). 
Second, a framework is needed for the processing of card transactions. 
And third, the various infrastructures need to develop the rules and standards that 
are  needed  in  order  to  establish  technical  interoperability.  In  December  2009  the 
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 3
 European Payments Council (EPC) agreed to update the PE-ACH/CSM framework 
to include card transactions. However, work still needs to take off on this.  
Cards standardization  
Another important issue is cards standardisation and a security certification framework. The 
standardization  of  cards  is  a  crucial  element  to  ensure  the  interoperability  of  cards  and  a 
harmonized use of cards across Europe. 
In  the  area  of  standardisation,  the  EPC  remains  in  charge  of  the  strategic  vision  and 
business rules for cards, while the Cards Stakeholder Group establishes functional, security 
and procedural requirements and deals with the maintenance and development of the “Book 
of  Requirements”.  This  document  provides  the  basis  for  the  technical  SEPA  standards 
necessary  to  allow  any  card  to  work  at  any  terminal.  Various  market  initiatives  have 
developed implementation standards and specifications in the card-to-terminal, terminal-to-
acquirer, acquirer-to-issuer, and certification and type approval domains. However, work on 
the implementation of these specifications is lagging behind. 
In the field of security certification for cards and terminals, the implementation specifications 
have been developed by CAS. The Eurosystem welcomes this work. However, governance-
related aspects of the SEPA security certification framework are still under discussion. The 
Eurosystem  expects  the  EPC  and  CAS  members  to  agree  on  concrete  proposals  for  a 
permanent governance structure. 
From  a  European  perspective,  it  is  of  strategic  importance  to  adopt  a  more  coordinated 
approach to global standard-setting bodies such as ISO and EMVCo. 
Secure retail payments are key 
3. 
The security of retail payments is a key issue as regards consumers’ and businesses’ trust 
and confidence in SEPA.  
The risk-based approach adopted by individual banks may be sub-optimal. Commercial risk 
tolerance may differ from social risk tolerance. 
SEPA requires a harmonised minimum level of security for retail payments in Europe. 
With regard to the level playing field for the security of payments, there seems to be a need 
for  greater  clarity  about  both  the  actors  involved  in  defining  security  requirements  across 
Europe and the requirements set by these actors. Moreover, there needs to be a common 
understanding about the substance of certain security requirements. The ECB supports the 
establishment of a forum to monitor market developments and foster further harmonisation of 
security standards within Europe.  
Market  participants  are  expected  to  implement  state-of-the-art  measures  to  improve 
information security and prevent payment fraud.  
For online “card not present” payments, market participants should introduce state-of-the-art 
authentication procedures and migrate to them by end-2012. In this respect, a liability shift 
(which has, for example, been used as an incentive for EMV migration) should apply. 
The  ECB  is  also  of  the  opinion  that  from  2012  onwards,  all  new  SEPA  cards  should,  by 
default, be issued as “chip-only” cards. This view is shared by Europol. 
If  the  industry  decides  to  keep  the  magnetic  strip  for  practical  reasons,  any  data  enabling 
magnetic strip transactions should be removed. In both cases, the industry will have to be 
prepared  to  offer  cardholders  cards  with  legacy  magnetic  strips  on  request  for  as  long  as 
there are still regions outside the SEPA area which have not fully migrated to EMV. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 Concluding remarks 
It is the role of the ECB, acting as a catalyst, to point out what remains to be done. We will do 
this in a new SEPA progress report, which is currently under preparation. 
The most important issue for now is to get clarity on the end date for migration. The ECB 
welcomes the fact that the Commission is about to issue a draft regulation. This should be 
done as soon as possible. 
Furthermore, the market should focus on cards, and the EPC needs to play a key role – from 
the  standardisation  of  cards  and  certification  to  the  involvement  of  end  users  and  the 
representation of Europe in global standardisation initiatives. We expect the EPC to remain 
active in these domains. 
At its introduction, the euro was – to some extent – confronted with criticism and scepticism. 
Today, the euro is a solid currency, we – the ECB – have delivered on our primary objective 
to  maintain  price  stability  and  the  euro  has  fared  well  even  in  the  current  crisis.  We  can, 
therefore, say that the euro has been a success.  
I strongly believe that the same will be true for SEPA. Once the many advantages of SEPA 
become fully realized and acknowledged. SEPA will be a great success.  
BIS Review 135/2010 
 5
