Christian Noyer: Monetary policy and macroprudential policy 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  conference  on  “The  future  of 
Monetary Policy”, Rome, 1 October 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at this joint Banca d’Italia, Einaudi Institute and 
Banque de France conference, which has provided a lot of stimulating ideas on the future of 
monetary  policy  frameworks.  In  my  intervention,  I  will  start  with  some  reflections  on  the 
relationship  between  the  objectives  of  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  and  I  will  then 
proceed to discuss several issues concerning the joint implementation of, and the interaction 
between, monetary and macroprudential policies. 
I. 
General considerations on the relationship between financial stability and 
price stability 
Both the experience of the last decades and, looking much further back, economic history 
provides a useful perspective on the relationship between price and financial stability: 
first, price stability is not a sufficient condition for financial stability but second is necessary; 
third,  a  key  reason  why  the  authorities  in  charge  of  monetary  policy  have  a  stake  in 
maintaining financial  stability  is  that  financial  instability  may  give  rise  to  “tail  risks”  to  price 
stability. 
Let me elaborate on these two issues in turn. 
Price stability is not sufficient for financial stability  
A. 
The  two  decades  leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis  had  been  characterized,  across  the 
developed world, by low and stable inflation, and, by historical standards, by exceptionally 
stable output growth. It is not by chance, indeed, that macroeconomists labeled those years 
as  the  “Great  Moderation”  era.  At  the  same  time,  however,  as  extensively  documented  in 
particular  by  the  BIS  in  several  perceptive,  early  papers,1  those  years  had  been  also 
characterized,  compared  with  the  previous  portion  of  the  post-WWII  era,  by  a  significantly 
more frequent occurrence of asset price bubbles and subsequent crashes.  
A  longer-term  perspective  clearly  shows  that  the  occurrence  of  asset  prices  booms  and 
busts under conditions of price stability, far from being a “fluke” of the Great Moderation era, 
had  been,  in  fact,  quite  common.  Until  the  outbreak  of  World  War  I,  indeed,  metallic 
standards had dominated for centuries, guaranteeing an extent of price stability which is, by 
today’s standards, virtually unimaginable. Just to mention a single example, the price level in 
England in 1661, five years before the Great Fire of London, had been virtually the same as 
that prevailing in 1913, one year before the collapse of the international Gold Standard. In 
spite  of  such  remarkable  price  stability,  however,  metallic  standards  had  been  recurrently 
plagued by financial crises and asset prices booms and busts, from the South Sea bubble of 
                                                 
1   See  in  particular  Claudio  Borio  and  William  White  (2003),  “Wither  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability?  The 
Implications  of  Evolving  Policy  Regimes”,  presented  at:  Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty:  Adapting  to  a 
Changing  Economy,  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, August 28 – 30, 2003. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 1
17202  to  the  “Panic  of  1907”,  which  was  only  solved  by  the  forceful  intervention  of  John 
Pierpont  Morgan,  and  which  ultimately  convinced  U.S.  policymakers  of  the  necessity  to 
establish a central bank. 
But  why  should  monetary  regimes  delivering  strong  price  stability  be  vulnerable  to  asset 
price bubbles and financial crashes? A long term perspective suggests that banking systems 
tend  to  periodically  generate  asset  price  bubbles  even  under  radically  different  monetary 
regimes. Having an outburst of several years of excessive credit growth, or for the old days 
financial crisis, the rising exposure of some financial institutions to asset price volatility has 
repeatedly  led  to  financial  crises.  Historical  experience  before  world  war  I,  where  price 
stability  has  been  unmatched  ever  since, should  have  reminded  all  of us,  financial  market 
participants  and  policy  makers  alike,  that  price  stability  is  no  blanket  insurance  against 
financial instability. 
Price stability is necessary for financial stability 
B. 
The most obvious case in which price instability automatically leads to financial instability is 
that of deflation, via the “debt deflation” mechanism originally identified by Irving Fisher with 
reference to the Great Depression.3 A more recent example of this phenomenon is provided 
by Japan, where the persistent deflation which has gripped the country since the early 1990s 
has  consistently  led,  ceteris  paribus,  to  a  heavier  debt  burden  for  households  that  had 
contracted  mortgages  in  the  boom  phase  of  the  late  1980s  and  deterioration  of  banks’ 
balance  sheets.  In  a  symmetric  fashion,  high  inflation  –  which,  historically  has  also 
consistently meant volatile inflation – threatens the very foundations of the financial system 
because of the resulting capricious and unpredictable redistribution of wealth between debtor 
and  creditor  institutions.  The  most  glaring  example  of  such  a  phenomenon  is  provided  by 
episodes  of  very  high,  or  hyper-inflation,  such  as  those  plaguing  a  significant  fraction  of 
belligerent nations in the aftermath of World War I. Evidence from the Great Inflation episode 
of the 1970s is, although less dramatic, equally telling.  
Altogether,  historical  evidence  therefore  leads  us  to  conclude  that,  although  not  sufficient, 
price stability is indeed a necessary precondition for financial stability. 
I now turn to a final point concerning the relationship between financial and price stability, 
namely  the  need  to  preserve  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  order  to  prevent  the 
emergence  of  “tail  risks”  to  price  stability.  I  will  start  by  discussing  risks  on  the  downside  
– that is, the possibility that the economy falls into a deflationary spiral – and I will then turn 
to those on the upside. 
C. 
The need to preserve the stability of the financial system in order to prevent 
the emergence of “tail risks” to price stability 
The best illustration of tail risks to price stability on the downside associated with financial 
crises comes from the historical experience of the United States during the Great Depression 
which followed the collapse of the stockmarket and housing bubbles of the second half of the 
1920s, and by that of Japan following the collapse of the real estate bubble of the second 
half  of  the  1980s.  In  both  cases  a  dramatic  expansion  of  credit  fuelled  bubbles  which 
pushed asset prices to dizzying heights. In the case of the 1920s United States, in particular, 
such credit expansion was associated with a wave of euphoria caused by “new-era” thinking 
                                                 
2   See Richard Dale (2004), The First Crash: Lessons from the South Sea Bubble, Princeton University Press. 
3   See  Irving  Fisher  (1933),  “The  Debt-Deflation  Theory  of  Great  Depressions”,  Econometrica,  Vol.  1(4), 
pp. 337–357. 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2010
which,  in  turn,  had  been  ignited  by  the  dramatic  wave  of  technological  innovation  which 
swept across the country during that decade.4 
The attempt, on the part of young Federal Reserve, to gently deflate asset prices via interest 
rates increases backfired, and the result was the 1929 crash, with the associated destruction 
of a staggering amount of financial wealth, and the injection into the economy of a significant 
extent  of  uncertainty.  This,  in  turn,  exerted  a  paralysing  effect  on  a  significant  fraction  of 
spending  decisions,  thus  playing  a  key  role  in  triggering  the  1930s  Depression  and  the 
resulting deflationary spiral.5 
What  should  we  conclude  from  this  brief  excursus?  In  launching  the  economic  revolution 
which unbound China and ultimately propelled it among the world powers, Deng Xiao-Ping 
famously  exhorted  his  countrymen  to  “Seek  truth  from  facts”,6  in  stark  opposition  to  the 
ideological approach which had dominated up until then. Within the present context the facts 
are clear: on the one hand, price stability is a necessary precondition for financial stability, 
although it is by no means a sufficient one; on the other hand, a key reason for preserving 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  in  order  to  avoid  potentially  significant  risks  to  price 
stability,  in  one  direction  or  the  other.  Let  me  now  turn  to  discussing  several  issues 
concerning  the  joint  implementation  of,  and  the  interaction  between,  monetary  and 
macroprudential policies. 
II. 
Issues concerning the joint implementation of, and the interaction between, 
monetary and macroprudential policies 
We  are  currently  in  uncharted  waters.  The  new  mix  of  macroeconomic  policies,  with  the 
setting  up  of  macroprudential  policies,  is  being  developed  as  we  speak.  Some  issues  are 
already  clear:  we  have  two  objectives  –  price  and  financial  stability  –  which,  based  on 
standard economic analysis, means that we will need two separate instruments to achieve 
them. Further, based again on standard analysis, the assignment of instruments to objectives 
ought to be based on the principle of comparative efficiency. Monetary policy is the natural 
instrument for pursuing price stability. Using again the prisma of Deng Xiaoping, the success 
of central banks in stabilizing inflation since 1995 strongly supports this view. Macroprudential 
policies – defined as a set of policies aimed at limiting both excessive credit growth and the 
build-up  of  systemic  risk  within  the  financial  system  –  will  have  to  take  care  of  preserving 
financial stability. From here onwards, however, things become less clear-cut, and sometimes 
positively complex. 
First,  the  two  objectives  are  qualitatively  different.  On  the  one  hand,  price  stability  is  very 
easy to define and to measure in terms of a specific price index. As a result, monetary policy 
is comparatively easy to communicate, and its performance can be assessed in a relatively 
straightforward way. Financial stability, on the other hand, is significantly fuzzier, as it deals 
with  preventing  the  accumulation  of  systemic  risks,  the  build-up  of  asset  price  persistent 
misalignments,  that  some  call  bubbles,  etc..  As  a  result,  it  cannot  be  defined  in  a 
straightforward fashion, with reference to, in the extreme case, a single indicator, and ought 
therefore to be communicated and assessed in a more complex way. 
Second,  and  crucial,  is  the  unchartered  interaction  between  the  two  policies.  On  the  one 
hand, recent thinking has stressed how monetary policy can contribute to sowing the seeds 
of future financial instability. Low interest rates, for example, can contribute to the build-up of 
                                                 
4   On this, see the discussion in Robert Shiller (2000), Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press. 
5   This has been convincingly argued by Christina Romer (1990), “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great 
Depression”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(August), 597–624 
6   As quoted in John Lewis Gaddis (2005), The Cold War: A New History, Penguin Press. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 3
financial  imbalances  via  the  so-called  “risktaking”  channel.7  Simply  put,  very  low  interest 
rates may create incentives for banks to take on more risks. Recent research has provided 
empirical  evidence  compatible  with  such  a  notion.  It  has  been  documented,8  for  example, 
how  market  based  measures  of  bank’s  risks  as  perceived  by  financial  market  participants 
tend  to  react  positively  to  changes  in  interest  rates,  so  that  a  lower  interest  rate  leads 
investor  to perceive  banks  as  less  risky.  By  the  same  token,  several papers9  have  shown 
that  credit  standards  are  correlated  with  the  level  of  interest  rates:  lower  interest  rates,  in 
particular,  imply  lower  credit  standards  including  to  customers  who  are  perceived  as 
representing a higher credit risk. On the theoretical side, research done at the  Banque de 
France10 has shown that, when the regulatory environment is not transparent, a decrease in 
the level of real interest rate increases banks’ risk-taking behavior, in parts because it may 
facilitate the under-pricing of risks typical when asset prices rise.  
Another risk, spotted by Raguram Rajan11, is that low interest rates lead banks into a “search 
for yield” strategy, in order to maintain a desired – or even institutionally mandated – rate of 
return. A time-honored principle of finance is that, ceteris paribus, the only way to increase 
the  expected  rate  of  return  is  to  take  more  risk,  and  the  result  of  such  search  for  yield  is 
therefore that banks will increase their risk exposure. 
An  alternative  channel  through  which  excessively  low  rates  may  have  contributed  to  the 
building up of financial imbalances during the period leading up to the crisis originates from 
central banks’ ultimate focus on goods’, rather than asset prices’ inflation. During a period 
characterized  by  large,  benign  supply  shocks  originating  from  the  integration  of  large 
developing countries into the global economy, the resulting disinflationary pressures induced 
central banks to keep interest rates at comparatively low levels – in particular, levels which, 
with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  may  have  contributed  to  excessive  credit  growth,  with  the 
resulting creation of asset prices’ bubbles. 
Some  commentators  have  henceforth  suggested  including  asset  prices  into  the  index 
targeted  by  the  central  bank.  I  see  this  as  a  distinctly  sub-optimal  solution,  as  it  would 
essentially amount, in practice, to moving to a situation with one instrument, monetary policy, 
aiming  at  a  combination  of  two  objectives,  price  and  financial  stability.  Economic  theory 
dictates that, in the presence of multiple objectives, policymakers ought to rely on a number 
of instruments at least equal to the number of objectives. Combining multiple objectives into 
a  single  one,  on  the  other  hand,  would  only  apparently  solve  the  problem  by  artificially 
reducing the number of goals, but it would not change the fundamental nature of the control 
problem facing the policymaker. 
At  the  current  juncture,  only  very  little  research  is  conducted  on  the  interaction  between 
monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  within  rigorously  microfounded  general  equilibrium 
models. The Banque de France staff and I are very admirative of the leadership of Banca 
                                                 
7   See Claudio Borio and Haibin Zhu (2008), “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking, and Monetary Policy: A Missing 
Link in the Transmission Mechanism?”, BIS Working Paper n. 268, December 2008. 
8   See Yener Altunbas, Leonardo Gambacorta, and David Marqués-Ibáñez (2010), “Does Monetary Policy Affect 
Bank Risk-Taking?”, ECB Working Paper n. 1166, March 2010. 
9   See  Vasso  Ioannidou,  Steven  Ongena,  and  José-Luis  Peydró  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy,  Risk-Taking  and 
Pricing: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment”, ECB, mimeo; Matteo Ciccarelli, Angela Maddaloni, and 
José-Luis  Peydró  (2009),  “Trusting  the  Bankers:  Another  Look  at  the  Credit  Channel  of  Monetary  Policy”, 
ECB, mimeo. 
10   See Benoit Mojon, Simon Dubecq and Xavier Ragot (2010), “Fuzzy Capital Requirements, Risk Shifting and 
the Risk Taking Channel of Monetary Policy”, Banque de France mimeo. 
11   See  Raguram  Rajan  (2005),  “Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?”,  presented  at:  The 
Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas 
City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25 – 27, 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2010
d’Italia in this domain, as shown in the paper by Angelini, Neri, and Panetta12 which has been 
presented  at  this  conference.  I  look  forward  to  further  research  on  this  new  dimension  of 
macroeconomic policy. If research on new topics has some form of diminishing returns, the 
first good papers in this area will have huge visibility and numerous citations. 
I  know  that  the  brain  power  in  this  audience  is  first  class.  Let  me  tell  you  that  if  you  ever 
dreamt of having an impact on the design and the implementation of economic policy, this is 
the time. Your inputs are badly needed ! 
                                                
 
12   Paolo  Angelini,  Stefano  Neri,  and  Fabio  Panetta  (2010),  “Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies”,  Banca 
d’Italia, mimeo. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 5
