Anselmo Teng: Macao’s role as a platform for economic, trade and 
financial services 
Speech  by  Mr  Anselmo  Teng,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  at  the 
3rd Ministerial  Conference  of  the  Forum  for  Economic  and  Trade  Cooperation  between 
China and Portuguese Speaking Countries, Macao, 13 November 2010. 
 Honourable Ministers,  
Dear Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlement,  
The Forum for Economic and Trade Cooperation between China and Portuguese speaking 
countries was established in 2003. The Forum attaches much importance to economic and 
trade  cooperation  development.  On  the  other  hand,  it  embodies  integration  of  different 
culture while members pay respect reciprocally to different trade practices. All through these 
years, encouraging results have been achieved via the principle of equality, mutual benefit 
and diversified cooperation displayed by members of the Forum. Today, we are holding the 
3rd Ministerial Conference of the Forum. We make use of the opportunity to welcome local 
entrepreneurs and financiers and their counterparts who have come afar. We gather together 
to voice out our opinions based on which we shall formulate how to better our cooperation.  
Portuguese  speaking  countries  are  a  market  of  more  than  200  million  consumers  and 
endowed  with  enormous  natural  resources,  which  are  complementary  to  the  economy  of 
China. In a short span of time of 7 years, the Forum has enabled member countries to develop 
a  brand  new  relationship.  Industry  and  trade  have  flourished,  visits  and  communications 
among members have become more frequent, the Ministerial Conference of the Forum has 
been  regularized.  The  Forum  has  promoted  interaction  in  the  financial  realm  and  financial 
institutions of both sides have achieved solid results arising from financial cooperation. 
We see harmonious atmosphere, equality and mutual benefit in the Forum, all of which have 
enhanced development. Integration of east and west cultures and complementary economic 
development are also being activated rapidly via various vehicles of the Forum. In view of its 
advantageous geographical location and historical background, Macao has been playing a 
vital function as the liaison platform for economic and trade cooperation between China and 
the Portuguese speaking countries. It is a unique city in China when comes to maintaining 
such  special  relationship  with  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  In  view  of  its  historical 
backdrop, its relationship with the Mainland, particularly in the realm of trade and financial 
connections, and the benign interactions with Portuguese speaking countries, particularly its 
partnership  with  financial  institutions  of  these  countries,  Macao  has  fully  displayed  its 
function as service platform in the middle.  
In the financial sector, as the financial regulator, the Monetary Authority of Macao (“AMCM”) 
has  concluded  MOU  (Memorandum  of  Understanding)  with  central  banks  of  6  Portuguese 
speaking countries, including the one signed with the central bank of Guinea-Bissau today. 
The  documents  have  enabled  us  to  build  up  a  mechanism  whereby  communication  is 
systemized;  cooperation  in  the  exchange  of  market  information,  professional  training, 
experience and technical skill has been made possible. In addition, in helping local financial 
institutions  to  explore  overseas  markets  and  to  seek  business  partners,  AMCM  started  in 
2007 to organize delegations of local financiers to make study tours to Angola, Brazil, Cape 
Verde,  Mozambique  and  Portugal.  More  plans  of  such  nature  are  now  in  the  pipeline. 
Through all these visits, representatives of the financial sector not only have an up-to-date 
picture  of  market  development,  they  have  also  established  connections  with  the  local 
financial  institutions  and  business  communities  there.  With  the  support  of  relevant  parties, 
AMCM  organized  in  2009  a  seminar  for  central  banks  of  Portuguese  speaking  countries. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 1
Apart  from  central  bankers  of  Portuguese  speaking  countries,  commercial  attachés  of  the 
Peoples  Republic  of  China  in  Portuguese  speaking  countries  were  also  invited.  The  move 
has injected booster in prompting economic, trade and financial cooperation between China 
and Lusophone countries.  
Economy and finance interact and integrate and have in fact become one entity. All along, 
the Mainland and Portuguese capital banks have accounted for the lion’s share in the Macao 
market. As regards cooperation in the financial field, some China capital banks have already 
concluded  business  cooperation  agreements  with  financial  institutions  of  Lusophone 
countries. For example, Bank of China Macao Branch has concluded memorandum of intent 
on remittance with Development Bank of Angola and Mozambique International Bank. In July 
this  year,  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China  (Macau)  signed  overall  business 
cooperation  agreements  covering  remittance,  trade  finance,  international  settlement  and 
syndicated loan with Banco Espirito Santo and Commercial Bank of Portugal. In September, 
Bank  of  China  executed  a  “Business  Cooperation  Framework  Agreement”  with  Portugal 
Investment Bank. The document provides financial support to China enterprises who want to 
invest  overseas.  From  the  solid  examples  aforementioned,  we  can  perceive  that  China 
capital  banks  are  actively  seeking  cooperation  with  Portuguese  capital  banks  to  explore 
business opportunity in Portuguese speaking markets. On the other hand, Portuguese capital 
banks are making use of the strong Mainland banking networks and experience to explore 
new business opportunity on the Mainland. The cooperation between China and Portuguese 
capital banks will further enhance the role played by Macao as economic, trade and financial 
platform  between  our  country  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  All  these  agreements 
facilitate financial cooperation and activate trade between the two sides.  
To  more  effectively  promote  multilateral  economic,  trade  and  financial  cooperation,  we 
should not miss the fine opportunity available and sturdy foundation laid down. Macao can 
enlarge its role as economic, trade and financial platform via the following conceptions:  
1)  
By  making  use  of  its  historical,  cultural  and  legal  framework  connection  with 
Lusophone  countries,  Macau  can  actively  assist  enterprises  of  the  Mainland, 
particularly  the  Pan-Pearl  River  Region,  to start  business  in  Lusophone  countries. 
As  RMB  cross  border  trade  settlement  business  has  been  inaugurated,  they  can 
strive to settle transactions denominated in RMB.  
AMCM is able to organize financial institutions of the Pan-Pearl River Region to visit 
Lusophone countries and help them to establish business connections with financial 
institutions there with a view to rolling out related business with them.  
All along, the Guangdong Province has been dubbed with the reputation of being a 
“Province of Manufacturers”. Now, an overall plan is being implemented to replace 
conventional industries with more innovative industries. It is prudent to make use of 
Macao  as  the  platform  to  channel  suitable  enterprises  to  set  up  manufacturing 
concerns in Lusophone countries. The move will trigger off a series of multilateral 
trade  transactions.  In  addition,  related  financial  services  can  be  generated  in  the 
course of relocation of the factories.  
In the regulatory realm, channels of co-operation needs to be built up and regulatory 
system  framework  needs  to  be  established  in  order  to  safeguard  cross-border 
financial activities and flow of funds.  
2)  
3)  
4)  
The above are food for further thought.  
Finally,  I  believe  that  through  interaction  and  endeavour  of  regulatory  authorities,  financial 
sectors and enterprises of member states, we are able to promote sustainable, steady and 
healthy development in the economic, trade, manufacturing and financial areas. In the face 
of all these, Macao can make good advancement and be able to enhance its role as platform 
for economic, trade and financial services.  
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2010
