Glenn Stevens: Overview of the Australian economy and future challenges 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 26 November 2010. 
 When we last met with the Committee in February this year, it was becoming clear that the 
recovery in the global economy was proceeding faster than many had expected. It was also 
clear that the strongest performance was in the emerging world, while recoveries in countries 
that had been at the centre of the financial events of 2007 and 2008 were relatively subdued. 
Global financial markets had continued to improve, but were paying close attention to the rise 
in sovereign debt in a number of countries.  
At  that  time,  people  were  talking  about  an  expansion  in  global  GDP  of  something  like 
4 per cent in 2010. As it turns out, it looks like the outcome will be stronger than that: current 
estimates for the year are about 4¾ per cent, which is above trend. The pattern of growth is 
still rather uneven. The additional strength has been concentrated in the emerging countries, 
with growth in China and India running at a pace of around 10 per cent in 2010. In contrast, 
growth  of  about  2½ per  cent  for  the  G7  group,  after  a  contraction  of  around  3½ per  cent 
in 2009, will leave a considerable margin of spare capacity and particularly of unemployed 
labour.  
Financial markets and policymakers have maintained, and indeed increased, their focus on 
issues of sovereign debt sustainability. First Greece, and now Ireland have sought financial 
assistance from European partners and the IMF, after a change in economic circumstances 
and a large rise in market borrowing costs left authorities with little other option, even with 
deep cuts to spending. Across continental Europe and the United Kingdom, governments are 
embarking  on  a  path  of  fiscal  consolidation,  in  order  to  put  public  finances  on  a  sounder 
footing  in  the  face  of  increased  obligations  and  reduced  revenues.  These  programs  will 
unavoidably have some short-term dampening effects on economic activity, which will likely 
become  clearer  during  2011.  But  the  scope  of  alternative  possibilities  open  to  the 
governments concerned is really rather limited.  
In this environment it is no surprise that the major central banks are mostly maintaining very 
low interest rates and in some cases increasing the sizes of their already expanded balance 
sheets  via  asset  purchases.  These  actions  are  designed  to  impart  some  further  stimulus 
through reducing long-term interest rates even further or via effects on private-sector balance 
sheets.  Yet  at  the  same  time  many  other  countries  have  moved  to  tighten  their  monetary 
policies  this  year,  in  recognition  of  the  robust  recovery  in  output.  In  most  cases  in  Asia  
– Japan being an exception – the rise in activity along the upward part of the “V” has now 
been seen and the pace of growth has to moderate if overheating is to be avoided.  
The combination of very low interest rates in the world’s developed financial centres, on the 
one hand, and strong growth and tightening monetary policies in Asia and Latin America, on 
the  other,  could  be  expected  to  place  pressure  on  exchange  rate  regimes,  and  so  it  has 
proved.  There  have  been  substantial  capital  flows  seeking  the  expected  higher  returns  in 
emerging economies and a rise in asset values in many of the recipient countries. A number 
have  responded  with  the  imposition  of  capital  controls  and  other  measures  to  contain 
leverage,  especially  in  housing  markets.  In  this  environment,  where  the  policy  imperatives 
differ  so  much  across  countries,  the  intensity  of  international  discussion  about  exchange 
rates was bound to escalate, and it has done so, quite markedly.  
A year from now we will probably have observed some moderation in global growth, from this 
year’s above-trend pace to something closer to trend. That is the assumption we are making. 
The  emerging  world  clearly  needed  some  moderation,  while  the  major  countries  working 
through the aftermath of banking crises are still likely, if history is any guide, to find it hard 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 1
going for a while yet. How much progress we will have made in resolving the “imbalances” 
issue remains very unclear.  
But  the  strength  of  global  growth  thus  far,  and  the  particular  pattern  of  growth  in  key 
emerging economies, with its very strong impact on demand for steel, has had a major effect 
on Australia’s terms of trade. These have returned to, and in fact exceeded, the six-decade 
highs seen two years ago. It is our assumption that prices for key resource exports will not 
remain this high, but will instead decline over the next few years. Even so, developments in 
the  period  since  February  have  led  us  to  lift  our  estimates  for  the  terms  of  trade  in  the 
2010/11 year.  
In  February  I  suggested  that  real  GDP  growth  in  the  Australian  economy  would  be  a  little 
over 3 per cent in 2010, and a little higher than that – about 3½ per cent – in 2011 and 2012. 
It  would  take  only  pretty  moderate  growth  in  the  second  half  of  the  year  to  achieve  that 
forecast for 2010. Next year, growth could be stronger than we had expected nine months 
ago,  though  obviously  there  are  still  numerous  areas  of  uncertainty.  Measured  in  nominal 
terms, the rise in GDP is running at about 10 per cent per annum just now, because of the 
rise in the terms of trade.  
Consumer  price  inflation  has  returned  to  rates  consistent  with  the  medium-term  target, 
running  at  about  2½ per cent  in  underlying  terms,  and  2¾ per cent  in  CPI  terms,  over  the 
past year. This is clearly a marked improvement from two years ago, when the CPI inflation 
rate reached 5 per cent. A significant decline in inflation was expected at the time the Board 
started to reduce interest rates in September 2008.  
Sometimes, the process of disinflation can be quite costly in terms of economic activity. That 
is  often  the  case  when  higher  inflation  lasts  long  enough  to  become  embedded  in 
expectations. That did not occur this time and the result was that inflation came down with 
relatively little short-run cost to output, very much as was the case in 2001 and 1995. It is, of 
course,  one  of  the  intended  effects  of  having  an  announced  objective  for  inflation  that 
inflation expectations be well anchored, which aids economic stability and efficiency.  
It is unlikely, though, that we will see inflation fall much further from here. We will probably 
see  some  ongoing  dampening  effect  on  inflation  of  the  rise  in  the  exchange  rate,  as  this 
usually takes some time to flow through fully. Growth in labour costs, however, is no longer 
declining, but rising. The overall pace could not be described as alarming at this stage, but 
the  turning  point  is  behind  us.  Nor  is  the  growth  of  the  economy  falling  short  of  potential 
growth; if anything, over the past year aggregate demand has risen considerably faster than 
potential output (something that is possible only with either considerable spare capacity or a 
rise  in  absorption  from  the  rest  of  the  world).  At  this  point,  the  gap  between  actual  and 
potential  output  is  probably  not  that  large.  Moreover,  while  the  annual  pace  of  growth  of 
utilities prices – a prominent feature of the past couple of years – has probably peaked, it is 
likely to remain high.  
Over the coming year, we think that inflation will be pretty close to where it is now, consistent 
with the target. But looking further ahead, in an economy with reasonably modest amounts of 
spare capacity, the terms of trade near an all-time high and the likely need to accommodate 
the  largest  resource-sector  investment  expansion  in  a  century,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  the 
medium-term risks on inflation lie in the direction of it being too high, rather than too low.  
Last  time  we  met,  I  explained  it  was  important  that  monetary  policy  not  overstay  a  very 
expansionary  setting  once  it  was  clear  that  the  danger  of  a  really  serious  downturn  in 
economic activity had passed. At that stage the Board had lifted the cash rate three times in 
late 2009. Most lenders raised borrowing rates by more than the cash rate, given that their 
costs of funds had moved up relative to the cash rate. I noted the Board was taking account 
of these shifts in deciding the appropriate setting of the cash rate. Most rates remained below 
normal at that stage. I also said that, if economic conditions evolved as we expected, further 
adjustments  to  monetary  policy  would  probably  be  needed  over  time  to  ensure  inflation 
remained consistent with the target.  
2 
 BIS Review 156/2010
In the first half of 2010 the Board did indeed make further adjustments, lifting the cash rate to 
4.5 per  cent.  This  was  roughly  100 basis  points  lower  than  what  we  would  once  have 
described as “normal”. In fact it was close to the lowest point reached by the cash rate in the 
two  preceding  interest  rate  cycles.  But  it  resulted  in  borrowing  rates  pretty  close  to  the 
average  of  the  past  decade  or  more,  and  so  was  what  could  be  considered  as  “normal”, 
allowing  for  the  changes  in  margins.  The  Board  judged  this  to  be  an  appropriate  point  at 
which to rest for quite some months. This allowed some time to assess the effects of earlier 
decisions and also to gauge what was happening in the rest of the world.  
Most recently, as you know, the Board decided to lift the cash rate by 25 basis points. Many 
lenders raised their loan rates by more than this. These moves have left the overall setting of 
monetary policy a little tighter than average, as judged by interest rate criteria. Of course, we 
are  aware  as  well  that,  particularly  for  business  borrowers,  non-price  conditions  remain 
tighter than they were for some years prior to 2008. Overall, and also taking account of the 
exchange rate, which has risen substantially this year, we judge this to be the appropriate 
setting for the period ahead.  
As the minutes from the Board meetings show, recent decisions were finely balanced. Quite 
reasonable arguments could have been made to wait a little longer before taking this step. 
Good arguments could also be offered as to why, when we looked ahead, it was prudent to 
take an early modest step in the tightening direction. On balance, the Board judged that to be 
the better course.  
This sequence of decisions was taken in the same framework that has guided our monetary 
policy for nearly two decades now: seeking to keep the growth of demand sustainable so as 
to  achieve  an  average  inflation  rate  of  between  2 and  3 per  cent.  It  is  worth  noting, 
incidentally, that the recently re-elected Government has once again committed, as have I, to 
this framework, which will continue to guide our decisions.  
My colleagues and I are here to respond to your questions. 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 3
