 Masaaki Shirakawa: Economic policy challenges lying ahead – two years 
after the crisis 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2010 Institute of 
International Finance (IIF) Annual Membership Meeting, Washington DC, 10 October 2010. 
 Introduction 
I.  
I am honored to be invited today to address the Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute 
of International Finance. 
I  wondered  how  I  would  be  able  to  contribute  most  to  discussions  at  this  meeting  without 
overlapping  other  participants’  presentations,  and  I  decided  to  talk  about  economic  policy 
challenges lying ahead, especially monetary policy challenges, with consideration of Japan’s 
experience.  In  fact,  there  are  increasing  discussions  in  the  United  States  recently  as  to 
whether the United States will fall into “deflation in the Japanese style” or the “lost decade 
like Japan”. 
In Japan, CPI inflation reached its peak of 3.3 percent in January 1991 soon after the burst of 
the bubble, started declining shortly thereafter, and turned negative in 1998 (Chart 1). When 
overlaying  U.S.  CPI  inflation  from  2007  on  Japanese  CPI  inflation  after  the  burst  of  the 
bubble, we find a striking similarity in the inflation developments between them. Looking at 
the  growth  in  bank  lending,  the  pace  of  the  declines  in  the  United  States  and  European 
countries is much faster than that in Japan.  
Of course, I do not have the answer to the tough question I raised shortly before. Nevertheless, 
concerning Japan’s experience, I do not think that either way of thinking is appropriate: to fear 
a  specter,  nor  to  take  Japan’s  experience  just  as  unique.  The  United  States  and  European 
countries  obviously  have  an  advantage  of  learning  from  Japan’s  experience.1  Japan  was  a 
lonely forerunner. 
Japan’s economy after the burst of the bubble 
II.  
Let me begin by making a quick summary of Japan’s experience.  
First, it took fairly long to restore the full-fledged recovery path after the burst of the bubble 
(Chart 2). Japan started recovering in a full-fledged manner in 2003 long after the burst of the 
bubble in the early 1990s. Until then, Japan experienced two business cycle expansions and 
three contractions in the “lost decade”. Whenever some signs of recovery were observed in 
Japan,  expectations  that  the  economy  would  finally  escape  from  stagnant  conditions  and 
enter a full-fledged recovery were rising. Based on such Japan’s experience, I attempted to 
draw public attention to the risk of falling into false optimism by using the phrase of a “false 
dawn”, when we first saw some signs of economic recovery in advanced economies in the 
spring of 2009.2 
                                                 
1   For  a  comparison  between  Japan’s  experience  after  the  burst  of  the  bubble  and  the  U.S.  and  European 
experience in the recent financial crisis, see Shirakawa, Masaaki, “Uniqueness or Similarity? – Japan’s Post-
Bubble Experience in Monetary Policy Studies –”, Keynote Address at Second IJCB Fall Conference hosted 
by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  September  16,  2010  (available  at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1009c.htm). 
2   See Shirakawa, Masaaki, “Way out of Economic and Financial Crisis: Lessons and PoliCY Actions”, Speech at 
Japan Society in New York, April 23, 2009 (available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0904c.htm). 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 1
 Second,  the  sharp  contraction  of  economic  activity  after  the  burst  of  the  bubble  in  Japan 
occurred when interbank funding markets became destabilized. That decline, however, was 
much  smaller  than  those  in  many  countries,  including  Japan,  after  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers in the fall of 2008. Looking at real GDP data, Japan recorded the largest decline by 
1.9  percent  in  the  first  quarter  of  1998,  but,  in  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  even  the 
United  States,  which  showed  the  smallest  decline  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
registered the huge decline by 3.0 percent during the period from the fourth quarter of 2008 
to the first quarter of 2009 (Chart 3). The two cases have the common trigger of an interbank 
market participant default.  
Third, Japan has experienced mild deflation, but has not experienced a deflationary spiral, by 
which I mean that a decline in prices induced a decline in economic activity, thereby leading 
to  a  further  decline  in  prices.  Consumer  price  inflation  turned  negative  in  1998,  and  from 
1997 to 2007, before the current crisis, it declined by 3.3 percent on a cumulative basis, and 
0.3  percent  on  an  annualized  basis  (Chart  4).  Under  mild  deflation,  however,  Japan 
registered  the  longest  recovery  from  2002  to  2007,  just  in  duration  without  considering  its 
strength (Chart 5). 
Fourth,  labor  practice  significantly  influenced  inflation  developments.  For  example,  about 
90 percent of the difference in consumer price inflation between Japan and the United States 
is attributed to services prices, which are strongly influenced by developments in the labor 
market (Chart 6). 
Let me elaborate on the effects of labor practice on inflation developments in more detail. As 
inflation declined in Japan, wages tended to be set in a more flexible manner. Such flexibility 
in  wage  setting  was  attained  not  only  through  a  reduction  in  bonus  payments  and  an 
increase  in  the  number  of  non-regular  workers,  but  also  the  downward  revision  of  fixed 
compensation for regular workers (Chart 7). Since the service sector is more labor-intensive 
than  the  manufacturing  sector,  flexible  downward  revisions  of  nominal  wages  caused 
declines  in  services  prices,  thereby  inducing  deflation.  As  you  may  be  well  aware,  Japan 
experienced  smaller  increases  in  unemployment  rates.  Their  flip  side  was  mild  deflation. 
Since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  management  and  labor  in  Japan  have  put  priority  on 
maintaining  employment,  and  to  do  so,  workers  have  accepted  reductions  in  wages.  By 
contrast, European countries had more rigidity in wage setting, and thus they were less likely 
to experience deflation at least in the short term, but needed to endure higher unemployment 
rates. Such differences in wage and employment developments in Japan and the European 
countries  are  the  results  of  social  choice  after  considering  various  costs,  and  do  not 
necessarily imply whether one system is better than the other.  
Turning to the fifth and last point on Japan’s experience, demographic changes affected the 
Japanese economy significantly. Japan delivered a weaker performance in real GDP growth. 
At  the  same  time,  in  terms  of  labor  productivity  growth,  Japan  still  showed  a  comparable 
performance  to  the  US,  although  Japan  had  lost  a  superior  performance  in  the  1980s 
(Chart 8). Obviously, the differences between Real GDP growth and labor productivity growth 
reflect the declines in the workforce in Japan. In any event, in extracting implications from 
Japan’s  “lost  decade”,  it  is  essential  to  analyze  not  only  short-term  aggregate  demand 
movements  but  also  changes  in  the  potential  growth  trend,  which  is  determined  by 
productivity growth and demographic changes. 
Major and common challenges for advanced countries  
III.  
Then, what should we consider in mapping out near-term economic policies in each country? 
Of  course,  the  answer  to  that  question  varies  from  country  to  country,  depending  on 
economic  conditions.  Based  on  Japan’s  experience,  I  will  offer  my  thoughts  on  major 
economic policy challenges that are common to advanced countries despite the differences 
in economic conditions. 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 First,  we  definitely  need  to  maintain  financial  system  stability.  Using  the  metaphor,  the 
economy  after  the  burst  of  a  bubble  can  be  divided  into  two  phases:  the  phase  of  “acute 
pains” arising from the malfunctioning interbank money markets and the phase of “chronic 
illnesses” from balance-sheet adjustments after such acute pains recede. It is very important 
to  stave  off  the  acute  pains,  which  are  likely  to  trigger  a  sharp  contraction  of  economic 
activity  and  potentially  produce  devastating  effects  on  the  economy.  In  May  2010,  major 
central  banks  reintroduced  dollar-fund  supplying  operations  when  dollar-funding  markets 
showed signs of tension, again reflecting increased concern over sovereign debts problems 
in peripheral European countries. Such measure was implemented with consideration of the 
importance of maintaining the stability in interbank funding markets. 
Second,  we  need  to  continue  with  the  unprecedented  easy  monetary  policy,  given  the 
current  economic  conditions.  In  fact,  many  advanced  countries  have  maintained  very 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ)  also  decided  recently  to 
implement  a  comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy  in  order  to  further  enhance  monetary 
easing.  That  included  three  measures:  (i)  clarification  of  maintaining  virtually  zero  interest 
rates; (ii) clarification of the time horizon to maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy; and 
(iii) establishment of an asset purchase program to purchase various financial assets, such 
as government securities, commercial paper (CP), corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds, 
and  real  estate  investment  trusts  and  to  conduct  the  fixed-rate  funds-supplying  operation 
against the pooled collateral. 
Third, we need to accept the fact that, once a country experienced a bubble, it will take fairly 
long to rise up from the bottom in the aftermath of the burst of a bubble, and restore the full-
fledged recovery path, despite various unprecedented policy efforts. As Japan’s experience 
shows,  it  is  the  hard  fact  that  the  economy  will  be  unable  to  achieve  a  strong  recovery 
without  resolving  “excesses”  accumulated  during  a  bubble  period.  The  form  of  “excesses” 
varies from country to country. In Japan, they were “three excesses” in the business sector: 
employment, production capacity, and debt (Chart 9). 
In  that  context,  we  sometimes  hear  an  argument  that  “the  delayed  monetary  policy 
responses caused the economic stagnation”. It is true that the BOJ failed to fully recognize 
the  significant  magnitude  of  adverse  effects  soon  after  the  burst  of  the  bubble,  like  other 
central  banks.  But  it  is  also  true  that  the  BOJ  carried  out  innovative  monetary  policy 
measures on a large scale as a pioneering effort.  
For example, the BOJ reduced the overnight interest rate to virtually zero in the second half 
of 1995, of which level corresponds to the current policy interest rates in the United States 
and European countries. The BOJ also expanded its balance sheet size considerably. From 
1995  when  the  overnight  interest  rate  fell  down  to  virtually  zero,  the  ratio  of  the  BOJ’s 
balance sheet size to nominal GDP increased by more than 20 percentage points at its peak 
(Chart  10).  That  increase  in  the  ratio  for  the  BOJ  was  twice  as  large  as  that  in  the  U.S. 
Federal Reserve (Fed), the European Central Bank (ECB), and the Bank of England (BOE) 
in  the  recent  crisis.  In  addition,  the  BOJ  made  a  policy  commitment  to  continuing  the 
quantitative easing policy “until core CPI inflation becomes stably zero or above”. The BOJ 
adopted “credit easing” in the current terminology, ahead of central banks in the world. The 
BOJ purchased asset-backed securities (ABSs), asset-backed commercial papers (ABCPs), 
and  even  stocks  held  by  financial  institutions  to  reduce  market  risk  associated  with 
stockholdings,  which  was  one  of  the  biggest  risk  factors  in  potentially  destabilizing  the 
financial system. 
In  retrospect,  the  BOJ  introduced  various  unprecedented  measures  under  the  uncharted 
circumstances  during  the  period  from  the  late  1990s  to  the  early  2000s.  Such  measures 
involved  most  of  the  elements  in  the  unconventional  policy  measures  taken  in  the  recent 
global  financial  crisis.  Nevertheless,  it  took  a  fairly  long  before  the  Japanese  economy 
restored  the  full-fledged  recovery  path.  And  that  fact  suggests  the  severity  of  the  balance 
sheet adjustments I have mentioned earlier. 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 3
 In any event, without sufficient public understanding about the fact that we need a long time 
to  complete  balance  sheet  adjustments,  the  delay  in  the  recovery  in  the  macroeconomic 
performance  is  likely  to  provoke  social  discontent.  That  tends  to  create  the  social  climate, 
which is prone to induce policy measures inconsistent with economic efficiency. That leads to 
the fourth point in economic policy challenges.  
Fourth, we need to pay more attention to the importance of maintaining the flexibility of the 
economic structure. As I discussed earlier, Japan’s “lost decade” was crucially attributed to 
the decline in population and productivity. In that sense, if foreign countries mistakenly draw 
the most crucial lesson from Japan’s experience as the necessity of short-term stimulative 
policy measures, they will face a risk of writing the wrong policy prescription. I do not go into 
the  details  of  economic  policy  in  each  country,  but  I  think  that  it  is  crucial  to  maintain  the 
flexibility of the economic structure to smoothly  reallocate labor and capital from the lower 
productivity sector to the higher productivity sector. That is, however, not necessarily easy, 
given the social climate after the burst of bubble, just I mentioned. 
Fifth, we cannot rule out the possibility that the current unprecedented easy monetary policy 
in  many  advanced  countries,  if  continued  for  an  extended  period,  will  produce  unintended 
consequences.  Under  the  easy  monetary  condition,  inefficient  businesses  tend  to  be 
preserved,  and  economic  rejuvenation  also  tends  to  be  delayed,  thereby  reducing  the 
productivity  growth.  Although  easy  monetary  policy  is  needed,  it  alone  cannot  solve  the 
problem.  Structural  reform  is  indispensable.  Also,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  such  easy 
monetary  condition  is  likely  to  contribute  to  the  emergence  of  another  bubble.  In  fact,  the 
prolonged  low  interest  rates  in  the  early  2000s,  in  the  aftermath  of  intensified  deflationary 
concern  stemming  from  the  burst  of  the  dot-com  bubble,  partly  contributed  to  the  global 
credit bubble.  
A  crisis  comes  to  the  surface  with  a  different  face  every  time.  The  current  recovery  in 
advanced countries is basically supported by strong growth in emerging countries. Thus, if 
the  strong  growth  in  emerging  countries  turns  out  to  be  the  one  entailing  the  bubble-like 
nature,  advanced  countries  as  well  as  emerging  countries  themselves  will  be  affected 
significantly.  As  for  equity  price  developments,  advanced  countries  still  stay  far  below  the 
level before the failure of Lehman Brothers, while a few emerging countries are reaching an 
all-time high due partly to capital inflows from advance countries. In some sense, it can be 
said  that  monetary  easing  in  advanced  countries  has  exerted  stimulative  effects  through 
capital  outflows  to  emerging  countries.  That  suggests  a  significant  change  in  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy from the conventional mechanism we generally 
assume. 
Sixth,  we  need  to  implement  financial  reform  in  a  well-balanced  manner.  In  light  of  the 
lessons from the recent crisis, it is a fairly appropriate direction of the reform to strengthen 
the existing capital requirement. At the same time, it is also necessary to avoid undermining 
the economic recovery in raising capital requirements. In that regard, I appreciate that the 
new  capital standards, so  called  “Basel  III”  agreed  at  the meeting  of  the  Group  of  Central 
Bank Governors and Heads of Supervision in September, ensures a good balance between 
the two requirements.  
I do also want to emphasize that we need to find the right balance between stricter regulation 
and  intensified  supervision.  Regulation  alone,  especially  in  the  form  of  more  regulatory 
capital, will not prevent the next crisis. The risk profiles of financial institutions vary across 
firms  and  countries,  and  they  change  over  time.  Thus,  regulation  needs  to  be  effectively 
combined with rigorous supervision and close monitoring. 
Closing remarks 
IV.  
I have discussed the points to be remembered in discussing near-term economic policies at 
this critical juncture. But I have stopped short of showing a specific direction of policy actions. 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 Such policy actions should be mapped out by the policy authorities and people concerned 
with consideration of economic conditions. Given that a crisis comes to the surface with a 
different face every time, what I can say here is that central bankers as well as executives of 
private financial institutions, who are all at this meeting, need to be humble enough to pay 
attention to various possibilities with consideration of historical lessons. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 5
  6 
   BIS Review 131/2010
  BIS Review 131/2010 
   7
  8 
   BIS Review 131/2010
     BIS Review 131/2010 
 9
     10 
 BIS Review 131/2010
    BIS Review 131/2010 
 11
