Thomas J Jordan: Systemic risk and regulation – managing the challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  J  Jordan,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  5th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Swiss  Finance  Institute,  Zurich,  
3 November 2010. 
 I would like to thank Dr. Claudia Strub, Till Ebner and Dr. Robert Bichsel for their valuable support in drafting this 
speech. 
Introduction 
The handling of systemic risk in financial systems is an immense challenge. First, because it 
is  not  always  possible  to  pinpoint  the  precise  sources  of  systemic  risk  due  to  complex 
interdependences  in  global  financial  markets.  Second,  because  before  the  outbreak  of  a 
crisis it is almost impossible to identify which domino will be the first to fall and thereby bear 
the  ultimate  responsibility  for  causing  the  financial  system  suddenly  to  falter  and  even 
collapse.  Finally,  the  impact  of  systemic  risk  can  extend  way  beyond  the  system  that  is 
initially affected. When the financial system is close to collapse, the costs are enormous, as 
was clearly apparent in the latest financial and economic crisis.  
In my presentation today, I will talk to you about where we currently stand in our examination 
of the background to this latest crisis and how we can best address the diverse challenges in 
relation  to  systemic  risk  in  the  financial  system.  I  will  begin  by  explaining  the  issue  of 
systemic  risk  in  a  little  more  detail,  taking  the  recent  crisis  as  my  example,  and  making  it 
clear  why  regulatory  interventions  in  the  financial  system  are  necessary.  On  the  basis  of 
these explanations, I will then present the key criteria, which, in my opinion, should be used 
as  guidelines  when  designing  regulatory  measures.  In  other  words,  I  will  be  sketching  the 
core components of a kind of roadmap for containing systemic risk. However, since we can 
never rule out the emergence of a new crisis, we also require a well-placed safety net. This 
will help to secure an adequate supply of liquidity to banks and markets, even at times of 
increased  stress.  A  final  section  will  be  dedicated  to  this  area,  with  some  remarks  on  the 
importance of the central banks’ function as lender of last resort.  
Systemic risk and the financial crisis  
Normally a number of different factors are simultaneously responsible for the accumulation of 
systemic risk over time leading to a crisis – as happened in the recent crisis. A number of 
well-known examples of possible risk factors and undesirable developments in the financial 
system include irrational market developments (e.g. bubbles during the upswing or fire sales 
during the downswing), inadequate or inappropriate regulation (e.g. weak points in Basel II), 
excessive  confidence  in  markets  and  models  (e.g.  VaR),  false  incentive  systems  (such  as 
implicit state guarantees for systemically  important banks), and complex and intransparent 
products (e.g. complex securitised loans).  
In  summer  2007,  these  factors  were  combined  or  interacted  with  one  another  to  create  a 
situation where confidence was suddenly withdrawn from the global financial system, which 
then went out of control. Even though three years have now elapsed since the start of the 
crisis,  it  would  be  rash  of  us  to  claim  that  we  have  clearly  identified  the  cause  of  the 
accumulation of the systemic risk revealed in the crisis and are now in a position to prevent 
the accumulation of such risk in future. For instance, although the bubble in the US housing 
market  was  identified  at  a  relatively  early  stage,  its  threat  to  the  system  was  totally 
underestimated. This fact clearly shows that systemic crises and their effects are difficult to 
forecast. Even in summer 2007, as it became obvious that the US housing market was in a 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 1
very  precarious  situation,  almost  no-one  foresaw  the  huge  impact  this  would  have  on  the 
global financial system and the world economy.  
Ladies and gentlemen, we are all aware that systemic crises will occur again and again. This 
is because risk in the financial system pro bably always emerges at a moment when we are 
not yet in a position to fully identify or understand it. However, irrespective of this fact, at this 
point I would like to stress how important it is that we use all the resources at our disposal to 
try and contain the effects of systemic crises or lessen the probability that such a crisis will 
occur, at the very least, even if we are unable to prevent crises altogether.  
First,  systemic  crises  are  enormously  costly.  Naturally,  that  alone  does  not  justify  state 
intervention. However, the legitimation for active state intervention can be derived from the 
fact that systemic risk gives rise to negative externalities, i.e. market failure, if it is not taken 
into account in the decision-making considerations of market participants. This means that 
the social costs of systemic crises are higher than the private costs. In the financial sector, 
this  issue  is  particularly  delicate,  because  of  specific  characteristics  that  can  give  rise  to 
negative systemic externalities of the kind I have just described.1 I will return to this important 
topic later in my presentation.  
Second, based on historic experience, I am convinced that both the magnitude of systemic 
risk  and  the  probability  that  systemic  crises  will  occur  can  actually  be  reduced  through 
intelligent regulation. Sure, they can also be sharply increased by incorrect regulation or lack 
of  regulation.  Yet,  improvement  can  be  achieved  even  if  it  is  not  easy  to  identify  the 
accumulation of systemic risk and even if regulation will never be perfect.  
Consequently,  the  need  and  the  potential  for  mitigating  the  accumulation  of  systemic  risk 
through regulation raises a number of questions with regard to the specific design of such 
regulation. Where do we start? How do we set priorities? Which principles should we abide 
by?  
The  number  of  regulatory  solutions  that  have  been  proposed  are  as  numerous  as  the 
possible triggers of systemic crises. Often, individual solutions focus on one specific cause. 
In my opinion, there are so many possible causes of a systemic crisis that it is insufficient to 
focus on just one specific cause when drawing up possible regulatory solutions. It would be 
an illusion to think that the issue of systemic risk could be totally eliminated in the long-term 
with such an approach.  
Consequently,  I  believe  it  is  important  that  the  problem  be  approached  in  a  systematic 
manner, and that comprehensible criteria for a list of measures that is likely to be effective be 
drawn up. Unless a roadmap is drawn up based on principles which guide us in the handling 
of the challenges we encounter in regulating systemic risk, there is a danger that decisions 
on  the  requisite  measures  will  be made  arbitrarily,  that  solutions  lacking  substance  will  be 
implemented or that nothing at all will be done. From the viewpoint of systemic stability, the 
result  would  be  suboptimal.  I  will  now  talk  about  the  criteria  for  assessing  regulatory 
measures.  
Do the measures ensure market discipline?  
The  first  important  criterion  is  whether  the  measures  that  are  taken  can  reduce  the  social 
costs  that  can  arise  as  a  result  of  systemic  risk.  Ultimately,  what  is  needed  is  an 
internalisation  of  the  negative  externalities,  so  that  market  discipline  and  market  order  are 
restored. The TBTF issue, in particular, is an illustration of the fact that the market’s power to 
impose  sanctions  is  not  fully  functioning  at  present,  since  systemically  important  banks 
                                                 
1   For instance, information contagion, interdependences (interbank market) non-substitutability of systemically 
important functions, etc. 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2010
cannot currently fail. On the contrary, they benefit from a government rescue guarantee for 
the very reason that, because of their systemic importance, their failure costs would be so 
high. Thus, at present, TBTF financial institutions are not obliged to bear the full extent of the 
risk they assume. In the event of problems they can pass on the risk to the general public. 
This is a fundamental contradiction to the basic principles of a properly functioning market 
economy.  
In order to contain these market imperfections the guiding principle should be – do what is 
necessary, but no more than is necessary! Consequently, the measures to be taken need to 
contribute  to  stability  without  obstructing  key  welfare-enhancing  functions  of  the  financial 
system.  In  particular,  it  is  important  that  the  measures  are  first  and  foremost  designed  to 
correct  false  incentives  and  to  guide  them  in  the  right  direction  so  that,  first,  unprofitable 
financial institutions leave the market of their own accord and, second, potential losses are 
borne by these institutions themselves, and not by the state.  
Consequently,  in  my  opinion,  measures  such  as  a  ban  on  proprietary  trading  or  the 
introduction  of  a  narrow  banking  system,  that  intervene  too  strongly  in  banks’  business 
models, are not very suitable. Such measures neither target the objective nor are they in line 
with the basic principles of the market economy. With regard to the TBTF issue, this principle 
has  prompted  the  committee  of  experts  appointed  by  the  Swiss  Government  to  draw  up 
proposals  including  the  creation  of  incentives  for  banks  to  become  less  systemically 
important overall, thereby reducing potential costs for the economy.  At the same time, the 
committee of experts’ proposal will allow for improved resolution in the event that insolvency 
appears imminent, and this will significantly alleviate the TBTF problem.  
Are the measures “structural”?  
A second criterion is that the measures should not just address the specific circumstances of 
the most recent crisis. In other words, fighting the last war will not win the next one. At the 
same time, the lessons of history show us that certain basic mechanisms repeat themselves 
in every crisis. Consequently, it is very important that we recognise these general patterns 
and include them in regulatory considerations in order to improve our crisis prevention. This 
prevention  is  geared  to  establishing  instruments  whose  effects  are  as  broad-based  as 
possible, in other words, instruments that are independent of the specific causes that lead to 
crises.  
One general pattern in financial crises is that market and investor confidence plays a central 
role.2 In general, when a bubble is being formed, soaring price trends are initially explained 
in “rational” terms. In the recent crisis, for instance, developments in the US housing markets 
were, for a long time, regarded as a logical and unproblematic consequence of state support 
measures or of innovation in the form of new financial products, as well as the constant 
inflow of capital from Asia.3 However, when the first symptoms of a crisis become evident, 
the  focus  moves  directly  to  other  aspects.  Which  market  participants  are  exposed?  How 
heavily are they exposed? How can one’s own assets be safeguarded in the best possible 
way? The irrational optimism of the previous period is followed by a rapid loss of confidence 
and then by a flight to security. A broad-based loss of confidence of this kind can sometimes 
result  in  serious  liquidity  problems,  even  for  fundamentally  well-backed  banks,  thereby 
triggering far-reaching second-round effects.4 
                                                 
2   Cf. Akerlof/Shiller (2008): Animal Spirits. 
3   Cf.  Reinhard/Rogoff  (2008):  Is  the  2007  U.S.  Sub-Prime  Financial  Crisis  So  Different?  An  International 
Historical Comparison. 
4   Cf. Acharya et al (2009): Manufacturing Tail Risk. A Perspective on the Financial Crisis of 2007–2009. 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 3
In my view, a regulatory setup that can handle crises originating from as many causes as 
possible must pay attention to fundamental mechanisms of this kind. The following example 
may explain more clearly what I mean: In Switzerland, the liquidity requirements that have 
been  in  force  since  June  will  help  to  reinforce  trust  in  the  stability  of  individual  financial 
institutions  and  ultimately  to  prevent  insolvencies.  These  provisions  require  big  banks  to 
ensure  that  liquidity  is  secured  for  at  least  30  days,  even  in  the  event  of  a  significant 
exogenous shock. Their most important aim is to make sure that, should an event of this kind 
occur,  a  clear  signal  will  be  sent  to  market  participants  that  the  affected  bank  has  time  to 
initiate the requisite adjustment measures and to stabilise its position, no matter what kind of 
shock has occurred.  
In addition there are also measures designed to counter procyclicality in the financial sector. 
They will help to prevent downward spiralling or crisis situations, in general. For instance, the 
large  capital  buffer  proposed  for  systemically  important  banks  by  the  Swiss  committee  of 
experts for  TBTF will have this kind of effect.5 The new Swiss liquidity standards are also 
designed  with  this  aim  in  mind.  In  good  times  the  liquidity  and  capital  buffers  will  be 
increased or maintained, and in stress situations they can be drawn upon.  
In  addition,  new  discretionary  instruments  could  generate  countercyclical  effects,  thereby 
guarding  against  possible  imbalances  in  the  financial  system.  For  instance,  one  possibility 
would  be  an  obligation,  which  would  apply  to  all  banks,  to  accumulate  additional  capital 
buffers in times of excessive credit growth. However, to date, experience with this kind of 
regulation is limited. It is therefore necessary to evaluate these instruments carefully.  
Do the measures contribute to the robustness of the regulatory setup?  
A third important criterion is that consideration must be given to the fact that each individual 
measure, on its own, is either insufficient, or displays shortcomings that are often not directly 
obvious,  or  can  be  manipulated  or  even  avoided.  These  latter  three  problems  become 
particularly  acute  as  the  measures  become  more  complex.  One  way  of  countering  these 
weak  points  is  to  make  use  of  simple  instruments,  as  an  alternative  to,  or  to  supplement 
complex instruments.  
The benefits of simple instruments are, first, that although they are often less detailed and 
specific,  they  are  more  effective  in  a  crisis.  For  instance,  it  is  true  that  a  straightforward 
restriction  in  banks’  leverage  using  a  simple  instrument,  the  leverage  ratio,  does  not  do 
justice  to  the  different  risk  classes  of  assets  and  may,  in  some  circumstances,  have 
unintended  effects  or  create  false  incentives,  as  can  any  other  regulation.6  However, 
excessive  leverage,  in  an  absolute  sense,  is  usually  a  clear  indication  that  a  company  is 
carrying a high level of risk with regard to its solvency.  
In the recent financial crisis, the leverage ratio of certain financial institutions was so high that 
their entire capital would have been eroded as a result of a mere 2% loss in the value of their 
assets. It could then be clearly demonstrated that the institutions with relatively low leverage 
weathered the crisis much better than those with high leverage.7 Second, simple instruments 
offset  the  shortcomings  of  complex  rules,  in  particular.  In  this  way  they  provide  a  kind  of 
safety net in case the complex regulatory approach emits incorrect signals. For instance, the 
                                                 
5   A  “capital  conservation  buffer”  whose  function  is  to  achieve  this  effect  is  also  planned  within  the  Basel  III 
framework. 
6   With  respect  to  the  leverage  ratio,  it  is  argued  that  this  measure  creates  incentives  to  substitute  high-risk 
assets for low-risk assets, thereby increasing a bank’s overall risk exposure. 
7   Comparing 2006 data for a broad sample of banks, a recent BIS study concludes that the mean leverage ratio 
of eventually severely stressed banks were lower than the mean leverage ratio of non-stressed banks. Cf. BIS 
(2010): Calibrating regulatory minimum capital requirements and capital buffers: a top-down approach. 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2010
risk assessment  models upon which the risk-weighted capital approach is based are most 
certainly prone to error. For these reasons, Switzerland decided to introduce a leverage ratio 
for the big banks as far back as 2008.8 
Another  way  of  making  regulation  more  robust  is  by  ensuring  the  diversification  or 
complementarity  of  measures.  Once  again,  the  leverage  ratio  is  a  good  example  of  this, 
since  it  has  to  be  complied  with  along  with  the  fulfilment  of  risk-weighted  capital 
requirements.  It  is  harder  to  simply  manipulate  this  kind  of  system  through  regulatory 
arbitrage.  
The benefit of complementary measures can also be strikingly illustrated using the example 
of the Swiss proposals aimed at mitigating the TBTF problem. The recommended policy mix 
represents  a  combination  of  complementary  measures  relating  to  equity,  liquidity,  risk 
limitation and organisation. More equity and liquidity must guard against insolvency on the 
part of systemically important institutions. These measures can support and supplement one 
another and, if necessary, counterbalance individual weaknesses. For instance, should the 
capital  buffer  prove  insufficient  and  a  crisis  situation  nevertheless  arise,  a  rescue  of 
systemically  important  functions  can  be  facilitated  by  means  of  preparatory  organisational 
measures involving improvements in the resolvability of banks.  
Integration in the international environment, yet accounting for national 
circumstances  
The  fourth  criterion  is  that  the  decisions  on  the  measures  that  are  finally  taken  must 
ultimately be embedded in an international framework while simultaneously taking account of 
specific national circumstances.  
At  international  level,  in  particular,  agreements  on  regulatory  standards  are  based  on 
negotiations in which the interests of different countries at different stages of development, 
with specific financial market structures have to be reduced to a common denominator. Often 
these interests diverge significantly.  
A uniform definition of capital, the same risk weighting for assets around the world and the 
same calculation for the leverage ratio are extremely important. Only by applying the same 
definitions worldwide, can the soundness of individual banks be compared internationally. It 
avoids the possibility of financial institutions engaging in arbitrage through the establishment 
of complex cross-border legal structures.  
These  international  decisions  are  also  far-reaching  in  their  importance  because  they 
predetermine 
regulators.  However, 
implementation at national level is ultimately decisive. In particular, it is the deciding factor as 
far as financial institutions in any one country are concerned. In this respect, an international 
minimum  standard  cannot  suffice  when  it  comes  to  addressing  specific  national  problems. 
For  instance,  at  the  moment,  the  Basel  III  package  does  not  address  the  issue  of 
systemically  important  banks,  which  fundamentally  concerns  Switzerland.  Because  of  this 
concern, proposals that go beyond Basel III were presented in the report of the committee of 
experts.  
faced  by  national 
the  options  and 
limitations 
Central banks as the lender of last resort for markets?  
I will now move on to another point, which is directly related to the topic of this conference – 
liquidity.  Since  markets  are  constantly  undergoing  dynamic  processes  of  adjustment,  it  is 
clear that another crisis can never be completely ruled out. Complete security is impossible. 
                                                 
8   The introduction of a leverage ratio is also planned within the Basel III framework. 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 5
Consequently, at times, the markets will be unable to provide sufficient liquidity in an efficient 
manner.  In  such  cases  it  is  essential  that  central  banks  are  able  to  step  into  the  breach 
temporarily as lender of last resort. In this way confidence in the financial institutions can be 
restored, and the vicious cycle of liquidity bottlenecks, forced fire sales and bank runs can be 
ultimately avoided.  
By  providing  emergency  liquidity  assistance,  central  banks  aim  primarily  to  stabilise  the 
precarious  liquidity  situation  faced  by  solvent  institutions.  Above  and  beyond  this,  the 
increasing importance of systemic risk has made the emergency liquidity provision to entire 
markets ever more imperative. Markets can also be faced with liquidity runs. This was only 
too  evident  from  the  high  risk  premia  observed  in  the  interbank  market  during  the  recent 
crisis. It is conceivable that central banks will take on the role of market maker of last resort 
in such situations in order to secure key market functions. Indeed, in certain situations it is 
essential.9 In an acute crisis, the costs and probability of a system collapse can be reduced 
in this way.  
However, the assumption of a lender of last resort or market maker of last resort function is 
not  without  problems.  First,  it  does  not  guarantee  long-term  stabilisation  in  every  case. 
Second, these crisis measures are no substitute for tackling the root causes or for lack of 
robustness on the part of financial market participants.  
In  particular,  the  presence  of  a  market  maker  of  last  resort  is  associated  with  a  variety  of 
incentive  problems.10  It  can,  for  instance,  encourage  market  participants  to  enter  into 
excessive risk exposure in the expectation that the central bank will step into the breach if 
necessary. Above and beyond this, in taking on the market maker of last resort function, a 
central bank assumes significant financial and reputation risks.  
To  summarise,  the  direct  and  indirect  costs  of  this  kind  of  market  intervention  need  to  be 
weighed up against the overall economic costs of a system-wide implosion of liquidity. At a 
time of significant stress in the system, we must probably retain a second line of defence of 
this kind for use when needed, if we are to carry out our task of ensuring sustainable welfare 
growth in the spirit of our mandate. However, liquidity or market assistance of this kind needs 
to be examined carefully, case by case. It must be planned as a distinct supplement to the 
first line of defence and clear principles laid down in connection with its provision. Last but 
not  least,  it  must  only  be  used  to  “kick-start”  a  market  that  is  fundamentally  capable  of 
survival.  Taking  on  a  permanent  market  replacement  function  is  something  that  should, 
fundamentally, be avoided.11  
Conclusion  
Ladies and gentlemen, I now come to the conclusion of my remarks today.  
The  accumulation  of  systemic  risk  represents  a  serious  threat  to  the  stability  of  financial 
systems. It is therefore important, on the one hand, to recognise this risk at an early stage 
and, on the other, to develop measures capable of containing it. I have spoken about four 
fundamental criteria for evaluating measures of this kind. In very brief terms, these measures 
must,  first,  be  conducive  to  maintaining  market  order,  second,  aim  to  tackle  the  structural 
causes  of  systemic  crises  wherever  possible,  third,  contribute  to  the  robustness  of  the 
regulatory setup and fourth, be consistent with international regulatory principles while, at the 
same  time,  not  fail  to  take  account  of  national  circumstances.  This  list  of  criteria  must  be 
                                                 
9   Cf. Buiter/Sibert (2007): The Central Bank as Market Maker of Last Resort. 
10   Cf. Nikolaou (2009): Liquidity (risk) concepts. Definitions and interactions. 
11   Cf. Tucker (2010): The Crisis Management Menu. In: Ayadi et al. (ed.): Crisis Management at Cross-Roads, 
pp. 13–25. 
6 
 BIS Review 146/2010
interpreted as a systematic and pragmatic set of procedural instructions – or, to use the term 
I used before, a roadmap. By observing these criteria, we can make a significant contribution 
to better managing the challenges that arise in connection with systemic risk in the financial 
system.  
To a large extent, ongoing international regulatory reform fulfils these criteria. For instance, 
the  narrower  definition  of  capital  and  the  adjustment  of  risk  weighting  under  Basel  III 
removes  a  number  of  key  weaknesses  in  the  Basel  II  standard.  The  individual  regulatory 
efforts undertaken in Switzerland are also in line with these criteria, in particular the TBTF 
package  and  the  leverage  ratio.  However,  the  reforms  have  not  yet  been  fully  carried 
through. For example, work to contain the TBTF problem at international level has only just 
begun.  It  is  important  that  the  measures  that  are  still  pending  also  fulfil  the  criteria  I 
mentioned before. In addition, there are also many proposals on the table that do not comply 
with  the  criteria  of  this  roadmap.  Thus,  we  need  to  act  carefully  to  make  sure  that  we 
introduce  only  effective  and  reasonable  regulation  and  that  we  do  not  unnecessarily  over 
regulate the system.  
It is also important to recognise that the definition of suitable measures by experts and the 
authorities represents no more than a first step. What ultimately makes the difference is that 
steps  are  taken  to  ensure  they  are  actually  implemented.  The  democratic  legitimation,  in 
particular, is an essential prerequisite for this. At the end of the day, it is politicians who must 
bear  responsibility  for  the  regulatory  measures.  Supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks 
play an advisory role but cannot make decisions on the introduction of the necessary laws 
and ordinances. Consequently, an important function of supervisory authorities and central 
banks  is  to  provide  clear  justification  for  the  considerations  upon  which  the  proposed 
measures  and  instruments  are  based,  so  that  they  are  comprehensible  for  the  political 
decision-makers. Here, too, the roadmap I have presented to you can be of assistance. 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 7
