 Duvvuri Subbarao: Emerging market economies leading global growth 
Remarks  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  a  panel 
discussion on the “Role of Emerging Economies Going Forward and Key Policy Challenges”, 
Washington DC, 9 October 2010. 
 The three issues laid out in today’s agenda are particularly relevant at this juncture and how 
we answer them in the months ahead will determine how the world regains and then sustains 
economic growth and financial stability. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  first  issue:  How  can  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  best 
contribute towards securing global economic prosperity? 
The most important way in which EMEs can contribute to global economic prosperity is by 
doing more of what they have been doing – that is by maintaining their growth momentum. 
The last few months have witnessed a remarkable phenomenon. EMEs have, to use a word 
that has now become clichéd, decoupled from advanced economies in a powerful way and 
started charting their own exit paths out of the crisis driven accommodative policies. Even a 
few months ago, not many would have thought that this meant much or mattered much to the 
global economy. But now we know EMEs have made a “difference”. By recovering from the 
crisis sooner, EMEs have provided much needed stimulus to the global economy.  
To take a historical perspective, according to Angus Maddison’s long term GDP time series, 
China and India accounted for about half of the world GDP before the industrial revolution. 
Since  then  their  contribution  declined  to  less  than  10  per  cent.  Rapid  economic  growth 
should help China and India to raise their per capita GDPs, gradually bridging the gap with 
advanced  economies,  as  Japan,  Korea  and  Singapore  already  have.  That  way  they  will 
provide  diversified  growth  poles  to  the  global  economy  and  contribute  to  global  economic 
prosperity. 
That EMEs can provide support to the global economy has been clearly demonstrated by our 
experience of the crisis. The Great Recession, for example, has been less deep than it would 
have been because of the growth contribution of EMEs, particularly China and India. And at 
the current juncture, when advanced economies are still experiencing a demand recession, it 
is the import demand from EMEs which is helping them make the necessary adjustment. 
In  order  to  maintain  their  growth  momentum,  EMEs  will  need  to  address  huge  challenges 
and put in place both collective and individual country strategies. What these should be is by 
now quite well known.  
What the October crisis has made us aware of is that putting all one’s eggs in one engine of 
growth  (pardon  my  mixed  metaphor)  is  risky.  Rebalancing  the  economy  towards  domestic 
demand is clearly key. Expanding and deepening intra-EME trade not just in goods but also 
in  services  is  the  other  area  where  EMEs  need  to  focus.  Intra-EMEs  financial  flows  are 
pathetically low. These are virtual greenfields that can and should be exploited. 
A lot of things need to be done at the country level too. In the case of India, for example, we 
need  to  bridge  the  infrastructure  deficit,  focus  on  social  sector  outcomes,  improve 
governance and implement strategies for private investment and job creation. 
The second area where EMEs can contribute to global prosperity is through ensuring that the 
G-20 forum remains meaningful and effective. 
When the history of this crisis is written, the London G-20 Summit in April 2009 will be seen 
as a clear turning point when the leaders of world showed extraordinary determination and 
unity  in  combating  the  deepest  economic  crisis  of  our  generation.  Sure  there  were 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 1
 differences,  but  they  were  debated  and  discussed,  and  compromises  were  made  without 
eroding the end goal – that is to end the crisis. 
Now, as we exit from the crisis, there are concerns and apprehensions that the vaunted unity 
that the G-20 had shown during the crisis is dissipating. There are many stereotype, and I 
believe,  mistaken  views  about  the  G-20.  Here  are  some  examples:  that  the  G-20  process 
has  become  hostage  to  differing  perceptions  on  financial  sector  regulation;  that  reforms 
being initiated at the national and regional levels are not consistent with a global optimal; that 
the trans-Atlantic differences on, for example, the size of fiscal stimulus, that surfaced during 
the height of the crisis have mutated into “north-south” differences as we are getting out of 
the crisis; that in spite of EMEs being given seats at the table, the G-20 agenda is still largely 
driven by advanced country concerns. 
EMEs  can  contribute  to  global  economic  prosperity  by  fighting  these  perceptions  and 
breaking these stereotype views. The G-20 may not be a perfect forum, but it is still the best 
that we have. 
A well functioning global economy is a huge asset for advanced and developing economies 
alike. For most of the last century, the US and Europe had played a dominant role in setting 
the  architecture  for  governing  the  global  economy.  From  establishing  the  Bretton  Woods 
Institution  and  forging  agreements  for  liberalizing  international  trade,  to  establishing  global 
financial standards to coordinating responses to economic crisis. EMEs now need to step in 
and do their part. We must remember that in a world divided by nation states, there is no 
natural constituency for the global economy. But as the October crisis has shown, the global 
economy as an entity is more important than ever. We should not allow a situation to develop 
where decisions essential for global prosperity fall through the cracks.  
The short point therefore is for EMEs to step in and work actively with advanced economies 
under the G-20 umbrella to design and implement globally optimal strategies. 
The  third  way  in  which  EMEs  can  contribute  to  global  prosperity,  which  in  fact  follows  my 
earlier point about the G-20 process, is to make the implementation of the Global Framework 
and the related Mutual Assessment Process (MAP) a success. 
In their Toronto Summit in July 2010, the G-20 leaders agreed on a “Framework for Strong, 
Sustainable and Balanced Growth”. At the heart of this Framework are strategies to be put in 
place  by  advanced  and  emerging  economies  to  restore  external  balances  and  repair  their 
financial sectors where need be. For reasons that are quite obvious, these national strategies 
have  to  be  coordinated  in  content  and  in  implementation.  Any  framework  like  this  can  be 
successful  only  in  an  atmosphere  of  trust  and  reciprocity.  Emerging  economies  can 
contribute to global prosperity by making an honest effort to making the Global Framework a 
success.  
Le me now turn to the second issue. What are the key macroeconomic policy challenges 
that EMEs will likely face in the context of rebalancing global order? 
Several challenges, admittedly inter-related, stare in the face of EMEs as they try to recover 
the growth momentum lost during the crisis.  
The  post  crisis  world  will  be  defined  by  two  important  characteristics.  First,  growth  in 
advanced countries will be tepid, and second, the global environment will be less friendly to 
globalization. Let us take these one by one.  
Advanced economies will slow down because, as public discourse over the last four months 
has revealed, they will give priority to restoring financial stability even if that means sacrifice 
of growth. This may not just be a short term trade-off but may indeed run into the medium 
term. The IMF itself has spoken of a “new normal” – a downward shift in potential growth of 
advanced  economies  because  of  the  impairment  of  their  financial  sectors  and  capital 
destruction. It will take at least a few years for advanced economy households and firms to 
repair their balance sheets at the individual level and for the economies to restore external 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 and internal balances at the aggregate level. In the process, advanced economies will have 
to  contend  with  structural  fiscal  deficits,  demographic  transitions,  worsening  income 
distribution and unemployment.  
A  corollary  of  a  low  growth  scenario,  weighed  down  by  domestic  concerns,  is  a  less 
welcoming  attitude to globalization.  There may not be actually be “deglobalization” but the 
earlier orthodoxy that globalization is an unmixed blessing is being increasingly challenged. 
The rationale was, and hopefully is, that even as advanced countries may see low end jobs 
being  outsourced,  they  will  still  benefit  from  globalization  because  for  every  low  end  job 
gone, another high end job – that is more skill intensive, more productive – will be created. If 
this does not happen rapidly enough or visibly enough, protectionist pressures will arise, and 
rapidly  become  vociferous  and  politically  compelling.  The  wave  of  currency  depreciations 
that we are seeing around the world is a manifestation of protectionist pressures.  
Going  forward,  the  biggest  challenge  for  EMEs  will  be  to  pursue  their  growth  and 
development  strategies  in  this  evolving  world  of  a  “new  normal”  of  growth  and  less 
welcoming of globalization. To address this challenge, EMEs will need to make adjustments, 
most notably by rebalancing from external to internal sources of demand. Even for a country 
like India where growth drivers have been predominantly internal, a lower global demand will 
hurt exports and the overall growth performance.  
The second big challenge for EMEs is going to be to implement Basel III. The broad contours 
of Basel III – higher and better quality capital, counter-cyclical buffers, limits on leverage and 
maintenance of minimum liquidity – are all quite familiar and I need not repeat them here. 
There is also some flexibility for national differences in adoption and implementation by way 
of a “comply or explain” provision.  
Basel III is undoubtedly well thought through and reflects the lessons of the crisis. However, 
its implementation comes at a time when EMEs see their credit demand picking up. India, for 
example,  is  the  second  fastest  growing  economy  in  Asia  but  our  credit-GDP  ratio  is  the 
second lowest in Asia. Non-bank sources of credit and internal savings have kept bank credit 
growth low. But all this means that there will be a sharp catch up as soon as these sources 
are exhausted. Our credit demand will see rapid expansion because of the investment needs 
of infrastructure, the “catch up” of the manufacturing sector, and most importantly, because 
of the credit demand that financial inclusion will bring.  
Basel III requires capital buffers to be built. Buffers provide insurance against bad times but 
they  also  raise  lending  costs  and  may  reduce  overall  lending.  Moreover,  counter-cyclical 
buffers  require  judgements  to  be  made  on  the  trajectory  of  the  business  cycle  and  on 
identification  of  the  inflexion  point.  Wrong  judgements  can  entail  huge  costs  in  terms  of 
foregone  growth.  The  challenge  for  EMEs  will  be  to  contend  with  the  challenge  of 
implementing  Basel  III,  and  at  the  same  time  ensuring  that  the  hugely  expanding  credit 
demand is met at affordable cost. 
Finally  let  me  address  the  question  of  –  How  emerging  economies  can  best  cope  with 
volatile capital flows? Can macroprudential policies be effective?  
A  clear  outcome  of  the  multi-speed  recovery  has  been  resumption  of  capital  flows  to 
emerging economies.  
In order to restore financial stability, advanced economies have assured markets that they 
will  maintain  low  interest  rates  over  an  extended  period.  And  in  order  to  manage 
expectations, they have repeatedly emphasized that intention. 
On the other hand, because of their earlier recovery, EMEs have begun to reverse their crisis 
triggered expansionary policies much sooner. In India, for example, because of our unique 
growth inflation dynamics, we raised policy interest rates five times since March 2010. One of 
the issues that dominate public discourse in India is, in fact, whether the Reserve Bank has 
reached neutral levels of policy rates, whatever they may be.  
BIS Review 131/2010 
 3
 The  interest  rate  differentials  between  advanced  economies  and  EMEs  have  naturally 
triggered  capital  flows  into  EMEs  putting  upward  pressure  on  their  currencies  and 
complicating their macroeconomic management. Quite understandably, EMEs are perturbed. 
Ideally, EMEs want stable capital flows, and just about enough flows to meet their current 
account deficits. That remains just that – an ideal. In fact, I have since formulated a law of 
capital flows which says that “capital flows never come in at the exact time or in the precise 
quantity you want”.  
To manage capital flows, EMEs don’t have easy options. It is possible, although not terribly 
efficient,  to  cherry  pick  the  type  of  flows.  Capital  controls  can  be  gamed  or  circumvented. 
Also  stop-go  policies  send  wrong  signals  to  potential  investors.  Despite  all  this,  different 
EMEs  have  tried,  and  will  continue  to  try  out,  capital  controls  of  both  price  and  quantity 
varieties.  
In  India,  we  have  had  our  share  of  concerns  on  managing  the  capital  account.  During 
2007/08,  the  year  before  the  crisis,  we  had  flows  largely  in  excess  of  our  current  account 
deficit  (CAD).  In  the  crisis  year  of  2008/09,  flows  were  far  short  of  the  CAD.  Last  year, 
2009/10 we were on a sweet spot, capital flows were just a tad higher than the CAD. Such 
sweet spots, of course, are uncommon.  
During  the  current  year,  2010/11,  we  saw  some  outflows  during  the  spring  when  the 
unfolding  Greek  drama  triggered  a  flight  to  safety.  But  over  the  last  few  months,  we  have 
seen rapid inflows no doubt triggered by the promise of higher short-term returns. 
And  so,  we  are  back  to  facing  the  usual  dilemma  of  managing  the  impossible  trinity.  Two 
considerations have guided our policy. First that, our policy should be as stable as possible 
without flip flop moves. Second, our use of controls should be prudent.  
The aftermath of the crisis has triggered a debate on the costs of building up reserves as a 
self-insurance. We have to acknowledge that their foreign exchange reserves have insulated 
EMEs from the worst impact of the crisis. There is an argument that a multilateral option of a 
pre-arranged line of credit that can be easily and quickly accessed can be a substitute for 
costly self-insurance. Such a multilateral option is necessary but not sufficient. EMEs need a 
Plan B and reserves are that Plan B. And a good Plan B is often the difference between the 
success and failure of Plan A.  
Furthermore,  in  evaluating  the  level  of  reserves  and  the  quantum  of  self  insurance  of  a 
country, it is important to distinguish between countries whose reserves are a consequence 
of current account surpluses and countries with current account deficits whose reserves are 
a result of capital inflows in excess of their economy’s absorptive capacity. 
India falls in the latter category. Our reserves comprise essentially borrowed resources, and 
we are therefore more vulnerable to sudden stops and reversals as compared with countries 
with current account surpluses.  
In  recent  months,  when  inflows  have  swamped  most  EMEs,  several  central  banks  have 
intervened  in  the  forex  markets.  We  haven’t  despite  receiving  more  portfolio  inflows  last 
month (September 2010) than in any other single month on record. The reason why we did 
not  feel  the  need  to  intervene  is  because  our  absorption,  driven  by  a  widening  current 
account  deficit  as  imports  have  surged  on  the  back  of  a  positive  outlook  on  growth  and 
investment,  has  also  increased.  Economies  that  have  current  account  surpluses  or  only 
small  deficits  have  intervened.  That  does  not  mean  we  won’t  intervene.  If  the  inflows  are 
lumpy  and  volatile  or  if  they  disrupt  the  macroeconomic  situation,  we  will  do  so.  Our 
intervention  will  be  to  keep  liquidity  conditions  consistent  with  activity  in  the  real  economy 
and to maintain financial stability. And not to stand against developments driven by changing 
economic fundamentals. 
Will we use macro-prudential instruments? We already do and will continue to use them. But 
the  operative  word  here  is  prudential.  Just  recently  we  tightened  rules  for  bank  lending 
against stocks. Our motivation was strictly the maintenance of financial stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 Let me end, by making a pitch for monetary policy taking financial stability seriously. I 
know that there are many who continue to believe that monetary policy should be guided by 
a single objective, namely keeping goods inflation stable. I think the world paid a heavy price 
for doing so. It was this orthodoxy that prevented many central banks from seeing what else 
was happening in their financial markets which in turn brewed the global crisis.  
In  India,  and  in  several  EMEs,  financial  stability  had  been  and  has  become  increasingly 
important  as  an  objective  of  monetary  policy.  And  I  am  not  talking  just  about  asset  price 
inflation, although it is a key consideration. In my view, it is this heterodoxy that helped EMEs 
avoid  the  kind  of  widespread  disruption  many  developed  financial  markets  suffered  in  the 
October  crisis.  I  may  be  wrong,  but  the  economics  profession  owes  itself  to  examine  the 
question seriously. 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 5
