Vítor Constâncio: The future of economic governance in Europe in a 
global perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
European Conference organised by the Gulbenkian Foundation, Paris, 7 December 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I am grateful to the Gulbenkian Foundation for inviting me here tonight. It is a great pleasure 
for me to be able to address you on the future of economic governance in Europe in a global 
perspective. Economic governance is a highly topical issue that is being worked on at this 
very moment in both policy and academic circles.  
European  and  global  governance  are  of  course  interconnected,  and  the  financial  and 
economic  turmoil  sweeping  over  the  world  economy  since  2007  is  having  fundamental 
effects on both. Accordingly, I will start by highlighting the lessons of the financial crisis for 
standard  economic  policy  and  theory,  which  will  have  a  substantial  impact  on  our 
methodologies for understanding the workings of markets and economies. I will refer to the 
changing  paradigms  of  global  governance,  including  the  shift-away  from  the  so-called 
“Washington  consensus” 
“Seoul 
consensus” emerging from the November G20 summit. Turning to Europe, I will then address 
the  challenges  for  economic  governance  as  regards  economic  growth  as  well  as 
macroeconomic  imbalances.  I  will  conclude,  after  also  referring  to  the  ongoing  reform  of 
financial regulation, with some observations on the role of Europe in global governance and 
what it means to be European at this point in time. 
inclusive,  development-orientated 
towards  a  more 
Lessons from the crisis for economic policy and theory 
2. 
It is difficult in the time I have available to convey my understanding of the reach and depth 
of the crisis we have been experiencing. Let me, however, provide with you with some key 
figures. 
The costs of the crisis, as estimated by Andrew Haldane of the Bank of England, in terms 
only of permanent loss of output, could amount to between one and five times the total value 
of present annual world output.1 The direct support given by governments and central banks 
to the financial sector have been quantified by the same author as equivalent to 25% of world 
GDP, with very heterogeneous percentages in different parts of the world: 30% in the euro 
area, 50% in the United States and a staggering 75% in the United Kingdom.2 Last week, the 
Federal  Reserve  disclosed  that  it  lent  USD  3.3  trillion  to  various  financial  institutions,  and 
even  hedge  funds  received  USD  71  billion.  Without  this  massive  state  intervention,  the 
financial  system  would  have  collapsed  with  an  accompanying  depression  in  the  real 
economy.  
Among the various causes of the crisis, two main ones stand out.  
 
First, the excessive growth of a loosely regulated financial sector in search of risky 
high yields and profits from rent seeking.  
Second,  the  development  of  sizeable  global  macro  imbalances,  with  the  high 
savings  of  many  emerging  countries  flooding  the  financial  markets  of  advanced 
                                                  
1   See Haldane, A., The $100 billion question, Bank of England, March 2010. 
2   See Haldane, A., The debt hangover, Bank of England, January 2010, p. 15. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 1
economies, especially the United States, and contributing to lower interest rates and 
asset bubbles.  
The crisis taught us some important lessons that economic policy cannot now ignore: 
1. 
the financial sector is not self-regulating and self-equilibrating and can generate very 
large economic crises;  
excessive credit growth and leverage almost always ends in a crisis generated by a 
collapse in demand and an unavoidable deleveraging of balance sheets; and,  
maintaining  price  stability  in  the  market  for  goods  and  services,  i.e.  controlling 
inflation, is not enough to avoid overshooting and bubbles in the price of assets – 
from housing to the financial markets.  
2. 
3. 
Humanity  has  been  taught  these  lessons several  times,  but  always  seems  to  forget  them. 
When this happens, regulation and supervision become loose and the financial system can 
then come off the rails on its own. This time in particular, this effect happened as a result of a 
“cognitive  capture”  of  regulators  by  the  dominant  economic  theories,  which  have  much  to 
answer with respect to the crisis.  
The prevailing macroeconomic theory saw the economy as a simple system determined by 
fully rational individuals that could anticipate a future perturbed only by some random shocks 
with  well-behaved  distributions  and  by  quickly  self-equilibrating  markets.  The  main  macro 
model did not have a financial sector, as it was supposed to work efficiently and smoothly 
without creating turmoil or bankruptcies.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  so-called  modern  finance  theory  maintained  the  “efficient  market 
hypothesis” (EMH), according to which financial markets process all relevant information for 
the  proper  valuation  of  assets.  In  consequence,  market  prices  are  always  right,  as  they 
reflect  fundamentals,  thus  precluding  the  possibility  of  bubbles  and  other  irrational 
phenomena like herd behaviour or long periods of mispricing.  
Another feature of modern finance theory is that only individual investors exist in the market 
and  determine  asset  prices  through  their  rational  decisions.  In  the  models,  there  are  no 
financial intermediaries with their own interests, creating significant principal-agent problems 
and  extracting  rent  through  instruments  of  financial  innovation  that  in  some  cases  only 
redistribute value from taxpayers and non-financial clients, contributing ultimately to financial 
disasters  with  high  costs  for  the  general  welfare.  In  the  United  States,  for  example,  the 
weight  of  financial  sector  profits  in  total  profits  increased  from  12%  in  the  early  1980s  to 
about 40% in 2007.3 
These points were forcefully made by Lord Turner, Chairman of the UK Financial Services 
Authority, and Paul Woolley in a recent book published by the London School of Economics 
called “The Future of Finance”. Turner writes that “It is possible for financial activity to extract 
rents from the real economy rather than to deliver economic value”. While recognising that 
“financial innovation ... may in some ways and under some circumstances foster economic 
value creation”, he insists that this “cannot be asserted a priori”. Ben Bernanke, Chairman of 
the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  in  his  testimony  to  the  US  Congress  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry 
Commission, made the similar remark that “some innovations amplify risk” and others “are 
used primarily to take unfair advantage rather than create a more efficient market”.  
The crisis has indeed struck a blow to standard economy theory. Many economic concepts 
and models will have to go through significant changes. Both in macroeconomic theory and 
finance theory, important revisions are underway to take better account of less-than-efficient 
                                                 
3   See  Turner,  A.,  “What  do  banks  do?”,  and  Woolley,  P.,  “Why  are  financial  markets  so  inefficient  and  
exploitive  –  and  a  suggested  remedy”,  in  Turner,  A.  et  al,  The  Future  of  Finance,  London  School  of 
Economics, 2010, Chapters 1 and 3, (www.futureoffinance.co.uk). 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2010
markets,  to  replace  rational  robots  with  economic  agents  endowed  with  insights  from 
behavioural economics, to go beyond the representative single economic agent and populate 
new models with heterogeneous agents, to acknowledge financial instability as a trigger of 
economic crises and the possibility of bankruptcies, and much more. For years to come, the 
crisis will generate new theories and models in the same way that the Great Depression led 
to the creation of macroeconomic theory by John Maynard Keynes. 
Recently,  Ben  Bernanke  described  some  of  the  changes  that  are  necessary,  stating  that 
“more work is needed on the behaviour of economic agents in times of profound uncertainty; 
on asset price bubbles and the determinants of market liquidity; and on the implications of 
financial factors, including financial instability, for macroeconomics and monetary policy”.4 
The changing paradigms of global governance 
3. 
Besides  economics,  other  paradigms  are  also  changing  as  a  consequence  of  the  crisis. 
Globalisation entered a new phase with an acceleration of the shift in global power towards 
emerging market economies that began in the last decade, giving these countries a seat at 
the  leading  table  of  world  governance,  most  notably  in  the  G20.  So  far,  the  potential  for 
tensions  and  challenges  within  this  new  framework  of  governance,  including  between 
advanced economies, has by and large been contained by the urgency of the tasks ahead. 
As  countries  emerge  from  the  economic  and  financial  crisis,  however,  incentives  for 
cooperation in the future may be reduced. 
Another  historic  shift  concerns  the  role  of  the  State  and  its  interplay  with  the  market.  The 
crisis  made  clear  that  the  State  is  irreplaceable  as  risk  manager  of  last  resort  and  as 
regulator  of  irretrievable  imperfect  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  instead  of  a  continuing 
expansion of free markets we see in various parts of the world the progress of a kind of state 
capitalism  with  the  accrued  importance  of  state  firms  and  sovereign  wealth  funds.  “The 
Washington  consensus  is  dead!”  proclaimed  the  UK  Prime  Minister  at  the  G20  London 
Summit in April last year, marking an end to the reign of principles unequivocally advocating 
free markets, privatisation, deregulation, smaller government and free capital movement.  
In fact, the laissez-faire regime of the “Washington consensus” is giving way to a quite different 
system: the new G20 “Seoul consensus”. At the risk of over-generalisation, the one-size-fits-all 
approach  to  economic  management  stemming  from  the  belief  in  an  optimal  model  is  being 
replaced  with  an  acknowledgment  of  the  merits  of  policy  diversity  and  tailoring  to  countries’ 
circumstances.  The  over-reliance  on  the  ability  of  markets  to  self-equilibrate  and  optimally 
allocate resources has foundered on the reality of asset prices decoupled from fundamentals, 
unsustainable credit growth, and precarious balance sheets. Instead, states have moved in to 
stabilise  markets,  manage  national  resources  and  provide  growth  impetus.  The  doctrine  of 
unrestricted capital flows, which the IMF very nearly mandated for all its members in 1998, has 
been revisited and countries are experimenting with various controls – with IMF endorsement – 
to protect themselves from flows of potentially destabilising magnitude or volatility.  
Amid all these historic changes, governance at the world level is facing three fundamental 
challenges: 
1. 
The reform of the international financial regulation in order to tame a sector prone to 
excesses,  whilst  respecting  the  need  to  maintain  the  level  playing  field  that  is 
essential from the point of view of globalisation. 
                                                 
4   See Bernanke, B., “Implications of the Financial Crisis for Economics”, speech at a conference co-sponsored 
by  the  Center  for  Economic  Policy  Studies  and  the  Bendheim  Center  for  Finance,  Princeton  University, 
September 2010. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 3
2. 
The reform of the international monetary framework to correct growing global macro 
imbalances and to stabilise the exchange rate system. 
The creation of cooperative conditions to ensure sustainable international growth. 
3. 
Much progress has been achieved since last year on the first two challenges, while the third 
seems  to  be  a  more  difficult  endeavour.  Concerning  financial  regulation  reform,  under  the 
aegis  of  the  G20,  a  remarkable  amount  of  work  has  been  done  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Board and the Basel Committee. A major component of this reform was the adoption of the 
new  Basel  III  framework  with  the  aim  of  strengthening  the  capital  base  of  banks  and 
introducing stricter liquidity risk requirements and a minimum leverage ratio. This in itself will 
substantially  reduce  the  probability  of  future  banking  crises,  thereby  improving  long-term 
economic and social welfare.  
All of these new measures, which will be introduced over a long transition period, should not 
have  any  unduly  severe  implications  for  the  ongoing  economic  recovery.  Although  the 
agreement on Basel III constitutes a robust conceptual framework, much remains to be done. 
The potential implications of the leverage ratio and the liquidity risk framework still need to be 
assessed. Furthermore, since the leverage ratio is largely based on accounting information, 
the  accounting  standard-setters  should  strengthen  their  efforts  to  eliminate  existing 
accounting differences. This is essential in order to ensure a level playing field.  
The  Basel  Committee  has  also  decided  that  systemically  important  financial  institutions, 
commonly designated as “too big to fail”, will be required to have a higher loss absorbency 
capacity  than  other  institutions  that  are  subject  to  Basel  III.  The  ways  and  means  of 
achieving this are going to be deliberated next year. 
In  relation  to  the  second  challenge  of  reforming  the  international  monetary  framework,  a 
good  start  was  achieved  with  the  governance  overhaul  of  the  IMF,  endorsed  at  the  G20 
Seoul Summit. The IMF’s move to better reflect the systemic importance of emerging market 
economies should lead to greater legitimacy. This could also have positive economic effects, 
such as a mitigation of precautionary reserve accumulation, which can otherwise contribute 
to  the  build-up  of  global  imbalances.  Exercises  aimed  at  analysing  spillovers  from  major 
countries  and  regions  to  the  other  partners  will  also  gain  new  legitimacy.  More  generally, 
however, I do not see a major reform of the international monetary system on the horizon, as 
there is no real substitute for the US Dollar in medium term. The special drawing right (SDR) 
is not a promising option, and the insufficiently deep and liquid financial markets of emerging 
market economies will limit the role that their currencies can play in the foreseeable future. A 
more  cooperative  system  of  exchange  rate  regimes  is  essential  but  does  not  depend  on 
unachievable radical reforms. 
Concerning the third challenge, creating the conditions for growth, the G20 have approved 
the  Framework  for  Strong,  Sustained  and  Balanced  Growth  which,  alongside  a  set  of 
structural  reforms,  has  at  its  core  fiscal  consolidation,  which  could  lead  to  1)  internal 
rebalancing  in  advanced  economies  by  substituting  public  stimuli  for  increased  private 
demand;  and  2)  external  rebalancing  by  promoting  domestic  demand  in  surplus  countries 
and increasing external demand in deficit countries.  
Such needs for rebalancing are sometimes presented in overly simplistic terms, namely that 
surplus countries should reduce savings and deficit countries should increase them, mainly 
through consolidation of public finances. The attempt to translate this into target ranges for 
current account deficits or surpluses failed at the Seoul Summit. The question is a complex 
one because it is not sufficient to change savings’ behaviour. The solution also has to involve 
movements  in  the  exchange  rate,  as  explained  by  John  Williamson  when  he  denied  the 
4 
 BIS Review 167/2010
possibility of an “immaculate transfer”.5 In fact, the reduction of domestic savings implies a 
positive change in the capital balance, which requires a necessary negative development in 
the current account. The appreciation of the currency is what helps this to happen. This is 
why,  at  the  G20  Toronto  Summit,  members  with  significant  external  surpluses  committed 
themselves  to  strengthening  their  domestic  sources  of  growth,  as  well  as  allowing  greater 
flexibility  in  their  exchange  rate  policies.  At  the  Seoul  Summit  the  G20  then  pledged  to 
“pursue the full range of policies conducive to reducing excessive imbalances”, the “timely 
identification”  of  which  will  be  facilitated  by  “indicative  guidelines”  to  be  agreed  by  finance 
ministers and central bank governors in the first half of 2011. The Summit also approved the 
Seoul  Development  Consensus  for  Shared  Growth  that  sets  out  a  commitment  to  work  in 
partnership with other developing countries to help them maximise their growth potential.  
There is, therefore, some progress in international cooperation but we are still far from the 
solution  to  the  major  question  of  correcting  global  imbalances  and  promoting  the 
mechanisms  of  international  adjustment  that  must  be  at  the  centre  of a  proper  functioning 
international monetary system.  
However,  the  challenges  that  the  advanced  economies  face  to  achieve  adequate  future 
economic growth go far beyond solving these international problems. The crisis has reduced 
the  growth  potential  of  these  countries  and  has  challenged  the  more  recent  growth  model 
based on the creation of demand through credit and indebtedness, which relies on expansion 
in construction, car production or financial services. The delocalisation of significant sectors 
of industry to emerging economies like China and India, increasingly of a non-traditional type, 
makes productivity growth in advanced economies more difficult, as productivity grows less 
in  the  services  sector.  This  difficulty  reflects  the  new  phase  of  globalisation  that  we  have 
entered.  
In 2004 Paul Samuelson wrote an article that, in his own words, “deals some weighty blows 
against  economists’  oversimple  complacencies  about  globalization”.6  He  demonstrated 
again,  as  he  had  already  done  in  his  1972  Nobel  Prize  lecture,  that  it  is  “dead  wrong”  to 
consider that the gains of those who benefit from trade are always and necessarily higher 
than the losses of those who are hurt by trade. This statement has nothing to do with the 
fact, which he also underlined, that the theories about free trade only apply in situations of 
full employment. It relates instead to the possibility that the less developed country will make 
a sudden jump in productivity (by imitation or other means) in sectors where the developed 
country  previously  had  a  comparative  advantage.  Samuelson  uses  the  examples  of  the 
United States and China for his demonstration and concludes that: “this invention abroad that 
gives to China some of the comparative advantage that had belonged to the United States 
can induce for the United States permanent lost per capita real income …. And, mind well, 
this would not be a short run impact effect. Ceteris paribus it can be a permanent hurt.” 
These  statements  do  not  mean  that  Samuelson  has  abandoned  his  position  in  favour  of 
liberalised trade, as he understands the dangerous consequences of any protectionist drive 
in the present circumstances. In a spirited answer to some of his critics, he explained that his 
point  was  just  a  lucid  reminder  of  good  theory,  saying:  “The  result  is  not  a  Spenglerian 
“Decline  of  the  West”,  but  rather  a  trend  toward  (but  not  necessarily  all  the  way)  to 
geographical equalization. Bet for the future half century to be a repetition of what took place 
historically in the first half: continued growth in the advanced world but arguably at a lower 
                                                 
5   See Williamson, J., “Comment”, in Bergsten, F. (ed), International Adjustment and Financing: The Lessons of 
1985–1991, Institute for International Economics, 1991, p. 243. 
6   See  Samuelson,  P.,  “Where  Ricardo  and  Mill  Rebut  and  Conﬁrm  Arguments  of  Mainstream  Economists 
Supporting Globalization”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 18, No 3, American Economic Association, 
2004, pp. 135–146, and Gomory, R.E. and Baumol, W.J., Global Trade and Conﬂicting National Interests. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 5
rate ceteris paribus due partly to competing imitative inventions abroad.”7 In the same text, 
he  warns  that  trade  theory  points  to  the  need  for  actual  redistribution  to  compensate  the 
losers,  a  trend  he  considers  to  be  heading  “…politically  downward  in  our  present-day 
democracies.” 
Among other factors, this has certainly contributed to the spreading of income inequality in 
our  societies,  a  development  that  has  led  to  increasing  recourse  to  indebtedness  by 
households. Raghuram Rajan, former IMF Chief Economist, in his new book describing the 
policies that resulted in this development (which won the 2010 Financial Times and Goldman 
Sachs Business Book of the Year Award), includes a chapter entitled “Let them eat credit”, a 
pun on the infamous Marie Antoinette quote.8 
The  impossibility  of  continuing  down  the  same  route,  now  that  all  economic  agents  are 
deleveraging, generates enormous difficulties to improve growth prospects for all advanced 
economies. They may face the threat of a protracted period of low growth. Only two things 
could  prevent  this:  1)  the  resolution  of  the  global  imbalances  conundrum  with  increased 
demand by emerging countries; or 2) a wave of technological innovations which create new 
needs and new markets.  
The  possibility  of  a  long  period  of  mediocre  economic  growth,  raises  the  prospect  of 
momentous social problems that will test our institutions. In the present post-modern culture 
where “higher values” tend to be depreciated, legitimacy comes primarily from performance 
in  terms  of  offering  permanent  hope  of  higher  living  standards.  As  Benjamin  Friedman 
indicated in his recent book, our democracies depend as much on economic growth as on 
the level of prosperity already attained.9 In a recent study10 that uses a dataset comprising 
16  OECD  countries  for  the  period  1970–2002,  the  authors  found  a  significant  relation 
between  variations  in  growth  and  support  for  extremist  parties,  mostly  of  the  right.  A  one 
percentage point drop in growth results in an increase of just under one percentage point in 
votes for extreme right parties. The authors conclude that: “In most economies this is unlikely 
to have any lasting impact on the political outcomes”, but we should remind ourselves of the 
1930s and how events can sometimes evolve very quickly. 
Challenges for economic governance in Europe 
4. 
It is time to turn to Europe and discuss what all these developments and challenges mean for 
the future of governance in Europe. I intend to answer this in two ways. 
First, I will address some of the challenges for economic governance in Europe, as revealed 
by  the  financial  crisis.  These  are  challenges  that  are  linked  to  fundamental  shifts  in  the 
international economy brought on by globalisation. The crisis has served to “unmask” them 
and bring them into clearer perspective, and now governance solutions are urgently called 
for. I see three areas that are critical for Europe: 
i. 
establishing a growth model to address adverse demographic trends and declining 
productivity in Europe, which imply weak potential growth in the future; 
addressing  macroeconomic 
procedures that ensure macroeconomic stability and competitiveness; and 
the  euro  area  and  establishing 
imbalances 
in 
ii. 
                                                
 
7   See Samuelson, P., “Response from Paul A. Samuelson”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19, No 3, 
2005, pp. 242–244. 
8   See Rajan, R., Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten The World Economy, Princeton University 
Press, 2010. 
9   See Friedman, B., The moral consequences of economic growth, Knopf, New York, 2005. 
10   See  Bruckner,  M.  and  H.P.  Gruner  (2010)  “Economic  growth  and  the  rise  of  political  extremism”  CEPR 
discussion paper n. 7723, March 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 167/2010
iii. 
setting-up an effective system of financial supervision, which is commensurate with 
the realities of financial integration in Europe. 
Second, I will address how the new developments in global governance accelerated by the 
financial  crisis  will  affect  European  governance,  and  the  role  Europe  can  play  in  this  new 
constellation.  
Growth and demographics 
4.1 
The move to a new phase of globalisation that I described above, and the profound shifts in 
global production and financial intermediation that are associated with it, have shone a light 
on some of Europe’s deep underlying challenges. It is now clear that, in hindsight, the good 
times  witnessed  in  Europe  the  years  before  2007  did  not  mark  a  shift  to  a  new,  higher, 
growth  trend,  but  rather  reflected  a  system  off-balance,  where  markets  were  insufficiently 
regulated  by  the  public  sector  and  where  unsustainable  growth  policies  were  insufficiently 
disciplined by markets. As the system rebalances, Europe’s challenges related to long-term 
economic growth are being revealed once more, in particular its adverse demographics, and 
there is an urgent need to address them.  
According  to  a  recent  growth  projection  by  the  European  Commission,  potential  output 
growth  in  Europe  would  amount  to  1½%  per  annum  on  average  in  the  period  2011–20  
– significantly below the rates observed in the EU in last 20 years and much below those 
recorded in the United States.11 The projected potential growth for euro area over this period 
is worse still, amounting to 1¼% per annum on average.  
These weak growth prospects are the consequence of two interrelated phenomena. 
 
First, population ageing is expected to result in a contraction of labour supply and to 
increase the fiscal burden of age-related expenditure. 
Second, in a no policy change scenario, productivity growth in Europe is expected to 
continue on the disappointing trend observed in the years before the financial crisis. 
According  to  the  latest  Ageing  Report  (2009),  which  is  produced  jointly  by  the  European 
Commission and the Economic Policy Committee (EPC), the number of elderly people in the 
euro area aged 65 and above will increase from about 59 million today to about 98 million in 
2060.  At  the  same  time,  the  working-age  population,  which  is  defined  as  people  aged 
between  15  and  64  years,  will  decline  after  2010  and  dropping  by  about  13.4%  by  2060. 
Another set of projections made by the U.S.  Census Bureau shows that by 2030 the total 
population in Europe will stagnate and the working-age segment will decrease by 12 million, 
in spite of the assumption made that Europe will take in 20 million immigrants over the next 
20 years. By contrast, the US population is projected to increase by over 60 million with an 
expansion of the active population by a growth rate of 0.5 million annually. Of the other major 
countries in the world, China, Japan and Russia will have developments similar to or worse 
than  Europe.  Only  India  will  follow  the  same  pattern  as  the  U.S.  In  the  euro  area,  the  
so-called old-age dependency ratio, i.e. the ratio of people aged 65 or above relative to the 
working-age  population  aged  between  15–64  years,  is  expected  to  increase  from  28%  in 
2010 to 54% in 2060. As a consequence, euro area public expenditure on pensions, health 
and long-term care is expected to increase by 5.6 percentage points of GDP by 2060. About 
half  of  this  rise  is  projected  to  come  from  governments’  spending  on  pensions  (around 
2.8 percentage points of GDP), and the other half will come from spending on both health 
care and long-term care (each around 1.4 percentage points of GDP). 
                                                  
11   See  European  Economy  7/2010:  European  Economic  Forecast  Autumn  2010,  pp.  48–60,  European 
Commission Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 7
Establishing a comprehensive strategy for growth 
To  arrest  and  reverse  these  trends  requires  an  ambitious  and  comprehensive  strategy  in 
each  Member  State.  In  June  of  this  year,  the  Commission  presented  the  “Europe  2020 
strategy”,  which  is  aimed  at  boosting  the  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  the  EU 
economies.  The  strategy  provides  a  coherent  policy  framework  for  Member  States  to 
implement structural reforms and for mobilising EU policies and instruments. The strategy’s 
overall  goals  have  been  translated  into  five  headline  EU-level  targets.  By  2020,  the  EU 
should increase its employment rate among 20 to 64 year olds to 75%, from about 69% in 
2009.  Equally,  to  promote  new  sources  of  growth  in  the  future,  overall  investment  in  R&D 
should reach 3% of GDP each year. Further targets under the strategy are aimed at limiting 
climate change in line with previously agreed targets, increasing educational attainment and 
reducing poverty.  
In its Autumn 2010 economic forecast, the Commission simulated the effects of closing the 
performance gap in the EU vis-à-vis the three best performing economies by one third on a 
number  of  relevant  policy  variables,  such  as  enhancing  competition  in  product  markets, 
reducing the administrative burden, shifting tax burdens from labour to VAT, reducing benefit 
replacement  rates  and  promoting  R&D.  The  simulation  results  showed  that  by  2020  a 
comprehensive package of policy measures, encompassing both product market and labour 
market reforms, could lead to a 2.2% increase in GDP, compared to the base line scenario. 
Employment levels could rise by about 1.5% over the same horizon. Such an outcome would 
also greatly support the ongoing fiscal consolidation process. Importantly, it would also seem 
that a swift implementation of such reforms would lead to immediate sizeable welfare gains 
already in the period up to 2015.12 
If  Europeans  are  to  reap  these  potential  benefits,  it  is  clear  that  reform  efforts  by  national 
governments have to be reinforced. It is therefore welcome that the EU-level targets under 
the Europe 2020 strategy are being translated into precise country-specific targets to guide 
policy-making  at  the  national  level.  Moreover,  the  simultaneous  review  of  Member  States’ 
fiscal and structural reform policies in European fora prior to national decision making – the 
so-called European Semester – to be introduced as of 2011 is likely to lead to stronger and 
more effective follow-up and peer pressure.  
An ambitious EU-level programme under the Europe 2020 umbrella will complement actions 
at the national level. This includes: 
1. 
completion  of  the  single  market  starting  in  2012,  twenty  years  after  the  1992 
deadline for establishing the internal market; 
mobilisation of all available financial resources under the EU budget; and, 
development of a new trade and external policy aimed at improving global market 
access for EU companies. 
2. 
3. 
Finally, the Commission is currently rolling out seven so-called “flagship initiatives” targeting 
key  policy  areas  of  the  strategy  (including  innovation,  education  and  competitiveness)  to 
complement national reform initiatives.  
Macroeconomic imbalances 
4.2 
These  processes  of  globalisation  and  financial  integration  in  Europe  have  facilitated 
increased leverage and more advanced financial engineering, which has made it possible to 
advance future consumption and maintain citizens’ standards of living in the face of shifts in 
global production and increased income inequality. Regrettably, the latter phenomenon has 
                                                 
12   See  European  Economy  7/2010:  European  Economic  Forecast  Autumn  2010,  pp.  57–60,  European 
Commission Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs. 
8 
 BIS Review 167/2010
not facilitated a smooth transition to a new equilibrium, but rather fed distorted expectations 
of growth among private agents, leading to excessive debt and risk taking, masking the need 
for economic adjustment to adapt to these global changes. The large scale deleveraging that 
began  in  2007  reversed  this  trend  and  laid  bare  large  fiscal  and  broader  macroeconomic 
imbalances  that  had  built  up  across  Europe  in  this  period.  It  is  these  imbalances  which 
subsequently fuelled the disorderly market developments we are seeing today. 
The  challenge  for  European  governance  is  how  to  manage  these  macroeconomic 
imbalances, how to prevent them from arising again, and how to deal with their effects in a 
more orderly manner. 
Imbalances should not be seen as a problem per se, as they may reflect natural economic 
adjustment  related  to  “catching-up”  phenomena  and  be  self-correcting.  Whilst  some  of 
developments in the euro area over its first decade reflected real economic convergence, in 
general  they  do  not  fall  into  this  category.  The  symptoms  of  unsustainable  positions  were 
apparent in most indicators. Growing current account deficits were predominantly linked to 
an increase in net private borrowing requirements, related credit growth and the build-up of 
private sector debt. In some (but not all) of these countries, there were also sharp increases 
in domestic asset prices, particularly house prices. While house prices declined in Germany 
between 1999 and 2008, there was an average annual increase of more than 10% in Spain 
and Ireland. These factors also fed into a sustained loss of competitiveness in a number of 
countries, with unit labour costs in Ireland increasing by 30% more than those in Germany 
between  2000  and  2008.  Fiscal  policy  was  also  expansionary,  reinforcing  these  nominal 
developments. Indeed, hardly any euro area country managed to observe a budget position 
close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  on  a  structural  basis  between  1999  and  2008,  despite 
government debt ratios above 60% of GDP in many countries.  
Eliminating imbalances 
Countries  that  have  accumulated  these  imbalances  face  a  long  process  of  adjustment  to 
more  warranted  levels  of  spending  and  debt  in  both  the  public  and  the  private  sectors.  A 
process of de-leveraging and balance sheet repair will have to take place in several cases. 
These adjustments will inevitably entail a period of low growth in domestic demand. This, in 
turn, will necessitate corrective adjustments in relative prices and wages in order to foster net 
exports and rebalance the economies in question.  
To make this process as short and effective as possible, decisive policy action is required on 
the part of governments. 
First,  convincing  fiscal  consolidation  to  redress  the  fiscal  imbalances  is  essential.  In  the 
present situation, the scale of the fiscal challenges faced by many European countries puts 
them in “uncharted waters”. In this context, adjustment is taking place in a number of euro 
area countries. According to the European Commission, the euro area average deficit ratio is 
projected  to  decrease  to  4.6%  of  GDP  in  2011  and  3.9%  of  GDP  in  2012  under  the 
customary no-policy-change assumption. This represents a sizeable improvement compared 
with the spring forecast, which stems mainly from expenditure measures announced or set 
out in more detail since then, in particular in the 2011 budgets. 
Second,  structural  reforms  should  be  introduced  to  increase  wage  flexibility  and  the 
adjustment  of  wages  to  appropriate  levels.  This  could  be  achieved  through  measures  to 
improve the functioning of labour markets, which would also facilitate the necessary transfer 
of workers from the non-traded to the traded sectors. In fact, we have already seen wage-
setting developments in some European countries that many observers would have believed 
impossible just a few years ago. The adoption of measures to increase productivity growth is 
also essential.  
Third,  repairing  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  and  making  banks  more  resilient  are  crucial 
prerequisites  for  the  resumption  of  growth  and  for  financing  the  reallocation  of  resources 
from the non-tradable to the tradable sectors. Many policy initiatives have already been taken 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 9
in  this  respect,  ranging  from  the  establishment  of  “bad  banks”  to  injections  of  capital  and 
government guarantees’ for bank debt. Of course, the liquidity policy of the Eurosystem has 
played a crucial role in supporting the financing of the overall economy since August 2007. 
Effective regulation has a key role to play in strengthening the financial system in the longer 
term.  
Preventing imbalances 
The experience of imbalances in the euro area in recent years, and the difficulties this has 
bequeathed,  are  convincing  reminders  that  “prevention  is  better  than  cure”.  The  economic 
governance framework at the EU level has not performed this function effectively, and there 
is an urgent need to reinforce economic governance to arrest the build-up of imbalances at a 
sufficiently early stage. To this end, EU governments have agreed on a number of proposals 
to strengthen economic governance in the EU and the euro area.  
First,  they  have  agreed  to  strengthen  procedures  for  surveillance  of  fiscal  policies,  with  a 
greater  focus  on  government  debt  levels  and  new  reputational,  political  and  financial 
sanctions to enhance enforcement of recommendations. Sanctions for excessive deficits will 
come  much  earlier  than  before.  There  is  also  an  expectation  that  national  fiscal  rules  and 
frameworks should be improved, although non-binding. Government finance statistics will be 
improved  by  enhancing  the  auditing  powers  of  Eurostat  and  giving  greater  professional 
independence to the European Statistical System. 
For the surveillance of broader macroeconomic policies, governments have agreed to set up 
a  new  macroeconomic  surveillance  framework,  with  an  alert  mechanism  based  on 
scoreboard indicators that should identify macroeconomic imbalances and vulnerabilities at 
an early stage and pave the way for their correction. As imbalances are more detrimental in a 
single currency area, there will be a stronger enforcement framework for euro area countries 
backed up by non-financial sanctions.  
Managing crises 
Reinforcing economic governance along these lines should give the EU and the euro area 
much greater resilience in the face of future challenges. But there will always be a risk that 
prevention  will  fail  and  that  countries  will  be  confronted  with  debt  crises.  In  such 
circumstances, it is essential to have in place a predictable framework for managing crises 
that contributes both to financial stability and the correct pricing of risk. 
In  this  context,  the  Eurogroup  agreed  on  28  November  on  the  contours  of  a  permanent 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  for  the  euro  area  based  on  the  existing  European 
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). The ESM will be capable of providing liquidity support for 
countries 
to  an  adjustment  programme  with  strong 
conditionality.  Decisions  on  ESM  assistance  will  be  made  by  the  Eurogroup  acting 
unanimously,  and  will  be  based  on  an  upfront  debt  sustainability  analysis  allowing  for  a 
meaningful distinction between liquidity and solvency crises. The Eurogroup also agreed that 
standardised and identical collective action clauses (CACs) would be introduced in the terms 
and conditions of all new euro area government bonds starting in June 2013. This framework 
should help clarify market expectations about future developments and contribute to greater 
certainty. 
financial  difficulties,  subject 
in 
The ECB position 
For the ECB, the central objective of the reforms of economic governance is to achieve all 
that  is  necessary  to  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  Monetary  Union.  The  proposals 
which have been put forward, namely by the Commission, are broadly appropriate for the EU 
countries  not  participating  in  Monetary  Union.  However,  the  ECB  considers  that  the 
framework needs to be more ambitious still for countries in the euro area: 
10 
 BIS Review 167/2010
  On  fiscal  surveillance,  there  is  a  need  to  enhance  significantly  the  enforcement 
procedures  for  fiscal  discipline,  which  should  include  in  particular  the  quasi-
automatic application of sanctions on the basis of clearly defined criteria and without 
scope for discretion through “exceptional circumstances” or waivers.  
On macroeconomic surveillance, the procedures need to be straightforward and use 
a maximum of analytical intelligence. The framework should focus on countries with 
vulnerabilities,  competitiveness  losses  and  high  debt  levels.  Vulnerabilities  should 
be  detected  on  the  basis  of  a  limited  number  of  indicators,  which  should 
automatically trigger an in-depth analysis of the country concerned when potential 
problems are revealed. Graduated sanctions should also come into play at an early 
stage to reinforce compliance. Assessments and recommendations should be given 
broad publicity at all stages of the surveillance process. 
Member States should anchor the new surveillance framework in national legislation by no 
later than the end of 2011. It is essential to introduce rules-based, medium-term frameworks 
and establish independent national institutions assessing fiscal policy. I hope that  the final 
result of the legislation emerging from the dialogue between the European Parliament, the 
European Council and the European Commission will represent the required quantum leap in 
the governance of the euro area.  
Financial supervision 
4.3 
The financial crisis has shown how the materialisation of systemic risks can have devastating 
effects for the financial sector and the broader economy. It has revealed the fragility of an 
apparently “healthy” financial system to collective behaviour by financial institutions, and the 
scale  of  the  potential  fallout  when  large  financial  institutions  fail.  It  has  also  illustrated  the 
severity of the adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy.  
These  effects  have  highlighted  the  absence  of  a  proper  framework  for  macro-prudential 
oversight of financial systems and micro-prudential supervision of individual institutions which 
addresses the interdependencies of a closely integrated single European financial market. In 
response, the European Parliament and the Council established a new European System of 
Financial Supervision, which will enter into force on 1 January 2011. It will be composed of 
three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) respectively for the banking, insurance and 
securities  markets,  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  that  will  focus  on  systemic 
risks, and national supervisors. The ESAs will be responsible for developing draft regulatory 
technical standards in order to ensure, through a single rulebook, a level playing field and an 
adequate protection of depositors, investors and consumers across the EU. In addition, they 
will  have  a  general  coordination  role  of  national  supervisors  in  order  to  ensure  consistent 
practices  as  well  as  specific  tasks  that  may  be  provided  by  legislation.  The  ESRB  will  be 
responsible for macro-prudential oversight of the EU financial system. It will monitor the EU’s 
financial system as a whole and it will issue risk warnings and policy recommendations on 
how to address systemic risks.  
The ECB has a strong interest in ensuring that the appropriate arrangements are in place for 
safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  European  financial  system,  since  this  is  essential  for  a 
smooth transmission of monetary policy. The ECB will be closely involved in the functioning 
of the new supervisory framework. The ECB President will chair the ESRB and the ECB will 
provide analytical, statistical and logistical support to the ESRB, as well as its Secretariat. In 
addition, the ECB will also cooperate closely with the future ESAs, particularly in the context 
of its own statutory task to contribute to financial stability.  
The role of Europe in global governance 
5. 
As I noted above, the financial crisis has led to a profound shift in power towards the largest 
emerging economies. Indeed, although we often refer to the “global” crisis, emerging markets 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 11
in  Asia  and  Latin  America  seem  to  have  escaped  unscathed.  Brazil  is  forecast  to  grow 
between  5.5  and  6  percent  this  year;  China  is  forecast  to  grow  10  percent;  and  India  is 
forecast to grow 7%. According to the IMF by 2014 these countries plus Russia will account 
for 61% of global domestic product growth.  
This  means  that,  in  economic  terms  at  least,  we  are  increasingly  confronted  with  a 
“multipolar”  world.  Whilst  the  United  States  remains  the  world’s  sole  military  superpower, 
economic power appears increasingly diffuse. You may recall Charles Kindleberger’s famous 
argument  that  the  presence  of  a  hegemon  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the  provision  of 
international  economic  stability.  Does  “multipolarity”  therefore  condemn  us  to  a  period  of 
global instability? 
My answer would be: not necessarily. The absence of an economic hegemon does not imply 
instability, but rather that more international cooperation is needed to ensure stability. This is 
where I see a crucial role for Europe in global economic governance in the future. 
One  of  Europe’s  greatest  strengths  is  its  commitment  to  multilateralism  and  international 
cooperation, and this will be more valuable than ever both to secure European interests and 
bind  emerging  powers  into  an  international  framework  of  cooperation.  Europe  can  also 
influence  the  conduct  of  global  governance  through  its  power  of  example.  This  is  what 
Joseph  Nye  referred  to  as  “soft  power”,  “the  ability  to  shape  the  preferences  of  others; 
convincing other actors to want the same things as you”.  
The most obvious example of European soft power is the policy of enlargement. Each new 
application  for  EU  membership  is  a  testament  to  the  attractiveness  of  our  community  of 
values  based  on  economic  and  political  freedom,  tolerance  and  the  rule  of  law.  The  EU’s 
process of unification and pacification of a continent is unique and exemplary. Europe also 
has the potential to exercise soft power through its response to the crisis. As I noted above, 
the “Washington consensus” has now been replaced by the Seoul Development Consensus 
for  Shared  Growth  and  a  fundamental  reappraisal  of  macroeconomic  theory  is  underway. 
There  is  therefore  a  window  of  opportunity  to  enshrine  new  approaches  to  issues  like 
ensuring  sustainable  growth  and  effective  regulation  of  financial  markets.  If  Europe  can 
tackle its own challenges in a credible manner, this is a role it could play. 
For many issues at both the European and the global level, I see the financial crisis as what 
political  scientists  call  a  “critical juncture”:  a  rare  period  when  the  rules  and  principles  that 
make-up institutions can be changed and new patterns can be “locked-in” for the future. The 
challenge for European governance, and for the global governance, is to get these patterns 
right. 
Conclusion 
6. 
To conclude. Europe is facing many challenges for which effective governance solutions are 
essential.  Some  of  these  challenges  have  arisen  from  the  financial  crisis.  Others  are  of  a 
more long-term nature, which the financial crisis has forced Europe to confront in the context 
of the new globalisation phase.  
It is perhaps then appropriate to remind ourselves that Denis de Rougemont, the great Swiss 
European  thinker,  defined  Europe  precisely  by  its  “globalising  mission”.  This  tendency  for 
universalism,  for  the  globalizing  of  the  world,  is  what  the  great  Portuguese  poet  Fernando 
Pessoa  characterises  as  the  main  contribution  of  Portugal  to  civilization.  Himself  bilingual 
and with an English education, he wrote in the 1920s that: “the Portuguese are essentially 
cosmopolitan. Never was a Portuguese only Portuguese: he was always everything”. A very 
similar  expression  was  used  by  the  German  philosopher  Johann  E.  Erdman,  a  disciple  of 
Hegel and Wilhelm von Humboldt, who wrote: “Es ist undeutsch, bloss deutsch zu sein” (It is 
not German to be only German). Written in 1862, in the context of the debate about German 
nationality  that  occupied  Germany  during  most  of  the  19th  century  until  its  unification,  the 
sentence reflects the caution of many participants to avoid any kind of nationalism.  
12 
 BIS Review 167/2010
It is by overcoming narrow nationalisms that Europe has been built. Nations are a construct 
of  man,  not  a  natural  reality.  They  reflect  the  social  a  priori  that  implies  that  our 
consciousness  and  our  knowledge  are  socially  constituted.  Many  nations  were  even  the 
product of the action of a State. There were Savoyards, Bretons, Gascons before there were 
French, and Bavarians and Prussians before there were Germans. This does not imply that 
Europe could become a Nation, not even as Montesquieu pretended “une Nation composée 
de plusieurs” (a Nation composed of many). Europeans are too diverse and too self-critical 
for  that  to  happen.  We  belong  nevertheless  to  two  societies:  our  own  society  and  the 
European one as the essential background for our rationalist, universal values. Reason can 
built new realities.  
In his famous Vienna address in 1935 on the existential crisis of Europe, Edmund Husserl 
underlines the fact that philosophical reason is the «original phenomenon that characterizes 
Europe». And his conclusion was: “The existential crisis of Europe has only two outcomes: 
either Europe will disappear in becoming ever more distant from its own rational signification, 
that is its vital sense, and will sink in the hatred of the spirit and in barbarity; or Europe will be 
reborn  from  the  philosophical  spirit  as  a  result  of  a  heroism  of  reason  that  will  overcome 
naturalism”.  
We know very well what happened in those dramatic times and how we could never again 
trust reason the same way. We live now in so-called post-modern times, which value more 
the  sceptical  side  of  reason.  So,  it  is  perhaps  more  realistic  to  appeal  to  less  lofty 
considerations and stress the dense network of interests that tie our nations together. At this 
crucial  moment  of  the  European  project  referring  to  the  benefits  of  the  “doux  commerce” 
allows us to take comfort and prop our hopes in another piece of wisdom from Montesquieu 
when  he  reminded  us  that:  “Les  nations  sont  comme  les  hommes,  elles  aiment  ce  que 
satisfait ses passions mais elles préfèrent encore plus ce que garantit leurs intérêts”.13 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                
13   “Nations  are  like  men,  they  love  what  satisfies  their  passions  but  like  even  more  what  guarantees  their 
interests”. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 13
