 Durmuş Yilmaz: Press conference for the presentation of the Inflation 
Report 
Press  conference  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, for the presentation of the Inflation Report, Ankara, 27 July 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests and Members of the Press, 
Welcome  to  the  press  conference  held  to  convey  the  main  messages  of  the  July  2010 
Inflation Report. 
The  report  typically  summarizes  the  economic  framework  addressed  in  monetary  policy 
decisions, elaborates global and domestic macroeconomic developments and presents the 
medium-term  inflation  forecasts,  which  have  been  revised  in  view  of  previous  quarter 
developments, along with the monetary policy stance. 
Before moving on to the Central Bank’s assessments on the inflation outlook and economic 
activity,  which  I  will  share  with  you  in  detail  shortly,  I  would  like  to  summarize  the  current 
global  conditions.  The  recovery  in  global  economic  activity  continued  during  the  second 
quarter of 2010. However, with the deepening financial distress, the euro area experienced 
weaker growth than other advanced economies, pushing down the growth rate for advanced 
economies,  whereas,  emerging  economies  continued  to  grow  faster  than  advanced  ones 
(Figure 1). Furthermore, it is noteworthy that that the modest recovery in growth in advanced 
economies has not yet been reflected on labor markets (Figure 2). This situation continues to 
have a detrimental effect on sustainable recovery in these countries. 
 Despite the recovery in global economic activity, recent developments have confirmed that 
the  global  economy  remains  fragile.  Rising  concerns  regarding  the  debt  sustainability  of 
several  Southern  European  countries  have  caused  risk  appetites  to  follow  a  volatile  and 
downward  trajectory,  which  in  turn, have  triggered  capital  outflows  from  emerging  markets 
and increased risk premiums. While risk premium indicators particularly in some European 
countries have increased, during this period, increases in emerging market risk premiums 
– especially in Turkey – have been limited (Figure 3). 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 1
  Sovereign debt-related problems in Europe have once again confirmed that downside risks 
regarding the global economy activity remain. This development led many central banks to 
adopt a monetary policy stance with an increased emphasis on downside risks, especially in 
advanced  countries.  Accordingly,  central  banks  of  advanced  economies  have  underscored 
that  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  would  be  kept  accommodative  for  a  long  period, 
while emerging economies have also adopted similar changes in their rhetoric through policy 
statements. These developments have postponed the expectations regarding the timing of 
policy normalization (Figure 4). 
2 
  BIS Review 133/2010
 According to this outlook, year-on-year inflation in consumer prices was flat in both advanced 
and  emerging  economies  during  the  second  quarter  of  2010  (Figure  5).  In  the  meantime, 
core inflation continued to diverge between both groups of economies (Figure 6). 
 Inflation developments 
1. 
After summarizing current global conditions, I would now like to make an evaluation of the 
inflation developments in Turkey that took place in the last quarter. Developments during the 
second quarter of 2010 confirmed the CBT’s assessment that the increase in inflation since 
the  last  quarter  of  2009  was  temporary.  The  April  Inflation  Report  stated  that  aggregate 
demand conditions would support disinflation and that the rise in inflation could be attributed 
to  factors  beyond  the  control  of  monetary  policy  such  as  increases  in  food,  energy  and 
administered  prices.  In  fact,  with  the  reversal  of  these  adverse  factors,  consumer  prices 
declined by 0.3 percentage points and annual inflation came down to 8.37 (Figure 7). Here I 
would  like  to  underline  that  this  was  the  first  decline  in  consumer  prices  ever  in  a  given 
quarter (Figure 8). 
BIS Review 133/2010 
  3
 The  course  of  food  prices  was  instrumental  in  the  favorable  outlook  of  inflation  in  the  last 
quarter. After climbing dramatically in the past two quarters and prompting consumer prices 
to soar, food prices plunged sharply during the second quarter of 2010 (Figure 8). The fall in 
food prices was attributable to the significant decline in unprocessed food prices (Figure 9). 
In addition, the adoption of import regulations for red meat at the end of April was another 
factor that slowed down unprocessed food prices more than expected (Figure 10). Besides, 
processed food prices also decreased during the last quarter, pushing food prices down even 
further (Figure 9). 
The favorable outlook of inflation was not only limited to food prices; services and core goods 
prices  also  saw  a  significant  slowdown  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  year  (Figure  11). 
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that prices of services recorded a quarter-on-quarter drop for 
the first time since the inception of the index. While this development was attributable to the 
sizeable fall in communication services, the rate of increase in other subcategories of services 
also slowed down (Figure 12). Specifically, annual rental inflation continued to fall steadily to an 
all-time low during the second quarter, which is a dramatic development (Figure 12). 
 4 
  BIS Review 133/2010
 Prices  of  core  goods  excluding  food,  energy,  alcoholic  beverages  and  tobacco  and  gold, 
moderated  in  this  quarter  owing  to  euro  depreciation  as  well  as  easing  commodity  prices 
(Figure 13). 
 In line with these developments, core inflation indicators also declined in the second quarter 
(Figure 14). The downward trend in underlying inflation is also apparent in the recent course 
of seasonally adjusted data (Figure 15). It should be pointed out that the tax incentives in 
2009  will  put  downward  pressure  on  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  core  price  indicators 
during July and October and that we expect core inflation indicators to remain consistent with 
medium-term targets in the upcoming period. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
  5
 Accordingly, the uptrend in medium-term inflation expectations that started in the final quarter 
of 2009 slowed during the second quarter of 2010 (Figure 16). In fact, following the better-
than-expected price developments during May and June and the return of annual inflation to 
single digits, near-term inflation expectations were revised down markedly quarter-on-quarter 
(Figure  17).  However,  current  inflation  expectations  for  12  and  24-months  ahead  hover 
slightly above year-end targets of 5.5 and 5 percent for 2011 and 2012, respectively. 
 Monetary policy response 
2. 
After  commenting  briefly  on  inflation  developments,  I  would  now  like  to  cover  the  policies 
pursued by the Central Bank during the last quarter. 
Anticipating  that  inflation  would  decrease  sharply  following  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the 
Central  Bank  of  Turkey  (CBT)  focused  on  alleviating  the  potentially  harsh  impact  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  on  the  domestic  economy.  In  this  respect,  the  CBT  has  delivered 
sizeable  cuts  in  policy  rates,  while  providing  liquidity  support  to  facilitate  the  smooth 
operation  of  credit  markets.  Accordingly,  policy  rates  have  been  cut  by  1025  basis  points 
since November 2008 (Table 1). Considering the favorable developments in credit markets 
and  the  moderate  recovery  in  economic  activity,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (the 
Committee) ceased policy rate cuts in December 2009. Notwithstanding the rapid increase in 
inflation during the last quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010, I would like to remind 
you  that  the  Committee,  highlighting  the  persisting  downside  risks  regarding  the  global 
economy  and  the  consistency  of  core  inflation  indicators  with  the  medium-term  inflation 
targets, expressed that policy rates would stay at low levels for a long period. 
6 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 During  the  second  quarter,  the  fall  in  inflation  and  increased  downside  risks  regarding  the 
global economy have vindicated the monetary policy stance of the Committee – that it may 
be necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for some time, and to keep them at 
low levels for a long period. Accordingly, we see that market expectations regarding future 
policy rates were revised downwards (Figure18). 
 Market rates also reflect growing expectations of delay and moderation in the rate-hike cycle. 
Accordingly, benchmark bond yields fell during the second quarter and continued to hover 
around historic lows despite the increased risk aversion (Figure 19). The downturn in market 
 BIS Review 133/2010 
 7
 rates was also driven by the improved inflation outlook. The flattening of the yield curve in 
July compared to April indicates that policy rate-expectations of market players have been 
revised downwards (Figure 20). 
The downslide was more significant in market rates than in inflation expectations during the 
second  quarter,  pushing  medium-term  real  rates  down  to  historic  lows  (Figure  21).  Yet  I 
would like to underline that real market rates in Turkey did not decouple substantially from 
other emerging economies (Figure 21). 
 8 
  BIS Review 133/2010
 The  ongoing  downward  trend  both  in  market  rates  and  the  tightness  in  credit  conditions 
contributed  to  the  maintenance  of  low  levels  in  loan  rates.  No  remarkable  change  is 
observed  in  loan  rates  in  the  second  quarter  despite  the  continuing  improvement  in  credit 
markets (Figure 22). 
 Inflation and monetary policy outlook 
3. 
Having summarized the Central Bank’s monetary policy stance as well as the effects of this 
stance on the markets, I would like to share with you the economic outlook underlying our 
revised forecasts. 
The first-quarter data on the GDP were largely consistent with the outlook presented in the 
April Inflation Report. Accordingly, the GDP expanded by 11.7 percent year-on-year during 
the first quarter of 2010 (Figure 23). This increase was driven by the low level in the same 
quarter  of  2009.  Meanwhile,  in  seasonally  adjusted  terms,  the  GDP  followed  a  nearly-
horizontal course by growing by 0.1 percent quarter-on-quarter (Figure 24). 
BIS Review 133/2010 
  9
 The  weak  global  economy  continued  to  weigh  on  economic  activity  and  employment  in 
external demand-oriented sectors. The recovery in the private sector gained stability in line 
with  our  forecasts.  In  this  respect,  the  largest  contributors  to  growth  in  the  first  quarter 
became private consumption expenditures and the change in stocks. This was also affected 
by  the  low  base  in  the  same  quarter  of  2009  (Figure  25).  Meanwhile,  public  expenditures 
contributed to growth by –0.8 points (Figure 26). 
Recent domestic demand indicators show that private consumption demand continues to grow 
and it will run above pre-crisis levels in the second quarter. Meanwhile, despite the rebound in 
the first quarter, investments remain below pre-crisis levels. These developments indicate that 
the total final domestic demand continued to grow in the second quarter (Figure 27). 
 Parallel to the recovery in domestic demand, credit markets continued to rebound robustly in 
the second quarter, leading to rapid loan growth in the real sector (Figure 28). The ongoing 
recovery both in commercial and consumer loans indicates that credit conditions support the 
rebound in economic activity. Accordingly, as in the previous quarter, our revised forecasts 
are based on an outlook that envisages the gradual removal of financial tightness. 
 10 
 BIS Review 133/2010
  Developments  in  global  economic  activity  have  been  of  major  concern  for  our  forecasts 
through  external  channels  ever  since  the  global  financial  crisis  erupted.  In  this  respect,  I 
would like to express our views on the effects of global developments on aggregate demand 
and the inflation outlook in the second quarter of the year. The uncertainty caused by fiscal 
problems in the euro area in May, and the consequent sharp depreciation of the euro led to a 
weaker external demand in the second quarter than envisaged in the April Inflation Report. 
Global growth forecasts remain basically unchanged compared to the April Inflation Report. 
However, euro area growth forecasts have been revised slightly downwards, reflecting the 
change  in  the  outlook  owing  to  the  problems  in  Greece,  Portugal,  and  Spain  spreading 
throughout  the  financial  systems  of  the  euro  area  –  our  largest  export  destination.  In  this 
respect, the export-weighted global economic activity index constructed by the CBT implies 
weaker external demand than that envisaged in April (Figure 29). 
BIS Review 133/2010 
  11
 When assessing the external demand outlook, it is important to consider our trading partner’s 
headline  growth  forecasts  as  well  as  the  composition  of  growth.  In  this  respect,  it  is 
noteworthy that the latest Consensus Forecasts release indicates a noticeable change in the 
composition  of  the  euro  area  2011  growth  forecasts.  More  specifically,  along  with  the 
depreciation of the euro owing to financial distress and the weaker growth outlook, euro area 
private  consumption  and  investment  forecasts  have  been  revised  downwards,  thereby 
emerging as a potential factor to affect our external demand prospects adversely (Table 2). 
In other words, despite the absence of a major revision in euro area growth forecasts, the 
change in the composition of GDP growth indicates a weaker external demand outlook for 
Turkey compared to the previous Report. 
 in 
Although  weak  external  demand  restrained  recovery  in  industrial  employment,  the  steady 
recovery in the labor market continued in the last period and non-farm employment posted a 
significant rise in the last one-year period fuelled by the steady increase in employment in 
construction and services sectors (Figure 30). The continued rise in labor force participation 
rates 
in  unemployment  rates. 
Unemployment  rates  fell  markedly  in  April  amid  increased  employment  and  reduced  labor 
force  participation  (Figure  31).  Leading  indicators  imply  that  the  recovery  in  non-farm 
employment  will  continue,  albeit  slower.  Unemployment  is  expected  to  remain  well  above 
pre-crisis levels for a long while, and therefore to exert no significant pressure on unit labor 
costs in the upcoming period. 
first  quarter  of  2010  curbed 
further  decline 
the 
12 
 BIS Review 133/2010
  Against this background, we now envisage weaker external demand conditions compared to 
the previous Report, while domestic demand continues to recover as anticipated. Therefore, 
the revised forecasts envisage that the resource utilization would stay at low levels and the 
contribution of aggregate demand conditions to disinflation would increase slightly. 
Regarding fiscal policy, in line with the MTP projections, we envisioned that the fiscal stance 
would remain supportive throughout 2010, albeit less strongly than in 2009, and that fiscal 
consolidation would gradually ensue starting from 2011 as guided by the fiscal rule set out in 
the  MTP.  In  this  respect,  we  assumed  that  the  fiscal  space  created  by  the  stronger-than-
expected economic activity leading to better-than-expected performance in budget revenues, 
would be used mostly to reduce the government debt stock and hence, fiscal adjustment in 
2011 and onwards would be implemented through institutional and structural improvements. 
In other words, we assumed that tax adjustments would be consistent with inflation targets 
and automatic pricing mechanisms throughout the forecast horizon. 
Consequently,  we  envisaged  that  the  rising  debt-to-GDP  ratios  would  reverse  course 
gradually starting in 2011, while the risk premium would not display any significant changes 
throughout the forecast horizon. 
There  have  been  some  important  developments  since  the  April  Inflation  Report  that 
necessitated  a  downward  revision  of  the  2010  inflation  forecast.  I  strongly  believe  that  a 
better understanding of the rationale behind the changes in our forecasts is very important 
for communicating our policy as well as for the viability of the principles of transparency and 
accountability; therefore, I would like to explain these factors in detail. 
Better-than-expected  outcomes  regarding  unprocessed  food  prices  urged  us  to  revise  our 
assumption for food inflation downwards. Accordingly, while we decreased our food inflation 
assumption for end-2010 from 9 percent to 7.5 percent, we maintained our assumptions for 
food  inflation  for  2011  and  2012  at  7  percent  (Table  3).  The  change  in  question  had  a 
0.4 percentage point downside impact on end-2010 inflation. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
  13
 With the increased downside risks regarding global economic activity, oil prices in the second 
quarter  were  below  the  levels  assumed  in  the  April  Inflation  Report  (Figure  32).  In  this 
context, while we revised our assumptions for crude oil prices for 2010 and 2011 downwards, 
oil price assumptions for 2012 were maintained at USD 90 (Table 3). This revision shifted the 
2010 inflation forecast down by 0.2 percentage points. 
 Core  goods  and  services  inflation,  which  we  believe  to  reflect  the  main  trend  of  inflation, 
declined more than we had anticipated. This decline led to a 0.2 percentage point fall in our 
year-end inflation forecast. 
The  contribution  of  aggregate  demand  conditions  to  disinflation  in  the  revised  forecast  is 
slightly  higher  than  envisaged  in  the  previous  Report  due  to  the  weaker  external  demand 
Outlook. Therefore, we made a downward revision in output gap forecasts that constitutes 
the basis for our medium-term forecast (Table 3). This change yielded 0.1 percentage point 
downward revision in the end-2010 inflation forecast. 
Overall,  the  mid-point  of  the  end-2010  inflation  forecast  has  been  revised  down  by 
0.9 percentage  points,  owing  to  the  downward  revisions  in  food  and  energy  prices 
assumptions and the recent slowdown in core inflation indicators. 
Now I would like to share with you our inflation and output gap forecasts produced in line with 
the framework that I have outlined so far. While producing our forecasts, we assumed that 
the measures outlined in our exit strategy would be completed to a large extent during the 
rest of the year, and that policy rates would be kept constant at current levels for some time 
to  be  followed  by  limited  increases  in  2011,  with  policy  rates  staying  in  single  digits 
throughout  the  3-year  forecast  horizon.  Within  this  framework,  medium-term  forecasts 
suggest that, with 70 percent probability, inflation will be between 6.5 and 8.5 percent with a 
mid-point of 7.5 percent at end-2010, and between 3.6 and 7.0 percent with a mid-point of 
5.3 percent by the end of 2011. Furthermore, inflation is expected to decline to 5.0 percent 
by the end of 2012 (Figure 33). 
14 
 BIS Review 133/2010
  I  would  like  to  underline  that  our  revised  forecast  indicates  that  the  monetary  tightening 
required  to  keep  inflation  in  line  with  medium-term  targets  would  start  later  and  would  be 
more limited than implied by the previous forecast. 
Although inflation trend is expected to remain consistent with the medium-term targets and 
follows a stable path, the exact course of headline inflation until mid-2011 would depend on 
the base effects driven by the volatile unprocessed food prices in the past year and the tax 
hikes implemented at the beginning of 2010 (Figure 33). Therefore, in order to help economic 
agents  to  better  interpret  developments  in  headline  inflation,  which  would  increase  the 
effectiveness  of  expectations  management,  I  would  like  to  provide  you  with  some  more 
information about this issue. 
Owing to the base effects resulting from the tax hike on tobacco in 2009 and the tax cuts on 
durable goods in March and April 2009, which began to cease in June 2009, inflation is likely 
to fall markedly in July 2010. Inflation is expected to rise in August due to the sharp drop a 
year ago, and decline substantially in the final quarter with the reversal of base effects from 
food prices. 
The contribution of tax hikes introduced in early 2010 will have largely disappeared and this 
will  be  the  primary  factor  influencing  the  inflation  trend  in  the  first  two  months  of  2011. 
Although  annual  inflation  may  rise  during  the  second  quarter  of  2011  amid  very  low  base 
effects  from  food  inflation,  inflation  is  expected  to  fall  gradually  in  subsequent  periods  to 
stabilize at around 5 percent by early 2012. 
I think analyzing the forecasts by comparing the latest data with the previous Report period 
would help to better understand the changes in forecasts. As I have mentioned earlier, we 
revised our output gap estimates slightly downwards compared to the April Inflation Report, 
owing  to  the  anticipated  impacts  of  the  problems  in  the  euro  area  on  aggregate  demand 
(Figure  34).  However,  there  is  no  significant  revision  in  the  pace  of  the  recovery,  as  the 
downward revision in the monetary policy stance is expected to partially compensate for the 
adverse impact of weaker external demand. In this respect, we based our assumptions on an 
outlook,  in  which  there  would  not  be  a  remarkable  change  in  the  pace  of  the  recovery  in 
economic activity. Accordingly, there has been no significant revision in the inflation forecasts 
for 2011 and onwards (Figure 34). 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 15
  Any  new  data  or  information  regarding  the  inflation  outlook  may  lead  to  a  change  in  the 
monetary policy stance. Therefore, I would like to underline once more that the assumptions 
regarding the future policy rates underlying the inflation forecast should not be perceived as 
a commitment on behalf of the CBT. 
Risks 
4. 
In the last part of my speech, I would like to provide some information on the risks regarding 
the inflation outlook in the upcoming period and the prospective monetary policy strategies to 
be implemented should these risks materialize. 
By  influencing  commodity  prices  and  external  demand  conditions,  global  economic  activity 
would  continue  to  be  the  main  factor  driving  inflation  dynamics  and  the  monetary  policy 
outlook. In this respect, the timing and the extent of monetary tightening to be implemented 
during 2011 under the baseline scenario may change depending on the course of economic 
activity. 
Recently, rising concerns regarding debt sustainability in several euro area countries and the 
spillover effects to the financial system have led to renewed turmoil across financial markets, 
underscoring  the  downside  risks  to  global  economic  recovery.  Furthermore,  ongoing 
problems  in  credit,  real  estate  and  labor  markets  in  advanced  economies,  with  little  policy 
options left in case of further disruption in global economic activity, suggest that downside 
risks regarding the pace of global growth are likely to persist for some time. Should the global 
economy face a longer-than-anticipated period of anemic growth, which would consequently 
delay domestic recovery significantly, the monetary tightening envisaged in 2011 under the 
baseline  scenario  may  be  postponed  towards  the  end  of  2011.  Moreover,  an  outcome 
whereby  global  economic  problems  intensify  and  contribute  to  a  contraction  of  domestic 
economic activity may trigger a new easing cycle. By contrast, monetary tightening may be 
implemented  in  an  earlier  period  during  2011,  should  the  recovery  in  economic  activity 
materialize faster than expected. 
Despite  the  increased  downside  risks  pertaining  to  external  demand,  domestic  demand 
remains  strong.  Although  problems  regarding  the  global  economy  have  the  potential  to 
restrain  domestic  demand  through  confidence  and  financing  channels,  countercyclical 
monetary policy and the ongoing improvement in employment conditions are likely to support 
16 
 BIS Review 133/2010
 the recovery in domestic demand. On the other hand, given the relative improvement in the 
creditworthiness of Turkey during the post-crisis period, a possible strengthening in capital 
inflows  in  the  forthcoming  period  stands  out  as  another  factor  that  may  lead  to  a  faster 
recovery  in  domestic  demand  in  contrast  to  external  demand.  Should  the  divergence  in 
growth rates between domestic and external demand continue in the forthcoming period, it 
would  be  necessary  to  utilize  other  policy  instruments  such  as  reserve  requirement  ratios 
and liquidity management facilities more effectively. Accordingly, if the composition of strong 
domestic demand and weak external demand continue as envisaged, and if this pattern of 
growth  co-exists  with  rapid  credit  expansion  and  a  deterioration  in  the  current  account 
balance, consequently leading to financial stability concerns, then the CBT may bring forward 
measures outlined in the exit strategy expected to be implemented until the end of 2010. 
Distinguished guests, 
The Central Bank of Turkey will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while 
formulating  monetary  policy.  Since  the  second  half  of  2009,  economic  activity  has  been 
stronger than envisaged in the MTP, leading to better-than-expected performance in budget 
revenues. Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce government debt would facilitate demand 
management and reduce any need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more flexibility 
regarding  the  conduct  of  countercyclical  monetary  policy.  In  this  respect,  should  fiscal 
discipline  be  implemented  through  institutional  and  structural  improvements,  such  as 
enacting and establishing the fiscal rule, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single-
digit levels over the medium term. 
Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT has focused on containing the adverse effects of the 
global  crisis  on  the  domestic  economy  without  conflicting  with  its  primary  objective  of 
maintaining price stability and this has to a large extent been achieved. Monetary policy will 
continue  to  focus  on  price  stability  in  the  period  ahead.  Strengthening  the  commitment  to 
fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s 
sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. Before concluding my 
speech,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  timely  implementation  of  the  structural  reforms 
envisaged  by  the  Medium  Term  Program  and  the  EU  accession  process  remains to  be  of 
utmost importance. Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 17
