Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Demographic trends, technological progress and 
economic growth in advanced economies 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  66°  Congresso  Nazionale  di  Pediatria  (66th  National  Paediatrics  Congress), 
Rome, 22 October 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Roberta  Serafini,  Isabel  Vansteenkiste  and  Nadine  Leiner  for  their  drafting  suggestions.  
I would also like to thank Ioannis Grintzalis for his valuable research assistance. The views expressed reflect my 
personal opinions. 
Introduction 
First of all, I would like to thank the Società Italiana di Pediatria for inviting me to participate 
in its Annual Meeting.  
You are probably wondering what an economist is doing at a paediatricians’ meeting. To tell 
you the truth, I have been wondering about that too. Let me try to answer that question. 
In brief, this will be my line of argument, based on nine points. 
1. 
In a society characterised by limited demographic growth, technological progress is 
the main engine of economic growth.  
The main instrument for developing technology is human capital. 
The  supply  of  skilled  labour,  which  makes  intensive  use  of  human  capital,  is  not 
keeping pace with the increase in demand, either in the United States or in Europe. 
This explains why there is a strong correlation between the level of education and 
the probability of getting a well-paid job. Those who do not have access to education 
risk being marginalised and having a relatively low income. 
Over  the  past  25  years,  the  supply  of  education  has  not  increased  in  line  with 
demand,  and  this  has  generated  a  worldwide  “excess  demand”  for  high-level 
education,  increasing  competition  and  costs.  In  other  words,  when  it  comes  to 
gaining access to high-quality education, competition is now much fiercer than it was 
for the previous generation. 
In  advanced  societies,  the  new  generations  are  not  prepared  for  the  new 
competitive  environment.  Such  preparation  occurs  during  the  early  years  of  an 
individual’s  life  (according  to  some,  during  the  first  seven  years),  when  the 
personality and the cognitive abilities are shaped.  
Educational  methods  are  largely  responsible  for  this  lag.  The  natural  tendency  to 
apply  the  methods  inherited  from  the  previous  generation  is  insufficient  in  the 
context of excess demand for high-quality education. 
It is not easy to change educational methods, in respect of those we experienced 
ourselves,  and  to  adapt  them  to  the  needs  of  a  global  society.  It  requires  critical 
capacity and the ability to listen, powers which not many people have.  
But there is one important exception, to which I will return at the end of my remarks. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
I would like to develop each of these points in turn. 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 1
Main drivers of growth: theory 
According to economic theory, growth is driven by developments in labour and capital and by 
developments  in  their  productivity.  Demographic  trends  affect  economic  growth  via  the 
effects related to the size and the structure of the population, i.e. mainly via changes in the 
number of persons of working age (usually assumed to be between the ages of 15 and 64). 
In  turn,  technological  progress  affects  growth  via  the  impact  on  labour  and  capital 
productivity. 
From  a  more  analytical  perspective,  per  capita  income  can  be  broken  down  into  labour 
productivity  (per  person  employed),  demographic  factors  (i.e.  the  size  of  the  working  age 
population  relative  to  the  overall  population)  and  the  employment  rate  (Chart  1).  If  we 
compare  some  advanced  economies,  namely  the  euro  area,  the  United  States  and  the 
United Kingdom, and three emerging market economies, i.e. Brazil, China and India, three 
main messages emerge. First, productivity gains are the prime engine of economic growth. 
Second, productivity growth significantly slowed in the euro area after the mid-1990s, while it 
accelerated elsewhere (except in the United Kingdom), particularly in emerging economies. 
Third,  demographic  developments  made  a  sizeable  contribution  to  growth  in  the  emerging 
market economies, while this contribution was much smaller or even negative in advanced 
economies. In essence, these data show that fostering innovation is key, especially for those 
economies  characterised  by  a  shrinking  share  of  working  age  population  owing  to  ageing. 
This  leads  me  to  a  brief  analysis  of  some  stylised  facts  on  demographic  developments  in 
advanced  and  emerging  market  economies.  I  will  then  talk  about  technological  progress. 
Finally,  I  will  discuss  the  importance  of  human  capital  accumulation  and  of  education  in 
particular. 
Some stylised facts on demographic developments… 
If we look at demographic developments in advanced economies such as Italy, the euro area 
(as an average), the United Kingdom and the United States and compare them with those in 
selected  emerging  market  economies  such  as  Brazil,  China  and  India,  three  significant 
differences emerge. 
First, emerging market economies tend to have more young people (Chart 2). In India almost 
one in three people were aged 14 or younger in 2008, while in Italy – which is among the 
countries with the lowest share of young people – the corresponding figure was only one in 
seven (14.2% of the overall population). The slide also shows that the share of people aged 
14  or  younger  has  been  declining  in  all  these  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies 
since 1985. However, although this decline has been even stronger in the emerging market 
economies, these countries still have proportionately more young people. 
Second,  the  share  of  the  working  age  population  in  advanced  economies  has  remained 
either broadly stable or has declined over the past 25 years, while it has risen substantially in 
emerging market economies (Chart 3). In Brazil, for example, the share of the working age 
population rose by more than 8 percentage points between 1985 and 2008, while it declined 
by almost 1.7 percentage points in Italy. 
Third,  the  populations  of  many  industrialised  countries  have  been  ageing,  while  those  of 
Brazil, China and India have been getting younger. 
These diverse demographic developments – and the ageing of the population in particular – 
make  it  more  difficult  for  many  advanced  economies  to  continue  to  grow  and  to  remain 
competitive on world markets. The problem has been exacerbated over the past 25 years, 
not least because many advanced economies have not acted quickly enough to address the 
ageing  problem  and  its  detrimental  impact  on  economic  growth.  But  competition  from 
emerging  market  economies  has  not  waited.  Moreover,  in  many  of  these  emerging 
economies,  competitiveness  has  also  been  stimulated  by  investment  in  the  technology 
sector. Let me elaborate on this last point with the help of a few figures. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2010
…and on technological progress 
Ten years ago the EU Member States committed to transforming the EU by 2010 into “the 
most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world […]”, as emphasised 
in the Lisbon strategy. In order to achieve this aim, an explicit target was introduced whereby 
each country was to spend at least 3% of GDP on research and development (R&D) by the 
year 2010. The data clearly show that progress in this direction has in fact been very limited 
(Chart 4). Among the largest four euro area countries, Italy ranks the lowest, and its level of 
R&D intensity has increased marginally since 1996.1 At the other end of the spectrum, China 
more than doubled its investment in R&D over the same period.  
The role of human capital 
Together with R&D, the economy’s ability to innovate crucially depends on human capital.2 
Human  capital  is  a  broad  concept,  covering  a  set  of  skills  which  are  acquired  through 
education, as well as via on-the-job training and experience. Also, human capital is affected 
by health conditions, on which people’s cognitive abilities directly depend. The importance of 
human  capital  to  economic  growth  has  been  demonstrated  in  a  number  of  empirical 
analyses.3  Several  studies  show  that  more  affluent  economies  are  also  richer  in  human 
capital.  For  example,  there  is  a  clear  positive  relationship  between  the  average  years  of 
schooling and per capita income in advanced economies (Chart 5).  
In  addition,  a  vast  literature  in  the  field  of  labour  economics  has  provided  evidence  that  a 
positive  causal  relationship  –  which  is  significant  and  robust  –  can  be  found  between  the 
years of formal schooling (at primary, secondary and tertiary level) and wages. This evidence 
suggests that private, or so-called “Mincerian”4, returns on education are within an average 
range of 6.5% to 9%; this means that an additional year of formal schooling is associated 
with  a  7.5%  increase  in  wages  on  average  over  a  working  life.5  Chart  6  illustrates  the 
evolution of the wage premium of college graduates and high school graduates in the United 
States. It shows that those who achieve higher educational levels enjoy substantially higher 
earnings; moreover, the wage gap between educated and less educated workers seems to 
have significantly widened since the early 1980s.  
The evidence related to the rise in returns on education – together with that on the inequality 
of earnings – provides useful information on the supply and demand of skills. In particular, 
these factors would suggest that while the relative demand for more educated workers has 
steadily increased in line with technological advances, the supply of highly skilled labour has 
not always kept pace with demand. In other words, the rise in the premium associated with 
technical  skills  indicates  a  mismatch  between  the  insufficient  supply  of  education  and 
growing labour market requirements. This hypothesis – which has recently been put forward 
                                                 
1   The latest data available for Italy are for 2006. 
2   Benhabib,  J.  and  Spiegel,  M.  (1994),  “The  Role  of  Human  Capital  in  Economic  Development”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics. 
3   For general surveys of the contribution of human capital and education to economic growth, see Krueger and 
Lindahl (2001) and Wasmer et al. (2006). De la Fuente and Ciccone (2002) review the literature with specific 
reference to Europe. 
4   The  “Mincerian  equation”  (developed  by  Polish-American  economist  Jacob  Mincer)  specifies  a  relationship 
between  an  individual’s  education  and  experience  and  his  or  her  wages.  See  Mincer  (1974),  Schooling, 
experience, and earnings, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Innovative methodological approaches have been employed in the field of labour economics (such as studies 
of twins who followed different education and life paths) to establish causality between education and private 
returns. For an extensive review of the micro evidence, see Card, D. (1999), “The causal effect of education 
on earnings”, Handbook of Labor Economics. 
5  
BIS Review 139/2010 
 3
by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz in respect of the United States6 – would in my view 
also  apply  to  a  number  of  European  economies  where  high-quality  education  is  in  short 
supply. An  analysis of educational wage differentials in selected EU countries reveals that 
Germany and Italy register the highest premium for those with tertiary education, indicating 
high excess demand for highly educated workers (Chart 7). 
Educational attainment in the United States and selected EU countries. Where do we 
stand? 
Chart 8 shows the percentage of the population which in 2008 had completed at least upper 
secondary education (left panel) and tertiary education (right panel). Both panels show the 
educational level of the young generation (aged 25–34) versus older age groups (therefore 
those who were in the young cohort a generation earlier). All countries have experienced an 
overall  improvement  in  the  skill  levels  of  their  population:  on  average  79%  of  euro  area 
citizens aged between 25 and 34 have at least completed upper secondary education; this 
proportion  is  26  percentage  points  higher  than  among  those  aged  between  55  and  64. 
However, there are considerable disparities across countries. For instance, in Spain and Italy 
the percentage of young people with upper secondary education is still below the euro area 
average, and much lower than in Germany and France (which are now at levels close to the 
United States). When looking at tertiary education, the performance of the Italian economy is 
significantly worse.  
In addition, the quality of education is at least as important as the number of years of formal 
schooling.  This  is  usually  measured  by  a  number  of  indicators,  including  pupil-to-  teacher 
ratios,  the  educational  level  of  teachers,  and  students’  performance  in  internationally 
standardised tests. Interestingly, a number of international studies suggest that, with regard 
to explaining the impact of education on growth, the quality of schooling is more important 
than the quantity. Put simply, it is not only the time spent at school that matters; it is what you 
learn,  how  you  learn  it,  and  from  whom.  More  generally,  recent  research  conducted  by 
economists  at  the  ECB  suggests  that  improvements  in  the  quality  of  labour  have  made  a 
substantial positive contribution to labour productivity growth in the euro area. In particular, 
those who have achieved at least degree-level education are, on average, more productive 
than those who have only primary education.7 
Overall,  despite  the  progress  made,  improving  education  –  in  both  quantitative  and 
qualitative terms – remains high on the policy agenda in Europe. In order to give you a sense 
of  the  relative  importance  assigned  to  education  in  advanced  and  emerging  economies, 
Chart 9 illustrates the expenditure in education as a share of total government expenditure. 
Again,  the  Italian  economy’s  bottom  ranking  is  striking  –  especially  in  comparison  with 
emerging economies – and thereby calls for a more decisive effort in this area.  
Finally,  let  me  add  that  today’s  young  people  in  advanced  economies  face  much  tougher 
competition  than  those  three  decades  ago;  in  particular,  competition  for  access  to  top 
international universities appears to have increased. The total number of students in science 
and  engineering  has  been  steadily  increasing since  the  mid-1980s,  and  the  rise has  been 
most rapid over the past decade (Chart 10). Looking at the breakdown between US and non-
US citizens, we can see that in 1985 fewer than 30% of science and engineering students 
came  from  outside  the  United  States,  whereas  in  2008  their  share  was  close  to  40% 
(Chart 11).  A  breakdown  of  doctorate  students  in  the  United  States  by  country  of  origin 
reveals that the share of Chinese and Indian students has increased at an extraordinary rate, 
                                                 
6   Goldin, C. and Katz, L. (2007), The race between education and technology: the evolution of US educational 
wage differentials, 1980 to 2005, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
7   See Schwerdt and Turunen (2007), “Growth in euro area labour quality”, Working Paper Series, No 575, ECB. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2010
from 9% in 1997 to almost 15% in 2007–08 (Chart 12). Over the same period, the proportion 
of students from EU countries remained substantially below the proportion of Chinese and 
Indian students, and has changed only marginally, despite the increasing need in advanced 
economies for highly skilled labour. 
Concluding remarks 
In industrialised countries, the generation now entering the labour market is, for the first time 
since the Second World War, facing worse conditions, on average, than those faced by the 
previous  generation.  And  there  is  a  risk  that  the  situation  will  be  even  worse  for  the 
subsequent generation. If there is not a rapid reversal of this trend, our societies may face 
huge economic and social problems. 
Reversing  the  trend  will  require  decisive  action  at  the  level  of  both  supply  and  demand  of 
education.  Public  debate  has  largely  focused  on  supply,  which  is  certainly  important  and 
assigns responsibility for improving the quality of education to public authorities. But too little 
attention is paid to demand, which is insufficient owing to a lack of awareness of the fact that, 
without an adequate education, an individual’s standard of living not only will not improve, but 
will inevitably decline. Our societies are not sufficiently aware of the fact that those who are 
not adequately prepared to compete for a better education will be denied access. 
Acquiring  human  capital  is  not  just  essential,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  and 
expensive. We are thus faced with the problem of how to prepare the young people of today, 
and  future generations,  for  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead.  In  order  to  resolve  this problem, 
there must be a greater understanding of learning processes. Jean Piaget, the pioneer of the 
constructivist theory of knowledge, explained that learning progresses through the stages of 
sensory  and  motor  skills  and  cognitive  abilities,  before  resulting  in  an  ability  to  assimilate 
formal  instruction.  A  deficiency  at  any  one  stage  can  result  in  problems  in  the  stages 
thereafter.  Without  the  appropriately  developed  cognitive  skills,  even  intensive  academic 
instruction and hours of private tuition do not succeed in making up for the gap accumulated 
in the previous learning stages. A child’s first years are his or her most formative ones. From 
birth, children are filtering stimuli and learning how to interact with their surroundings and the 
people they are in contact with. Parents play a critical role in laying the foundations for their 
child’s  education.  They  are  most  often  a  child’s  first  teachers:  they  pass  on  not  only  the 
fundamentals of education, but also teach the child how to learn. 
However, when educating their children, parents often rely on personal experience. But the 
simple  transmission  of  knowledge  from  parents  to  children  is  no  longer  sufficient.  Piaget 
wrote  that  “indeed,  the  aim  of  intellectual  education  is  not  to  know  how  to  repeat  or  to 
conserve ready-made truths. It is in learning to gain the truth by oneself at the risk of losing 
time  and  of  going  through  all  the  roundabout  ways  that  are  inherent  in  real  activity”.  He 
continued: “Education, for most people, means trying to lead the child to resemble the typical 
adult  of  his  society…but  for  me  and  no  one  else,  education  means  making  creators...You 
have to make inventors, innovators – not conformists”.8 
Parents must receive guidance on how to correctly adapt the education of their children to 
the new needs of society in the future. However, parents are often unwilling to accept outside 
interference.  They  will  not  be  inclined  to  listen  to  anyone  who  tries  to  convince  them  that 
simply reproducing the systems and procedures that they themselves experienced – which, 
as I explained earlier, were probably sufficient in a world that differed from the one we are 
living  in  today,  with  an  excess  demand  for  high-quality  education  –  is  damaging  for  the 
cognitive growth of their children. 
                                                 
8   Piaget, J. (1972), Problèmes de psychologie génétique, Denoël/Gonthier, Paris. 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 5
There  is,  however,  one  exception  to  this.  Personal  experience  tells  me  that  if  there  is 
someone that parents are prepared to listen to, someone in whom they place absolute faith, 
it  is  the  paediatrician.  I  don’t  want  to  go  into  why  this  is,  but  it  is  a  fact,  a  fact  which  you 
paediatricians have to take on board and which gives you considerable responsibility. On the 
other hand, the arguments that I have put forward up to now are well-known to you, as you 
will have experienced them yourselves during your education. The difficulty of gaining access 
to  higher  education,  the  growing  competition  and  the  correlation  between  education  and 
quality of life are not new to you. Whether you like it or not, your role cannot be limited to the 
field  of  medicine  because  your  actions  have  an  impact  on  the  development  of  economic 
systems.  Through  your  scientific  work  and  your  practice,  you  contribute  every  day  to 
extending  life  and  thus to  the  ageing  of  the  population.  The  problem  is  that  our  advanced 
societies  are  not  yet  well-equipped  to  deal  with  these  developments.  Those  who  pay  the 
highest price may well be precisely those children that you help every day, who will not be 
adequately prepared to face the challenges that society has dropped on them. 
What, then, is the function of the paediatrician? My suggestion to you is to take advantage of 
the receptive ears that parents have for you, not only to give them the necessary medical 
advice, but also to help them to be parents in our modern society, a role which is much more 
important – and more difficult – than is often thought. 
I am sure that you are already doing so. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
 
 
 
Chart 1: Average contribution to real per capita GDP growth 
Growth rates, in % 
Source: ECB computation on World Bank, WDI database. 
 6 
  BIS Review 139/2010
Chart 2: Trends in youth population 
Percentage of population aged 14 years and below 
Source: World Bank. 
 Chart 3: Trends in working age population 
Percentage of population aged between 15 and 64 
Source: World Bank. 
  BIS Review 139/2010 
  7
Chart 4: Developments in R&D expenditure 
Public expenditure on R&D as % of GDP 
Source: World Bank. 
Note: For Italy and Brazil the latest available data point is 2006. 
 Chart 5: Human capital and economic growth 
 Sources: Barro-Lee (2010); World Bank, WDI database. 
 8 
 BIS Review 139/2010
Chart 6: Growing wage premium to high skilled labour and wage differential in the US 
Sources: Goldin and Katz (2007). 
Note: “College graduate wage premium” is based on the college / high school wage differential (in logs). “High school graduate 
wage premium” is based on the high school / eighth grade wage differential (in logs). 
  Chart 7: Relative earnings from employment, by level of educational attainment for 25-64 year-olds, 2007 
Source: OECD. 
Note: upper secondary and post-secondary non-tertiary education = 100. Data for Italy refer to 2006 (latest available year) 
  BIS Review 139/2010 
9
Chart 8: Level of education 
Source: OECD. 
 Chart 9: Public spending on education 
Total public spending on education as % of government expenditure 
Source: World Bank. 
 10 
 BIS Review 139/2010
Chart 10: Full-time graduate students in science and engineering in the US (I) 
Source: National Science Foundation. 
Chart 11: Full-time graduate students in science and engineering in the US (II) 
% of total graduates  
Source: National Science Foundation. 
  BIS Review 139/2010 
 11
Chart 12: Countries of origin of non-US citizens earning PhDs at US colleges and universities 
% of total doctorates awarded 
Source: National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago. 
 12 
 BIS Review 139/2010
