 Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 20 October 2010. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  October 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
The  global  economic  recovery  is  entering  a  new  phase.  In  advanced  economies, 
temporary factors supporting growth in 2010, such as the inventory cycle and pent-
up  demand,  have  largely  run  their  course  and  fiscal  stimulus  will  shift  to  fiscal 
consolidation over the projection horizon. 
The  Bank  expects  that  private  demand  in  advanced  economies  will  become 
sufficiently entrenched to sustain the recovery. However, the combination of difficult 
labour market dynamics and ongoing deleveraging in many advanced economies is 
expected to moderate the pace of growth, relative to prior expectations. 
These  factors  will  contribute  to  a  weaker-than-projected  recovery  in  the  United 
States in particular. 
Growth in emerging-market economies is expected to ease to a more sustainable 
pace as fiscal and monetary policies are tightened. Heightened tensions in currency 
markets and related risks associated with global imbalances could result in a more 
protracted and difficult global recovery. 
The  economic  outlook  for  Canada  has  changed.  The  Bank  expects  the  economic 
recovery to be more gradual than it had projected in July, with growth of 3.0 per cent 
in 2010, 2.3 per cent in 2011, and 2.6 per cent in 2012. This more modest growth 
profile  reflects  a  more  gradual  global  recovery  and  a  more  subdued  profile  for 
household spending. 
Overall,  the  composition  of  demand  in  Canada  is  expected  to  shift  away  from 
government  and  household  expenditures  towards  business  investment  and  net 
exports.  The  strength  of  net  exports  will  be  sensitive  to  currency  movements,  the 
expected recovery in productivity growth, and the prospects for external demand. 
Inflation in Canada has been slightly below the Bank’s July projection. The recent 
moderation in core inflation is consistent with the persistence of significant excess 
supply and a deceleration in the growth of unit labour costs. 
The  Bank  judges  that  the  output  gap  is  slightly  larger  and  that  the  economy  will 
return to full capacity by the end of 2012 rather than the beginning of that year, as 
had been anticipated in July. 
The inflation outlook has been revised down and both total CPI and core inflation 
are now expected to converge to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in 
the economy is gradually absorbed and inflation expectations remain well-anchored. 
Important  risks  remain  around  this  outlook.  The  three  main  upside  risks  to  the 
inflation outlook are higher commodity prices, a stronger-than-anticipated recovery 
in the U.S. economy, and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the 
Canadian household sector. 
These  upside  risks  are  balanced  by  three  downside  risks  relating  to  Canada’s 
international competitiveness, global growth prospects, and the possibility of a more 
pronounced correction in the Canadian housing market. These risks are balanced. 
          BIS Review 138/2010 
 1
   On  19  October  2010,  the  Bank  maintained  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  at 
1 per cent.  This  leaves  considerable  monetary  stimulus  in  place,  consistent  with 
achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation  target  in  an  environment  of  significant  excess 
supply in Canada. 
At  this  time  of  transition  in  the  global  recovery,  with  a  weaker  U.S.  outlook, 
constraints  beginning  to  moderate  growth  in  emerging-market  economies,  and 
domestic considerations that are expected to slow consumption and housing activity 
in  Canada,  any  further  reduction  in  monetary  policy  stimulus  would  need  to  be 
carefully considered. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions.  
2 
 BIS Review 138/2010
