Ardian Fullani: Macrofinancial stability in EU candidate countries and 
potential candidate countries – lessons to be learned 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  High-level  Policy 
Workshop on Macro-prudential Policy, Frankfurt am Main, 14 December 2010. 
 Dear colleagues, 
It is a pleasure to discuss with you our experience with the crisis and share some thoughts 
on the relevant lessons for the future. My perspective on this issue will focus on the case of 
Albania;  an  emerging  market  economy  which  imported  the  crisis  through  financial  market 
channels  and  interconnectedness.  The  challenges  posed  to  eastern  European  economies 
and  decision  makers  were  mostly  the  same  in  nature,  while  their  policy  response  differed 
according to economic structures, institutional differences and degrees of freedom enjoyed 
by them. 
Let me briefly preview the three main messages of my speech. 
The  first  one  is  that  there  is  no  conflict  between  price  stability  and  financial  system 
stability in the long run – instead, they do mutually re-enforce each other and the resilience 
of  the  economy  to  external  and  internal  shocks.  From  a  central  bank’s  point  of  view,  a 
corollary to this is that any macro-prudential measure taken to enhance financial stability is 
an  investment  in  medium  and  long  term  price  stability.  I  believe  this  conclusion  is  amply 
borne from Albania’s recent experience. 
My second message is that global or even regional financial markets require global or at 
least regional supervision and crisis resolution mechanisms. Just as problems originating 
on a particular sector of the economy can escalate into general macroeconomic imbalances, 
so financial market imbalances in one financial institution or one country can disrupt other 
financial institutions or countries. Collaboration between home-host supervisors is therefore a 
must, but I would argue that probably more can be done in this regard. 
My  third  message  concerns  the  role  of  anchors  in  the  design  and  implementation  of 
macro-prudential  policies.  Monetary  policy  is  made  credible  from  the  clear  focus  on  a 
transparent measure of price stability (CPI inflation) which in turn increases the accountability 
of  the  central  bank  pursuing  it  and  ultimately  its  operational  flexibility.  Financial  stability  is 
inherently  a  more  difficult  concept,  even  on  a  theoretical  level,  but  I  think  more  should  be 
done to quantify the term and unify its understanding. This would allow for more transparent 
communication and increased public support for the central bank’s action. 
I will now expand on these issues. 
Price stability and macro-prudential measures 
1. 
A panoramic glance at the experience of central and eastern European economies with the 
latest crisis would indicate a broad range of outcomes. While this might look normal at first 
view, it is worth remembering that CEE countries share quite a few commonalities in their 
economic and financial structures. Furthermore, they were hit by the same type of external 
shock,  at  exactly  the  same  time.  One  has  thus  a  fair  approximation  of  a  controlled 
experiment on the role of macroeconomic policies before and during the crisis. 
At  the  risk  of  generalizing  too  much,  I  would  say  that  CEE  economies  shared  broadly  the 
same development model and problems. We benefited from large capital inflows mainly in 
the form of FDI, remittances and cross-border loans. Western European banks penetrated 
our financial system, increasing financial intermediation and facilitating capital inflows. This 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 1
process  resulted  in  fast  credit  and  economic  growth  based  on  a  consumption  lead  model. 
While inflation has been generally under control financial imbalances and vulnerabilities were 
increasing, in the form of rapid growth in real estate prices and balance sheet exposures in 
liquidity and foreign currencies. 
Our  economies  were  hit  by  the  crisis  since  the  first  week  of  October  2008.  The  fear  of 
contagion was enhanced further by a sharp decrease in the market value of the EU banking 
groups  that  operate  in  the  region.  It  affected  negatively  the  public  trust  in  the  system, 
resulting  in  widespread  deposits  withdrawals.  Later,  as  the  financial  crisis  progressed  and 
transformed  into  a  global  economic  recession,  the  effects  extended  to  real  economy  and 
exchange  rate  depreciation.  Most  of  the  countries  in  the  region  faced  a  rapid  liquidity 
shortage  caused  by  the  deposits  run,  lower  remittances  and  FDI  outflows.  The  balance 
sheets across the region suffered from both liquidity problems and exchange rate depreciation. 
This was negatively reflected in consumption and investment, which further deteriorated the 
financial  stability  outlook  with  the  possibility  of  a  balance  sheet  deflation  and  economic 
contraction mutually supporting each other in a vicious spiral. 
The  ability  of  our  economies  to  absorb  these  shocks  was  however  different.  The  natural 
instinct  of  macroeconomic  policies  facing  such  a  contraction  scenario  is  to  engage  in 
countercyclical measures in the form of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies. However, 
the  very  presence  of  financial  stability  concerns  in  the  equation  significantly  changed  the 
equation.  We  can  safely  argue  that  countries which  experienced  the least  macroeconomic 
and financial imbalances were the ones better placed to pursue countercyclical policies and 
in fact the ones which emerged the fastest from the effects of the crisis. 
I believe Albania is such a country: 
 
 
We had no bank failures or public injections of capital; 
We  did  contain  and  reverse  the  confidence  crisis  in  the  financial  system  and  its 
adverse effects. In fact, we did not experience financial disintermediation; 
We did continue to grow, albeit at a slower pace; 
We did manage to keep inflation expectations anchored. 
 
 
Therefore,  I  will  share  with  you  our  thoughts  and  measures  throughout  this  period.  To 
conclude this topic I will briefly summarize my personal lessons from this crisis. 
Before the crisis, Bank of Albania was concerned for the possible financial threats that were 
being  accumulated  during  the  years  of  fast  financial  intermediation.  To  illustrate  the  point: 
most  of  the  credit  growth  went  in  the  non-tradable  sector,  with  services  and  construction 
accounting for most of the expansion. At the same time, more than 70 percent of total credit 
was in foreign currency with EURO making the biggest share of the outstanding stock. 
The tune of that period was the same in the entire region. The overall impression that the 
financial innovations had reduced the risk and the abundant global liquidity created a very 
optimistic picture. Despite some truth in this, the pace at which financial intermediation grew 
annually  was  frenetically  high.  In  particular  there  were  two  main  aspects  of  financial 
intermediation that were particularly troubling in my opinion. First, economic agents created 
financial excesses using mostly the financial system. While meeting their needs, the financial 
system  aligns  and  matches  agents’  positions  according  to  length  of  maturity  and  liquidity. 
This holds true under the assumption that all claims and obligation will be fulfilled in timely 
manner in the same order. Otherwise if they violate this assumption and end up overlapping 
each  other  than  financial  system  might  become  unstable.  Our  concern  was  that  too  many 
gaps were opening to fast and the Albanian economy seemed to experience some sort of 
what  latter  came  to  be  named  as  risk-taking  channel.  Second,  there  appeared  to  be  a 
general mispricing of risks from the banking sector. High concentration in particular sectors 
or  clients  indicated  undue  risk  analysis  or  risk  management  from  banks,  while  lending  to  
2 
 BIS Review 173/2010
un-hedged  borrowers  in  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  seemed  to  be  a  potential  moral 
hazard issue. 
We  addressed  the  first  issue  through  increasing  information  sharing  and  facilitating  the 
dialogue between the monetary policy and the financial stability and supervision of the Bank. 
Normally, the foresight of monetary policy is from the trough to the pick of the business cycle 
because it is mandated with smoothing the fluctuation in economy or prices. However, the 
duration  of  financial  gaps  and  excesses  might  be  very  different  and  usually  much  longer. 
Therefore  monetary  policy  by  design  has  the  potential  to  forget  about  financial  stability; 
therefore  we  were  potentially  missing  important  information  regarding  the  effects  that 
decision making on monetary policy could have on the sustainability of agent’s budgets. That 
is why I believe was important to have guardians of financial stability in the monetary policy 
decision  making  process.  With  this  reasoning  we  have  brought  the  director  of  supervision 
and  the  director  of  financial  stability  in  the  monetary  policy  advisory  committee.  In  this 
respect our monetary policy did not focus only in the discussion of macro effects but also in 
the discussion of the micro effects of decision making. This resulted in policy coordination 
within  the  central  bank.  I  believe  that  this  is  the  first  line  of  defense  that  we  had  in  our 
philosophy. This helped us to strike the correct balance between all policies. 
The  second  issue  was  addressed  through  tightening  macro-prudential  regulations  and 
policies  and  strengthening  the  on-site  supervision  of  banks.  Through  regulatory  and 
supervisory  interventions,  we  aimed  to  improve  the  commercial  bank’s  governance 
and  their  transparency,  to  strengthen  their  risk  assessment  and  risk  mitigation 
strategies, to improve the capital adequacy and liquidity ratios, as well as to reduce 
the exposure to credit risk stemming from un-hedged borrowers in foreign currency or 
predatory practices from commercial banks. 
On the same line, our policy response during the crisis was cautious, prioritizing financial 
stability and the preservation of inflation expectations to outright economic stimulus. By the 
beginning of the first quarter of 2009, financial panic, liquidity problems especially in foreign 
currency, slowdown in EU economic area and the financial stress in the EU banking system 
affected  both  the  real  and  the  financial  sectors  of  Albanian  economy.  Credit  slowed  down 
considerably,  exchange  rate  started  to  depreciate,  and  forecasts  for  economic  growth  and 
inflation were down. In the mean time deposit withdrawals continued and liquidity concerns 
become more prominent.  
Bank of Albania provided ample liquidity in domestic currency in the interbank market while 
tightening  its  supervision  on  banks  and  increasing  the  collaboration  with  their  home 
supervisors.  A  specific  feature  that  needs  to  be  mentioned  is  the  timely  increase  of  the 
deposit insurance scheme. This move marked a turning point in the confidence crisis of the 
public to the banking system and the liquidity problems of the system. 
From  a  narrow  perspective  centered  on  its  main  objective  of  price  stability,  the  focus  of 
monetary policy would be an expansionary action. However, considerations of the external 
balances  of  our  economy,  its  financial  stability  and  the  need  to  anchor  expectations, 
constrained  our  decisions.  I  will  elaborate  briefly  on  these  factors.  Faced  with  contained 
upward pressures in inflation, the central bank focused its attention on determinant factors of 
financial stability. By refraining from pursuing an expansionary monetary policy, the central 
bank did not exacerbate the pressures on the exchange rate which would than put additional 
strain  on  un-hedged  borrowers  and  the  bank’s  balance  sheets.  Furthermore,  interest  rate 
cuts had the potential to affect deposit withdrawals and cause liquidity problems and further 
depreciation. At the time these two were the main concerns to financial stability. 
The  Albanian  economy  did  however  receive  some  macroeconomic  stimulus  in  the  form  of 
fiscal  expansion.  This  countercyclical  policy  was  made  possible  because  of  the  previous 
work done to consolidate the fiscal position and to anchor macroeconomic policies and public 
expectations. Albania approached the crisis with sustainable fiscal position in terms of deficit 
and public debt, creating room for maneuver and fiscal expansion to support economy before 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 3
monetary policy could intervene. Therefore the first lesson from the crisis for authorities 
would be to follow countercyclical policies, which will permit for bolder action in time 
of crisis.  
What are the lessons for the future? I think I already mentioned the first one. The second 
lesson,  which  relates  to  the  price  and  financial  stability,  is  equally  important.  Price  and 
financial  stability  do  not  conflict  each  other  in  the  long  run.  Central  bankers  should 
never  forget  that  fiat  money  on  which  we  base  our  way  of  life  and  prosperity,  is  a  social 
contract,  based  on  the  society’s  trust  that  every  bill  will  be  honored  by  the  creator  of  that 
money,  which  in  most  of  the  cases  is  the  central  bank.  This  trust  is  one  of  the  important 
pillars that guaranty not only the economic system but the entire society. 
In my opinion, even in the short run, the central banks are well equipped to pursue these two 
goals with the instruments at their disposal: main policy rate on refinancing operation; macro-
prudential  policies  on  a  systemic  level;  and,  careful  and  diligent  micro  supervision  of 
commercial banks. Having two goals and at least two instruments should allow for an optimal 
mix  of  policies,  at  least  in  theory.  In  practice,  as  is  indicated  from  our  experience,  central 
banks  should  not  shy  to  lean  against  the  wing  in  order  to  discourage  or  at  least  contain 
financial imbalances. Furthermore, every time we face fundamental economic problems with 
potentially negative systemic implications, we revert to financial stability. I firmly believe that 
the first and most important job for a central bank is to ensure the integrity of money 
and the banking system. 
Joint supervision and crisis response mechanisms 
2. 
Building bridges of continuous communication with local bank managers, home supervisors 
and  headquarters  of  the  mother  institutions  has  proved  to  be  critical  in  dealing  with  the 
problems before they get out of hand. While communication is an advice that is frequently 
used, we made a good use of that beyond mere courtesy. We acknowledged that financial 
development was following a certain pattern. Financial institutions like all other businesses 
adopt marketing strategies and stick to such strategies in all markets. What this means for us 
is that once new product are developed and tested in other markets, they will follow the same 
pattern of marketing in other markets as well. 
In the years that preceded the crisis, financial institutions started the practice of lending in 
exotic  currencies,  offering  very  low  interest  rates  and  being  without  any  economic  relation 
with the borrower activity. Being aware of these developments, from previous communication 
with other central banks in the region, we were alerted to spot the first sign of such behavior 
in  our  economy.  Therefore  at  the  first  signs  of  such  credits,  we  discussed  with  the 
management of our banks and stopped administratively lending in these currencies for all un-
hedged borrowers. 
On a systemic level, I do believe the recent experience highlighted some issues that need to 
be looked more carefully in the future. I will highlight here only three of them. 
 
The policies that facilitated the capital inflows into economies of the region were not 
followed by actions which could have provided the needed liquidity when these flows 
reversed  or  stopped.  Countries  of  the  region  did  not  benefit  from  the  swap 
agreements  or  similar  arrangements  that  would  allow  us  access  to  short  term 
liquidity. One can certainly say that in normal times that could be resolved at group 
level. However, this didn’t necessarily prove to be the case in the recent experience. 
Because our financial systems are inter-connected, I think this issue deserves more 
attention in the future. 
A  crucial  step  in  alleviating  the  financial  crisis  in  CEE  countries  was  the  Vienna 
initiative,  which  stabilized  both  the  balance  sheets  of  the  big  banking  groups 
operating  in  the  region  and  the  trust  of  our  public  in  them.  I  think  such  a  facility 
needs to be permanent, at least in the case of global or European potential financial 
BIS Review 173/2010
 4 
   Financial  regulation  and  regulatory  arbitrage  was  a  serious  issue  before  and 
throughout the crisis. Before the crisis, banking groups would play regulatory regime 
and  policies  against  each  other  and  try  to  reach  some  kind  of  lowest  common 
denominator throughout the region. Countless times we have heard the complaint 
“Why are you not allowing this, your neighbors do!”, and I’m sure others people in 
this  room  have  heard  it  too.  During  the  crisis,  we  experienced  several  cases  of 
countries  trying  to  seek  individual  solutions  to  common  problems.  While  fully 
respecting the idiosyncrasies and different timing priorities of each country, I think 
we would all benefit from a more collegial approach to regulation. 
On  a  national  level,  I  believe  the  stress  should  be  on  supervision  of  Systemically 
Important Financial Institutions, with the right care not to create wrong perceptions 
related with moral hazard. In our region, these institutions are typically banks. In my 
view, these banks should become subject of a more stringent regulatory framework, 
in  terms  of  capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  business  and  risk  profile,  including 
contingency  plans.  The  supervisory  authority  should  always  be  prepared  for  the 
worse and make sure that crisis management procedures are complete and tested. 
In this process, valid recommendations of international organizations will be closely 
followed  for  adequate  implementation  over  time.  It  is  important  to  have  close 
coordination with other public authorities in the country, including government.  
Anchors of macro-prudential policies 
3. 
The role of anchors in monetary policy is well known. I mentioned before that an important 
lesson from the crisis for authorities would be to rigorously pursue countercyclical policies. I 
would like to stop a bit here and focus on this issue. I believe that Albania was prepared for 
the crisis because IMF programs have played an important role as a credible foreign anchor 
for economic policies. The IMF programs and similar EU membership process have played a 
similar  role  in  all  CEE  and  SEE  countries.  However  as  the  countries  have  matured  out  of 
these programs or joined the EU, the political incentives to continue fiscal consolidation have 
been  fading  away.  Current  events  show  that  the  symptoms  have  spread  to  other  older 
members of EU, where such policies become the reason behind instability. 
Therefore  the  role  of  anchors  is  very  important  for  preserving  and  safeguarding  financial 
stability.  Sound,  clear  and  enforceable  fiscal  rule  would  be  an  important  step.  Effective 
supervision based on simple and clear capital adequacy and liquidity rules would be another. 
The  Basel  III  accord  is  a  first  step  in  the  right  direction.  A  unified  approach  and  technical 
toolkit  to  stress-testing  exercises  would  be  also  helpful.  The  joint  stress-test  exercise 
conducted by the ESCB is the right way forward. I would however encourage broadening its 
scope  in  candidate  and  potential  candidate  countries  of  CEE,  in  order  to  have  a  unified 
measurement  system  throughout  Europe.  Lastly,  other  measures  of  financial  imbalances 
such  as  excessive  asset  price  increases,  under-pricing  of  risks,  search  for  yields  and 
increased risk taking need to be better incorporated in the standard models used by central 
banks. 
Conclusion 
In the light of this discussion, a central bank could not avoid the responsibility of engaging to 
protect  financial  stability,  even  though  this  is  not  defined  as  a  particular  mandate.  Our 
experience  as  an  emerging  country  indicates  that  price  and  financial  stability  are 
preconditions  for  each  other.  Our  motto  is  that  any  investment  that  we  make  in  financial 
stability today will return high benefits in price stability in the long run.  
BIS Review 173/2010 
 5
Concurrently,  I  think  our  collective  experience  throughout  the  crisis  showed  that  more  can 
done  in  order  to  develop  and  institutionalize  the  proper  mechanisms  that  would  allow  for 
better FX liquidity management in EE countries. A mechanism such as the Vienna initiative 
that  would  encourage  the  commitment  of  parent  banks  to their  EE  subsidiaries  and  would 
discourage their financial disintermediation in these countries can be made permanent with 
added  benefits  to  all  the  stakeholders.  Furthermore,  regulatory  harmonization  can  be 
improved and regulatory arbitrage can be mitigated. 
On  macro-prudential  policies  I  argued  on  the  need  to  develop  specific  anchors  that  would 
make  more  credible,  transparent  and  therefore  achievable  the  goal  of  financial  stability. 
Measuring financial stability, or instability, might be difficult but that should not discourage us 
from trying. 
Thank you for your attention. 
  
Measures taken in the banking supervision area during the pre-crisis period. 
Box 1 
     6 
 On June 2007, the new Law on Banks in the Republic of Albania entered into force. This Law 
stipulates  rigorous  principles  and  rules  on  the  risk  management,  aiming  at  protecting  the 
depositors, investors and fostering the banking system’s stability. 
On January 2008, the Credit Registry started the operation representing a vital infrastructure-
related development.  
On March 2008, the Bank of Albania adopted a package of regulatory amendments which 
were generally oriented to adopting more conservatory policies in several main directions of 
day-to-day  commercial  banking  running.  In  more  concrete  terms,  this  therapy  can  be 
described: 
 
In compliance with the new Law On Banks in the Republic of Albania, new quantitative 
thresholds  were  set  for  the  calculation,  supervision  and  reporting  of  banks’  large 
exposures to parent banks and related entities.  
In order to better diversify the risk arising from the concentration in banks’ investments in 
the international financial markets, lower thresholds were set for banks’ large exposures.  
Internal  control  is  considered  an  integral  part  of  banks’  governance.  Hence,  special 
emphasis  was  put  in  designing  the  key  principles  for  an  independent,  unbiased  and 
accountable  internal  control.  Internal  control  should  cover  each  section  of  the  bank  in 
order to prevent the origination and development of undesired risks. 
    Accountable  governance  is  a  key  principle,  especially  on  financial  institutions,  whose 
success is, among others, largely dependent on public confidence in them. Accordingly, 
the  Bank  of  Albania  considers  the  quality  of  human  capacities  –  implying  the  hiring  of 
skillful  people  in  the  decision-making  process  and  risk  management  –  as  fundamental. 
The  decision  making  process,  should  always  be  based  on  such  expert  opinions  and 
recommendations. 
  The  transparency  related  to  the  banking  and  financial  products  and  services  provided, 
was also paid special attention. The new legal requirements standardize the manner and 
form of providing information to the clients on the banking products and services banks 
provide. 
  Part  of  this  new  package  was  also  the  standardization  of  the  required  information  that 
banks and branches of foreign banks should disclose, related to the banks’ main activity, 
their  organization  and  management,  their  financial  performance  and  position,  the  risk 
management and the accounting policies. 
BIS Review 173/2010
