Kiyohiko G Nishimura: The importance of developing financial safety 
nets and the role of central banks 
Address  by  Mr  Kiyohiko  G  Nishimura,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  
Annual  Conference  of  the  International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers  (IADI),  Tokyo, 
27 October 2010. 
 Introduction  
I.  
I am greatly honored and particularly delighted to have been invited to address this annual 
conference hosted by the International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI).  
Two years have passed since the global financial crisis triggered by the failure of Lehman 
Brothers. Authorities world-wide have made great efforts to contain the further deepening of 
the  crisis  and  this  process  has  confirmed  the  crucial  importance  of  deposit  insurance  and 
other safety nets. However, at the same time, it has also become clear that there remain a 
number of issues to be addressed, in order to prevent any future crisis of such magnitude.  
As deposit insurance plays a central role in financial safety nets, it is of utmost importance for 
senior officials of deposit insurance organizations and relevant authorities world-wide to have 
the  chance  to  discuss  first-hand  and  intensively  among  themselves  the  future  of  financial 
safety nets. This conference is one such occasion.  
In  my  address  today,  I  will  talk  about  several  issues  which  I  believe  are  key  to  the 
development  of  effective  financial  safety  nets,  and  about  the  role  of  central  banks  in 
maintaining financial stability.  
II.  
Stability of the financial system and financial safety nets  
Current international discussions  
Lively discussions are underway in various international forums as part of the effort to build a 
resilient financial system. The issues under consideration include (i) strengthening financial 
regulation  and  supervision,  (ii)  developing  effective  resolution  regimes,  (iii)  raising  the 
coverage limit of deposit insurance, and (iv) developing financial market infrastructures. All of 
these  discussions  are  aimed,  in  one  way  or  another,  at  preventing  the  failure  of  financial 
institutions and/or at containing financial crises. In this sense, these discussions all contribute 
to the improvement of financial safety nets in a broader sense, as they serve to protect the 
financial system from various kinds of shock. 
Let  me  touch  on  some  recent  developments  on  these  issues.  With  respect  to  financial 
regulation, a  new  framework  for  the  quality  and  quantity  of  bank  capital  was  agreed  on  in 
Basel  last  month.  I  believe  the  new  standards  are  attainable  for  Japanese  banks  through 
efforts  such  as  the  accumulation  of  retained  earnings,  although  the  banks  still  need  to 
improve their profitability as well as strengthen their capital bases.  
One of the main tasks in the international forums hereafter is to deal with the moral hazard 
associated with systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), in other words, the “too 
big  to  fail”  problem.  Specific  measures  to  tackle  this  problem  are  under  discussion  at  the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB) and elsewhere.  
Regarding  deposit  insurance,  temporary  measures  such  as  blanket  deposit  guarantees  or 
raising coverage limits were introduced during the crisis in the United States, Europe, and a 
number  of  Asian  countries.  Some  of  these  measures  have  been  maintained  and  become 
permanent.  
BIS Review 143/2010 
 1
The importance of striking the right balance in developing financial safety nets  
Although the development of financial safety nets is important, a wider and stronger safety 
net is not always the ideal. In order to maintain financial stability in the long run, striking the 
right balance is necessary in a number of areas. Therefore, I would like to talk further about 
some crucial issues in the development of financial safety nets, using “balance” as a keyword. 
Balance between stronger regulation and macroeconomic recovery 
First of all, balance is needed between stronger regulation and macroeconomic stability. The 
global economy has been on a moderate recovery path since the spring of 2009. However, 
balance-sheet  adjustments  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  are  still  underway,  and  many 
advanced economies are facing the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates, as well as 
the need for fiscal consolidation. Under these conditions, it is essential for us to be especially 
wary that the regulatory reforms currently under discussion do not undermine the recovery of 
the global economy as a whole.  
Balance between the development of financial safety nets and moral hazard  
Secondly, balance is needed between development of financial safety nets and limiting moral 
hazard. We obviously need to prevent the failure of financial institutions as much as possible 
and  ensure  sufficient  protection  for  depositors  in  case  a  financial  institution  should  fail. 
However, this should not be at the risk of inducing moral hazard, which could consequently 
destabilize the financial system in the long run.  
As  I  mentioned,  measures  are  being  discussed  to  address  the  moral  hazard  problem 
associated with financial institutions that are regarded as being systemically important or “too 
big to fail”, and therefore, considered to have implicit public support. Tackling the “too big to 
fail” problem also highlights the importance of balance in the context of curbing excess risk-
taking by financial institutions, while ensuring market dynamism and encouraging innovative 
financial activities.  
Having said this, we should consider some crucial points when contemplating measures for 
problems  associated  with  SIFIs.  First  of  all,  if  it  becomes  revealed  to  the  market  that  a 
financial  institution  is  to  be  treated  as  a  SIFI,  this  could  in  fact  induce  moral  hazard.  In 
addition, looking back at the experience of Japan’s financial crisis, whether an institution is 
systemically important or not depends on the condition of the financial system, and also on 
the effectiveness of the existing resolution regime. Furthermore, considering the essence of 
the moral hazard problem, the question of how to deal with SIFIs needs to be contemplated 
from  various  perspectives.  For  example,  we  need  to  take  into  account  perspectives  on 
containing  the  crisis  as  well  as  preventing  it,  and  the  balance  between  regulation  and 
supervision. To be specific, capital surcharges should not be the only measure for dealing 
with SIFIs. There are many, not mutually exclusive, alternatives to capital surcharges, such 
as  liquidity  surcharges,  strengthened  supervision,  and  improvements  in  resolvability.  I 
believe  it  would  be  appropriate  for  each  country  to  choose  the  best  practice  from  such 
measures or their combinations, depending on the environment surrounding its own financial 
system.  
Balance in the size of financial safety nets among jurisdictions; need for global 
coordination  
Thirdly, balance in the size of financial safety nets is needed among jurisdictions. With the 
globalization  of  financial  institutions’  operations,  they  have  become  more  interconnected. 
Likewise, households now have more foreign assets such as foreign currency deposits and 
foreign  bonds.  These  circumstances  indicate  the  increasing  importance  of  having  a  cross-
border perspective when developing financial safety nets.  
2 
 BIS Review 143/2010
For example, regarding deposit insurance, a large-scale deposit shift between countries in 
Europe was observed in the fall of 2008 due to gaps in deposit insurance coverage. Some 
Asian countries raised their coverage limits in order to maintain the competitiveness of their 
banks. These examples demonstrate the importance of global coordination in the designing 
of deposit insurance.  
Another issue revealed in the aftermath of the failure of Lehman Brothers is the need for a 
resolution  regime  that  facilitates  the  orderly  wind-down  of  failing  financial  institutions  in  a 
cross-border  context.  Obviously,  each  country’s  legal  system  depends  substantially  on  its 
particular social framework, and convergence of resolution regimes is not easy. It is also not 
necessarily  appropriate.  However,  it  is  becoming  more  important  for  authorities  to  have  a 
good understanding of their respective resolution regimes and to communicate closely in the 
actual  resolution  process.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  recent  crisis,  the  establishment  of  crisis 
management  groups  among  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  for  internationally 
active financial institutions has been an important step forward in this regard. It is necessary 
for the authorities concerned to continue coordinated work on this issue.  
The role of central banks in maintaining financial stability  
III.  
The  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  has  brought  renewed  attention  to  the  role  of  central 
banks in financial safety nets, which in turn contribute to financial stability. This has led to the 
assignment  of  macro-prudential  roles  and  financial  regulatory  authority  to  central  banks  in 
the United States and Europe.  
In  this  respect,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  had  an  important  role  in  both  micro-  and  macro-
prudential dimensions for maintaining financial stability. From a micro-prudential perspective, 
the Bank conducts on-site examination and off-site monitoring of a wide range of financial 
institutions  including  securities  firms,  and  urges  improvement  in  risk  and  business 
management when necessary. From a macro-prudential perspective, the Bank implements 
appropriate policy measures based on its analysis and assessment of the condition of the 
financial system as a whole by utilizing the information obtained from financial institutions as 
well as from the markets. Measures taken by the Bank from a macro-prudential perspective 
during  the  crisis  include  resumption  of  stock  purchases  held  by  banks,  and  provision  of 
subordinated loans.  
In  this  way,  the  Bank  of  Japan  plays  a  critical  role  in  maintaining  the  stability  of  Japan’s 
financial  system.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  make  every  effort,  in  both  micro-  and  macro-
prudential dimensions, to ensure and maintain this financial stability.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 143/2010 
 3
