Jürgen Stark: The new normal 
Intervention  by  Mr  Jürgen  Stark,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the 13th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2010. 
 6. 
7. 
In  my  contribution  I  will  discuss  the  question  of  “What  is  the  new  normal”,  a  question, 
which in light of the latest events, may strike many of you as far-fetched. But it is not, since 
the  day-to-day  management  of  the  current  sovereign  debt  crisis,  too,  requires  a  sense  of 
direction.  
The  question  is  certainly  a  difficult  one.  To  be  sure,  crisis  times  are  times  of  rapid  and 
unpredictable  changes.  In  this  sense  crisis  times  are  transitory,  leading  from  one  “stable” 
situation to a new one. But can we really say that pre-August 2007 was normal? 
Let me recall the key characteristics of that time: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Strong growth of the world economy of around 5% per year;  
strongly increasing foreign exchange reserve accumulation; 
large and persisting current account deficits, e.g. in the US; 
strong and persisting house price appreciation in large parts of advanced countries; 
extremely  muted  volatility  in  real  economic  activity,  essentially  all  variables  were 
trending up; 
large and persisting profits of financial sector entities; implied probabilities of default 
of large banks were negligible;  
measures  of  relative  credit  risk  at  historically  low  levels:  yield  compression 
phenomenon; 
almost no liquidity risk priced into financial contracts. 
8. 
If  you  were  a  policy  maker,  would  you  take  this  characterisation  as  a  benchmark  for  the 
design of post-crisis policies and frameworks? 
As the answer is obvious, the pertinent question is rather: What should be expected to be the 
“new normal”?  
What  can  be  said  with  some  certainty  is  that  in  the  “new  normal”  financial  markets  will 
function more smoothly than today and economic growth will in general be on a sustainable 
path, reflecting the growth potential of the respective economy. But a number of elements will 
have  changed  due  to  experiences  made  during  the  crisis  and  the  policy  responses  which 
followed. Specifically, I would expect  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
What does this imply in concrete terms? In my view, 
1. 
2. 
3. 
unsustainable deficit paths to continue no longer; 
business models in financial markets to come under far closer scrutiny; 
the valuation of liquidity to increase permanently;  
new regulation to render financial intermediation more secure, but also more costly. 
Pre-crisis growth paths are unlikely to be reached again. 
Risk premia will stay elevated, relative to pre-crisis levels. 
More market players in financial markets will exit as their business models will have 
become unsustainable. 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 1
4. 
5. 
6. 
We are likely to experience more volatility in macroeconomic variables than in the 
pre-crisis period. 
Central banks are likely to show a stronger tendency of “leaning against the wind” if 
unsustainable asset price developments emerge. 
Macro-prudential  risks  will  be  monitored  more  closely,  as  exemplified  by  the 
establishment of the ESRB. 
ECB Mandate 
The mandate of the ECB to deliver price stability is clear and will remain unchanged. It is 
anchored in the Maastricht Treaty. I am glad that we have this single mandate instead of a 
dual  mandate  or  even  more  objectives.  Mandates  with  several  goals  may  overburden 
monetary policy, given that a central bank has only one instrument: the short-term interest 
rate. Following Tinbergen and Theil, it has been recognised that a central bank endowed with 
one policy instrument can only pursue one independent goal. 
The unambiguous mandate to deliver price stability is the most prominent element of a set of 
interrelated principles of sound monetary policy. 
Further important and widely accepted principles for the conduct of sound monetary policy 
are: 
Credible commitment to the mandate of price stability 
1. 
This principle is the basis for securely anchoring longer-term inflation expectations consistent 
with  price  stability.  To  achieve  it,  the  central  bank  must  always  stand  ready  –  and  be 
perceived as standing ready – to take all necessary actions to deliver on its mandate. The 
credibility  of  this  commitment  requires  the  central  bank  to  operate  under  the  appropriate 
institutional  set-up,  most  importantly  political  independence,  and  that  it  develops  a  track 
record which signals its willingness and capacity to deliver price stability. 
Independence from political influence 
2. 
The  importance  of  this  principle  has  been  established  in  a  large  body  of  theoretical  and 
empirical literature. It is laid down in the Maastricht Treaty and has proven elementary during 
the  crisis.  Central  bank  independence  is  also  fully  borne  out  by  the  strict  prohibition  of 
monetary financing. 
Medium-term orientation 
3. 
The medium term orientation is based on the well-established fact that long and variable lags 
characterise the transmission of monetary policy decisions. Monetary policy cannot be used 
to  dampen  short-term  effects  on  price  developments,  and  it  should  avoid  fine  tuning  of 
demand conditions. 
Transparency and accountability 
4. 
Transparency and accountability strengthen the credibility of the central bank’s commitment 
to price stability, by ensuring that the public understands that the motivation behind monetary 
policy decisions is the pursuit of price stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2010
Comprehensive analytical framework 
5. 
Monetary policy decisions must be underpinned by a comprehensive analytical framework, 
which ensures that all relevant and available information support timely and efficient decision 
making in the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  ECB’s  two  pillar  strategy  provides  such  a  framework.  It  combines  the  results  of  the 
economic  analysis  with  those  of  the  monetary  analysis.  The  experience  from  the  financial 
crisis has demonstrated very clearly that it is not sufficient for the conduct of sound monetary 
policy to study short-term cyclical developments in the real economy. Rather, the monetary 
analysis helps to identify longer term risks to price stability and supports thus the medium 
term orientation of monetary policy. Monetary analysis can also signal financial imbalances 
and vulnerabilities. It is an important input in any strategy of “leaning against the wind”, as 
mentioned above. 
Separation principle  
6. 
Generally, a clear distinction must be maintained between the determination of the monetary 
policy stance and the provision of liquidity to the market. This “separation principle” ensures 
that the conduct of liquidity provision is not interpreted by market participants as signalling 
the future course of monetary policy.  
Technically this means that the EONIA is kept very close to the main policy rate in normal 
times.  Through  the  adoption  of  fixed-rate  full  allotment  in  the  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  the  EONIA  has  been  deviating  from  the  main  refinancing  rate  and  has  been 
closer to the deposit rate. With a normalisation in financial markets the demand for excess 
liquidity  is  dropping,  so  that  the  withdrawal  of  non-standard  measures  can  proceed.  As  a 
result the EONIA will ultimately return to levels around the main refinancing rate. Hence, the 
separation principle will be fully re-established. 
The monetary policy of the ECB is firmly grounded in this set of principles. They are partly 
embedded  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  (in  terms  of:  single  mandate,  political  independence, 
prohibition of monetary financing) and in our operational framework. 
Also in a “new normal” environment we will continue to do everything to deliver what we have 
delivered so far which is, according to our mandate, price stability over the medium term. 
Where does the ECB stand in terms of phasing out non-standard measures?  
Using its broad operational framework, the Eurosystem in a context of a severely impaired 
interbank  market  was  capable  to  alleviate  banks’  concerns  about  access  to  liquidity  and 
thereby  to  support  the  flow  of  credit  to  households  and  corporations  and  ensure  the 
maintenance of price stability. 
All our non-standard measures – enhanced credit support and Securities Market Programme – 
were exceptional responses to extraordinary circumstances and as such temporary in nature. 
Specifically, all measures taken during the period of acute financial market tensions are fully 
in line with our mandate. 
 
 
Overall, our non-standard measures have proved effective. 
This  contradicts  academic  literature  on  the  “irrelevance  of  monetary  policy 
operations”. 
However: These measures represent strong medicine. 
We therefore need to constantly assess whether or not it is still warranted. 
The ECB has a strategy in place to phase out the liquidity support measures.  
The  process  of  phasing  out  started  in  December  2009:  We  suspended  liquidity 
provision  at  maturities  of  6-month  and  1-year;  the  covered  bond  purchase 
 BIS Review 152/2010 
 3
 By now the following liquidity support measures have remained in place: unlimited 
liquidity provision in our refinancing operations at a fixed interest rate and the SMP. 
 How will the phasing out process proceed? 
Our  decisions  will  be  guided  by  gradualism  and  steadiness  and  will  be  consistent  with 
improvements in financial market conditions and real activity. 
In my view, conditions in both money and financial markets have improved significantly over 
recent months, notwithstanding the most recent tensions in some segments of the European 
sovereign debt market. 
 
Since summer, the amount of liquidity demanded in ECB refinancing operations has 
declined by about one third (not taking into account the CBPP: from EUR 881 bn on 
30  June  this  year  to  EUR  510  bn  today).  As  a  consequence,  excess  liquidity  has 
dropped by about 60% (from EUR 220 bn on 30 June to EUR 87 bn). This process 
has been driven by receding demand on the part of financial market participants.  
Furthermore, we have experienced a re-activation of the interbank money market: 
The  EONIA  volume  has  nearly  doubled  since  summer  (from  EUR  26.3  bn  on 
30 June to EUR 45.7 bn yesterday).  
I would take this development as a positive sign that banks trust each other more. 
 
Nevertheless,  the  question  remains  whether  there  is  something  that  has  changed  in 
interbank money markets which would lead to lower activity at present and in the future – 
temporarily or permanently. Furthermore, to what extent does the fixed-rate full allotment and 
the narrower corridor dampen market activity?  
The phasing out of our liquidity support measures will continue after the end of the current 
quarter. What will this phasing out lead us to?  
An important lesson is that the operational framework and the principles underlying its design 
have served the ECB well both before and during the crisis.  
The  principles  are:  operational  efficiency,  a  strong  market  orientation,  simplicity  and 
transparency and equal treatment of counterparties.  
The post-crisis operational framework needs to be designed in a way that creates the proper 
incentives for the banking community to assume its responsibilities and take the appropriate 
decisions  in  a  timely  manner  to  shape  a  healthy  banking  sector  at  the  service  of  the  real 
economy. 
Yet, some future changes may be envisaged due to the “new normal” world. One example 
may  be  the  impact  of  the  new  liquidity  regulation.  We  will  carefully  monitor  and  adapt  the 
framework, in line with the principles, if need arises.  
Let me sum up. 
1. 
We  seem  to  be  in  the  process  of  “normalisation”  in  the  sense  that  we  move  to  a 
more stable situation. However, the crisis is not over yet and the situation in some 
financial market segments remains challenging. 
The  “new  normal”  will  be  different,  but  still  difficult  to  characterise.  The  crisis  will 
have  changed  the  economic  and  financial  environment  a  lot.  Which  of  these 
changes will be temporary, which ones more permanent?  
– 
– 
Most likely we will see lower but more sustainable growth paths. 
I would expect risks to be priced more appropriately. 
2. 
4 
 BIS Review 152/2010
 As  exemplified  by  the  recent  agreement  on  Basel  III  at  the  G20  level, 
regulation and supervision will be strengthened. 
The lessons to be learned in central banking are that principles of sound monetary 
policy need to be safeguarded: a clear mandate, a medium-term and broad-based 
monetary policy strategy, taking into account information on money and credit, and 
independence from political influence.  
Finally I would note that non-standard measures were the exceptional response to 
exceptional circumstances. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 5
