Caleb M Fundanga: The importance of multi-cultural awareness and 
language learning 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the signing 
ceremony  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  the 
Chinese International School in Zambia, Lusaka, 22 December 2010. 
 The Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China to Zambia, H.E Mr. Li Qiangmin 
The Chairperson – Chinese International School in Zambia, Mr Li Tie 
The Deputy Governor Administration – Dr Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula 
The Deputy Governor Operations – Dr Austin Mwape 
The Principal – Chinese International School in Zambia, Mr. Tan Haitao 
Distinguished Teachers from the Chinese International School in Zambia 
Colleagues from the Bank 
Members of the Press 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  gives  me  great  delight,  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  to  welcome  you  all  to  this 
important signing ceremony of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Bank 
of Zambia and the Chinese International School in Zambia. The MoU that we are about to 
sign today provides a framework for the provision of Chinese language lessons to members 
of staff at the Bank of Zambia. 
Your  Excellency,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  attaches  great  importance  to  the  need  for  staff  to 
learn  other  international  languages.  In  the  process  of  both  economic  globalization  and 
diversity  of  culture,  language  has  become  more  and  more  important.  Multilingualism  is 
important in our world today not only in terms of communicating and advancing in the global 
economy, but also in order to understand other cultures. It is important because we need to 
know  more  about  other  nations’  cultures  and  history  to  improve  world  relations.  In  this 
regard,  in  October  2004,  the  Bank  entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  Embassy  of  the 
Republic of France for the provision of French lessons to members of staff. To date several 
members of staff have benefited from this programme and can comfortably speak, write and 
understand the French language. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  importance  of  China  on  the  world  economy  cannot  be 
overemphasized.  With  the  sustainable  development  of  the  Chinese  economy  and  the 
increasing promotion of the status of China in the world, particularly the China’s access to 
the World Trade Organization, the successful hosting of the 2008 Olympics in Beijing and the 
World Expo 2010 in Shanghai, it is imperative to understand the Chinese language owing to 
its important role in business and trading. There is therefore a need for people to understand 
Chinese culture, economy, politics, and the lives of 1.3 billion Chinese people. 
Furthermore,  the  rapid  growth  of  the  Chinese  economy  has  entailed  greater  demand  for 
primary  commodities  like  copper.  Coupled  with  this,  the  demand  for  manufactured  goods 
from China has increased in a number of countries including Zambia. The level of Chinese 
investment  pouring  into  the  country  has  also  significantly  increased  while  the  Chinese 
community  in  the  country  has  continued  to  grow  following  the  rising  number  of  Chinese 
investments  in  Zambia.  The  level  of  interactions  between  Zambian  businesses  and  those 
from China has therefore significantly increased. 
However, the obvious and notable obstacle to the smooth conduct of business transactions 
and  interactions  between  the  people  of  our  two  countries  has  been  the  language  barrier. 
Many a time, communication between our people has been through the use of interpreters. 
BIS Review 175/2010 
 1
Reliance on interpreters can be very inconveniencing, ineffective and costly. This barrier can 
be overcome by learning the Chinese language. 
It is against this background that the Bank has taken keen interest in launching this MoU. 
The principal objectives of the MoU are to:  
a) 
establish  a  framework  in  which  the  Chinese  International  School  can  facilitate 
capacity building in learning the Chinese language among BOZ employees;  
promote  multi-cultural  awareness  and  appreciation  of  a  diversity  of  languages 
necessary  for  Bank  staff  to  transact  effectively  and  efficiently  in  social  and 
professional fora which require the usage of Chinese; and  
enhance opportunities for bi-and or multilateral co-operation between the Bank and 
relevant Chinese-speaking authorities and stakeholders. 
b) 
c) 
It is therefore our hope that the MOU we are signing today will assist in not only fostering 
stronger  trade  relationships  between  Zambia  and  China  but  to  also  avail  our  staff  a  multi 
cultural awareness which would assist them both in their official work and in developing their 
social networks. We also hope that staff will have opportunities for higher education in China 
and other South East Asian countries where the Chinese language is spoken. Allow me to 
mention here that, already three bank employees are currently pursuing Phd programmes in 
China under the Chinese Government scholarship programme. With the introduction of this 
initiative, it is my hope that more of our staff can be offered scholarships to study in China. 
In conclusion, let me appeal to the members of staff who will be enrolled on the programme 
to take the course seriously bearing in mind the resources that the bank is investing into this 
undertaking. To this effect I urge the human resources department to enrol employees who 
are committed to learning the language. I also wish to thank the Chinese International School 
in Zambia for accepting our proposal and we look forward to a further cooperation with other 
Chinese institutions in order to foster the relations of our two countries. 
Lastly, I want to thank you, Your Excellency, for finding time to witness this great occasion. 
I thank you all for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 175/2010
