Subir Gokarn: The price of protein 
Inaugural address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a 
special conference in honour of Dr Kirit Parikh at the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development 
Research (IGIDR), Mumbai, 26 October 2010. 
 Assistance provided by Balbir Kaur, Praggya Das, Abhiman Das, Nishita Raje, Muneesh Kapur, Rekha Misra and 
Deepa  Raj  is  gratefully  acknowledged.  This  address  draws  upon  the  ongoing  research  project  in  the  Reserve 
Bank on structural drivers of food inflation in India. 
Introduction  
It is a great pleasure for me to be speaking at this seminar to celebrate the 75th birthday of 
Prof.  Kirit  Parikh.  During  the  time  that  I  spent  at  IGIDR  under  his  leadership,  I  had  the 
opportunity to work on a number of issues, on all of which I received enormous support and 
encouragement from him, which has continued even after first I and then he moved on to 
other institutions. My years at IGIDR provided me firm foundations in individual and collective 
research  as  well  as  teaching  and  dissemination,  which  have  served  me  very  well  in  the 
activities I have been involved in since then. I would like to thank him for his role as a mentor 
and  belatedly  wish  him  a  happy  75th  birthday.  I  am  glad  that  in  my  current  position  I  can 
contribute to shaping IGIDR’s strategies for the future.  
If I was asked to describe Prof. Parikh’s approach to research in one sentence, it would be: 
“Focus on the details, never losing sight of the big picture”. The balance between micro and 
macro,  between  individual  drivers  and  aggregate  outcomes,  was  visible  in  a  lot  of  the 
research that was carried out at the institute during my time here and it is an approach that I 
have  found  most  useful  in  applied  research.  Since  I  joined  the  Reserve  Bank,  several 
colleagues and  I  have been  trying to  understand  the  dynamics  of  food  prices,  which  have 
been a major driver of domestic inflation over the past few years. I thought that this seminar 
would be an entirely appropriate occasion to present some of our analysis of the micro-level 
price  dynamics  of  specific  food  items,  based  on  demand-supply  fundamentals  and  then 
relate this analysis to two very significant “big picture” issues.  
The context 
When  we  break  down  recent  food  inflation  into  contributions  by  different  items,  a  striking 
feature is the role played by key sources of protein. The dominant source of protein in Indian 
diets is pulses, which of course vary quite significantly across regions and, to some extent, 
between income groups. Milk and milk products also figure quite prominently and then we 
have  Eggs,  Meat  and  Fish.  Analysis  of  dietary  patterns  in  terms  of  income  elasticities 
suggest  that  as  incomes  increase,  the  share  of  proteins  in  representative  diets  also 
increases. In other words, as levels of affluence increase, the demand for proteins is bound 
to  increase  overall;  the  form  in  which  they  are  consumed  will,  of  course,  differ  based  on 
geography and socio-cultural factors. In recent years, the shifts in the income distribution and 
their  impact  on  the  demand  for  a  whole  range  of  products  –  two-wheelers,  automobiles, 
consumer durables, mobile phones and so on – has been extensively analyzed, which in turn 
has provided significant inputs into business strategy. When it comes to proteins, apart from 
business  strategy,  the  impact  of  income  growth  and  distribution  has  significant  policy 
implications as well, which is what I mean by “big picture” issues and which I shall come to 
later in the presentation.  
BIS Review 143/2010 
 1
Price dynamics  
The recent transition in the Wholesale Price Index from the 1993–94 base to the 2004–05 
base  highlighted  the  impact  that  a  changed  production/consumption  basket  can  have  on 
measured  inflation.  Specifically,  food  inflation as  measured  by  the  new  index  is  noticeably 
higher than that measured by the old one. The primary reason for this is that the items that I 
have been talking about – alternative protein sources – along with some others, have higher 
weights  in  the  new  index,  which,  of  course,  suggests  that  the  price  of  proteins  has  been 
increasing relatively faster than other food items. Slides 1 and 2 display the relative rates of 
increase.  
From Slide 1, it appears that the price levels of Pulses began accelerating in 2005 and have 
continued to do so since then. There is a sustained divergence between the Pulses index 
and the overall Food index, which suggests a structural change in relative prices. Of course, 
there is a wide variety of pulses consumed across the country, with strong regional patterns. 
But, even at an aggregate level, Pulses are clearly becoming more and more expensive and, 
contrary  to  widespread  perceptions,  this  does  not  appear  to  have  much  to  do  with  the 
performance of the monsoons. Milk and Eggs, Meat and Fish also show a distinct upturn in 
price levels, though this is of somewhat more recent origin than for Pulses.  
Slide 1 
Prices of proteins 
 Slide 2 displays the inflation rates for these three sets of food items. The pattern for Pulses 
appears to conform to perceptions about sensitivity to monsoons. At least in the most recent 
months, the inflation rate for pulses has dropped significantly – in fact, below the overall rate 
of food inflation. However, the inflation rates for the other two items continue to be above the 
overall food inflation rate. The rate for Eggs, Meat and Fish has dropped a bit, but the rate for 
Milk appears to have its own dynamic.  
2 
 BIS Review 143/2010
Slide 2 
Inflation rates of proteins 
Of course, this is not sufficient to draw any inferences about the structural nature of protein 
price  inflation.  Slide  3  presents  the  results  of  the  decomposition  of  the  three  price  level 
series. The red lines capture the structural components and the picture is unmistakable; the 
prices of all three protein sources are on a strong upward trajectory, which, is occasionally 
offset by favourable cyclical factors, particularly in the case of Pulses, given the direct impact 
of monsoon performance on Pulse production.  
 Slide 3 
Structural components 
BIS Review 143/2010 
  3
 Demand drivers  
The 61st
Round (2004–05) of the National Sample Survey is the most recent large sample 
data available for consumer expenditure. Though dated, it provides a basis for analyzing the 
relationship between household affluence and expenditure on various items. In the course of 
this project, we have estimated price and income elasticities for a variety of food products, 
including  the  three  categories  on  which  this  presentation  is  focused,  at  several  levels  of 
disaggregation  –  by  item,  by  state  and  by  income  fractile.  The  results  will  eventually  be 
published in a detailed report, but given the occasion and time constraints, I would just like to 
convey a sense of what we are attempting to do. Essentially, it is the analysis of inflection 
points:  what  is  the  threshold  level  of  income  (or,  in  this  case,  household  expenditure)  at 
which the composition of the diet changes significantly. A national aggregate is not a very 
precise  way  of  doing  this,  given  the  enormous  variations  in  factors  that  drive  consumer 
behavior across the country, but it serves to illustrate the approach.  
Slide 4 presents the relationship between Monthly Per Capita Expenditure (MPCE), which is 
of  course  a  proxy  for  household  affluence  and  the  level  of  spending  on  the  three  protein 
sources that we are discussing. Interestingly, the expenditure on Milk and Milk Products is 
higher than that on Pulses in all expenditure fractiles of the urban population, while it begins 
to dominate Pulses at a fairly low fractile in the rural population. Eggs, Meat and Fish also 
begin  to  dominate  Pulses,  though  at  somewhat  higher  income  fractiles  in  both  rural  and 
urban populations.  
Slide 4 
Consumption of proteins 
Source: Level and Pattern of Consumer Expenditure 2004–05, NSS Report No.508. 
 But, to focus on the main point that this analysis seeks to make, it is the points of inflection 
visible  on  the  graphs  that  are  most  relevant.  I  would  like  to  present  a  simple  simulation 
exercise to illustrate the use of this information for making aggregate projections of demand 
for these items. Slide 5 presents a summary of the exercise. Let us assume that the point of 
inflection on the graph reflects the expenditure level (in 2004–05 prices) at which diets shift 
decisively  towards  higher  consumption  of  proteins.  Between  2004–05  and  2009–10,  per 
capita incomes grew by about 39 per cent. With this growth, how many people are likely to 
have reached this threshold by 2010? Assuming that the distribution itself remains constant, 
the  simulation  reveals  that  about  220  million  –  180  million  in  rural  areas  and  40  million  in 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2010
urban areas – people would have reached the threshold level of MPCE over this five-year 
period. In addition to this, people who were already above the threshold in 2004–05 would, 
as a result of rising incomes, presumably also increase their consumption of these items.  
Slide 5 
A simulation exercise 
 At the aggregate level, this analysis presents a dramatic picture of how increasing affluence 
is  impacting  the  spending  on  protein  sources.  This  pattern  is  in  complete  conformity  with 
global historical precedents, a point to which I shall return in the discussion of “big picture” 
issues.  This  is  exactly  the  kind  of  dynamic  that  has  been  seen  in  the  Indian  economy  for 
products  like  two-wheelers,  automobiles,  various  consumer  durables  and  a  host  of  others. 
But,  unlike  in  food  items,  the  massive  expansion  of  demand  for  these  products  was  not 
accompanied  by  a  sharp  surge  in  prices.  The  obvious  reason  for  this  was  that  the  supply 
response in these markets was strong enough to keep pace with demand. A combination of 
large new capacities, free trade and scale economies and technological progress has helped 
to  increase  supply  even  while  costs  have  fallen.  Unfortunately,  the  same  powerful  supply 
response is yet to manifest itself as far as proteins are concerned.  
Supply conditions  
Let  us  take  a  brief  look  at  the  supply  scenario  in  each  of  these  protein  sources.  Slide  6 
displays the per capita availability of Pulses as a whole and separately for Tur (Arhar). This is 
a  story  of  long-term  decline  in  availability,  in  which  production  has  not  been  able  to  keep 
pace  with  population  growth,  let  alone  increasing  affluence  and,  consequently,  greater 
demand  for  both  Pulses  as  a  whole  and  Tur  in  particular.  Heavy  rain  dependence,  small 
holdings  and  weak  rural  infrastructure  seem  to  be  preventing  any  break-through  surges  in 
productivity  in  the  way  that  massive  increases  in  cereal  production  was  achieved.  Slide  7 
shows  just  how  volatile  the  supply  situation  in  Pulses  is.  As  regards  production  and  yield, 
there  is  a  reassuring  trend  towards  stable  growth  during  the  past  couple  of  years  at  the 
aggregate level. However, the disaggregated picture shows that individual Pulses are subject 
to relatively high production volatility, which given the relatively low degree of substitutability 
that  is  visible  in  Pulse  consumption,  inevitably  contributes  to  price  volatility.  Overall,  if  the 
very recent trend in aggregate production is sustained, supply constraints will ease. Going by 
the  past  record,  however,  there  do  not  appear  to  have  been  persistent  phases  of  output 
growth, which indicates the difficulty of achieving a break-through.  
BIS Review 143/2010 
 5
Slide 6 
Stagnation in pulses 
Source: Ministry of Agriculture. 
Slide 7 
Production, yields and growth 
  One  option  is  to  import  Pulses.  Since  very  few  other  countries  produce  and  consume 
significant  quantities  of this  item  (and  certainly,  Tur  is  virtually  unique  to  India),  this  would 
have to be in the form of contract farming arrangements. While this may be feasible in terms 
of  actual  production,  transportation  costs  are  likely  to  neutralize  any  benefits  from  such 
arrangements as a way of meeting demand while keeping prices in check.  
Slide 8 displays the supply scenario for Milk. In terms of per capita availability, it is clearly a 
far more reassuring trend than for Pulses. This indicator of supply has been rising steadily, 
reflecting the many organizational and logistic innovations that were effectively implemented 
in  this  sector.  However,  two  factors  need  to  be  taken  into  consideration  here.  One,  the 
second graph on the slide indicates that the growth rate of Milk production is declining and 
volatile.  Two,  returning  to  the  demand  perspective,  Milk  is  the  most  significant  source  of 
protein  in  expenditure  terms  for  most  households.  Since  it  is  directly  related  to  the  age 
6 
 BIS Review 143/2010
composition of households, the preponderance of growing children and young adults is likely 
to  boost  demand  for  milk,  all  other  factors  remaining  equal.  With  a  sustained  increase  in 
demand, slowing growth and volatile production will clearly have an impact on prices.  
Slide 8 
Milk production and per capita availability 
Source: Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India. 
Slide 9 provides one explanation for why the Milk supply situation may be turning adverse. 
Oil cake is a significant component of cattle feed and its price clearly has an impact on the 
cost of production of Milk. With oil cake prices trending up quite significantly over the past 
few years, changes in the feed mix may be resulting in lower yields, contributing to supply-
demand imbalances and price pressures.  
 Slide 9 
Rising input costs 
The  picture  for  Eggs,  Meat  and  Fish  is  generally  similar  to  that  of  Milk.  For  illustrative 
purposes, Slide 10 displays the per capita availability and growth rates for Egg production. 
While production and availability have been increasing, the growth rate shows relatively high 
volatility, raising the prospect of price surges in the face of steadily increasing demand. Of 
course, given the significance of the informal sector in the production and distribution of all 
 BIS Review 143/2010 
 7
these  items,  production  data  might  reasonably  be  considered  a  bit  suspect.  However,  the 
bottom line is that the price dynamics of this category of proteins are entirely consistent with 
an emerging structural imbalance between demand and supply.  
Slide 10 
Production and per capita availability of eggs 
Source: Annual Report, 2008–09 of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Government of India. 
 Big picture issues  
So far, I have been dealing with the microeconomics of protein prices – the interplay between 
demand and supply for individual food items. I will conclude this presentation by exploring 
the linkages between the micro and the macro with reference to two important issues.  
The first is the significance of these individual price dynamics to a basic concern of central 
banking. From a  monetary policy perspective, the  conventional view of food prices, is that 
surges  are  temporary,  driven  by  supply  disruptions  that  at  worst  last  one  season.  As 
conditions  return  to  normal,  as  they  usually  do,  the  price  surges  are  expected  to  recede. 
Transmission  lags  in  monetary  policy  are  generally  seen  to  be  longer  than  the  typical 
agricultural season, so, if monetary instruments are used to deal with such price shocks, they 
have  no  impact  on  the  immediate  cause  of  the  problem,  while  possibly  doing  damage  to 
growth  prospects  down  the  road.  However,  if  the  economy  is  at  or  close  to  full  capacity 
utilization, even a temporary price shock can aggravate inflationary expectations, which may 
justify a monetary response even though the shock is temporary and will die out before the 
actions  take  effect.  But,  when  we  begin  to  consider  the  impact  of  structural  food  price 
shocks,  such  as  the  ones  we  appear  to  be  experiencing  in  the  Indian  context,  the  policy 
implications become complex.  
Do we treat these developments as a change in relative prices, with consumers substituting 
away  from  the  increasingly  expensive  food  items,  with  no  particular  macroeconomic 
significance  and,  therefore,  no  implications  for  policy?  Or,  do  we  see  them  as  a  threat  to 
overall price stability because there are really no substitutes for protein and increasing prices 
of its sources will immediately translate into higher wages and, through them, to generalized 
inflationary pressures, which certainly warrant a policy response? Persistent price increases 
in commodities for which there are no effective substitutes will, other things remaining equal, 
raise  the  potential  rate  of  inflation  over  a  period  of  time.  This  means  that  either  actual 
inflation or interest rates will be higher than they would be in the absence of such increases.  
8 
 BIS Review 143/2010
The second big picture issue relates to the welfare implications of high protein prices. We are 
used to thinking about economic development as a process of transformation, which can be 
measured  in  terms  of  some  universal  indicators:  the  share  of  agriculture  in  GDP,  for 
example,  or  the  degree  of  urbanization,  all  of  which  provide  the  foundations  for  greater 
affluence.  But,  there  is  also  a  strong  nutritional  dimension  to  development.  Beyond  basic 
food  security,  which  may  be  provided  even  by  a  carbohydrate-dominated  diet,  economic 
development  is  closely  associated  with  the  increasing  significance  of  protein  in  people’s 
diets, which in turn is driven by the decreasing relative prices of protein sources. India has 
certainly  experienced  phases  when  this  has  taken  place  –  for  example  the  surge  in  Milk 
production  that  was  termed  the  White  Revolution  –  but  the  analysis  presented  above 
suggests that these trends have not been sustained. Rapid economic growth is contributing 
to  the  emergence  of  persistent  demand-supply  imbalances  which,  in  turn,  are  making 
proteins  more  expensive.  In  the  absence  of  a  significant  positive  supply  shock,  this  might 
result in the weakening of the economy’s most productive resource – its people.  
Concluding comments  
Increasing demand for proteins appears to be an inevitable consequence of rising affluence. 
The  availability  and  affordability  of  proteins  is,  therefore,  an  important  indicator  of  an 
equitable and sustainable development process, with implications for both nutritional balance 
and macroeconomic stability. To help achieve both objectives, a powerful supply response in 
all  sources  of  protein  is  needed.  The  Green  Revolution  succeeded  in  doing  this  for 
carbohydrates.  The  White  Revolution  succeeded,  at  least  for  a  while,  in  doing  it  for  Milk. 
Similar  combinations  of  factors  now  need  to  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  goal  of  ensuring 
protein security for the Indian economy.  
Once again, my best wishes to Prof. Parikh and thank you all for listening to me. 
BIS Review 143/2010 
 9
