Durmuş Yılmaz: Reform strategies and expectations in the new normal – 
a public perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yılmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  
at the Active Academy 8th International Finance Summit, Istanbul, 8 December 2010. 
 Distinguished participants and esteemed guests, 
Before starting my speech, I would like to thank the directors and staff of the Active Academy 
for their efforts in organizing the 8th International Finance Summit.  
The  Turkish  economy,  which  has  achieved  stronger  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  a 
sound financial system thanks to steadfast implementation of structural reforms since 2001, 
has been one of the economies that exited the crisis very rapidly. In the upcoming period, the 
new economic conjuncture needs to be managed wisely in order to sustain macroeconomic 
stability.  Therefore,  today  I  would  like  to  devote  my  speech  entirely  to  macroeconomic 
stability. 
in  developed  countries 
Distinguished participants, 
The recovery observed in the aftermath of the crisis continues albeit being slow and gradual. 
However,  the  downside  risks  pertaining  to  the  future  global  growth  outlook  persist. 
Vulnerabilities  continue  especially 
that  experience  serious 
deterioration  in  budget  balances  and  an  excessive  rise  in  public  debts.  Perceptions  are 
growing that the accommodative fiscal policies and expansionary monetary policies adopted 
by these countries fall short of achieving the desired results in unemployment and growth. 
Meanwhile,  developing  countries,  which  have  stronger  financial  structures,  are  enjoying  a 
faster recovery process. The decoupling observed between these two groups of countries is 
expected to continue in the upcoming period as well. 
Global  liquidity  has  increased  significantly  as  central  banks  of  developed  countries,  which 
eased  policy  rates  rapidly,  adopted  quantitative  easing  policies.  Recently,  capital  flows  to 
developing  countries  such  as  Turkey  have  been  accelerating  owing  to  expectations  that 
short-term interest rates in developed countries would remain low for an extended period, the 
decoupling in growth performances of countries and increased risk appetite. 
In the face of growing capital flows, some developing countries are introducing measures to 
prevent capital inflows. However, past experiences of countries show that restricting capital 
inflows is not really effective in terms of the volume of capital inflows while it is only partially 
effective  in  terms  of  the  type  of  incoming  capital.  In  other  words,  due  to  reasons  such  as 
financial  innovation  and  the  integration  of  markets,  it  is  not  possible  to  effectively  prevent 
capital flows, unless they are fully controlled.  
The  current  conjuncture 
flows  and 
implementing policies that would reinforce financial stability and enhance financial depth. In 
this respect, the Financial Stability Report, which was prepared by the Central Bank of the 
Republic  of  Turkey  and  made  public  yesterday,  is  an  important  policy  text  delineating  the 
strategy  to  be  implemented  in  the  upcoming  period  to  maintain  and  reinforce  financial 
stability in Turkey. Therefore, I suggest that the report be examined in detail.  
The policy framework, which the Report outlines in detail, has four pillars. One of the main 
pillars of policy implementations in this respect is to encourage economic units to borrow less 
and  to  use  more  equity  capital  (in  other  words  to  have  lower  leverage  ratios).  Recent 
implementations such as increasing required reserve ratios, the termination of remuneration 
of required reserves, the sustained fiscal discipline in the public sector as underlined in the 
to  benefiting  wisely 
is  conducive 
from  capital 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 1
the  net 
this  end, 
to  strengthen 
foreign  exchange  position.  To 
revised  Medium-Term  Program,  the  increase  in  Resource  Utilization  Support  Fund 
deductions imposed on consumer loans, the introduction of limitations to loan/value ratio in 
mortgages, the 12-percent target for banks’ capital adequacy ratios are deterring measures 
against an excessive rise in indebtedness ratios. 
Secondly,  the  extension  of  maturities  regarding  the  borrowings  of  economic  units  is 
encouraged.  Under  the  aegis  of  the  Undersecretariat  of  Treasury,  studies  for  extension  of 
maturities in public borrowings are being carried out successfully. An important development 
is  that  The  Banking  Regulation  and  Supervision  Agency  has  permitted  the  issuance  of 
Turkish  lira  bonds  so  as  to  extend  the  maturities  of  liabilities  in  the  banking  sector. 
Additionally, the Central Bank decreased overnight borrowing by 400 basis points last month 
enabling short-term swap interest rates to go down when required. Besides, the Central Bank 
aims  to  encourage  long-term  deposits  with  the  new  arrangements  to  be  made  in  required 
reserves. 
The  third  pillar  of  the  policy  framework  is  to  encourage  borrowing  in  terms  of  the  Turkish 
currency  and 
the 
Undersecretariat  of  Treasury  is  oriented  towards  borrowing  in  TL;  the  FX-denominated 
domestic  debt  stock  was  pushed  down  gradually  and  Central  Bank  accelerated  reserve 
accumulation  at  times  of  elevated  capital  inflows,  through  the  flexible  foreign  exchange 
buying auctions. Reasons such as implementation of the floating exchange rate regime, the 
progress made in terms of attaining price stability and the decrease in TL interest rates have 
facilitated  a  wider  use  of  Turkish  lira  in  the  economy  as  opposed  to  foreign  currency. 
Moreover,  measures  like  setting  higher  required  reserve  ratios  for  foreign  exchange  than 
those for Turkish lira and not permitting households to use FX-denominated or FX-indexed 
loans  encourage  the  private  sector  to  borrow  in  Turkish  lira.  The  foreign  exchange  net 
general position arrangement for the banking sector and allowing the issuance of TL bonds 
by banks in a controlled manner can also be considered in this context. 
The fourth and last pillar of the policy framework is to promote the risk management concept. 
In  this  respect,  steps  to  be  taken  regarding  financial  training  assume  importance  for  the 
smooth functioning of the system. We welcome the efforts towards increased recognition of 
Turkish  Derivatives  Exchange,  more  diversified  products  and  more  widespread  use  of 
forward transactions. In addition, we believe that the floating exchange rate regime that has 
been  in  implementation  since  2001  has  significantly  contributed  to  the  embedding  of 
awareness of exchange rate risk.  
In  short,  given  the  current  conjuncture,  the  avoidance  of  excessive  borrowing  both  by  the 
public and private sector; preference of longer maturities in all borrowings, opting to borrow 
in  TL  as  much  as  possible  and  managing  risks  efficiently  will  considerably  strengthen  the 
resilience of Turkish economy against external shocks.  
The  monetary  policy  adopted  by  the  Central  Bank  is  composed  in  a  way  to  make  price 
stability and financial stability complementary. In this context, I would like to evaluate how the 
CBRT will use policy tools in the upcoming period within the framework of possible scenarios 
provided in the inflation reports. 
As also demonstrated on the slide, the current conjuncture supports the CBRT’s stance of 
keeping policy rates constant for some time, and at low levels for a long period. On the other 
hand,  developments  in  the  aggregate  demand  composition  necessitated  that  instruments 
other  than  the  policy  rate  be  brought  to  pre-crisis  levels.  In  this  respect,  we  have  largely 
completed the exit strategy measures that we announced in April 2010.  
2 
 BIS Review 174/2010
  
In  the  October  Inflation  Report,  we  stated  that  our  baseline  scenario  was  based  on  an 
outlook  where  domestic  demand  is  stronger  compared  to  the  previous  reporting  period, 
external  demand  continues  to  restrain  economic  activity,  and  thus  aggregate  demand 
conditions continue to support disinflation, albeit to a lesser degree. This baseline scenario 
assumes a policy framework that the measures outlined in our exit strategy are completed by 
the end of the year, and that policy rates are kept constant at current levels for some time 
followed by limited increases starting from the last quarter of 2011, with policy rates staying 
at single digits throughout the forecast horizon (in other words, 3 years). In this respect, non-
interest instruments will be actively used in order to address the risks on financial stability 
stemming from rapid credit expansion and deterioration in the current account balance. 
The  European  Central  Bank  reluctantly  joined  the  ranks  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  Bank  of 
England and Bank of Japan that have engaged in monetary expansion due to fast-growing 
debt problems in Europe. As a result, materialization of the first scenario has become more 
likely, as illustrated in the right-hand part of the chart. In that case, the scenario described in 
our  Inflation  Report  of  October  2009  might  come  up  on  the  agenda.  According  to  this 
scenario, on account of the expansionary fiscal and monetary policy on a worldwide scale, 
coupled with rising risk appetites and the relative improvement of credit risk across emerging 
markets including Turkey, capital inflows to these countries will continue to hold strong. The 
low level of resource utilization as well as the strong tendency of cost shocks, which reduce 
the prices of imported inputs, to reflect upon consumer prices suggests downside risks on 
inflation in the short term. Materialization of such a scenario could lead to temporarily lower 
policy  rates  than  envisaged  in  the  baseline  scenario  and  the  use  of  macroprudential 
instruments in the direction of tightening in order to cut the pace of credit growth in tandem 
with the temporary rate cuts. 
The  second  scenario  illustrated  in  the  chart  was  shared  with  the  public  in  our  Inflation 
Report of October 2010. Both recent economic developments in Europe and decisions taken 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 3
by central banks of developed countries increase global economic uncertainty significantly. 
Should  the  measures  taken  at  a  global  level  cause  long-term  and  high-rated  increases  in 
food and commodity prices, and should such increases lead to a deterioration in the price 
setting  behavior,  which  in  turn,  hampers  achieving  the  medium-term  inflation  targets,  an 
earlier-than envisaged tightening in the baseline scenario would be considered. In this case, 
as domestic credit expansion would weaken, the use of macroprudential instruments might 
not be needed in the direction of tightening.  
If measures taken in developed countries remain inadequate, the third scenario illustrated 
in the lower left-hand part of the chart might be considered. In that case, as indicated in the 
latest  Inflation  Report,  should  the  global  economy  face  a  longer-than-anticipated  period  of 
anemic growth, the monetary tightening envisaged to start in the final quarter of 2011 under 
the baseline scenario might be postponed. Moreover, an outcome, whereby global economic 
problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic activity, may trigger 
a second round of easing. In this case, the use of macroprudential instruments might not be 
needed in the direction of tightening, as domestic credit expansion will weaken. 
Distinguished guests, 
I would like to underscore once more that as the Central Bank, our primary objective is to 
achieve and maintain price stability, and that as stipulated by Article 4 of the CBRT Law, we 
are responsible for “taking precautions for enhancing the stability in the financial system and 
taking  regulatory  measures  with  respect  to  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets”. 
Therefore,  we  will  continue  to  act  with  due  diligence  in  terms  of  financial  stability  in  the 
upcoming  period  as  well.  However,  the  Central  Bank  is  not  the  only  entity  in  charge  of 
financial stability. Other public authorities such as the Ministry of Finance, Undersecretariat 
of  Treasury,  Capital  Markets  Board  of  Turkey,  and  primarily  the  Banking  Regulation  and 
Supervision Agency, also have significant authority and policy instruments in this regard. It is 
essential that in the period we are going through, all policy instruments in hand should be 
deployed  in  a  coordinated  manner  for  the  establishment  of  a  sounder  and  more  stable 
financial structure.  
To close my remarks, I would once again like to thank everyone who has contributed to the 
organization of this event. 
4 
 BIS Review 174/2010
