Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: What future for financial globalisation? – 
sovereign debt and the global economy 
Dinner speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Joint  European  Central  Bank–Journal  of  International  Economics  
(ECB-JIE)  conference  on  “What  future  for  financial  globalisation?”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
9 September 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to welcome you to this conference on “What future for financial globalisation?” 
A  discussion  on  this  topic  could  not  be  more  timely  as  policy-makers  and  academics  are 
currently  making  great  efforts  to  make  sense  of  what  happened  before  and  during  the 
financial  crisis.  Questions  are  being  asked  about  what  lessons  can  be  learned  and  what 
adjustments need to be made to economic policy in the future. 
When policy-makers have the opportunity to talk to academic researchers many synergies 
can  be  identified.  That  is  why  I  am  pleased  that  this  conference  has  attracted  so  many 
excellent  researchers  in  the  fields  of  international  macroeconomics  and  finance.  I  am 
especially happy that the conference has been co-organised by the Journal of International 
Economics. I should like to thank the journal’s Editor, Charles Engel, for helping to organise 
this two-day event. 
At the latest Economic Policy Symposium held in Jackson Hole a couple of weeks ago, in a 
very  stimulating  paper,  Eric  Leeper  set  out  a  long  list  of  questions  that  he  felt  should  be 
addressed by researchers in order to fill the large knowledge gap in the field of fiscal policy 
and guide it closer to scientific analysis and away from its current state of alchemy.1 Tonight I 
would like to add a couple of issues to that list, which are partly related to the international 
dimension of fiscal policy (often ignored by US academics). I will try to inspire our academic 
colleagues to give more thought to some issues which are key to the functioning of the global 
financial system and about which policy-makers often do not have sufficient understanding to 
inform their actions.  
The legacy of the financial crisis 
One feature of the financial crisis that has become apparent only at a relatively late stage 
has  been  the  dramatic  and  widespread  increase  in  public  debt,  especially  in  advanced 
economies. I will focus on this legacy and its implications for both the global financial system 
and the global economy as a whole.  
First,  regarding  the  global  financial  system,  high  levels  of  public  debt  in  major  advanced 
economies are likely to have a non-negligible impact on financial market conditions over the 
next few years. We have seen in some cases how financial markets react to delayed fiscal 
consolidation, at times in a rather non-linear fashion. The uncertainties associated with such 
reactions make it very difficult for policy-makers to calibrate the appropriate budgetary path. 
There is a risk of a cliff effect, beyond which market participants tend to loose confidence in 
the ability of sovereign states to repay their debts and regain it only after a very long and 
painful  adjustment.  The  contagion  effects  we  observed  last  spring  suggest  that  this  risk 
should not be underestimated, raising a series of issues that have not yet been considered in 
                                                 
1   Leeper, E., “Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy”, presented at the Economic Policy Symposium organised by 
the Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 26–28 2010. 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 1
full,  even  in  the  literature.  What  kind  of  scenarios  could  develop  if  the  sovereign  debts  of 
several advanced economies are no longer perceived as risk-free assets? How do financial 
markets work in the absence of a risk-free rate?  
Second, the asymmetric distribution of public debt across the world economy has important 
implications for the adjustment of global imbalances. On the one hand, there is the risk that 
the protracted and excessive public and external indebtedness of advanced economies could 
ultimately prove to be – once again – unsustainable. On the other, if debtor countries adjust 
internal imbalances and lift national savings, who will assume the role of consumer of last 
resort once played by the United States? This is an oft-posed question in international policy 
debates. 
Let me address these two issues in reverse order. 
Global fiscal and current account imbalances 
The  negative  correlation  recorded  during  the  crisis  between  the  current  account  and  the 
fiscal balances has been largely in line with expectations. In the long run, however, current 
account  deficits  could  well  increase  again  globally  if  the  fiscal  expansion  which  has  taken 
place  in  recent  years  is  not  reined  in.  In  fact,  the  available  evidence  suggests  that  the 
adjustment of current account imbalances has so far been largely cyclical. The reduction in 
trade  imbalances  following  the  crisis  has  slowed  and,  in  several  cases,  has  started  to 
reverse. In both the United States and China we are already close to pre-Lehman levels in 
absolute terms.  
The sheer asymmetry in size and composition of the fiscal stimulus in advanced countries 
compared with any measures taken in emerging economies is likely to magnify the expected 
resurgence  of  current  account  imbalances.  Similarly  to  the  pre-crisis  situation,  advanced 
economies’  indebtedness  would  be  financed  with  capital  flows  from  emerging  economies. 
This  implies  not  only  a  massive  misallocation  of  global  capital,  but  also  undermines  the 
credibility of any initiative to rebalance savings and investments both within and across the 
main regions of the global economy. As a result, it risks creating – once again I should say – 
delusional expectations in financial markets about the sustainability of imbalanced financial 
and trade flows. 
Policy discussions are likely to return to where they were a few years  ago. The crisis has 
given us the opportunity to question their analytical and practical basis.  
There are concerns regarding the burden of adjustment on deficit countries and its impact on 
the world economy. If debtor countries adjust internal imbalances and raise national savings 
– thus avoiding the scenario of resurging global imbalances – which country would then act 
globally as the consumer of last resort? In other words, can we avoid a scenario in which 
there is protracted slow growth across all regions of the global economy until imbalances are 
eliminated? Admittedly, this is not a new question, but it is more pertinent than ever.  
The typical answer is that, in order to avoid the slowdown, surplus and, in particular, creditor 
economies should rebalance growth within their economies by increasing domestic demand, 
strengthening  non-tradable  sectors  and  reducing  reliance  on  export  industries.  Thus  the 
policy  recommendation  to  surplus  countries  is  to  stimulate  domestic  demand,  in  particular 
through fiscal policies or structural reforms aimed at reducing the level of net savings.  
The problem is that surplus countries are in surplus in the first place either because they are 
fiscally more conservative, at least compared with the more profligate countries – and rightly 
so I should add – or are facing a situation in which private savings are very high and might 
even  increase  if  public  dis-savings  were  to  rise.  Since  surplus  countries  are  reluctant  to 
embark on expansionary domestic demand policies, the correction of payments imbalances 
is faced with some form of asymmetry, a situation that is often disliked by deficit countries. At 
the global level it has at times been used by the latter as an excuse for delaying adjustment. 
Global imbalances are the result of a lack of policy coordination. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2010
It seems to me that we need better economic analysis in order to address this issue. First, 
we  need  to  understand  whether  a  given  level  of  world  growth,  if  achieved  through 
unsustainable imbalances, is in itself sustainable. In 2003–07 the world economy grew at an 
unprecedented pace, also owing to the large imbalances financed through the recycling of 
large capital flows. If these imbalances were not sustainable, the underlying rate of growth of 
the world economy, and of some of its components – in particular the deficit countries – was 
probably  in  itself  not  sustainable.  Accordingly,  asking  who  will  provide  the  demand  of  last 
resort if the deficit countries save more might not be the right question to ask, because it is 
based on the presumption that the unsustainable pre-crisis growth rate represents the post-
crisis objective.  
We  certainly  need  a  better  understanding  about  the  potential  growth  of  the  various 
economies  and  its  structure,  taking  due  account  of  how  comparative  advantages  have 
changed, also as a result of the crisis. My intuition is that such an analysis would suggest 
that  potential  growth  in  the  United  States  is  substantially  lower  than  the  average  growth  it 
experienced over the past decade and requires a shift of resources from the non-tradable to 
the  tradable  sector.  Given  that  such  a  shift  in  resources  cannot  occur  instantaneously,  it 
should  not  be  surprising  if  the  US  economy  experienced  a  period  of  temporary  higher 
unemployment. In that case, trying to stimulate growth and reduce unemployment to achieve 
the  pre-crisis  equilibrium  through  macroeconomic  policies,  as  some  are  suggesting,  might 
only delay the adjustment and lead again to an unbalanced path. On the other hand, some 
surplus countries, such as Germany, might be able to achieve higher growth than in the past 
decade,  because  of  the  increased  potential  resulting  from  their  better  positioning  in 
international  trade  specialisation  achieved  over  the  years  and  if  they  are  able  to  employ 
resources more efficiently in the non-tradable sector. 
The  second  issue  that  I  would  like  to  raise  relates  to  the  endogenous  factors  that  induce 
rebalancing of growth between deficit and surplus countries. Theory suggests that if external 
demand falls, owing to the lower levels of growth in deficit countries, surplus countries will be 
able to export less and thus also experience lower growth. This would free up resources in 
the latter countries which should then be allocated to the non-tradable sector. Furthermore, 
the interest rate in surplus countries should fall, inducing residents to save less and consume 
more.  However,  these  adjustment  mechanisms  may  take  time  and  may  lead  to  temporary 
sub-optimal growth. It is necessary to investigate whether the adjustment process is indeed 
slow,  especially  after  a  crisis  such  as  the  one  we  have  experienced.  For  instance,  some 
recent figures for the euro area, and Germany in particular, as well as China seem to show 
that over time the contribution of the external sector may be decreasing. The ability of global 
trade to sustain growth and contribute to global recovery also seems to have been stronger 
than expected.  
The implications for global finance 
Let me now turn to the second issue, namely the implications of rising public indebtedness in 
advanced economies. Although deficits are expected to start narrowing gradually next year, 
the  fiscal  burden  remains  huge.  Government  debt  levels  among  advanced  economies  are 
expected to increase further and approach 100% of GDP. The International Monetary Fund 
estimates that by 2015 the general government gross debt will reach 110% of GDP in the 
United States and 95% of GDP in the euro area. This amounts to an almost doubling in the 
United States and an increase of around 40% in the euro area. Looking forward, the issue of 
the  sustainability  of  the  debt  in  several  industrial  countries  is  looming.  This  raises  several 
analytical  problems,  which  in  my  view  have  not  been  fully  examined  in  the  literature,  but 
which  are  very  important  for  policy-makers  and  financial  market  participants.  Here  I  will 
consider two of them. 
The first analytical problem relates to the assessment of a country’s solvency. This task is 
not as simple as assessing the solvency of a company, a household or a financial institution. 
It  ultimately  depends  on  the  country’s  ability  to  raise  taxes  and  sustain  a  level  of  primary 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 3
surplus that enables the debt to be stabilised and reduced over time. This depends both on 
economic  and  political  factors  that  are  not  easy  to  summarise  in  the  nice  differential 
equations that economists like to work with. It is thus inevitable that simplifying assumptions 
are made, but it is often forgotten that excess simplicity may lead to partial or even wrong 
results. Let me briefly elaborate.  
The analysis of the sustainability of sovereign debt has largely been based on the experience 
of  developing  or  emerging  market  countries.  It  is  now  applied  to  advanced  economies, 
starting with Greece. How often do we hear that Europe should learn from the Brady bond 
experience  to  address  the  Greek  debt  problem?  We  should,  however,  examine  the  risks 
associated  with  reasoning  by  analogy  in  this  way.  The  risk  is  that  solutions  devised  for  a 
particular case are not applicable to other cases. Let me give you some examples. 
First, in many debt crises of the past in emerging market economies, the fiscal problem was 
not  necessarily  the  main  cause  of  the  crisis.  More  usually,  the  crisis  originated  in  the 
combination  of  an  unsustainable  exchange  rate  peg  and  foreign  denominated  debt.  The 
devaluation of the currency would raise the stock of the debt in relation to GDP, which in turn 
would further contribute to make the peg more difficult to sustain and thus fuel speculative 
attacks against the currency, in a vicious circle. Under these circumstances, if a peg could 
not be sustained, the devaluation would have to be accompanied by a restructuring of the 
debt  or  a  partial  default  to  stabilise  the  situation.  This  is  not  the  case  in  most  advanced 
economies,  either  because  the  debt  is  generally  denominated  in  domestic  currency  or 
because the peg is a “super-hard” one, as in Greece’s case. Certainly, if Greece were to exit 
the  euro  –  a  hypothesis  that  I  make  just  for  the  sake  of  reasoning,  but  which  I  consider 
absurd  –  its  debt  burden  would  de  facto  worsen  given  that  it  is  denominated  in  euro,  and 
partial  default  or  restructuring  would  in  that  case  be  unavoidable.  However,  thanks  to  the 
irrevocable nature of participation in the euro, the debt trap is avoided. What many analysts 
– or I should say doomsayers – have not understood is that the debt problem is the biggest 
incentive for Greece to remain in the euro area. 
Second,  in  many  previous  crises  in  emerging  market  economies,  the  debt  issued  by  the 
country  was  largely  held  by  foreigners.  A  restructuring  of  the  debt  thus  mainly  hit  foreign 
citizens  and  was  thus,  from  a  political  and  economic  viewpoint,  relatively  less  costly  for 
domestic  residents.  In  advanced  economies,  the  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  domestic 
wealth  is  more  relevant  in  relation  to  GDP  and  is  partly  composed  of  domestic  debt 
instruments,  including  government  bonds.  A  debt  restructuring  or  default  thus  has  an 
immediate  and  direct  impact  on  the  value  of  the  residents’  wealth  and  thus  on  the  real 
economy. The larger the impact of a (partial) default on the financial and real economy of the 
country,  the  more  costly  a  (partial)  default  would  be,  compared  with  the  alternative  of 
achieving the primary surplus necessary to stabilise and reduce the public debt.  
What is often forgotten is that the wealth effect does not depend only on the direct effects of 
a default or restructuring of the public debt, but also on the chain of events that would be 
triggered throughout the entire banking and financial system. Owing to the role of advanced 
economies as lenders of last resort to their own financial system, as has been confirmed by 
this crisis, a debt problem at the level of the state would cripple the economy as a whole. 
This is often ignored by those who claim that there can be such a thing as an “orderly” debt 
restructuring  mechanism  for  the  public  debt  of  advanced  economies.  We  need  better 
analysis also in this domain. 
The second issue which deserves more analytical work relates to the functioning of global 
financial  markets  in  allocating  resources  and  setting  relative  prices  in  an  environment  in 
which  the  probability  of  sovereign  default  becomes  significant  and  widespread.  In  other 
words, what happens when certain assets that are considered relatively safe, and in some 
cases are used as safe havens, are not considered as being that safe any more? 
The crisis has shown the importance of financial markets relying on liquid and safe assets to 
protect  against  systemic  risk.  Traditionally,  the  government  bonds  of  advanced  economies 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2010
have  played  this  role.  What  scenarios  open  up  if  advanced  economies’  sovereign  debt 
assets are no longer perceived as risk-free assets? How would this affect the functioning of 
financial markets? There is no doubt that there would be  some direct spillover to all other 
assets.  The  riskiness  of  the  global  portfolio  can  be  expected  to  rise  more  than 
proportionately.  Indeed,  if  the  public  sector  is  itself  over-leveraged,  who  can  back  up  the 
public  sector?2  It  can  be  expected  that  higher  yields  and  lower  asset  prices  would  exert 
downward pressure on economic activity through increases in the costs of external finance, 
negative wealth effects and negative effects on confidence.3 
A  world  without  default-free  assets  would  have  further  implications  for  economic  activity 
because these are the prototype of “information-insensitive” instruments, i.e. they serve as 
“money”  and  provide  the  basic  functions  of  money  when  the  opportunity  cost  of  holding 
money  becomes  too  high.4  For  instance,  information-insensitive  assets  are  an  important 
source of collateral in financial markets. The disappearance of “good” collateral would reduce 
credit supply and thus impair economic activity. 
Higher  solvency  risk  also  increases  other  risks  at  the  macro  level,  such  as  the  risk  of 
“financial  repression”.5  As  public  debt  rises  to  unsustainable  levels,  domestic  financial 
institutions  may  be  “encouraged”,  if  not  forced,  to  hold  domestic  sovereign  debt  in  their 
portfolios.  This  would  lead  to  inefficient  allocation  of  capital,  high  costs  of  financial 
intermediation  and  thus  lower  growth.6  Finally,  in  the  case  of  reserve  currencies,  higher 
solvency  risk  would  potentially  hamper  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  system. 
These questions are just a few examples of the issues on which we need further work.  
To  conclude,  it  is  clear  that  current  and  increasing  levels  of  public  debt  in  advanced 
economies raise problems which are not only of a macroeconomic nature, but affect many 
other  dimensions  of  the  global  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  our  ability  to  understand  the 
complexity  of  the  issue  is  still  limited.  This  situation  is  worrying,  to  the  extent  that  our 
societies may take decisions on the basis of imperfect models and wrong assumptions.  
Not everybody agrees with the concerns I have just raised, and many take the current very 
low yields on some government bonds as a comforting sign. My impression is that they may 
be  confusing  relative  and  absolute  concepts  of  risk.  And  such  a  mistake  could  entail  very 
high costs for our societies.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                
2   Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, 2010, “From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis”, NBER Working Paper 15795. 
3   Reinhart,  C.  and  K.  Rogoff,  2009,  “This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”,  Princeton 
University Press. 
4   Gorton, G. and A. Metrick, 2009, “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”, NBER Working Paper 15223. 
5   Reinhart,  C.  and  K.  Rogoff,  2009,  “This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”,  Princeton 
University Press. 
6   Roubini, N. and  X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995, “A  growth model  of inflation, tax evasion,  and  financial repression”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 35(2), pp. 275–301 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 5
