Erkki Liikanen: Global rebalancing, asset prices and policy responses 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Fifth  High-Level 
Seminar of the Eurosystem and Latin American Central Banks, Madrid, 10 December 2010. 
Due to the strike and weather conditions the speech was distributed in written form. 
 Some background  
Global imbalances are certainly not a new policy concern. The most visible manifestation of 
these imbalances is the large current account deficits and surpluses, but these are not the 
whole  story.  Current  account  positions  reflect  a  number  of  deeper,  more  fundamental 
problems.  Therefore,  the  inevitable  future  rebalancing  has  to  involve  deeper  structural 
changes in the countries involved. 
The  risks  caused  by  the  global  imbalances  have  been  well  documented  in  research  and 
policy papers over the last ten years. Also, the imbalances have long been among the central 
agenda items in several international meetings. Most recent serious efforts to address them 
include the IMF-led Multilateral Consultations in 2006 and, today, the ongoing G20 Mutual 
Assessment Process.  
Such rounds of discussions have successfully established a broad agreement over the key 
policy  objectives 
these  are  remarkably 
straightforward. National saving needs to increase in the major deficit countries (such as the 
United States), and be reduced in the major surplus countries (such as emerging Asia and 
the oil exporting countries). It has also been acknowledged that for both deficit and surplus 
countries, meeting these objectives requires significant policy adjustments. 
However, the multilateral initiatives to address global imbalances have so far suffered from 
an obvious lack of traction to actual policy outcomes. Since the onset of the global financial 
crisis, the imbalances have admittedly undergone a certain reduction. But recent projections 
indicate that the imbalances tend to persist – or even grow – well into the future. It appears 
that  the  imbalances  have  become  an  even  more  persistent  characteristic  of  our  economic 
environment than was previously thought. 
the  problem.  At 
their  simplest, 
to  resolve 
The nature of the imbalances  
International  surpluses  and  deficits  are  not,  of  course,  harmful  as  such  if  they  remain 
reasonable.  They  are  a  natural  reflection  of  financial  integration.  They  provide  flexibility  to 
savers  and  investors.  By  that,  they  are  welfare  enhancing.  However,  very  large  current 
account deficits, when persistent and growing, fuel concerns of external sustainability. 
Two main risks to the international community have been extensively debated for almost a 
decade.  First,  sustainability  concerns  may  lead  to  a  sudden  collapse  of  confidence  in  the 
ability  of  the  deficit  countries  to  maintain  their  external  positions.  The  resulting  disruptive 
adjustment would be harmful for the deficit and surplus countries alike and to the bystander 
countries  as  well.  So  far,  this  risk  has  not  materialized  and  for  the  moment,  the  US  bond 
markets do not seem to consider it particularly acute. The second risk is that the imbalances 
may  give  rise  to  tensions  in  global  trade  as  well  as  exchange  rate  relations;  this  risk  is 
materializing constantly, as witnessed in the run-up to the Seoul G20 Summit. 
Beyond these two main risks, the financial crisis exposed a number of more subtle channels 
of  transmission  through  which  global  imbalances  undermine  global  economic  stability.  In 
particular,  the  enormous  growth  of  financial  intermediation  and  innovation,  related  to  the 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 1
imbalances, combined with regulatory weakness, has made the international financial system 
much  too  fragile  relative  to  the  accumulated  risks.  Also,  the  fragility  of  the  international 
financial markets has led to a volatility of capital flows which may harm even fundamentally 
stable economies. 
Easy and simplistic explanations of global imbalances have typically failed to stand the test 
of time. They may explain the most conspicuous developments in any one time period, yet 
fail to capture the multitude of relevant factors at play. It is therefore necessary to think of the 
imbalances as products of several fundamental factors, which lie deeper than the superficial 
level of macroeconomic policies. I will not go into these in great detail, but wish merely to 
mention a couple of rather general trends. 
The  low  pre-crisis  national  saving  rates  in  deficit  economies  were  supported  by  low 
borrowing  costs  and  the  consequent  asset  price  boom  during  the  period  of  “great 
moderation”. The low borrowing costs themselves reflected a number of reasons – from the 
“global savings glut” in emerging markets to failures in financial markets’ risk assessments – 
and their relative significance certainly varies from country to country. But now, the economic 
structures of the deficit countries have adapted to the inflow of resources from abroad, and 
their internationally competitive sectors are smaller than they should be. 
The  high  saving  rates  in  major  surplus  economies  are  largely  driven  broadly  by  two  key 
factors.  Official  sector  savings  derive  largely  from  export-lead  growth  strategies  based  on 
asset-accumulating competitive exchange rate pegs combined with capital controls. Private 
sector savings for their part are motivated by structural forces, including demographic trends, 
the  lack  of  developed  social  safety  nets  and  a  still  underdeveloped  financial  sector  that 
hampers  domestic  lending  –  and  channels  domestic  savings  abroad.  Of  course,  in  some 
commodity exporting countries, surpluses and official sector savings have been boosted by 
elevated commodity prices. 
I would also like to emphasize the significance of the domestic policy contexts in the major 
deficit  and  surplus  countries.  As  I  mentioned  in  the  beginning,  the  solution  to  the  issue  of 
external  imbalances  seems  relatively  simple  if  considered  in  isolation:  just  reverse  the 
existing divergent trends in saving and investment ratios between the countries involved. It is 
important,  however,  to  recognize  that  the  global  imbalances  also  reflect  cross-country 
differences  in  economic  structures  and  real  resources,  which  give  rise  to  differing  policy 
interests.  
The post-crisis outlook for the imbalances 
So what does the crisis imply for the evolution of the imbalances going forward? Here I wish 
to make a few brief observations. 
On the one hand, the challenge of external rebalancing in the deficit countries has become 
closely  intertwined  with  the  internal  rebalancing  between  public  and  private  demand. 
Whereas  the  low  saving  rates  in  major  deficit  economies  previously  reflected  large-scale 
private sector borrowing, the rapid decline in private spending after the crisis replaced private 
deficits with sizeable public sector deficits. 
Too much of global demand and economic activity is now dependent on the fiscal deficits in 
the developed world. Therefore, the deficit countries here face a dual task: to rebalance the 
government  budgets  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  establish  a  growth-friendly  economic 
environment that provides a sustainable foundation for the growth of private spending. 
In terms of policy, one priority here lies in measures to maintain the availability of credit to the 
private sector, for example through repair and reform of the financial sector. 
However,  credit  is  not  enough  by  itself.  The  growth  of  private  demand  must  lie  on  a 
sustainable basis. In the deficit countries, future growth inevitably needs to rely increasingly 
2 
 BIS Review 172/2010
more on net exports. This is a competitiveness question, but also a structural question. And 
this, of course, goes part and parcel with the objective of reducing the external imbalances. 
On the other hand, recent events clearly demonstrate how the current crisis has increased 
the international pressure on emerging market countries with surpluses. This was clearly 
apparent at the last round of G20 discussions, where foreign exchange issues were at the 
centre of the agenda. Undoubtedly, the problem has not gone away and will be one of the 
hardest issues also in the upcoming meetings. 
However  the  exchange  rate,  the  real  exchange  rate  to  be  exact,  is  only  a  part  of  the 
adjustment  mechanisms  which  can  lead  to  a  more  balanced  redistribution  of  economic 
activity  and  spending.  In  the  end,  the  more  the  surplus  countries  can  achieve  through 
opening  their  markets,  increasing  competition,  and  diversifying  their  economies  towards 
services,  the  less  pressure  will  prevail  on  their  exchange  rates,  and  the  smaller  are  the 
inflationary pressures they encounter. 
So, orderly balancing is about structural changes in all affected societies, in deficit countries 
as  well  as  surplus  countries,  around  the  globe.  The  political  difficulty  of  making  these 
adjustments happen is considerable. 
The roles of the euro area and Latin America 
No matter how the eventual and necessary global adjustment will take place, it will have spill 
over effects that concern us all. 
What  unites  the  Latin  America  and  euro  area  is  the  fact  that  global  imbalances  are  not  a 
problem of our own making. Both regions, taken as aggregates, have had broadly balanced 
current  accounts  and  maintained  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes.  But  still,  neither  region 
would be immune to the spill over effects from a possible disorderly adjustment. And they 
would  not  be  immune  to  the  changes  in  relative  prices  which  go  together  with  an  orderly 
adjustment, either. 
It  is  this  common  role  as  exposed  bystanders  where  the  Latin  American  and  European 
viewpoints meet, regarding the global imbalances. Policy makers in both regions worry about 
the danger of exchange rate volatility, and should think hard how to position their economies 
for the future, post-adjustment circumstances. 
For  the  euro  area,  the  challenges are  threefold.  There  is the  fiscal  challenge  you  are  well 
aware of; there is the challenge of increasing the productivity of the Euro area economies, 
especially  in  the  countries  with  big  external  deficits,  and  there  is  the  challenge  of 
strengthening our financial system, which was so severely shaken by the crisis. Of these, I 
think  the  productivity  challenge  is  the  most  fundamental  in  the  long  run,  and  much  of  the 
fiscal sustainability issue hinges on that as well. And without credible public finances, there 
cannot be a lasting solution to the stability of the financial sector. 
Latin  America  for  its  part  has  already  fallen  victim  to  some  of  the  fallout  from  global 
imbalances. Since the bust of the US asset price boom, the suppressed domestic demand 
coupled with near-zero interest policy has turned private capital to search for higher yield in 
the  still-growing  emerging  markets.  Latin  America  has  painful  experiences  with  excessive 
external 
inflows  causes 
understandable concern. 
Under  such  circumstances  of  potentially  disruptive  capital  inflows,  capital  controls  have 
understandably  become  an  increasingly  attractive  option  for  emerging  markets  trying  to 
temporarily  smooth  the  inflow  of  foreign  capital,  alleviate  excessive  pressure  on  the 
exchange rate and mitigate a build-up of risk in their domestic economies. 
The debate over the desirability and effectiveness of capital controls is still ongoing and I do 
not wish to give definite advice on their proper role and scope. However, I do believe that 
indebtedness,  and  hence 
the  prospect  of 
large  capital 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 3
financial  development  and  innovation  tends  to  make  the  maintenance  of  capital  controls 
progressively more difficult and ineffective. And even as views on the controls have become 
more  pragmatic  within  the  international  community,  the  historical  experience  thus  far  is 
mixed. It is safest to consider them as a temporary expedient, which cannot be relied upon to 
provide a lasting solution. 
I  would  also  note  that  a  proliferation  of  capital  controls  can  introduce  potentially  adverse 
distortions  in  the  international  financial  system,  which  should  not  be  ignored.  Where 
necessary, the international community should therefore seek to establish common principles 
for  their  appropriate  design.  This  is  an  area  where  the  IMF  policy  advice  and  monitoring 
could have a greater role.  
Conclusion: addressing the problem 
Finally,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  how  the  problem  of  global  imbalances  could  be 
constructively addressed. I will leave a more detailed discussion on this for the subsequent 
sessions of this seminar, but wish to highlight one observation that is relevant to what I have 
just said. 
If deficit and surplus countries would choose to pursue policies based on their narrowest self-
interests,  seeking  to  postpone  inevitable  structural  changes,  the  problems  of  global 
imbalances – and their adverse effects – would be likely to persist. 
The only way to address the problem is international policy coordination. It is not enough to 
simply demonstrate that the imbalances can be addressed through an orderly, policy-driven 
adjustment.  What  is  also  required  is  a  credible  commitment  from  all  key  stakeholders  to 
follow a cooperative approach. 
As I see it, success in the latter requires two things. Partly, the commitment to a cooperative 
approach is a commitment to compromise. This can be achieved only through an open and 
direct interaction involving all key players. Despite its limitations, the G20 Mutual Assessment 
Process is the best tool we have for the task. Its mere existence has facilitated an exchange 
of views that was long lacking from international policy coordination. 
But,  and  fortunately  so,  the  necessary  global  rebalancing  is  not  only  about  making 
compromises. The world economy is not a zero sum game, and better cooperation delivers 
real benefits to be shared. One needs to present a convincing enough a case – in both the 
major deficit and surplus economies – that the spillovers from globally inconsistent policies, 
are not in the interest of any country. This is certainly not an easy feat and will be a major 
challenge  in  the  discussions  going  forward.  The  challenge  is  even  larger  because  the 
solution involves so deep adjustments, not only in macroeconomic policies, but in the very 
economic structures of the countries involved.  
4 
 BIS Review 172/2010
