 Rundheersing Bheenick: Three sinister traps we need to face up to 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner in honour of Economic Operators, Port Louis, 27 November 2010. 
 First let me extend a warm welcome to you all here this evening at this annual dinner which 
the Bank hosts in honour of our economic operators. 
We are specially privileged to have with us, tonight, the managing director of De La Rue, one 
of the most historic partners, not just of the Bank but of our country. Our association goes 
back  one  and  a  half  century.  It  was  in  1860  that  Thomas  De  La  Rue,  as  the  nascent 
company  was  then  known,  bagged  their  very  first  banknote  printing  contract,  to  supply 
Mauritius  with  three  denominations.  Would  you  believe  it,  they  took  three  whole  years  to 
deliver on that first order! They must have improved on that pretty fast as they are today the 
world’s largest commercial printer. De La Rue is celebrating its 150th anniversary this year 
and we shall be screening a short video clip later to mark the occasion. 
The  year  has  been  one  of  change.  The  Prime  Minister  came  back  at  the  head  of  a  new 
Government. All our banks thrived, not just survived. A new bank opens for business next 
month in December. Another one, an Islamic bank, is slated to begin operations in the first 
quarter  of  next  year.  And,  just  to  remind,  in  2010  I  came  back  too,  after  a  little  lacuna,  in 
which we had first, as a sequel of that little business of the street theatre, a Supreme Court 
judgment, followed by a judicial Enquiry, and then a new Minister of Finance. To adapt what 
the writer H.H. Munro, better known by his pen name Saki, said after his cook had left his 
service,  
The former minister was a good minister, but as ministers go… he went. 
Ah well, Sic transit Gloria mundi! 
If  I  may  say,  as  in  so  many  aspects  of  the  market  place,  the  outcome  of  this  fiscal  and 
monetary contretemps seems just to have followed the predictions of Newton’s third Law of 
motion, which you will recall, says that 
every action has an equal and opposite reaction.  
It  has  been,  frankly,  at  times,  a  rather  confusing  experience,  but  as  Alan  Clarke,  British 
diarist and former minister of defence, put it more colourfully, 
“If you have bright plumage, people will take pot shots at you.” 
That,  unfortunately,  is  the  fate  of  central  bank  governors,  regularly  fired  upon,  and 
occasionally  just  simply  fired.  The  current  Federal  Reserve  Chairman,  the  avuncular  Ben 
Bernanke, may have created a new precedent after QE2 last month, by actually drawing fire 
from  other  governors  and  foreign  governments.  The  eponymous  Uncle  Ben  enjoys  a  solid 
reputation by guaranteeing the quality of his product, long grain rice. “Helicopter Ben”, critics 
allege, now flooding the world with liquidity, seems to be destroying his by becoming a serial 
debaser of his product, the greenback. 
One sad event this year was the passing of Vice-president Angidi Chettiar, who lived to a 
sprightly 83, even after five decades in the hurly-burly of politics. He was our Chief Guest at 
an  event  which  the  Bank  hosted  in  this  self-same  venue  to  launch  our  40th  anniversary 
commemorative coin. We mourn his passing. 
Looking  back  over  the  past  year  we  have  much  cause  for  satisfaction;  but  aren’t  we  just 
perhaps overdoing it a little? Why this sense of smug self-satisfaction? Why this palpable air 
of complacency engulfing us? This reflects a syndrome which we must combat for our own 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 1
 good. We should not gloat on our success. What Graham Greene said of his own profession, 
writing, is equally applicable to the economic performance of countries: 
“...success  is  always  temporary,  success  is  only  a  delayed  failure;  and  it  is 
incomplete.”  
Everybody tells us how well we are looking. Well done the government; well done the private 
sector; well done the workers; well done our bankers; well done the Press. Let us distribute 
satisfecits all round. I do not want to sound like a spoilsport but I want to raise the alarm. It 
does not suffice to be on the right track, as we undoubtedly are. We must also move fast, 
faster  than  the  competition,  if  we  are  not  to  be run  over.  I  venture  to  suggest  that we  are 
running the risk of falling into three particular traps, which await to ensnare unwary countries 
in our position. I call these three traps MIT, ELT and BLT, respectively. 
I  shall  turn  to  them  in  a  minute.  But,  just  to  put  us  in  a  good  mood  for  a  moment,  let  us 
rehearse  the  good  news,  before  we  try  to  stomach  the  bad  news.  Our  net  international 
reserves have increased by a full third over the last three years, rising from Rs 75 billion in 
January 2007 and topping Rs 100 billion for the first time in November 2009. Rest assured 
that  we  took  steps  to  reduce  our  exposure  to  the  dollar,  the  euro  and  the  pound  sterling, 
which  together  accounted  for  over  97%  of  our  portfolio  in  2007.  Now,  this  has  fallen  to  a 
more  prudent  70%,  with  our  dollar  and  euro  exposures  having  been  reduced  to  35%  and 
25%, respectively, from 40 and 41% previously. Our SDR allocation and gold holdings make 
up nearly 14% of the portfolio, the balance being commodity currencies like the Canadian, 
Australian and New Zealand dollars and the Japanese yen. 
The nominal value of that gold we controversially purchased from the IMF in November 2009, 
has risen by some Rs 570 million, perhaps the best investment the bank has ever made in its 
entire history; no wonder there is international talk about moving back to gold as a reference 
value, if no longer as actual backing, for paper currencies. The platinum coin we launched 
last year has increased 16% in terms of platinum value. The gold coin we launched here in 
2007 did even better, its value increasing by 42%. That “barbarous relic of a bygone age”, as 
Keynes dubbed gold, has not lost its shine over the centuries and may still be pressed into 
monetary service! So in this initiative we are ahead of the game, brickbats notwithstanding.  
Our  much-maligned  exchange  rate  policy  is  another  success  story,  to  be  celebrated,  not 
decried. The MERI exchange rate index has been fairly stable, indicating that our policy has 
minimized volatility and maintained the stability of the exchange rate of the rupee. Had the 
Central Bank reacted, as many pressed us to do, and followed the euro in its wild gyrations, 
the  economy  would  have  suffered  untold  damage,  with  the  poorest  and  most  vulnerable 
strata of our countrymen taking the worst hits.  
In  the  course  of  the  year,  the  Bank  ventured  boldly  in  two  complementary  directions.  We 
spent  more  than  Rs  11  billion  to  purchase  the  equivalent  of  US$  375  million  in  foreign 
currency, partly in an attempt to contain rupee appreciation. We sold less than half of this, 
only  US$  156  million,  to  the  State  Trading  Corporation  at  favourable  rates  in  a  parallel 
attempt  to  finance  food  and  fuel  imports  and  thus  to  contain  the  impact  of  exchange  rate 
rises on consumer prices. We were criticized for both of these moves, for doing too little in 
the first case – where some held that we should have driven down the rupee to the point 
where  the  worst-performing  exporter  could  break  even  –,  and  for  doing  too  much  in  the 
second case – where others took the view that the Bank had no business selling anything to 
the STC, in the first place! We were somewhat vindicated when, together with a supportive 
monetary stance, the inflation rate tumbled from double digits not too long ago (10.8%, year-
on-year in September 2008) to an all-time low of 0.1 % in October last year, although it has 
picked up since and stood at 3.2% in October this year. 
The domestic banking landscape has remained vibrant throughout, in stark contrast to the 
scene of distress and desolation in many other countries. While banks in much of the rest of 
the world are drowning in red ink, with bail-outs and nationalizations, our banks are thriving. 
Annual banking sector assets and banking deposits both grew by nearly 14% in Mauritius. 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 Advances increased by over 16%. And this happened while non-performing loans declined in 
the past two years from 2.4% to 2.1%. Banking profits over the twelve months, ending June 
2010, were running at Rs 1 billion per month. Come to think of it, that’s nearly Rs 50 million 
per working day. Quite an achievement for a population of less than 1.3 million, isn’t it? And 
that, too, when the world economy is going through its worst crisis in a generation!  
Little wonder, then, that the hard-pressed Minister of Finance couldn’t resist dipping deeper 
into that kitty. When the Chairman of the Mauritius Bankers Association reacted to what his 
members no doubt thought was confiscatory overreach and retorted that banks constitute an 
easy prey, I was reminded of the story of Mr William Sutton. The name may not be familiar to 
many of you as by profession he was a bank robber. He enjoyed quite a reputation in that 
disreputable profession. When asked by a reporter after being sentenced for the umpteenth 
time for the same offence:  
“Tell me, Willie, why do you rob banks?”  
“Because that’s where the money is!” was the classic reply. 
Sutton is probably the only bank robber in history to give his name to a law. Sutton’s Law 
states that in diagnosing a problem, start with the most obvious.  
Apart from tempting Ministers of Finance, this kind of profit level may also indicate that our 
banks are perhaps overly conservative and could be a little bolder in fueling the economy. 
The  sector  where  the  growth  of  bank  credit  recorded  its  worst  performance  has  been  the 
manufacturing sector. There was actually a negative growth in credit to the EPZ. This tight 
banking  posture  may  look  good  in  the  books  of  the  banks,  but  it  does  not  bode  well  for 
economic growth and innovation. 
As  many  here  will  know,  the  G20  met  earlier  this  month  in  Seoul  to  find  ways  of 
strengthening the global banking and financial system. Averting future crises is topmost on 
the agenda, neck to neck with stimulating and sustaining the recovery. The buzzword now is 
Basel III, whose tough capital requirements have got major international banks up in arms, 
lobbying furiously against the stricter provisions. Here in Mauritius, we have little to fear from 
Basel III as our banks are very well-capitalized. We have been proactive in this field with the 
imposition of a 10% capital adequacy ratio on our financial institutions, instead of the Basel II 
standard of 8%. 
On  the  regional  front  within  COMESA,  we  scored  another  success  with  the  Regional 
Payment  and  Settlement  System  which  will  be  run  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  will  be 
aggressively promoted by all participating central banks. The COMESA Monetary Institute, 
which will be hosted by the Central Bank of Kenya, will become operational by January 2011.  
Now that is all pretty good news in anyone’s book. Hey didn’t we do well; we have survived. 
But where, as economic operators, is our vision beyond that? What legacy are we leaving for 
our children? I’m afraid the truth is, we find ourselves in a new third world of jobbing middle-
income countries prone to be stuck with a future of uncertainty, volatility, and like many other 
SIDS, heightened economic and environmental vulnerability. As we face the coming decade, 
the awkward decade as yet without a name, the teenies perhaps, I fear we are likely to be 
overwhelmed  by  the  three  seemingly  inescapable  traps  I  mentioned  earlier.  MIT,  ELT  and 
BLT. 
Just  to  titillate  your  curiosity,  MIT  here  does  not  stand  for  the  famous  seat  of  learning  in 
Cambridge, Massachussets, familiar to the academic boffins. ELT has a key role in avionics 
and air safety where it stands for Emergency Locator Transmitter but our ELT is much less 
benign. As for BLT, no I was not referring to the bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwich you 
had for lunch. What on earth could I mean by MIT, ELT and BLT? And why should I be so 
scared of them, singly or in combination? 
That’s enough titillation for now! Let me clarify the mysterious acronyms: MIT stands for the 
middle income trap; ELT is the extended life trap; and BLT is the banking liquidity trap. I hope 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 3
 that,  by  the  time  I  resume  my  seat,  some  of  you  will  begin  to  share  my  concern  that  this 
formidable  trio  packs  a  very  powerful  punch  indeed,  and  constitutes  a  veritable  trifecta  of 
challenge confronting our country. 
This is not just my diagnosis of our current predicament. It is a recurring feature across the 
globe, especially common among middle-income countries. Hence the MIT label, the middle 
income trap. Nations from East to west, from Vietnam to Barbados, and from north to south, 
from  Estonia  to  Botswana,  suffer  the  same  dilemmas.  At  the  heart  of  MIT,  we  find  the 
complacency which I alluded to earlier. A particularly virulent feature of MIT is the fact that 
those very factors that aided middle-income countries to effect the transition from low-income 
and underdeveloped status to their present more comfortable position in the middle income 
order, seem to undergo a genetic mutation and turn into factors which actually hold middle-
income countries back, preventing their next transition to higher income.  
Educated, broad-minded and subtle government leaders, a small set of second-generation 
wealthy bright local business monopolies, a pool of educated but none-too-skilled workers, 
creaking  infrastructure  and  utilities  unable  to  keep  pace  with  development,  policy  inertia 
when  not  downright  policy  paralysis,  accompanied  or  not  by  flows  of  aid,  remittances  and 
foreign direct investment, will not facilitate the new transition.  
Prof  Paul  Collier  reminded  us  the  other  day  when  he  gave  a  lecture  at  the  Bank  of  the 
tremendous  pressure  in  slow-growing  middle-income  countries,  which  find  themselves 
unable to keep pace with either the more dynamic developing countries fast catching up on 
them or the fast-growing middle-income countries getting further and further ahead of them. 
In  the  2009  Industrial  Development  Report  of  UNIDO,  Mauritius  shows  signs  of  becoming 
exactly  such  a  slow-growing  middle-income  economy:  we  occupy  the  55th  position,  far 
behind Malaysia (16th), Turkey (43rd), Tunisia (49th), and not that far ahead of Bangladesh 
at 87th position. In the “logistics performance index”, we do much worse, trailing in 132nd out 
of 150 countries. 
Something  has  clearly  gone  wrong  here,  don’t  you  think?  The  report  offers  a  generic 
explanation. Middle-income countries that developed a niche for themselves some years ago 
are now facing intense competition from new lower-income countries, eager to move up the 
ladder  to  middle-income  category.  The  dynamic  ones  have  enhanced  the  diversity  and 
sophistication  of  the  products  they  produce.  The  laggards  are  competing  with  low-income 
countries for space at the bottom of the export sophistication ladder. Joining in a race to the 
bottom is hardly an appealing prospect.  
To avoid such a catastrophic outcome, we must spare no effort to reengineer, to plug the 
knowledge and skill gap with our Asian competitors, and do whatever it takes to restore our 
competitive  advantage  so  that  our  exporters  become  once  again  a  dynamic  force  of 
economic  transformation.  This  calls  for  profound  changes  in  the  way  we  conduct  our 
business; but therein lies the rub. We seem to have become deeply averse to change. To 
paraphrase Jean Monnet, the architect of the EU, when he observed the resistance to the 
formation  of  the  European  community  and  blind  protectionism  of  their  national  interest  by 
sovereign states in divided post-war Europe all heading for disaster:  
“Man has a natural instinct to resist change until it becomes a necessity, and he 
won’t recognise necessity until he’s faced with a crisis.” 
But, let’s ask ourselves, do we really need a crisis to jolt us out of the Middle Income Trap? 
We know we inhabit one of the most densely-populated countries in the world. We face a 
continued increase in population of some 5–7,000 people a year. Over the next ten years, 
this  means  an  addition  close  to  the  size  of  the  total  population  of  the  Seychelles.  This 
increase is arising, not from increasing fertility which has been steadily declining from 2.05 to 
1.5 over the last ten years, but rather from our longer life expectancy which has increased by 
2 years for both males and females to stand at 69.5 and 76.6, respectively, over the same 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 period.  This  is  the  ELT,  the  Extended  Life  Trap,  the  second  leg  of  the  trifecta  to  which  I 
referred. 
It  has  some  very  serious  social,  economic,  and  financial  implications,  which  are  not  self-
evident. We are living longer, healthier lives and surely that is a good thing, isn’t it? Our very 
good performance on the Human Development Index is built on it. It is a feature we share 
with  some  advanced  countries  in  the  western  world  and  surely  that’s  a  good  thing  too! 
Nothing to worry about there, one would be tempted to say! Where’s the trap I’m going on 
about?  
It all boils down to a question of affordability. As baby-boomers move into a long and well-
deserved  retirement,  the  pensioner  support  ratio  is  worsening,  which  means  there  will  be 
fewer and fewer people in employment per pensioner. The median age has risen by nearly 
four years in the last decade from 28.5 to 32.1 years. By 2019, our population pyramid will 
look more like one of the gleaming tower blocks going up all over the place and less like a 
pyramid.  Unfunded  old  age  pensions  and  universal  health  care  providing  costly  high-tech 
medicine  to  a  growing  number  of  senior  citizens  in  the  last  years  of  their  life  may  rapidly 
outstrip our capacity to finance them.  
The recent experience of some countries such as France is there to remind us of the risks to 
which  we  expose  ourselves  if  we  do  not  undertake  the  appropriate  reforms  in  time.  The 
street  demonstrations  which  followed  in  the  wake  of  the  French  government’s  attempt  to 
extend  the  retirement  age  also  explain  why  policy-makers  are  so  reluctant  to  grasp  this 
particular  nettle.  Why  incur  the  wrath  of  an  unbridled  electorate  today  to  tackle  a  problem 
which is building up to explode only some time in the future? The Extended Life Trap, which 
brings a panoply of problems relating to fiscal sustainability and intergenerational transfers, 
may overwhelm middle-income countries if the underlying problems remain unaddressed. 
Let  me  now  come  to  the  third  component  of  my  sinister  trinity:  BLT.  This  is  the  Banking 
Liquidity  Trap.  I  do  not  need  to  tell  an  audience  such  as  the  one  we  have  tonight  of  the 
importance  of  money  and  finance  to  a  modern  economy.  With  the  global  financial  and 
economic crisis, there’s scarcely anybody around the country who has not been touched in 
one way or another by its after-effects. The problem there at the epicentre of the crisis was a 
credit crunch arising from a lack of liquidity in the system. The problem here is an excess of 
liquidity,  coexisting  back-to-back  with  a  credit  crunch  affecting  some  sectors.  There, 
governments have overborrowed, or are doing quantitative easing, making financial markets 
and  bondholders  nervous  and  demanding  higher  returns  and  driving  up  yields.  Here, 
Government is not rolling over all its domestic maturing debt, making banks awash with cash, 
and  driving  down  yields  on  treasuries.  That  is  why  solutions  applicable  there  cannot  and 
should not be transposed here. 
We have been cutting back the excess liquidity in the system. We did not panic when it hit 
nearly Rs 8 billion in mid-August this year when it equated to over 43% of the currency in 
circulation. This excess was partly driven by FDI inflows which we were forced to mop up in 
an  attempt  at  partial  sterilisation.  We  issued  a  rapidly-escalating  volume  of  Bank  paper 
during the year. In addition to short-term bills of maturity of up to a year, we found ourselves 
forced to issue notes of longer-term maturities, ranging from two to four years, to pick up the 
slack  created  by  net  redemption  of  Government  paper.  The  amount  of  Bank  of  Mauritius 
paper  outstanding  now  totals  Rs  7.3  billion,  comprising  bills  of  Rs  3.8  billion  and  notes  of 
Rs 3.5  billion.  In  spite  of  all  these  efforts,  we  still  had  an  excess  liquidity  of  nearly 
Rs 4.2 billion at the close of business yesterday.  
Now, it is quite possible, indeed very likely, that the demand for loanable funds has fallen off 
as a result of the knock-on effects of the global economic crisis and the timid recovery. There 
is a famous law in economics to the effect that supply creates its own demand. They say a 
certain Monsieur Say said it. That law has been suspended, it seems. Whether in the vaults 
of commercial banks or at the central bank, excess liquidity is idle money. It is equivalent to 
keeping money under the mattress and not using it to put people to work and help business 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 5
 to  thrive.  If  we  take  that  together  with  the  low  net  non-performing  loan  levels  we  have 
achieved, currently standing at just above 2%, and the profits of our banks, now running at 
Rs 50 million per day, we have some difficulty in understanding why the flow of credit to the 
export manufacturing sector has fallen so steeply. 
In the mid-70’s, credit to the manufacturing sector accounted for 42 % of total bank credit. In 
the mid-80’s, this had halved to about 20%. In the mid-90’s, it fell to around 15%. In the last 
five years, this rapid decline continued and averaged a little less than 5%. What is still more 
disturbing than the relative decline is the fall in the actual volume of credit, which contracted 
from Rs 8.2 billion in June 2008 to Rs 6.6 billion in June 2010. The picture is not that dismal 
when  we  look  beyond  manufacturing  at  overall  credit  growth  to  the  private  sector.  Here, 
absolute  volumes  are  still  rising,  having  more  than  doubled  between  June  2005  and 
June 2010, from Rs 102 billion to Rs 217 billion. But the rate of overall credit growth has also 
been decimated in this period, from an annual 26% to only 8%.  
All  this  gives  us  cause  for  serious  concern.  Are  our  banks  perhaps  becoming  too  risk-
averse? Is there an unmet demand for loans in parallel with excess liquidity in the system? If 
so, aren’t we failing to tap our full growth potential? By becoming too conservative, are our 
bankers doing us a disservice? It would be foolish to suggest that the bottom line of banks 
does not matter and we are not saying that. We certainly do not want to add our island to the 
list of states such as Iceland and Ireland, coincidentally island-states, with a sad experience 
of what happens when banks become reckless and take excessive risks. Here, we are far 
from that kind of situation. I think it is legitimate to ask ourselves if our banks are just possibly 
focusing too much on their bottom line, to the detriment of the top line for the country as a 
whole?  And  if  so,  we  should  examine  what  measures  we  could  take  to  get  credit  flowing 
again to the sectors in need. We should put our money to work for the people. That is the 
business of banks: fuelling business.  
So, there we are facing this sinister trinity of MIT, ELT and BLT. If we become complacent 
with  our  recent  success,  and  rest  on  our  oars,  if  we  end  up  believing  the  picture-perfect 
image of our island of our tourist brochures, we run the risk of being swept downstream. If we 
do not carefully navigate our way out of the troubled waters that these traps generate, we 
may  put  at  risk,  not  just  our  progress,  but  also  our  hard-earned  gains  in  the  economic 
sweepstakes if not our very survival in the global economy. We may be staring at nothing 
less than the perpetual and progressive impoverishment of our people if we don’t extricate 
ourselves from these traps.  
To  escape  these  traps,  we  need  to  face  up  to  the  multiple  challenges  they  pose.  Most  of 
them go well beyond monetary policy and the narrow remit of central banks. Some intensive 
soul-searching is called for. Is it healthy for many of us to continue to worship at the altar of a 
weak rupee? Should we saddle our poorer compatriots with the additional burden of paying 
for  currency  depreciation?  A  sliding  rupee  will  push  up  prices  in  our  import-dependent 
economy, reduce disposable incomes of consumers, and result in a net transfer of national 
wealth to richer exporters. Ultimately, what is at issue here is a question of social choice. To 
address it, a strong leadership is a must. But so is a clear and agreed framework for action in 
a context of continuing policy analysis. I hesitate to call it a five-year plan for fear that one of 
our honourable guests present here tonight might just find in it, with a little further stretch of 
the imagination, the confirmation of his recent startling observation that the Bank of Mauritius 
Tower is now leaning in a Leninist direction!  
Voltaire, the pre-revolutionary writer, political scientist and wit, observed that:  
“Governments need both shepherds and butchers.” 
We  have  got  the  shepherds.  Bring  on  the  butchers!  Let’s  be  done  with  the  sacred  cows 
standing in the way, sapping our vitality! We need new champions to propel us to the next 
stages  of  development,  which  is  about  achieving  fresh  integrated  economic,  social  and 
environmental harmony. Let us not just sit back and say well done the government, hurrah 
6 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 for our visionary Prime Minister and a pat on the back for the Minister of Finance. We need to 
snap out of our complacency. Above all we must escape our own hubris. 
But this is a celebratory dinner and I have somewhat wandered off course trying to foretell 
the future of our nation and provide some guidance through our troubled waters ahead. So I 
shall just leave you with a new law for survival. On similar occasions in the past, I have given 
you the Maradonna theory of interest rates, and the Einstein theory for success. I have this 
evening  already  made  reference  to  Newton’s  third  law  of  motion  and  Sutton’s  Law,  a  law 
grounded in solid bank robbing experience. So let me now offer, for your digestion, Winston 
Churchill’s law for survival in public office: “It is”, he declared, 
“…the ability to foretell what is going to happen tomorrow, next week, next month 
and  next  year;  and  to  have  the  ability  afterwards  to  explain  why  it  did  not 
happen.” 
Let me conclude, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, with some wise words from 
a former chief executive of Shell Oil, which serve as a golden rule in his industry. Although 
couched in the language of the oilman drilling for oil, it is sound advice, readily applicable to 
public speaking, as you will appreciate:  
“If you are not striking, stop boring!” 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 7
