Paul Fisher: Managing liquidity in the system – the Bank’s liquidity 
insurance operations 
Speech by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director, Markets, and Member of the Monetary Policy 
Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Loan  Market  Association  Syndicated  Loans 
Conference, London, 30 September 2010. 
 The Bank of England uses its balance sheet to support its core objectives of both monetary 
and financial stability. The financial crisis over the past three years has clearly placed more 
emphasis on the latter. So, this morning, I want to set out how the Bank has developed its 
“Sterling  Monetary  Framework”  in  order  to  support  financial  stability:  in  particular  what  we 
refer  to  as  the  “liquidity  insurance” operations. Since  the liquidity  of  the  banking  system  is 
crucial to the functioning of financial markets, this should be of direct interest to the LMA’s 
members. I intend to briefly describe the main facilities as they now stand, including changes 
made  during  the  past  three  years.  I  then  want  to  address  some  topical  issues  that  have 
arisen.  
Central bank money and monetary policy 
The balance sheet of a Central Bank plays a crucial role in the implementation of its policy 
objectives. In a Quarterly Bulletin article earlier this year, we set out an analysis of how the 
Bank of England’s balance sheet evolved during the financial crisis.1 Let me briefly spell out 
the main elements. The main entry on the liability side of the balance sheet is “central bank 
money”, comprising banknotes, which are supplied on demand, and the reserve accounts of 
commercial banks and building societies.2 These are effectively sterling current accounts for 
the  commercial  banks  –  they  are  among  the  safest  assets  a  bank  can  hold  and  are  the 
ultimate means of payment between banks. In normal circumstances, the main entry on the 
asset side of the balance sheet is the Bank’s lending to those same commercial banks.3 In 
setting monetary policy, our normal objective would be to lend exactly the amount of central 
bank money demanded, consistent with the MPC’s choice of Bank Rate. Crucially, although 
the targets for reserves accounts may react to the state of financial stability in the system, 
the Bank’s choices here are dictated by the stance of monetary policy. 
In normal times, we ask the banks to choose their own targets for reserve accounts and then 
lend just enough cash to the system as a whole so that the banks can collectively meet the 
aggregate of their targets. The commercial banks will then lend to, or borrow from each other 
in  the  inter-bank  market,  to  distribute  the  total  amount  of  cash  around  the  system  so  that 
each individual institution can meet its target. Each bank is incentivised to meet its reserves 
target  by  the  application  of  penalty  rates  to  those  who  are  –  on  average  over  a  monthly 
maintenance period – either excessively short or long. If an institution cannot meet its target 
through the inter-bank market, it can use the Bank’s standing deposit and lending facilities. 
Under  these  facilities,  reserve  account  holders  can  deposit  with,  or  borrow  from  the  Bank 
overnight  for  unlimited  amounts  at  a  fixed  penalty  to  Bank  Rate.  So  in  practice,  these 
facilities impose a narrow corridor on either side of the Bank Rate. For example, if it becomes 
cheaper for a commercial bank to borrow under the standing facilities than to borrow in the 
                                                 
1   Cross, Fisher and Weeken (2010), Quarterly Bulletin, 50, 1, pages 34–42. 
2   For the rest of this speech I will take references to “banks” to include building societies. 
3   Exceptionally at the current moment, the main asset is a loan to the Bank of England Asset Purchase Facility 
Fund. 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 1
market, then it will do so, providing a natural ceiling to short-term market interest rates. That 
in turn ensures that overnight interest rates4 remain close to Bank Rate set by the MPC. 
Exceptionally, to fund the programme of asset purchases in 2009/10, the Bank unilaterally 
increased the size of commercial bank reserves on a massive scale – from around £36bn at 
the start to a peak of around £164bn. Since that level was far in excess of the commercial 
banks’ own targets we suspended the reserves averaging system and agreed to pay Bank 
Rate on all reserves held with us. And, in place of lending to the banks, we supplied the extra 
cash to the system by the direct purchases of assets. I want to stress that the banks had no 
choice  but  to  accept  that  their  collective  holdings  of  reserves  would  go  up.  Of  course, 
individual banks could have tried to pass the money in these accounts on to each other, but 
unless it was withdrawn in the form of banknotes, then it would just go round the system and 
end up, each day, back in an account with the Bank of England. And by paying Bank Rate on 
all reserves, we retained close control over market rates, even though the quantity of central 
bank money was swollen. 
Using the balance sheet to support financial stability 
Given that these mechanisms are used to implement monetary policy set by the MPC, then 
what  else  can  a  central  bank  do  with  its  balance  sheet  to  support  financial  stability, 
independently of those monetary policy decisions? That’s the question that I want to focus on 
in the rest of this talk. 
The nature of a commercial bank’s business fundamentally involves maturity transformation. 
Customer deposits may be available for instant withdrawal while bank lending to corporate 
and  households  tends  to  be  committed,  potentially  for  many  years.  As  a  result,  banks 
typically run significant liquidity risks. The provision of a central bank reserves account helps 
commercial  banks  to  manage  their  liquidity  risk,  by  allowing  them  meet  their  ordinary 
payments  needs,  including  normal  intra-day  variations.  But  at  times,  even  a  well-run  bank 
can suffer an unexpected shortage of liquidity. To mitigate that risk, the central bank provides 
back-stop  liquidity  insurance  to  both  individual  institutions  and  to  the  system  as  a  whole 
under stress (as in the aftermath of Lehman’s collapse, reflecting a system-wide increase in 
both credit and liquidity risk). The objective is to reduce the cost of liquidity disruptions for 
solvent  and  viable  institutions  and  so  maintain  the  flow  of  payments  services  of  the  UK 
financial system. But in meeting that objective, the Bank must ensure that it guards against 
moral  hazard,  by  setting  the  incentives  in  such  a  way  that  discourages  anything  but 
exceptional use of our facilities, and that it adequately protects its own balance sheet from 
risk of loss.5 
Operational Standing Facilities 
The process of reserves averaging should deal with small unexpected liquidity shortages or 
long positions. For larger shocks, the most immediate short-term form of liquidity insurance is 
the Bank’s Operational Standing Facilities which, as well as helping keep short-term interest 
rates  close  to  Bank  Rate,  can  help  individual  firms  cope  with  frictional  stress  such  as 
operational  disruptions  and  short-term  volatility  in  market  interest  rates.  Under  these 
                                                 
4   Since lending to the Bank is free from credit risk, it is the secured overnight rate – up to the next MPC decision 
date – that should be broadly in line with Bank Rate. 
5   The intention is to avoid a firm drawing on publicly-provided liquidity support mechanisms if they actually have 
a fundamental problem of solvency or viability. But liquidity risk can never be completely distinguished from 
solvency risk at a point of stress. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2010
facilities,  reserve  account  holders  can  deposit  with,  or  borrow  from  the  Bank  overnight  for 
unlimited amounts at a penalty to Bank Rate.6 
Open Market Operations 
The  Bank’s  Open  Market  Operations  (OMOs)  take  the  form  of  reverse  repo  operations 
–  economically  equivalent  to  secured  lending  –  at  different  maturities.  Normally  we  would 
lend  (cash)  short-term  for  one  week  and  longer-term  for  multiples  of  three  months.  Short-
term repos have not been needed regularly since we started to inject cash directly via the 
asset  purchase  programme.  But  normally  short-term  lending  operations  would  take  place 
weekly  at  a  size  designed  to  be  consistent  with  the  commercial  banks’  aggregate  reserve 
targets for that maintenance period. This short-term lending takes place against a relatively 
narrow set of high quality collateral – mainly government bonds. The price has usually been 
Bank Rate7 and bids pro-rated. 
Short-term  repos  are  not  intended  to  provide  any  back-stop  liquidity  support.  They  are 
limited, competitive and take a narrow range of high quality collateral. They are designed to 
help  implement  the  monetary  policy  stance.  If  there  is  excess  central  bank  money  in  the 
system relative to reserve targets, the Bank can also drain cash out. We can do this either by 
repo of bonds held on the Bank’s balance sheet or by offering to supply one-week Bank of 
England bills at Bank Rate.8 
Longer-term  repos  have  a  monetary  objective  in  part.  It  is  not  necessarily  efficient  to  lend 
very large amounts of cash every week in short-term repos. It would imply that the market 
was  consistently  short  of  cash  in  large  size  on  a  week-by-week  basis,  perhaps  putting 
unnecessary  strain  on  the  inter-bank  lending  market  and  on  the  Bank’s  operations.  That 
strain could, perhaps, cause unwanted volatility in overnight rates. By lending a proportion of 
the cash for longer term – three months or more – the Bank can ensure that the size of short-
term repo operations are set at an appropriate level. 
Using longer-term repos to meet financial stability objectives has grown in importance during 
the  financial  market  crisis.  They  can  provide  liquidity  support  in  at  least  three  dimensions: 
maturity, size and collateral type. The inter-bank market has been quite disrupted at times 
during  the  past  three  years.  Counterparty  credit  concerns  have  limited  unsecured  lending, 
and liquidity was sometimes hoarded. A range of asset managers increased their holdings of 
cash at increasingly short maturity – ultimately in overnight accounts – concentrated in what 
they  assessed  to  be  the  safest  banks.  In  consequence,  other  banks  struggled  to  get  the 
liquidity they needed via market mechanisms, particularly term borrowing, even when there 
was  more  than  sufficient  cash  in  the  system  as  a  whole  and  even  if  the  firms  had  good 
quality collateral. The amounts being rolled in overnight markets became a risk in itself. The 
Bank  responded  by  massively  increasing  its  lending  at  three  months  maturity  from  £12bn 
before the crisis to a peak of around £180bn in early 2009. Essentially we chose to lend so 
that  any  bank  which  needed  to  could  bid  for  and  obtain  liquidity  at  three  months.  The 
significant  increase  in  term  liquidity  that  ensued  meant  that  there  would  have  been 
downwards pressure on short-term interest rates. So in order to keep market interest rates 
close to Bank Rate, the Bank drained the excess liquidity via issuing Bank of England bills. 
At its peak, the Bank issued around £100bn of one-week bills. 
                                                 
6   Currently, the deposit rate is zero and the borrowing rate 75bps. In more normal conditions, these spreads can 
be expected to be symmetric around Bank Rate. 
7   The Bank can choose to lend in variable rate repos. This happened for a brief period in mid-2009. 
8   Again,  variable  rate  bills  could  be  used.  This  happened  during  the  first  few  months  of  the  asset  purchase 
programme. 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 3
This process of lending on one side of the Bank’s balance sheet and borrowing on the other 
–  both  in  large  scale  –  effectively  dis-intermediated  the  malfunctioning  sterling  inter-bank 
market, ensuring that central bank money got to all those counterparties which needed it. 
In addition to the greater size and longer maturity of lending, the Bank also widened the pool 
of  collateral  eligible  in  the  three-month  lending  operations  to  accept  high-quality  private 
sector  securities.9  These  included  AAA  RMBS  and  covered  bonds,  neither  of  which  had 
previously been taken as collateral by the Bank in OMOs.10 This provided further support to 
the banking system, at a time when both primary and secondary markets for these private 
sector securities had closed. 
The temporary expansion of long-term repos during the crisis raised a number of important 
policy  questions  for  the  Bank.  Firstly,  it  was  very  difficult  to  decide  exactly  how  large  the 
operations should be. This had to be assessed by reading market conditions. Secondly, the 
Bank also had to set an appropriate price to charge for lending against wider collateral, to 
mitigate adverse selection and the moral hazard risk. A minimum 50 basis point spread was 
applied. Thirdly, since the increase in the Bank’s liabilities (commercial bank reserves) was 
being  funded  at  Bank  Rate,  and  the  assets  were  earning  rates  linked  to  3-month  market 
rates, there was a significant interest-rate mis-match. When Bank Rate was cut rapidly and 
by more than was anticipated by the market during Autumn 2008, the Bank recorded a large, 
unintentional surplus.11 In the permanent regime, it is important that the Bank not be exposed 
to the risk of a large loss if Bank Rate were to be increased above market expectations. 
In June 2010, those operations were replaced with a new permanent framework designed in 
part  to  reflect  these  concerns.  The  operations,  pioneered  with  the  invaluable  help  of  Paul 
Klemperer  from  Nuffield  College,  Oxford,  are  known  as  “Indexed  Long-Term  Repos”.  The 
most  innovative  aspect  is  that  banks  can  bid  to  borrow  cash  against  either  the  normal, 
“narrow”  collateral  set  –  as  standard  in  short-term  repos  –  or  a  “wider”  set  of  collateral, 
including private sector securities. Counterparties can submit bids using one or both types of 
collateral.  They  can  even  make  a  “paired  bid”,  quoting  spreads  at  which  they  would  be 
indifferent between the two collateral sets. The Bank of England then allocates a proportion 
of  the  operation  against  wider  collateral,  where  that  proportion  depends  on  the  spreads 
offered. The idea is that as the market becomes more stressed, counterparties are willing to 
pay  more  to  borrow  against  wider  collateral.  As  the  clearing  spread  rises  the  Bank, 
automatically  within  the  auction,  lends  a  greater  proportion  against  wider  collateral.  The 
clearing price is the intersection of the revealed demand schedule of the firms bidding and 
the private supply schedule of the Bank of England. After each ILTR operation, the Bank can 
use the pattern of bids to help assess whether the total amount on offer needs to be changed 
for the next monthly operation. In addition, we decided to index the clearing spreads to the 
subsequent  out-turn  for  Bank  Rate,  with  a  minimum  spread  of  zero  so  that  there  is  no 
interest-rate risk to the Bank of England. 
Finally,  the  Bank  is  also  able  to  respond  to  strains  in  short-term  foreign  currency  funding 
markets, utilising swap lines with other central banks to conduct foreign currency OMOS. For 
example,  in  September  2008,  the  Bank,  in  concert  with  a  number  of  other  central  banks, 
announced coordinated measures designed to address continued elevated pressures in US 
dollar short-term funding markets. 
                                                 
9  
10   Our approach to risk managing these securities has been set out in the Quarterly Bulletin. See Breeden and 
Initially the collateral list was expanded in the Autumn of 2007 and then again in Autumn 2008. 
Whisker (2010), Quarterly Bulletin, 50, 2, pages 94–103. 
11   See Bank of England (2009), Annual Report and Accounts 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2010
The Special Liquidity Scheme 
During early 2008, following the collapse of Bear Stearns, and with the continued closure of 
the  securitisation  markets  making  mortgage-backed  securities  and  hence  mortgages 
substantially illiquid, it became clear that additional and exceptional liquidity support would be 
needed for the UK banking system. The Special Liquidity Scheme was designed to provide 
that support on a one-off basis, in large size and for a long maturity. The form of the Scheme 
was an asset swap (effectively a collateral upgrade). For a fee, the commercial banks were 
lent  nine-month  Treasury  bills  against  a  broad  set  of  eligible  collateral.  In  practice  the 
collateral received in the Scheme was dominated by own-name residential mortgage backed 
securities  (RMBS  and  covered  bonds).  The  banks  could  use  the  Treasury  bills  to  raise 
liquidity in the market, at a time when the primary, secondary and repo markets for RMBS 
were all closed. These bills were also eligible in the Bank’s repo operations. 
The Scheme was limited to lending against collateral that was held on balance sheet at the 
end  of  2007.  The  principle  was  that  the  Bank  shouldn’t  support  the  banks  in  issuing  new 
securities for which there might not be a private market or to subsidise new lending.12 The 
fact that the Special Liquidity Scheme was a form of asset swap meant that it had no impact 
on  the  supply  of  central  bank  money  and  thus  no  direct  implications  for  monetary  policy. 
Following standard accounting practice, it was not on the Bank’s balance sheet.13 
The Scheme will expire at the end of January 2012. It will not be extended or replaced. After 
three  years  of  large-scale  liquidity  support  the  Bank  expects  each  institution  to  be  in  a 
position to fund itself through normal market mechanisms. In order to prevent a refinancing 
“cliff” at the end of 2011, the Bank has had bilateral discussions with the main users of the 
Scheme to ensure that there are credible funding plans in place to reduce their use of it in a 
smooth fashion. Of the £185bn of Treasury bills initially advanced, some £57bn has already 
been repaid.  
The Discount Window Facility 
Alongside the Operational Standing Facilities to cope with short-term frictional shocks, and 
Long-Term  Repos  to  cope  with  system-wide  liquidity  shocks,  the  Bank’s  Discount  Window 
Facility  offers  large-scale  liquidity  support  for  idiosyncratic  as  well  as  system-wide  shocks. 
The Discount Window was launched during the heart of the crisis in October 2008. It allows 
banks  and  building  societies  to  borrow  gilts  against  a  wide  range  of  collateral,  at  fees 
reflecting the type of that collateral and the size of the drawing relative to the size of the firm. 
Although similar in principle, the Discount Window is not intended to be a direct replacement 
for the Special Liquidity Scheme. It is both shorter-term and more expensive in steady-state, 
in  line  with  the  underlying  principles  for  all  the  Bank  of  England’s  permanent  liquidity 
insurance operations: that commercial banks should be incentivised to manage their liquidity 
risk prudently in the market. The terms were also designed to protect the Bank against risk to 
its own balance sheet.  
Transactions under the Discount Window facility are intended to be for a maximum 30 days, 
although  they  can  be  rolled.  In  recognition  of  continuing  stresses  in  financial  markets,  the 
Bank  announced  in  January  2009  that,  for  an  additional  fee  of  25  basis  points,  it  would 
temporarily permit drawings from the Discount Window with a maximum term of 364 days.  
                                                 
12   Because  covered  bonds  and  master  trust  RMBS  are  based  on  revolving  pools  of  mortgages,  an  exception 
was made to accommodate them, but with a strictly declining limit over the three year life of the Scheme. 
13   But  it  did  require  Treasury  agreement  for  the  Debt  Management  Office  to  create  and  lend  the  additional 
Treasury bills, and for the Treasury to underwrite the Scheme should there be any losses. 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 5
Access to the Discount Window is only permitted for firms that are considered by the Bank to 
be  solvent  and  viable.  Nevertheless,  large  scale  borrowing  from  the  central  bank  can 
generate credit risk concerns in the minds of market counterparties. To avoid this “stigma”, 
the Bank releases information on the use of the Facility averaged over counterparties and 
over a three-month period, released with a further quarter’s lag. 
Following a market consultation, the Bank has recently announced that, as of early next year, 
it  will  extend  the  range  of  collateral  it  is  willing  to  take  in  the  Discount  Window  to  include 
diverse portfolios of “raw” loans.14 This extension has a number of advantages. Securitising 
loans into asset backed securities – such RMBS – is expensive and only available to firms 
large  enough  to  have  a  securitisation  programme.  Allowing  portfolios  of  loans  to  be  used 
directly  as  collateral  means  that  a  smaller  firm,  without  a  securitisation  platform,  can  also 
access the Window. Since financial instability can start with smaller banks just as easily as 
larger  ones,  expanding  the  universe  of  possible  Discount  Window  counterparties  has  a 
significant financial stability benefit. By eliminating the need for securitisation, it also reduces 
somewhat the costs for all firms in maintaining a portfolio of collateral pre-positioned at the 
Bank of England. We encourage counterparties to lodge collateral with the Bank and to use it 
to test the system. This ensures that they are able to draw on the Facility immediately in a 
time  of  need  so  that  the  system  is  prepared  for  and  protected  against  further  bouts  of 
instability. 
We were very grateful for the LMA’s thoughtful response to the Bank’s consultation on DWF 
collateral and, in particular, for their very positive support of our proposal to take portfolios of 
loans.  We  did  not  agree  on  everything  that  the  LMA  wanted!  We  feel  it  would  be 
inappropriate  to  take  leveraged  loans  as  collateral  for  example,  given  the  higher  risk 
associated with them. But we look forward to working together in the future. Amongst other 
things, sorting out the documentation of loan portfolios will be an important priority for both us 
and for the LMA going forward. 
Related issues 
Having described the Bank’s liquidity insurance operations, I want to address a few Related 
issues which are sometimes raised with me. The first concerns the state of the securitisation 
markets and that for covered bonds in particular. In Europe, the ECB routinely takes covered 
bonds and other private sector securities as collateral in all of its operations. And there is a 
perception of state support for the covered bond market, perhaps because covered bonds 
have often been issued by quasi-state banks. The Bank is occasionally lobbied by industry 
representatives  to  offer  more  support  to  the  covered  bond  market.  I  want  to  make  three 
points in response.  
First, that RMBS and covered bonds are already eligible collateral in both the Indexed Long-
Term Repo operations and in the Discount Window Facility alongside a range of other private 
sector  securities.15  It  is  only  short-term  OMOs,  which  are  conducted  for  monetary  policy 
purposes, where such assets are not eligible. In order to help manage the risks arising from 
securitised assets, and to help improve market functioning by establishing higher standards, 
the  Bank  will  be  demanding  detailed  disclosures  –  to  the  Bank  and  publicly  –  on  the 
underlying assets and structures. This transparency initiative has generally been welcomed 
by investors and we hope it will encourage the establishment of viable securitisation markets 
in future.  
                                                 
14   Further details are available on the Bank’s website at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/marketnotice100719.pdf. 
15   A bank may not submit its own covered bonds in Long Term Repos, only those of other issuers. But it may 
submit either in the DWF. 
6 
 BIS Review 126/2010
Second,  the  Bank’s  permanent  operations  are  intended  to  offer  liquidity  support  for  the 
banking  system,  not  for  the  market  in  any  one  particular  type  of  security.  Intervening  in  a 
partial  way  could  create  unfortunate  market  distortions.  If  there  is  a  genuine  market  for  a 
private sector security, it should be able to support itself in the medium-term without special 
forms of liquidity support from the authorities. 
Third,  the  asset  purchase  programme,  although  focussed on  buying  gilts,  was  intended  to 
support  the  liquidity  of  all  private  sector  securities  by  forcing  would-be  gilt  holders  to 
purchase more risky assets (rather than by direct central bank purchases of those assets). 
There is plenty of evidence to suggest that was indeed the outcome and most private sector 
markets have recovered to some degree. The covered bond market has also been supported 
by the introduction of FSA regulations, to provide additional comfort for investors.16 
A second topical issue is bank funding more generally. It is often asserted that the Special 
Liquidity Scheme provides a funding source for banks and that, given continuing pressures 
on them to raise funds to support lending, we should extend the lifetime of the Scheme. The 
first  point  to  note  is  that  the  Scheme  facilitates  funding  but  does  not  provide  it  directly. 
Rather,  as  I  have  outlined  today,  the  SLS  provides  a  collateral  upgrade  and  the  private 
sector remains the ultimate source of funding as the Treasury Bills lent under the Scheme 
are turned into cash in the market. A similar point can be made about debt issued under the 
Government’s  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  –  the  Government  provides  a  guarantee  but  it  is 
still the market which buys the bonds and provides the cash. As these schemes come to an 
end,  the  challenge  for  the  banks  is  not  so  much  the  sourcing  of  an  additional  quantity  of 
funding. It is to roll over that existing market funding into different funding instruments. 
More generally, a central bank should not allow its liquidity operations to become, or even to 
be perceived as a source of sustained funding for banks or for any other form of medium-
term lending. The only medium-term source of commercial bank funding, and hence for their 
lending, is private sector savings, whether channelled through retail or wholesale markets. A 
central bank does not have access to those private sector savings. 
The grey area is that short-term liquidity support, in size and continually rolled over, looks 
and acts a lot like funding. That is why the Special Liquidity Scheme was designed to lend 
against legacy assets only and one of the reasons why the Bank has been so determined 
that it will end as scheduled. Suppose the scheme were to be rolled on indefinitely. What was 
intended and designed as system-wide central bank liquidity support would become instead 
a  fiscal  operation.  We  would  be  using  government  debt  –  and  hence  public  money  –  to 
subsidise  a  group  of  private  sector  firms,  with  the  public  purse  being  at  risk.  There  are 
serious political choices here, and they are not for the central bank to make. 
I have set out in this talk many of the things that a central bank can do with its balance sheet. 
It can create central bank money, and does so in implementing monetary policy. It can also 
support financial stability. The Bank can use its operations to distribute money around the 
banking  system  when  the  inter-bank  market  is  not  operating  properly.  And  it  can  provide 
emergency short-term liquidity support for the system or individual banks under operational 
and market stress by changing the size, the maturity and the type of collateral taken in its 
operations. And can even supply foreign currency in extremis. But, being without access to 
private sector savings, the Bank can not provide sustained, medium-term funding for banks, 
nor lend directly in size to the non-financial sector on a sustained basis. 
                                                 
16   More information is available at http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/international/uk_rcb.pdf. 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 7
Credit supply and syndicated loans 
Finally, and especially given the nature of this conference, I want to touch on the supply of 
credit more generally. Despite various forms of support from the Bank of England and from 
Government,  it  is  clear  that  the  lending  capacity  of  the  banking  system,  in  the  UK  and 
elsewhere,  is  impaired  and  will  take  some  years  yet  to  recover.  Some  banks  need  to 
continue de-risking and de-leveraging. Others, including new banks, are likely to grow. But 
the supply of bank lending to businesses during the recovery is likely to be more expensive 
than  it  was  pre-crisis  and  possibly  constrained  in  quantity.  In  2009  we  saw  one  of  the 
consequences,  with  a  record  year  for  sterling  corporate  bond  and  equity  issuance  as 
investment grade corporates by-passed the banking sector. 
The loans market is a particularly important part of the system of credit provision. Syndicated 
loans allow firms to borrow in larger size and for longer periods, and facilitate the lenders in 
diversifying  their  risk.  Given  the  highly  concentrated  origination  of  business  lending  in  this 
country, it is useful that the syndicated loans market and the secondary loans market allow a 
wider  group  of  firms  to  contribute  to  lending  to  UK  businesses,  including  non-bank 
participation.  
Over the next few years there are a lot of corporate loans, made during the boom years of 
credit  supply,  which  fall  due  for  repayment  or  rollover.  That  is  a  particular  challenge  for 
subinvestment  grade  borrowers,  including  most  SMEs.  It  is  clear  that  the  high-yield  debt 
markets are very much more developed in the United States than in Europe and so a greater 
burden here falls on bank finance. But non-banks may also have a key role to play. The Bank 
has  been  engaging  with  market  participants  over  policies  or  market  developments  in  the 
loans  market  which  would  support  lending  by  non-bank  institutions.  Some  of  that  analysis 
was reflected in a discussion paper on non-bank lending, published by HM Treasury earlier 
this  year.  Whatever  the  ultimate  source  of  finance,  we  sincerely  hope  that  the  UK  loans 
market will be able to play its part in the necessary provision of credit to viable small and 
medium-sized  businesses  which  will  be,  in  large  part,  the  future  source  of  UK  economic 
growth. 
8 
 BIS Review 126/2010
