Philip Lowe: Forecasting in an uncertain world 
Address by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, 
at  the  Australian  Business  Economists  Annual  Forecasting  Conference  dinner,  Sydney, 
8 December 2010. 
 Thank you for the invitation to join the Australian Business Economists (ABE) this evening. It 
is both an honour and pleasure to be able to speak at the ABE’s annual dinner.  
This evening, I would like to talk about an issue that I know is close to the hearts of many of you. 
It is also one that you have been discussing all afternoon. And that is economic forecasting.  
As economists, forecasting is something we are required to do on a regular basis. As a policy 
adviser, as a business person or as an investor, one has no choice but to be forward looking. 
So for many of us, some form of forecasting – with all its difficulties and pitfalls – is the bread 
and butter of our professional lives.  
Tonight,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  three  aspects  of  forecasting  from  the  perspective  of  a 
central  banker.  The  first  is  the  general  role  that  forecasts  play  in  the  setting  of  monetary 
policy. The second is the approach to forecasting that we use at the Reserve Bank.1 And the 
third  is  some  of  the  issues  that  we  have  been  grappling  with  as  we  have  put  our  current 
forecasts together.  
Monetary policy and forecasting 
Australia’s monetary policy framework is best described as a medium-term inflation target. 
Over time, we want to ensure that inflation averages somewhere between 2 and 3 per cent. 
And this is exactly what has happened since this framework was put in place. Since 1993, 
CPI  inflation,  excluding  the  effects  of  the  introduction  of  the  GST,  has  averaged  exactly 
2.5 per cent.2 This is in contrast to average inflation of 8.7 per cent over the previous two 
decades (Graph 1).  
An  important  feature  of  inflation-targeting  frameworks  is  that  they  are  forward  looking.  We 
know  that  it  takes  time  for  changes  in  monetary  policy  to  have  their  full  effect  on  the 
economy,  just  as  it  takes  time  for  changes  in  other  variables  –  like  the  terms  of  trade  or 
government spending – to have their full effects. This means that if we are to achieve our 
medium-term  objective,  and  to  avoid  unnecessary  swings  in  the  economy,  we  need  to  be 
thinking about what might happen in the future.  
When  inflation-targeting  regimes  were  first  established  around  the  world,  many  observers 
characterised  the  appropriate  policy  rule  as  setting  the  policy  rate  so  that  the  inflation 
forecast was at the midpoint of the target band at some specific horizon, say two years. It 
was also often argued that for reasons of enhancing credibility, there should be some form of 
“penalty” on the central bank if inflation moved outside the target band; in effect, the edges of 
the band should be viewed as an “electric fence”, to be avoided if at all possible.  
 
                                                 
1  Previous  discussions  of  the  role  of  forecasts  at  the  RBA  can  be  found  in  Stevens  G  (1999),  “Economic 
Forecasting  and  its  Role  in  Making  Monetary  Policy”,  RBA  Bulletin,  September,  pp  1–9,  and  Stevens 
G (2004), “Better than a Coin Toss? The Thankless Task of Economic Forecasting”, RBA Bulletin, September, 
pp 6–13. 
2  Excluding  the  effect  of  the  GST  and  mortgage  interest  payments,  the  average  inflation  rate  has  been 
2.6 per cent. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 1
Graph 1 
 This  form  of  inflation  targeting,  however,  never  seemed  particularly  attractive  to  the  RBA. 
While we are committed to ensuring that inflation outcomes are consistent with the medium-
term target, we have not felt the need to set the cash rate so that our inflation forecast at a 
specific horizon was exactly 2½ per cent. Nor have we felt that the edges of the target are 
like  an  electric  fence.  We  have,  from  the  outset,  had  a  more  flexible  approach  than  this. 
Since  the  current  framework  was  adopted,  our  two-year-ahead  inflation  forecast  has  on 
occasions been below 2 per cent, and on other occasions it has been above 3 per cent.3 And 
in terms of actual outcomes, year-ended CPI inflation has been outside the 2 to 3 per cent 
range a bit more often than it has been within the range.  
This more flexible approach has two advantages. The first is that, in the event that inflation 
turns out to be unexpectedly too high or too low, the central bank has some flexibility about 
the  pace  at  which  inflation  is  returned  to  the  target  range.  Provided  the  central  bank’s 
commitment  to  medium-term  price  stability  is  credible,  this  flexibility  can  deliver  better 
outcomes for the real economy.  
The second advantage is that this flexibility provides greater scope to take into account not 
just the central forecast, but also the medium-term risks around that forecast.  
Let me try and make this a little more concrete by asking you to think about an economy that 
experiences  a  positive  supply  shock,  say  an  improvement  in  productivity  or  lower  world 
prices for the goods that it imports. Normally, this type of shock would be expected to boost 
economic growth, increase asset returns and lower inflation, at least for a time.  
What then is the right monetary policy in this economy? In a world in which the setting of 
policy is determined solely by the two-year-ahead inflation forecast, the answer may well be 
to  lower  interest  rates.  If  inflation  is  forecast  to  be  below  the  target  midpoint  in  two  years 
time, lower interest rates, at least for a while, would help get inflation closer to target.  
But would lower interest rates be the best response? To answer this I would need to tell you 
some  more  parts  of  the  story.  If  asset  prices  were  rising  very  quickly,  investors  were 
exuberant,  and  the  financial  sector  was  making  credit  liberally  available,  then  lowering 
interest rates simply to hit the inflation target at one specific point in the future may not be the 
                                                 
3 
In part, this reflects the fact that for much of the inflation-targeting period, the forecasts were prepared on the 
assumption that the cash rate was held constant over the forecast horizon. 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2010
best response. Experience has taught us that low interest rates at a time of rapid increases 
in leverage and asset prices can pose significant medium-term risks to the outlook for the 
economy  and  for  inflation.  Ignoring  these  risks,  and  making  leverage  cheaper  by  lowering 
interest  rates,  simply  to  ensure  that  the  short-term  inflation  forecast  was  at  the  target,  is 
unlikely to be the best policy.  
The general point here is that while the central forecast for inflation itself will often provide a 
good guide for policy, this will not always be the case. On some occasions, the medium-term 
risks are just as important.  
It is sometimes argued that the way to deal with these risks is to simply extend the forecast 
horizon  to  say  three  years.  So,  instead  of  setting  the  interest  rate  so  that  the  two-year 
forecast is at the midpoint of target, set it so the three-year forecast is at the midpoint of the 
target. The idea of thinking about what might happen beyond just the next two years makes a 
lot of sense, but the mechanical response of just extending the forecast horizon is probably 
not  the  best  approach.  The  further  out  one  goes,  the  less  certain  one  can  be  about  the 
future.  It  is  hard  enough  to  make  judgements  about  the  risks  that  the  economy  faces,  let 
alone  forecasting  exactly  when  those  risks  might  actually  materialise.  This  makes  it  very 
difficult  to  incorporate  the  future  realisation  of  risks  into  central  forecasts.  While  we  might 
have  a  reasonable  degree  of  confidence  that  some  particular  risk  will  materialise  at  some 
point,  predicting  that  point  is  extremely  hard.  In  my  own  view  then,  this  means  that  just 
simply extending the forecast horizon for the point forecast of inflation is an unsatisfactory 
way of dealing with risk.  
The better approach is to have a flexible inflation target that effectively anchors medium-term 
inflation expectations, but provides the scope to take into account the various risks that arise 
in the complicated world in which we live. This means that we need to be thinking about the 
whole distribution of possible outcome, both in the short-term and medium-term, and not just 
the point forecasts over the next one or two years. Under this approach, at times, the two-
year  inflation  forecast  will  be  away  from  the  midpoint  of  the  target  band.  The  flexibility 
embedded in this approach obviously needs to be exercised with care, and relatively rarely, 
but good policy means that, in some circumstances, it does need to be utilised.  
In setting policy from month to month, the RBA Board spends a lot of time discussing the 
likely evolution of inflation and output and the risks facing the economy. In late 2008, when 
the outlook took a turn for the worse and the downside risks increased, the Board lowered 
the cash rate quickly and in large steps, despite inflation at the time being above the target 
band. Then, in late 2009 and early 2010 when the outlook had brightened, the cash rate was 
increased,  with  lending  rates  returning  to  around  normal  levels.  And  just  last  month,  the 
Board again increased the cash rate, with the result that monetary policy is now judged to be 
slightly on the restrictive side.  
This latest decision was taken not because the economy is currently growing too quickly or 
that inflation is currently too high. Clearly, neither is the case. Rather, it was made on the 
basis  of  the  outlook  for  output  and  inflation.  With  the  economy  currently  operating  with 
relatively limited spare capacity at a time when a substantial lift in investment is expected, it 
was judged that inflation was more likely to rise than fall over the next few years. Given this, 
the Board judged that it prudent to make an early and modest adjustment to the cash rate. In 
doing so, the Board has sought to reduce the probability of inflation rising to uncomfortably 
high levels and thus requiring a more substantial increase in interest rates later on.  
Before I turn to the forecasting process itself, it is important to emphasise that the Board’s 
decisions are not driven in a mechanical fashion by the forecasts. Both the Bank staff and 
the  Board  are  very  conscious  of  the  limitations  of  numerical  forecasts.  Predicting  exactly 
which quarter inflation is likely to increase, and at what pace, is inherently difficult. What is 
often more useful is the analysis and storyline that support the numerical forecasts. It is this 
analysis, rather than exact numbers, that is rightly the main focus of our internal discussions 
and our communication with the public.  
BIS Review 167/2010 
 3
Forecasting at the Reserve Bank 
I would now like to turn to the actual forecasting process at the RBA.  
As many of you know, we publish a table that sets out our forecasts of inflation and growth 
each  quarter  in  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy.  We  also  discuss  the  broad  analysis 
underlying these forecasts and the main risks. Consistent with our general approach, we do 
this  in  words,  rather  than  using  fan  charts  showing  statistical  bands  of  uncertainty  as  has 
become popular in some other countries.  
The forecasts that are published in the Statement on Monetary Policy are discussed at the 
Board meeting three days earlier and are developed through a series of internal meetings 
over the preceding month. Outside of this quarterly cycle, the forecasts are kept under review 
by the staff.  
The  actual  forecasting  process  has  three  key  elements.  The  first  is  the  day-to-day 
assessment of trends in the economy. The second is the use of formal econometric models. 
And the third is the information that we obtain from our business liaison program. I would like 
to touch on each of these.  
The obvious starting point is to understand what is currently happening in the economy and 
the  financial  system  and  what  that  means  for  the  future.  In  our  Economic  Analysis 
Department there are around 50 economists continually monitoring the pulse of the domestic 
and  global  economies.  Elsewhere  in  the  Bank,  staff  are  analysing  developments  in  the 
financial system and financial markets.  
Inevitably  the  data  that  we  look  at  are  subject  to  measurement  error  and  they  are  often 
conflicting. This means that much of our time is spent discussing the data and what they tell 
us about recent trends, as well as the future. Judgement is obviously critical here, with the 
strong collective memory of the Bank staff playing an important role. The judgments that are 
reached are also anchored by some underlying economic relationships and concepts. As we 
prepare  our  forecasts,  we  are  constantly  asking  ourselves  questions  such  as:  how  much 
spare capacity does the economy have; what constitutes full employment; what is the neutral 
real  interest  rate;  what  is  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy;  what  is  the  state  of 
private-sector  balance  sheets;  and  how  well  anchored  are  inflation  expectations.  I  know 
many of you ask the same questions.  
In most cases it is not possible to come up with definitive answers to these questions, and 
the Bank certainly does not have doctrinaire views. What we do is continually confront our 
conditional  assessments  with  the  ongoing  flow  of  economic  data.  When  things  turn  out 
differently to what we expect, we study the outcomes very closely to see what we can learn. 
This  process  of  continual  testing,  learning  and  re-testing  is  at  the  core  of  our  forecasting 
process.  
The second element of our forecasting is the use of a suite of forecasting models. This suite 
includes  simple,  single-equation  models,  multi-dimensional  vector  autoregressive  models, 
and an estimated structural Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) model. We use 
this suite, rather than just a single model, because of the considerable uncertainties in the 
modelling process. Most of the time, we look for the central tendency of the various models 
and use them to inform the more judgemental process that I just discussed. The models are 
also used in the development of various scenarios.  
The third part of the forecasting process is our liaison with business. Each month the RBA 
staff across the country conduct around a hundred meetings with businesses and agencies 
in an effort to better understand what is happening right now and what is likely to happen in 
the future. Over recent years, a couple of examples stand out where this liaison has been 
particularly important. One was in helping us understand the implications of the much tighter 
credit conditions in 2008 and 2009. And the other has been helping us understand the scale 
and the timing of the pick-up in investment in the resources sector. In both cases, our liaison 
4 
 BIS Review 167/2010
provided us with valuable information that was not available elsewhere and had a significant 
role in shaping our forecasts.  
So that in a nutshell is how we go about forecasting. It is a combination of judgement, formal 
models  and  liaison.  And,  as  I  said  a  few  minutes  ago,  it  is  as  much  about  the  underlying 
analysis and storyline as it is about a particular set of numbers.  
in 
A higher capital stock 
I would now like to discuss a couple of practical considerations that we have been thinking 
about as we have put our forecasts together over recent times.  
The first of these is the implications of a significant increase in Australia’s stock of physical 
capital.  
As the Governor spoke about at length last week, Australia is experiencing a perhaps once-
in-a-century  boom 
the  urbanisation  and 
industrialisation of Asia. This boom has increased the average return on physical capital in 
Australia,  although  clearly  there  is  significant  variation  across  sectors,  with  the  return  on 
capital in some sectors having declined.  
The  increase  in  the  average  return  on  capital  means  that  it  is  plausible  to  argue  that  the 
optimal  capital  stock  in  Australia  has  increased,  perhaps  significantly  so.  Not  surprisingly 
then, the ratio of business investment to GDP has been high over the past five years, and it 
is  expected  to  remain  high  over  the  next  few  years.  Since  2005,  Australia’s  capital  stock 
(excluding  dwellings)  is  estimated  to  have  increased  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  around 
5½ per cent. This is up by 2 percentage points from the average rate of increase over the 
previous quarter of a century (Graph 2).  
largely  reflecting 
terms  of 
trade, 
the 
Graph 2 
 One implication of this pick-up in investment is a pick-up in growth in the economy’s overall 
capital-labour  ratio.  Again,  over  the  25  years  to  2005,  this  ratio  increased  at  an  average 
annual rate of around 1¾ per cent. In contrast, over the past five years, it has increased at 
twice  this  pace,  and  this  faster  rate  of  increase  is  also  likely  to  continue  for  a  while  yet 
(Graph 3). In effect, we are becoming a more capital-intensive economy, with movements in 
world prices leading to a significant expansion of the resources sector, which is one of the 
most capital-intensive sectors of the economy.  
BIS Review 167/2010 
 5
Graph 3 
 From a forecasting perspective, this raises a host of interesting questions. I want to touch on 
just three of them.  
The first question is the implication for the growth rate of potential output. If everything else 
were constant, faster growth in the capital stock should lead to faster growth in potential output. 
If  we  use  a  simple  production  function,  for  example,  and  hold  everything  else  constant,  the 
2 percentage point increase in the growth rate of the capital stock (excluding dwellings) that we 
have seen would lift potential growth by ½ percentage point or possibly a bit more.  
But of course, everything else is not constant. In particular, total factor productivity growth has 
slowed significantly over the past decade. Indeed, according to the national accounts, almost 
all the growth in output since the early 2000s has been accounted for by growth in labour and 
capital inputs, rather than by improving the way we use that labour and capital (Graph 4).  
Graph 4 
One important forecasting issue is whether this is likely to continue, or whether a return to 
closer-to-average productivity growth will see potential output grow a little more quickly than 
 6 
 BIS Review 167/2010
we  have  become  accustomed  to  over  the  past decade.  The  latter is clearly  the  preferable 
outcome, although as yet there are few signs of a lift in productivity growth.  
A second question is the implications for inflation. If indeed potential output growth were to 
pick up, this would mean that the economy could grow more quickly over the medium term 
without causing inflation to rise. But in the short term, producing and installing the increased 
capital can add to demand pressures in the economy.  Of  course, one way in which these 
pressures can be mitigated is by importing the required machinery and equipment. To some 
extent  this  is  what  has  been  happening.  Much  of  the  physical  capital  for  a  number  of  the 
large resource projects is, by necessity, imported. And the appreciation of the exchange rate 
has  lowered  the  relative  price  of  capital  goods  from  abroad.  Over  time,  imports  of  capital 
goods have grown considerably more quickly than investment (Graph 5). Yet, even as we 
rely more on imported machinery and equipment to increase the capital stock, it still takes 
significant  domestic  resources  to  install  this  imported  machinery  and  equipment.  So  an 
important  forecasting  issue  here  is  to  what  extent  the  period  of  accelerated  growth  in  the 
capital  stock  will  affect  inflation  pressures  in  the  economy,  and  to  what  extent  can  these 
pressures be reduced by importing goods from abroad.  
Graph 5 
 A third question is the implications for the risk profile of the overall economy of the higher 
capital stock. While the central scenario is a positive one, there are risks. In the late 1980s, 
for  example,  we  saw  a  large  increase  in  the  capital  stock,  particularly  of  commercial 
buildings, but when the recession came, much of this investment had to be written off. The 
result  was  large  losses  to  banks  and  investors.  Similarly,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the 
current wave of investment will earn high returns. So a relevant forecasting question here is 
how these risks are likely to play out and how they are influenced by the way in which the 
increase in the capital stock is financed.  
In  thinking  about  each  of  these  three  questions  –  the  impact  on  potential  growth,  the 
implications for inflation and the changing risk profile of the economy – it is the combination 
of judgement, models and liaison that I discussed a few moments ago that we rely on. As in 
other areas, we do not have fixed views, but instead we are continually testing, learning and 
re-testing.  
Confident but cautious 
A  second  consideration  shaping  our  recent  forecasts  is  the  attitude  of  households  to 
spending and borrowing. Over the past year or so, we have had the rather unusual situation 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 7
in which households, when surveyed, report that they are quite optimistic about the future, 
yet at the same time, they are quite restrained in both their spending and borrowing.  
While  measuring  saving  rates  is  notoriously  difficult,  the  latest  national  accounts  show  a 
marked increase in the household sector’s saving rate over recent years, with the increase 
fully reversing the decline that took place from the end of the 1980s to mid 2003 (Graph 6). 
Somewhat  remarkably,  the  increase  in  the  household  saving  rate  in  Australia,  at  least  as 
measured,  has  been  larger  than  that  in  many  other  countries,  including  the  United  States 
where household balance sheet repair is a major factor weighing on the economy. And unlike 
in  the  United  States,  where  household  confidence  is  very  low,  this  rise  in  saving  has 
occurred in Australia at a time when confidence is quite high (Graph 7).  
Graph 6 
Graph 7 
  There are a number of explanations for this increase in household savings in Australia, but it 
is likely that the most important is a rethinking of attitudes to debt and spending following the 
events in the global economy over the past few years. It would appear that many households 
now view high levels of debt and low rates of saving as more risky than they did previously. 
This  has  led  some  to  save  a  little  more  and  others  to  borrow  a  little  less.  And  the  strong 
growth in household incomes over the past year has made this easier to do.  
8 
 BIS Review 167/2010
The forecasting issue here is how persistent is this change likely to be. Is it just a temporary 
phenomena  that  will  wane  as  memories  of  GFC  fade?  Or  has  there  been  a  long-lasting 
change in attitudes after two decades of rapid increases in household borrowing?  
It  is  difficult  to  know  what  the  right  answer  is,  but  the  restraint  being  exhibited  by  the 
household sector is turning out to be quite long-lasting. In preparing our own forecasts, we 
have, for some time, been assuming that the household saving rate stays high for quite a 
while  yet.  If  this  were  to  occur,  not  only  would  it  lead  to  a  lowering  of  risk  in  household 
balance  sheets,  but  it  would  reduce  inflationary  pressures  during  the  period  of  high 
investment. This is obviously an area that we are watching closely and it is one where our 
approach  of  testing,  learning  and  re-testing  is  important  as  we  continue  to  review  our 
forecasts.  
Conclusion 
So, in summary there is no shortage of interesting issues to ponder over as we think about 
the future. The world economy is undergoing fundamental change as the weight of economic 
activity moves from the North Atlantic economies to Asia, and as the household sectors of 
many  countries  re-think  their  attitudes  to  spending  and  borrowing.  These  are  important 
structural  changes  that  are  likely  to  shape  the  Australian  and  the  global  economies  over 
coming years. I wish you luck in incorporating these changes into your central forecasts and 
into the risks around those forecasts!  
Thank you for your attention this evening and I wish you all the best for 2011.  
BIS Review 167/2010 
 9
