Duvvuri Subbarao: Frontier issues on the global agenda – need for 
global cooperation 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Indian  Council 
International  Economic  Relations/InWent/German 
Development Institute (ICRIER/InWent/DIE) Conference on “Policies for growth and financial 
stability beyond the crisis – the scope for global cooperation”, Mumbai, 27 October 2010. 
for  Research  on 
 1.  
First of all, my thanks to the organizers of this conference – ICRIER, the German 
Development Institute (DIE) and InWent – for inviting me to inaugurate this conference on: 
“Policies  for  Growth  and  Financial  Stability  Beyond  the  Crisis  –  the  Scope  for  Global 
Cooperation”.  Having  just  returned  from  a  meeting  of  G-20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central 
Bank Governors in Korea over this weekend, I am deeply sensitive to the value of generating 
a wider debate on issues that the world has to grapple with as we emerge out of the crisis.  
2.  
The focus of this conference on global cooperation is particularly relevant. Everyone 
now has her/his list of lessons of the crisis, and one item common on almost every list is the 
lesson that today’s macroeconomic problems cannot be resolved without global cooperation. 
The crisis has taught us that no country can be an island and that economic and financial 
disruptions anywhere cause ripples, if not waves, everywhere. The crisis also taught us that 
given the deepening integration of countries into the global economic and financial system, 
uncoordinated responses will lead to worse outcomes for everyone. 
3.  
When the history of this crisis is written, the London G-20 Summit in April 2009 will 
be  seen  as  a  clear  turning  point  when  the  leaders  of  the  world  showed  extraordinary 
determination  and  unity  of  purpose  in  combating  the  deepest  economic  crisis  of  our 
generation.  Sure  there  were  differences,  but  they  were  debated  and  discussed  and 
compromises were made without eroding the end goal – that is to end the crisis. 
4.  
The priority task today is to calibrate the exit from the crisis driven accommodative 
policies  and  put  the  world  on  a  sustainable  growth  path.  Global  cooperation  is  as  vital  for 
managing this recovery as it was for managing the crisis. There is a growing apprehension 
though that the vaunted unity that the G-20 had shown during the crisis is dissipating and 
that  its  resolve  to  foster  globally  optimal  solutions  is  weakening.  When  all  the  details  are 
distilled  out,  two  main  worries  emerge:  first,  that  countries  are  not  able  to  resolve  their 
conflicts of interest, and second that at the world level we are bogged down by the tyranny of 
the present and are not able to resolve the balance between medium term sustainability and 
short term compulsions. 
These concerns are valid, but the judgement on G-20 is perhaps harsh. The global 
5.  
problems  we  are  facing  today  are  complex  and  not  amenable  to  easy  solutions.  Many  of 
them  require  significant  and  often painful  adjustments  at  the  national level,  and  in  a  world 
divided by nation-states, there is no natural constituency for the global economy. At the same 
time, the global crisis has shown that the global economy as an entity is more important than 
ever.  We  cannot  afford  a  situation  where  decisions  essential  for  global  prosperity  become 
hostage to domestic concerns. 
6.  
Against  this  background,  and  keeping  in  view  the  vast  sweep  of  this  conference 
theme, what I propose to do in this inaugural address is to highlight the frontier issues on the 
present  day  global  agenda  and  emphasize  how  we  cannot  resolve  them  without  global 
cooperation. 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 1
Multi-speed recovery 
7.  
By all accounts, the world has recovered from the financial meltdown and the follow 
on recession much sooner than we had feared at the depth of the crisis. In its latest World 
Economic  Outlook  (WEO  –  October  2010),  the  IMF  projected  global  growth  for  2010  of 
4.8 per  cent;  this  marks  a  surprising  upward  revision  from  its  earlier  projection  of 
4.6 per cent.  This  remarkable  turnaround  in  outlook  masks  some  significant  geographical 
variations in the recovery process. Emerging market economies (EMEs), contributing nearly 
half of this growth, have clearly been the engine of this recovery. World trade which shrank 
by 11 per cent in 2009, is projected to expand by 11.4 per cent in 2010, again powered by 
import demand of EMEs which is rising twice as fast as that of advanced economies. 
8.  
On the other hand, in advanced economies, there are growing concerns about the 
slowing  momentum  of  recovery,  stubbornly  high  rates  of  unemployment  and  persistent 
output gaps. Although specifics vary, the G-3 – America, Europe and Japan – are caught in 
fierce  policy  debates  on  stimulus  and  exit  strategies.  At  the  heart  of  this  debate  are  two 
issues  that  pit  the  short-term  against  the  medium  term:  first,  whether  additional  fiscal 
stimulus at this stage will jeopardize medium term fiscal sustainability; and second, whether 
continued  expansionary  monetary  stance  –  QE2  in  popular  jargon  –  will  be  an  adequate 
substitute  for  the  waning  fiscal  stimulus,  and  what  implications  the  ultra  loose  monetary 
policy may have for medium term inflation trends. 
9.  
A question often asked is whether EMEs will be able to sustain global growth even if 
advanced economies continue to languish. People who put this question, I believe, are doing 
so as a rhetoric – to encourage analytical thinking rather than to solicit an affirmative answer. 
Sure,  multiple  growth  poles  are  a  safety-net  for  the  whole  world,  but  to  expect  EMEs,  by 
themselves,  to  lift  global  growth  will  be  unrealistic.  Note  that  emerging  and  developing 
countries account for less than half of world GDP even when measured at PPP valuations, 
and only about a third of the world trade in goods and services. Notably, the much hyped 
“decoupling” does not stand to strict scrutiny. On the contrary, there is evidence of powerful 
coupling. Recent research within IMF shows that the detrended aggregate output growth of 
EMEs has strong association with the aggregate output growth of advanced economies and 
this  “association”  has  in  fact  increased  over  time,  evidencing  not  only  that  the  coupling  is 
strong but that it is getting stronger. Sure, in recent years EMEs have been less affected by 
recessions in advanced economies owing to improved policy framework and more effective 
macroeconomic  management.  But  over  an  entire  cycle,  the  economic  prospects  of  EMEs 
remain firmly coupled with those of advanced economies. 
Global adjustments – short term and medium term 
10.  
All members of the G-20 are deeply conscious that purely national solutions do not 
solve  global  problems  and  that  they  each  need  to  make  an  adjustment  to  the  post-crisis 
global  realities.  It  is  in  calibrating  the  exit  in  the  short-term  and  sequencing  the  structural 
reforms in the medium term that the differences arise, and that is where global cooperation is 
most vital. 
11.  
The post-crisis global scenario has thrown up three interrelated issues. The first is 
the need for rebalancing across and within economies. In as much as global imbalances – no 
matter  whether  they  were  caused  by  “a  consumption  binge”  in  advanced  economies  or  a 
“savings glut” in EMEs – were one of the root causes of the crisis, reducing imbalances is a 
necessary condition for global financial stability. A second issue is the role of exchange rates 
in redressing external imbalances. A third set of questions relates to capital flows into EMEs 
raising the familiar challenge of managing the impossible trinity. Let me turn to these one by 
one. 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2010
The  first  issue,  rebalancing,  is  the  focus  of  the  latest  (October  2010)  World 
12.  
Economic  Outlook  of  the  IMF.  I  can  do  no  better  than  to  quote  from  the  foreword  to  the 
Report. 
“Achieving a “strong, balanced and sustained world recovery” – to quote from the 
goal set in Pittsburgh by the G20 – was never going to be easy. .... It requires two 
fundamental and difficult economic rebalancing acts. 
First,  internal  rebalancing:  When  private  demand  collapsed,  fiscal  stimulus 
helped alleviate the fall in output. But fiscal stimulus has to eventually give way to 
fiscal consolidation, and private demand must be strong enough to take the lead 
and sustain growth. 
Second,  external  rebalancing:  Many  advanced  economies,  most  notably  the 
United States, which relied excessively on domestic demand, must now rely more 
on  net  exports.  Many  emerging  market  economies,  most  notably  China,  which 
relied excessively on net exports, must now rely more on domestic demand. 
These two rebalancing acts are taking place too slowly.” 
trend  rates  of 
13.  
A  prime  lever  for  redressal  of  external  imbalances  is  exchange  rate  flexibility,  the 
second  issue  that  I  listed.  Rebalancing  will  require  deficit  economies  to  save  more  and 
consume less. They need to depend for growth more on external demand which calls for a 
real depreciation of their currencies. The surplus economies will need to mirror these efforts 
– save less and spend more, and shift from external to domestic demand. They need to let 
their currencies appreciate. Managing currency tensions will require a shared understanding 
on  keeping  exchange  rates  aligned  to  economic  fundamentals,  and  an  agreement  that 
currency interventions should be resorted to not as an instrument of trade policy but only to 
manage disruptions to macroeconomic stability. 
14.  
That  brings  me  to  the  third  issue  that  I  listed,  return  of  lumpy  and  volatile  capital 
flows.  Since  capital  flows  have  become  such  an  emotive  topic  around  the  world  in  recent 
months, it is important perhaps to recall a few realities. First, that emerging and developing 
economies do need capital flows to augment their investible resources, but such flows should 
meet two criteria: they should be stable and be roughly equal to the economy’s absorptive 
capacity.  The  second  reality  that  we  must  remember  is  that  capital  flows  are  triggered  by 
both  pull  and  push  factors.  The  pull  factors  are  the  promising  growth  prospects  of  EMEs, 
their  declining 
improved 
governance. The push factors are the easy monetary policies of advanced economies which 
create the capital that flows into the EMEs. What this says is that international capital flows 
comprise a structural component and a cyclical component. It is the cyclical component that 
typically causes all the adjustment problems for EMEs. 
That said, the multi-speed recovery around the world and the consequent differential 
15.  
exit from accommodative monetary policy has triggered speculative capital flows into EMEs. 
The biggest problem thrown up by capital flows is currency appreciation which erodes export 
competitiveness. Intervention in the forex market to prevent appreciation entails costs. If the 
resultant liquidity is left unsterilized, it fuels inflationary pressures. If the resultant liquidity is 
sterilized, 
from  hurting 
competitiveness, also encourages further flows. 
16.  
Currency appreciation is not the only problem arising from the ultra loose monetary 
policy  of  advanced  economies.  Speculative  flows  on  the  lookout  for  quick  returns  can 
potentially  lead  to  asset  price  build  up.  The  assurance  of  advanced  economies  to  keep 
interest  rates  “exceptionally  low”  for  “an  extended  period”  has  also  possibly  triggered 
financialization of commodities leading to a paradoxical situation of hardening of commodity 
prices  even  as  advanced  economies  continue  to  face  demand  recession.  Hardening  of 
commodity prices has affected those EMEs which are net importers of commodities. 
it  puts  upward  pressure  on 
inflation,  capital  account 
rates  which,  apart 
liberalization  and 
interest 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 3
Managing capital flows should not be treated as an exclusive problem of EMEs. In 
17.  
as  much  as  lumpy  and  volatile  flows  are  a  spillover  from  policy  choices  of  advanced 
economies, the burden of adjustment has to be shared. How this burden has to be measured 
and shared raises both intellectual and practical policy challenges. The intellectual challenge 
is  that  we  do  not  have  a  good  theory  that  explains  the  role  of  capital  flows  in  the 
determination  of  exchange  rates.  We,  of  course,  have  an  established  theory  of  current 
account management and the role of exchange rate as a variable in that. What we now need 
is a theory that encompasses both current and capital accounts and one that gives a better 
understanding  of  what  capital  controls  work  and  in  what  situations.  That  is  the  intellectual 
challenge.  What  is  the  practical  challenge?  The  practical  challenge  is  that  once  we  have 
such  a  theory,  we  need  to  reach  a  shared  understanding  on  two  specific  aspects:  first,  to 
what  extent  are  advanced  economies  responsible  for  the cross  border  spill  over  impact  of 
their  domestic  policies,  and  second,  what  is  the  framework  of  rules  that  should  govern 
currency interventions in the face of volatile capital flows. 
Protectionism 
18.  
In  the  post-crisis  world,  there  may  not  actually  be  “deglobalization”  but  the  earlier 
orthodoxy  that  globalization  is  an  unmixed  blessing  is  being  increasingly  challenged.  The 
rationale behind globalization was, and hopefully is, that even as advanced countries may 
see some low end jobs being outsourced, they will still benefit from globalization because for 
every low end job gone, another high end job – that is more skill intensive, more productive – 
will  be  created.  If  this  does  not  happen  rapidly  enough  or  visibly  enough,  protectionist 
pressures will arise, and rapidly become vociferous and politically compelling. The efforts of 
several  countries  around  the  world  to  resist  currency  appreciation  are  a  manifestation  of 
protectionist pressures. 
19.  
There is concern in some quarters that while open protectionism has been resisted 
relatively well during the current crisis, opaque protectionism has been on the rise. Opaque 
protectionism  takes  the  form  of  resorting  to  measures  such  as  anti-dumping  actions, 
safeguards, preferential treatment of domestic firms in bailout packages and discriminatory 
procurement practices. Experience shows that countries resort to restrictive trade practices 
in  areas  not  covered  by  multilateral  rules  or  by  exploiting  the  lack  of  specificity  in  certain 
rules. To strengthen multilateral trade discipline, the need for a quick conclusion of the Doha 
Round  can  hardly  be  overemphasized.  In  a  world  with  growing  worries  about  the  debt 
creating stimulus packages, a Doha Round agreement should be welcomed as a non-debt 
creating stimulus to the global economy.  
International monetary system 
20.  
The  global  crisis  has  revived  the  familiar  concerns  about  the  robustness  of  the 
international monetary system. The system we now have is that the US dollar is the world’s 
reserve currency by virtue of the dominant size of the US economy, its share in global trade, 
the preponderant use of dollar in foreign trade and foreign exchange transactions and a host 
of other intangible factors. The US has met the obligation of an issuer of reserve currency by 
running  fiscal  and  external  deficits  while  enjoying  the  comfort  of  not  having  to  make  the 
necessary adjustment to bridge the deficits. Such persistent deficits of a dominant economy 
can potentially create imbalances at the global level as indeed happened in the build up to 
the  crisis.  While  the  US  took  care  of  the  supply  side  of  the  reserves,  the  demand  side 
impetus comes from several factors including the accumulation of reserve assets by EMEs 
as a measure of self-insurance against external shocks. 
21.  
The problem with the world having only a single reserve currency came to the fore 
during the crisis as many countries faced dollar liquidity problems as a consequence of swift 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2010
deleveraging  by  foreign  creditors  and  foreign  investors.  Paradoxically,  even  as  the  US 
economy was in a downturn, the dollar strengthened as a result of flight to safety. 
22.  
Based  on  the  experience  of  the  crisis,  several  reform  proposals  have  been  put 
forward  to  address  the  problems  arising  from  a  single  reserve  currency.  One  is  to  have  a 
menu  of  alternative  reserve  currencies.  But  this  cannot  happen  by  fiat.  An  alternative 
currency or currencies will take root as reserve currency/currencies only if those currencies 
are  fully  convertible  and  acquire  a  dominant  share  in  world  trade.  A  second  option  is  to 
develop the SDR as a reserve currency. This does not seem to be a feasible option. For the 
SDR to be a genuine reserve currency, it has to fulfil several conditions: the SDR has to be 
accepted  as  a  liability  of  the  IMF,  has  to  be  automatically  acceptable  as  a  medium  of 
payment in cross-border transactions, be freely tradeable and its price has to be determined 
by forces of demand and supply. A third suggested solution aims at reducing the need for 
self-insurance  and  thereby  the  dependence  on  a  reserve  currency  by  supporting  a 
multilateral  option  of  a  prearranged  line  of  credit  that  can  be  easily  and  quickly  accessed. 
Such a multilateral option is necessary as a complement to self-insurance but it cannot be a 
substitute; some measure of self-insurance will continue to be the first line of defence. 
23.  
None of the above solutions as you can see fully addresses the problems arising 
from a single global reserve currency. What this underscores is that at the global level we 
need to explore these and other options for protecting ourselves from the vulnerabilities that 
we confront as a consequence of a single reserve currency.  
Governance of Bretton Woods institutions 
24.  
The  global  crisis  has  underscored  the  importance  of  reforming  the  governance 
structures  of  Bretton  Woods  institutions  –  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank,  so  as  to  give 
representation  to  EMEs  commensurate  with  their  growing  share  in  the  global  economy. 
These  reforms  are  central  to  the  legitimacy  and  effectiveness  of  these  global  institutions. 
There  has  been  significant  progress  in  respect  of  World  Bank  capital  and  voice  reforms. 
Quota reform in the IMF is also expected to be completed soon. Countries which have not 
been  traditional  creditors,  including  India,  have  entered  into  sizeable  credit  arrangements 
with the Fund. This strengthens the case for quota shifts in their favour as a group, and in 
particular to dynamic EMDCs, to better reflect current global economic realities. These shifts 
need to be followed up by continuing the dynamic process aimed at enhancing the voice and 
representation  of  the  poorest  through  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  quota  formula  by 
July 2013. Here the need for cooperation among countries will be crucial. 
Financial sector reforms 
25.  
In September 2010, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) put out a 
comprehensive  paper  indicating  the  broad  agreement  reached  on  the  Basel  III  proposals. 
Broadly, these reforms will require banks to hold more and better quality capital and to carry 
more liquid assets, will limit their leverage and mandate them to build up capital buffers in 
good  times  that  can  be  drawn  down  in  periods  of  stress.  The  Basel  III  process  is  not  yet 
complete. Some aspects of Basel III, such as common equity and tier I capital have been 
firmed up; others such as the new global liquidity standards and the leverage ratio have yet 
to be precisely specified. This will be done after a further assessment of the reasonableness 
of  these  measures  and  their  impact  on  banks’  balance  sheets  as  well  as  the  national 
economies. Though this would allow time for further calibration and refinement, it could on 
the other hand contribute to regulatory uncertainty. Moreover, there are several issues such 
as  capital  conservation  buffer  and  countercyclical  buffer  which  are  fraught  with  severe 
definitional and implementation complexities and challenges. 
26.  
Another crisis driven initiative has been to expand the erstwhile Financial Stability 
Forum into a Financial Stability Board (FSB) by giving representation to EMEs. The FSB has 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 5
been working on a number of initiatives including managing the moral hazard associated with 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs)  through  more  stringent  regulatory  and 
supervisory norms, principles to guide compensation of bank managements, a single set of 
accounting standards  and  regulation  of  OTC  derivatives,  credit  rating agencies  and  hedge 
funds. There are also several areas where substantial work needs to be done including in 
improving  resolution  regimes  for  cross-border  banks  and  systemically  important  nonbank 
financial  companies,  addressing  the  procyclicality  of  the  financial  system,  and  macro-
prudential surveillance. More work also needs to be done to extend the prudential norms on 
the  lines  of  Basel  III  to  the  shadow  financial  system  which  lay  at  the  heart  of  the  recent 
financial crisis. 
27.  
Within a common set of agreed-upon global standards, each jurisdiction may have 
to tailor some of its rules and supervisory practices to national conditions and preferences. 
The  big  challenge  going  forward  will  be  to  implement  global  standards  with  national 
differentiation but without giving any scope for the market to interpret national deviations from 
the standards as regulatory looseness. 
in 
the  Bretton  Woods 
Conclusion 
28.  
Let  me  now  summarize.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  covered  what  I  believe  are  the 
frontier issues on the present day global agenda. In particular, I gave a picture of the multi-
speed  recovery  and  its  implications  for  global  adjustments  in  the  short  term  and  in  the 
medium  term.  These  adjustments  need  to  cover  three  inter-related  issues:  redressing 
imbalances,  exchange  rate  flexibility  and  management  of  capital  flows.  I  emphasized  how 
global  cooperation  is  vital  to  reach  a  shared  understanding  on  all  the  three  issues.  I  then 
raised the possibility of a post crisis world which will be less welcoming of globalization and 
how  this  may  trigger  protectionist  pressures.  I  moved  on  to  emphasize  how  global 
cooperation  is  vital  for  reforming  the  international  monetary  system  and  the  need  for  a 
comprehensive  quota  and  representation  reform 
Institutions 
commensurate  with  the  growing  contribution  of  EMEs  to  global  growth  and  global  trade. 
Finally, I gave a brief status of the reforms in the financial sector, and how again restoring 
financial stability at the national and international levels requires global cooperation. 
29.  
The common thread running through all the issues that I raised is the need for global 
cooperation in solving our most pressing problems of today. Given the strength and pace of 
globalization,  purely  national  solutions  are  not  only  inadequate  but  may  indeed  be 
counterproductive. 
30.  
I realise I have raised several issues without providing complete solutions. I believe 
that is the privilege of the inaugural speaker. The burden of identifying solutions and debating 
their pros and cons belongs to the conference proper. 
31.  
The global crisis has taken a devastating toll on global growth and welfare. In their 
painstakingly  researched  book,  “This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”, 
Kenneth  Rogoff  and  Carmen  Reinhart  show  how  over  eight  hundred  years,  all  financial 
crises can be traced to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis 
to the next. Each time, experts have chimed that “this time is different” claiming that the old 
rules do not apply and the new situation is dissimilar to the previous one. It will be too costly 
for the world not to heed this lesson. We should cooperate not only to firmly exit from the 
crisis, but also to ensure that in resolving this crisis, we do not sow the seeds of the next 
crisis. 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2010
