Mohammad bin Ibrahim: The development of the Malaysian financial 
markets 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Mohammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the Persatuan Pasaran Kewangan Malaysia (PPKM) Gala Dinner, Kuala Lumpur, 
12 November 2010. 
 Allow me to express my thank you to the organizer, Persatuan Pasaran Kewangan Malaysia, 
in  short  PPKM,  for  inviting  me  to  tonight’s  2010  PPKM  Gala  Dinner.  It  gives  me  great 
pleasure  to  deliver  the  opening  remarks.  My  address  will  specifically  focus  on  the 
development  of  the  Malaysian  financial  markets.  The  future  of  the  financial  markets  is  of 
interest to us all here today. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  the  significant  progress  that  the  Persatuan  has  achieved  since  its 
establishment  in  1973.  It  has  contributed  significantly  in  representing  the  interest  of  the 
dealer community and in providing feedback and developmental ideas on issues relating to 
the development of the Malaysian financial markets. PPKM also plays an important role as a 
bridge  to  the  relevant  regulatory  authorities.  The  relationship  had  been  productive  to  the 
overall development of our financial market. Indeed, through this cooperation, the Malaysian 
financial markets have come a long way and have grown steadily in size, breadth and depth 
over the years. This has received acknowledgement in the recent World Economic Forum’s 
overall Financial Development Index (the Index refers to three broad areas: Factors, policies 
and  institutions,  Financial  intermediation  and  Financial  access),  where  Malaysia  is  now 
ranked 17th, up 5 notches from 22nd place previously. This is a commendable achievement 
but we still have a lot to do. 
As Malaysia moves forward with the economic transformation programme, the demands for 
the  financial  sector  as  enabler,  catalyst  and  driver  of  growth  will  increase.  The  financial 
sector as a whole is expected to grow in size, from 4.6 times GDP now to 5–6 times GDP by 
2020.  The  significance  of  financial  markets,  relative  to  funds  raised  through  financial 
intermediaries  such  as  banks,  will  continue  to  rise.  In  meeting  the  needs  of  the  new  high 
value added economy, our financial sector needs to be developed further and innovative in 
its  approach  in  order  to  facilitate  higher  levels  of  domestic  and  international  trade  and 
investments.  One  such  innovative  approach  is  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  and 
vibrant Islamic financial industry. 
It  is  our  aspiration  to  transform  Malaysia  as  the  Islamic  Financial  Hub.  Crucial  to  the 
transformation is intensifying of our efforts to further develop the foreign currency markets in 
Malaysia. In particular, we should seek to capitalise on our competitive advantage in Islamic 
financial  markets  and  move  beyond  our  previous  focus  of  advisory  and  promoting  primary 
market  issuances  and  move  up  to  build  an  end-to-end  value  chain  capability  –  where  we 
should also focus on secondary market trading, settlement and custody services.  
But this aspiration of ours could only be achieved if there is a collaborative effort between the 
industry and the authorities. One such platform is the Malaysia International Islamic Financial 
Centre (MIFC) initiative that comprises a community network of the country’s financial and 
market  regulators,  including  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  (Central  Bank  of  Malaysia),  Securities 
Commission  Malaysia,  Labuan  Financial  Services  Authority  and  Bursa  Malaysia  (Kuala 
Lumpur  Stock  Exchange);  Government  ministries  and  agencies  together  with  industry 
participation from the banking, takaful, capital market institutions, human capital development 
institutions  and  professional  services  companies  which  are  participating  and  working 
collaboratively  in  the  field  of  Islamic  finance.  The  creation  of  International  Islamic  Liquidity 
Management Corporation (IILM) recently was the outcome of the High Level Taskforce on 
Liquidity Management that was formed by the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB). It is a 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 1
collaborative  effort  to  develop  a  liquidity  framework  that  can  provide  widely  acceptable 
liquidity  solutions  to  Islamic  financial  institutions,  to  promote  better  liquidity  management. 
IILM  will  be  an  issuer  of  Shariah  compliant  financial  instruments  that  are  highly  liquid  and 
tradable  in  the  secondary  financial  market.  This  is  an  important  infrastructure  capacity 
building  since  it  would  expand  the  scope  of  business  for  Islamic  finance  globally  and  was 
achieved through collaborative effort.  
Another initiative is the creation of a Sukuk Investment Fund – foreign currency funds to be 
disbursed to selected Islamic Fund Management Companies (IFMCs) to invest primarily in 
foreign currency sukuk issued out of Malaysia. The Fund would support the proliferation on 
the buy side for the issuance of sukuk out of Malaysia, besides providing a platform for the 
Islamic fund management industry, including start-ups to build their track record in managing 
foreign  currencies  fund  denominated.  Complementary  to  this  initiative  is  the  creation  of  a 
Malaysian-based  sukuk  index  for  foreign  currency  and  also  an  extension  of  our  domestic 
settlement capabilities to include foreign currency securities. 
This  is  the  moment  when  we  need  the  cooperation  from  the  private  sector  in  support  of 
government’s measures to generate business and to stimulate the economic growth. There 
are enormous opportunities for the industry to benefit from these initiatives.  
The  strengthening  and  the  transformation  of  the  financial  sector  contributed  by  financial 
deregulation,  opening  of  markets  and  integration  have  created  a  more  competitive 
environment.  In  aligning  to  the  rapidly  changing  and  increasingly  challenging  global 
environment with significant growth in world trade and enhanced international linkages with 
global economies, the foreign exchange administration (FEA) rules have been progressively 
liberalized  to  promote  flexibility  and  competitiveness  of  the  economy  while  safeguarding 
monetary and financial stability. 
The philosophy on the liberalisation of the foreign exchange administration rules takes into 
account the readiness of the economy which includes sound macroeconomic fundamentals 
and prudent fiscal policy, a well diversified financial market with sound and stable financial 
system  that  is  able  to  withstand  external  shocks,  liquid  and  efficient  capital  market  and 
healthy balance of payments position that is supported by an effective and well functioning 
surveillance  mechanism.  The  country’s  improved  economic  fundamentals  and  the  resilient 
financial system have enabled the gradual pace of liberalisation of the FEA rules since 2003. 
A fact that is often over looked is that, during the recent crisis, contrary to actions undertaken 
by many, Malaysia had further liberalized the FEA rules to promote greater efficiency in the 
conduct of international trade, promote a conducive business environment and to allow the 
use of domestic currency in the settlement of trade with the country’s major trading partners. 
This  is  a  timely  measure,  given  the  country’s  strong  linkages  with  the  global  and  regional 
economies in particular, the Asian economies. 
The various measures put in place by the authorities have enabled Malaysia to be ranked as 
the Top 10 most competitive nation in the World Economic Report by IMD, Switzerland. On 
ease of doing business, FEA’s ranking had also improved significantly from 13th (which is 
one  of  the  most  problematic)  in  2005/2006  to  2nd  place  (easiest  for  doing  business)  in 
2009/2010  reflecting  partly  the  stakeholders’  positive  assessment  on  FEA  to  support  the 
conduct of business in Malaysia. The country’s easy and facilitative regulatory environment 
including FEA rules, had also contributed to Malaysia’s recent upgrading from a “Secondary 
Emerging  Market”  to  a  “Advanced  Emerging  Market”  status  in  the  FTSE’s  Country 
Classification Index, hence the potential increase in non-residents’ investments in Malaysia 
following the increase in Malaysia’s weightage in the index from the current level of 2.41% by 
June 2011.  
In spite of the above and based on our interactions with some of you, there remain a lot of 
myths and misconceptions on Malaysia’s FEA rules, even amongst the banking fraternity. It 
is my hope that I am able to dispel these misperceptions surrounding Malaysia’s FEA rules 
specifically on activities that can be undertaken by non-residents for investments in Malaysia. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2010
It is also my hope that you will make the effort to convey this message to your colleagues, 
clients and international counterparts.  
Let me now share with you five of the misconceptions 
Myth 1:  FEA rules are restrictive 
We  recognized  that  for  an  investor,  capital  mobility  is  important.  Malaysia  has  always 
ensured  that  the  rules  are  not  restrictive  to  capital  flows  or  do  not  penalise  investors  who 
contribute  to  the  development  of  the  country.  Today,  non-residents  are  free  to  transfer 
their funds into Malaysia for investments in any type of ringgit assets and also remit out 
of Malaysia, all income as well as proceeds from the divestments of these ringgit assets 
in foreign currency. Also, there is no levy imposed. 
Myth 2:  FEA rules are restrictive on non-residents to manage risk on investments in 
Malaysia 
Apart from free capital mobility, the ability to manage risks of investments is equally essential 
for an investor. In recognizing this need, the current FEA rules freely allows non-residents to 
hedge  ringgit  exposures  of  their  investments  in  ringgit  assets  with  the  onshore  banks 
supported by underlying commitment. Such transactions can be settled on gross or net basis 
and there is also no restriction on the minimum tenure of the hedge. 
Myth 3:  FEA rules are restrictive on non-ringgit transactions undertaken onshore by 
non-residents  
Non-residents  are  free  to  undertake  any  type  of  non-ringgit  transactions  with  the 
onshore banks. They are also free to open any number of foreign currency accounts with the 
onshore banks with no limits imposed on the maintenance of funds in these accounts. Funds 
in these accounts are also free to be remitted abroad. 
Myth 4:  FEA rules are restrictive on accessibility to onshore financing by non-
residents  
There has never been any restrictions on the accessibility to foreign currency financing by 
non-residents from onshore banks. They are free to borrow any amount in foreign currency 
from  the  onshore  banks  as  well  as  from  non-banks  residents  which  do  not  have  any 
domestic ringgit borrowing. For prudential purposes and for efficient allocation of domestic 
resources, limits are currently only applicable on foreign currency lending by resident lenders 
which have domestic ringgit borrowing and are converting ringgit into foreign currency for the 
lending.  
With the progressive liberalisation of the FEA rules, non-residents are also free to obtain any 
amount of ringgit financing from the onshore banks and non-bank residents to finance real 
sector activities and for purchase of immovable properties in Malaysia. In line with Malaysia’s 
aspiration  to  be  a  leading  international  Islamic  financial  hub,  flexibility  is  granted  for  non-
residents  to  raise  ringgit  through  issuance  of  sukuk  in  Malaysia  as  part  efforts  to  attract 
higher level of foreign participation and promote diversity of market players and products in 
the Malaysian Islamic financial markets. The sukuk market now accounts for more than fifty 
percent of our bond market and has drawn participation from a wide range of international 
corporations and multilateral agencies in raising funds and investing in sukuk issuances out 
of Malaysia. 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 3
Myth 5:  FEA rules are restrictive on accessibility to ringgit offshore by foreign 
investors for settlement of their investments in Malaysia 
Many  may  not  have  realised  that  since  2007,  non-residents  have  been  allowed  to  access 
ringgit offshore through any appointed overseas branches within the same banking group of 
the  onshore  banks  to  purchase  or  sell  ringgit  on  a  spot  or  forward  basis  based  on  firm 
underlying commitment for investments in ringgit assets. This was to maximise the potential 
and seamless opportunities through the widening of international investors’ participation into 
the Malaysian capital market. As onshore banks, you should capitalise on these opportunities 
to reap the benefits and at the same time, contribute to the enhancement in the development 
of the domestic financial market. These FEA rules were also designed to facilitate investment 
by foreign companies into the real sector. It is our intention that the FEA rules will facilitate 
and ease foreign investment into the country. 
I will conclude by extending my appreciation to the organizing committee for extending me 
the  invitation  to  this  dinner.  I  wish  you  a  very  pleasant  and  enjoyable  evening,  and  look 
forward  to  further  strengthening  the  mutually  beneficial  relationship  between  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia and the Persatuan. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2010
