Mark Carney: Living with low for long 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Economic  Club  of 
Canada, Toronto, 13 December 2010. 
 Introduction  
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Economic  Club  of  Canada  for  this  opportunity  to  reflect  on  the 
current economic and financial trends. I am sure many in this room would like me to stop at 
the  title,  “Living  with  Low  for  Long,”  so  you  can  go  merrily  into  the  Christmas  holidays, 
content  that  I  have  just  provided  an  early  present  of  extraordinary  guidance  on  future 
Canadian monetary policy. However, I am not bearing gifts today. Canadian monetary policy 
will continue to be set, as it has in the past, for overall Canadian conditions and guided by 
our 2 per cent inflation target.  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  focus  on  the  factors  that  have  led  to  a  low-interest-rate 
environment  in  major  advanced  economies,  and  the  implications  of  this  environment  for 
financial stability and economic growth.  
Global economic outlook  
Current turbulence in Europe is a reminder that the crisis is not over, but has merely entered 
a new phase. In a world awash with debt, repairing the balance sheets of banks, households 
and countries will take years. As a consequence, the pace, pattern and variability of global 
economic growth is changing, and Canada must adapt.  
For  the  crisis  economies,  the  easy  bit  of  the  recovery  is  now  finished.  Temporary  factors 
supporting growth in 2010 – such as the turn in the inventory cycle and the release of pent-
up demand – have largely run their course. Fiscal stimulus is turning to fiscal drag and, for 
some  countries,  rapid  consolidation  has  become  urgent.  Household  expenditure  can  be 
expected  to  recover  only  slowly.  This  all  implies  a  gradual  absorption  of  the  large  excess 
capacity in many advanced economies.  
This is not surprising. History suggests that recessions involving financial crises tend to be 
deeper and have recoveries that take twice as long. In the decade following severe financial 
crises,  growth  rates  tend  to  be  one  percentage  point  lower  and  unemployment  rates  five 
percentage points higher.1 The current U.S. recovery is proving no exception.  
In such an environment, very low policy rates in the major advanced economies could be in 
place  for  a  prolonged  period  –  a  possibility  underscored  by  the  recent  extensions  of 
unconventional monetary policies in the United States, Japan and Europe.  
This tendency towards low-interest rates is being reinforced by structural forces. The global 
economy  is  rapidly  becoming  multi-polar,  with  emerging-market  economies  now  driving 
commodity  prices,  representing  almost  one-half  of  all  import  growth,  and  accounting  for 
about two-thirds of global growth.  
This is an increasingly uneasy emergence. Growth strategies reliant on exports and excess 
national  savings  are  unsustainable  in  the  long  term.  In  the  near  term,  for  many  emerging 
economies,  the  limits  to  non-inflationary  growth  are  approaching  and  the  challenges  of 
shadowing U.S. monetary policy are increasing.  
                                                 
1   See C. Reinhart and V. Reinhart, “After the Fall,” Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City 2010 Economic Policy Symposium. Available at: 
http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2010/reinhart-paper.pdf.  
BIS Review 170/2010 
 1
With  currency  tensions  rising,  some  fear  a  repeat  of  the  competitive  devaluations  of  the 
Great  Depression.  However,  the  current  situation  is  actually  more  perverse.  In  the  1930s, 
countries  left  the  gold  standard  in  order  to  ease  monetary  policy,  and the  system  became 
more flexible.  
Today,  the  process  is  working  in  reverse.  The  international  monetary  system  is  sliding 
towards a massive dollar block. Over a dozen countries are now accumulating reserves at 
double digit annual rates, and countries representing over 40 per cent of the U.S.-dollar trade 
weight are now managing their currencies.  
This death grip on the U.S. dollar is reducing the prospects for rebalancing global demand. 
As the Bank of Canada has argued elsewhere, the potential costs are huge – to $7 trillion in 
lost global output by 2015.2 
Ultimately, excessive reserve accumulation will prove futile. Structural changes in the global 
economy will yield important adjustments in real exchange rates. If nominal exchange rates 
do  not  change,  the  adjustment  will  come  through  inflation  in  emerging  economies  and 
disinflation in major advanced economies.  
This  more  wrenching  adjustment  has  already  begun,  raising  the  risk  of  debt  deflation  and 
deficient  global  demand.  At  a  minimum,  this  dynamic  reinforces  the  low-interest-rate 
strategies of major advanced economies and may necessitate further rounds of quantitative 
easing.  
So what does this mean for countries caught in the middle, like Canada? I will review three 
aspects:  
 
 
 
the effect of the second round of quantitative easing (QE2);  
the implications for Canadian monetary policy; and  
the potential financial stability implications of “low for long” interest rates.  
QE2 and implications for Canada  
Last month, the Federal Reserve launched a new program to buy US$600 billion in longer-
term treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011.3  
It is doing so because, even though its policy rate has been effectively zero for two years, the 
Fed  is  still  missing  both  legs  of  its  dual  mandate  to  foster  price  stability  and  maximum 
employment.  Core  inflation  is  at  an  all-time  low  and  unemployment  is  unusually  high.  The 
spectre of large structural unemployment threatens.  
QE2 is designed to support the economy through easier financial conditions. In theory, by 
putting  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  U.S.-Treasury  rates,  the  program  stimulates 
interest-sensitive sectors of the economy such as housing and business investment. Portfolio 
rebalancing  should  encourage  investors  to  shift  towards  riskier  assets  such  as  corporate 
debt  and  equities.  This  in  turn  increases  financial  wealth,  which  supports  spending.  In 
contrast, some financial investment may shift to harder assets such as commodities, which 
would reduce the disposable incomes of Americans.  
                                                 
2   See M. Carney, “Restoring Faith in the International Monetary System,” speech delivered to Spruce Meadows 
Changing Fortunes Round Table, Calgary, Alberta, 10 September 2010. Available at:  
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2010/sp100910.html. 
It will also reinvest maturing existing holdings amounting to about US$250 billion to US$300 billion. 
BIS Review 170/2010
 
3  
2 
 The  exchange  rate  is  another  important  channel.  As  returns  on  U.S.  assets  fall,  investors 
could  seek  alternative  investments  outside  the  country,  weakening  the  currency,  boosting 
exports and curbing imports.  
Finally,  and  importantly,  expectations  of  higher  growth  should  help  increase  inflation 
expectations  towards  a  range  consistent  with  the  Fed’s  mandate.  This  keeps  real  interest 
rates down, which encourages investment and spending.  
Of course, the exact impact of the program is hard to discern as QE2 is not the only news in 
financial markets. Since the policy was first mooted by Chairman Bernanke in August, all the 
expected  effects  have  been  evident,  supporting  the  Fed’s  rationale.  Since  the  November 
announcement, U.S. financial conditions have improved only slightly, reflecting the conflicting 
forces of some better U.S. data, heightened risk aversion caused by the European turmoil, 
possibly  revised  expectations  regarding  the  ultimate  size  of  the  program,  and  the 
announcement  of  a  major  new  fiscal  package.  The  overall  impact  of  QE2  may  be  more 
modest than previous interventions when market dislocations were more severe.4 
The  Bank  of  Canada  anticipated  the  Fed’s  latest  move  when  we  published  our  October 
projection  (not  hard  to  do,  given  the  openness  with  which  the  Fed  discussed  its  plans). 
Overall, we expect the net impact on Canadian GDP to be positive but small. This balances 
the impact of stronger U.S. growth on demand for Canadian goods and services, as well as 
on our terms of trade, with the possibility of further drag on non-commodity exports arising 
from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.  
Canadian monetary policy  
While the Canadian economy is importantly affected by developments in its largest trading 
partner, Canadian monetary policy is set for overall Canadian conditions and is guided by our 
2  per  cent  inflation  target.  Given  that  the  United  States  was  the  epicentre  of  the  financial 
crisis  and  that  the  Canadian  financial  system  has  continued  to  function  well,  it  is  not 
surprising that our two economies have performed very differently. It is entirely appropriate 
that our monetary policies have diverged somewhat.  
Consider  the  responses  to  the  extraordinary  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  enacted  in  the 
wake of the crisis.  
 
Canadian  output  has  now  surpassed  its  pre-crisis  peak  (a  situation  unique  in  the 
G-7).  
Canadian final domestic demand has grown by 5.7 per cent since the trough of the 
crisis – more than twice the rate (2.6 per cent) in the United States.  
The Canadian economy recovered all of the jobs lost in the recession and added a 
further 23,700; the U.S. economy has recovered only one-tenth of jobs lost, while 
over 40 per cent of unemployed workers have now been out of work for more than 
half a year.  
Household credit has grown by about 7 per cent in Canada since the trough in GDP; 
in the United States, it has fallen by 3.5 per cent.  
                                                    
4   Research  suggests  that  the  first  round  of  quantitative  easing  in  2009  was  successful  in  improving  market 
functioning  and  lowering  long-term  rates  by  30-100  basis  points  in  the  United  States  and  up  to  100  basis 
points  in  the  United  Kingdom.  See  J.  Gagnon,  M.  Raskin,  J.  Remache,  and  B.  Sack,  “Large-Scale  Asset 
Purchases  by  the  Federal  Reserve:  Did  They  Work?”  (Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report 
No. 441, March 2010) and M. Joyce, A. Lasaosa, I. Stevens and M. Tong, “The Financial Market Impact of 
Quantitative Easing” (Bank of England Working Paper No. 393, August 2010). 
BIS Review 170/2010 
 3
 The  most  recent  rates  of  core  inflation  were  1.8  per  cent  in  Canada  versus 
0.6 per cent in the United States.  
It is not all good news. The weak links in the Canadian economy have been poor productivity 
growth and declining export competitiveness. As the Bank has emphasised in recent months, 
a rotation of demand from household expenditures to business investment and net exports 
will  be  important  to  a  sustained  Canadian  expansion.  In  this  regard,  much  remains  to  be 
done.  
Since  the  spring,  the  Bank  has  unwound  the  last  of  its  exceptional  liquidity  measures, 
removed  the  conditional  commitment,  and  raised  the  overnight  rate  from  0.25  per  cent  to 
1 per  cent.  Last  week,  the  Bank  maintained  its  target  for  the  overnight  rate  at  this  level.  
This decision leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 
2 per  cent  inflation  target  in  an  environment  of  significant  excess  supply  in  Canada.  Any 
further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered.  
Historically  low  policy  rates,  even  if  appropriate  to  achieve  the  inflation  target,  create  their 
own risks. Aside from monetary policy, Canadian authorities will need to remain as vigilant as 
they  have  been  in  the  past  to  the  possibility  of  financial  imbalances  developing  in  an 
environment of still-low interest rates and relative price stability.  
I would like to spend the balance of my time on the more general issue of how the perception 
of  low  rates  for  long  could  potentially  distort  behaviour  in  public,  financial,  corporate  and 
household sectors.  
Implications for sovereigns  
In some countries, low interest rates may delay necessary fiscal consolidation.5 By shifting 
their debt profile towards shorter-term financing, governments reduce interest rate payments. 
The substantial purchases of longer-term government bonds by foreign and domestic central 
banks could delay market signals about debt sustainability.6 While low current interest rates 
create  short-term  fiscal  flexibility,  they  expose  budgets  to  any  increase  in  policy  rates  and 
abrupt changes in private market sentiment. Countries would be wise to heed the lessons 
learned by Canada in the 1990s: the bond market is there until it is not.  
Implications of low for long for the financial sector  
The  conviction  that  interest  rates  will  be  low  for  long  can  lead  to  various  types  of  risky 
behaviour in the financial sector.  
As  we  have  all  just  been  reminded  at  great  cost,  an  extended  period  of  stability  breeds 
complacency among financial market participants as risk-taking adapts to the perceived new 
equilibrium.7  Indeed,  risk  appears  to  be  at  its  greatest  when  measures  of  it  are  at  their 
lowest.  Low  variability  of  inflation  and  output  (reduces  current  financial  value  at  risk  and) 
encourages greater risk-taking (on a forward value-at-risk basis). Investors stretch from liquid 
to  less-liquid  markets  and  large  asset-liability  mismatches  are  stretched  across  credit  and 
currency markets.  
                                                 
5   This is why it is important to adhere to the Toronto G-20 commitment to halve deficits by 2013 and stabilize 
debt to GDP by 2016. 
6   Estimates of central bank ownership of U.S. Treasuries and U.K. gilts are both now over 40 per cent. 
7   Either  perceptions  of  risk  or  risk  preferences  could  change.  In  the  former  case,  complacency  about  actual 
risks can mean taking greater risks within the same risk budget. 
4 
 BIS Review 170/2010
These dynamics helped compress spreads and boost asset prices in the run-up to the crisis. 
They also made financial institutions increasingly vulnerable to a sudden reduction in both 
market and funding liquidity.8  
The crisis prompted a brutal reversal, culminating in the panic in the autumn of 2008.  
The  period  ahead  will  be  somewhat  different.  In  particular,  perceptions  of  macroeconomic 
risk are more volatile, which should help limit complacency.9 Nonetheless, some of the risky 
dynamics associated with perceptions of an extended period of low interest rates could still 
be at work going forward.  
For example, over the past year and a half, banks have used low short-term funding rates to 
rebuild capital by investing in long-term government bonds.10 This strategy is effective to a 
point,  provided  complacency  does  not  set  in  over  the  duration  of  low  policy  rates.  Making 
consistent  positive  carry  may  diminish  the  sense  of  urgency  with  which  banks  reduce 
leverage  or  write  down  bad  assets.  Financial  institutions  may  also  take  this  game  too  far, 
underestimating  the  risks.  This  is  a  particular  concern  since  banks  have  considerably 
shortened the term structure of their funding in the aftermath of the crisis. Banks would do 
well  to  remember  that  marginal  adjustments  of  interest  rates  have  non-negligible  effects 
when leverage is high.  
A  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  also  has  important  implications  for  insurance 
companies  and  pension  funds  with  their  longer-term  guaranteed  returns  or  benefits.  By 
reducing yields on assets and raising the net present value of liabilities, a sustained period of 
low  interest  rates  makes  these  guarantees  harder  to  fulfill.  To  address  potential  shortfalls, 
funds could move into riskier assets in a search for yield and/or shorten their duration to limit 
asset-liability mismatches.11  
The  extent  of  these  strategies  will  depend  on  accounting  treatment  of  liabilities  and 
regulatory arrangements. Some new proposals such as the recent International Accounting 
Standards Board’s  proposed  amendments  to accounting standards  for  insurance  contracts 
(IFRS 4) could have far-reaching systemic implications. The Bank correspondingly welcomes 
the  Chairman’s  recent decision  to consider  other  options  to  improve  the  transparency  and 
international comparability of insurance accounting.  
Implications for the corporate sector  
Low rates for an extended period of time reduce the incentives for banks to enforce the terms 
of loans and for firms themselves to adjust.  
Past experience has shown that low policy rates allow “evergreening,” or the rolling-over of 
non-viable  loans.  The  classic  example  was  Japan  in  the  1990s  when  banks  permitted 
debtors to roll over loans on which they could afford the near zero interest payments but not 
                                                 
8   See  M.K.  Brunnermeier  and  L.H.  Pedersen,  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity,”  Review  of  Financial 
Studies, 2009 22(6):2201–2238. 
9   An analysis of the factors driving the weekly rates of return on a wide range of assets suggests that, since the 
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, a higher proportion of the overall variation in weekly asset 
returns can be explained by a common factor. See Bank of Canada, Financial System Review, December, 
2010. 
10   The expectations channel is important because it determines the term spread, net-interest margin 
and forward-looking capitalization (accrual) of the banks. See T. Adrian and H.S. Shin, “Financial 
Intermediaries,  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy,”  a  paper  prepared  for  the  symposium, 
“Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August, 2008. 
11   To some extent, insurance companies are sheltered from the immediate effects given the longer-term nature 
of their obligations as well as penalties on the withdrawals of existing plans that can be sizeable. 
BIS Review 170/2010 
 5
principal  repayments.  By  evergreening  loans  instead  of  writing  them  off,  banks  preserved 
their capital, but this delayed necessary restructuring of industry. Moreover, the presence of 
non-viable  (or  “zombie”)  firms  limited  competition,  reduced  investment  and  prevented  the 
entry of new enterprises.12 
Here  in  Canada,  the  risk  of  such delayed  adjustment  is  relatively  modest  at  present  since 
most  Canadian  corporate  balance  sheets  are  in  outstanding  shape.  Corporate  leverage 
declined in the third quarter of 2010 – approaching its lowest level in two decades – and it 
remains significantly below that in the United States, the United Kingdom and the euro area. 
However,  it  is  possible  that  a  mild  form  of  such  behaviour  could  develop  in  some  sectors 
such as homebuilding, where land values may be slow to adjust to new realities. At present, 
low carrying costs provide powerful incentives for developers to wait out the current softness.  
Unfortunately, the best contemporary analogue to the Japanese zombie firms is probably the 
U.S.  household  sector.  Problems  with  the  foreclosure  process,  government  programs  and 
forbearance  by  lenders  are  all  delaying  the  adjustments.13  Absent  more  aggressive 
restructuring, the impact of negative equity on one-quarter of U.S. homeowners will weigh on 
consumption for the foreseeable future.  
Implications for households  
Encouraged in part by low interest rates, Canadian household credit has expanded rapidly 
during  the  recession  and  throughout  the  recovery.  As  a  consequence,  the  proportion  of 
households with stretched financial positions has grown significantly.  
In a series of analyses over the past year the Bank has found that Canadian households are 
increasingly vulnerable to an adverse shock and that this vulnerability is rising more quickly 
than had been previously anticipated.14, 15 
While  there  are  welcome  signs  of  moderation  in  the  pace  of  debt  accumulation  by 
households,  credit  continues  to  grow  faster  than  income.  In  some  regions,  lower  house 
prices have begun to weigh on personal net worth. Without a significant change in behaviour, 
the  proportion  of  households  that  would  be  susceptible  to  serious  financial  stress  from  an 
adverse shock will continue to grow.  
The  Bank  has  conducted  a  partial  stress-testing  simulation  to  estimate  the  impact  on 
household balance sheets of a hypothetical labour market shock. The results suggest that 
the  rise  in  financial  stress  from  a  3-percentage-point  increase  in  the  unemployment  rate 
would double the proportion of loans that are in arrears three months or more. Owing to the 
declining  affordability  of  housing  and  the  increasingly  stretched  financial  positions  of 
households, the probability of a negative shock to property prices has risen as well.  
Even  if  the  growth  in  debt  continues  to  slow,  the  vulnerability  of  Canadian  households  is 
unlikely to decline quickly given the outlook for subdued growth in income. In addition, private 
consumption is unlikely to be bolstered by gains in house prices going forward.  
                                                 
12   “Low Interest Rates: Do the Risks Outweigh the Rewards?” Bank for International Settlements Annual Report 
2009/2010, Chapter III. 
13   Governor Kevin Warsh of the Federal Reserve rightly notes: “The steep correction in [U.S.] housing markets, 
while painful, lays the foundation for recovery – far better than the countless programs that sought to subsidize 
and temporize the inevitable repricing,” from the speech, “Rejecting the Requiem,” delivered to the Securities 
Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York, New York, 8 November 2010. 
14   Bank of Canada Financial System Review, June 2010 and December 2009. 
15   This analysis was conducted using data from the Canadian Financial Monitor survey by Ipsos Reid Canada. 
6 
 BIS Review 170/2010
Lines of defence  
Experience suggests that prolonged periods of unusually low rates can cloud assessments of 
financial  risks,  induce  a  search  for  yield,  and  delay  balance-sheet  adjustments.  There  are 
several defences.  
The  first  line  of  defence  is  built  on  the  decisions  of  individuals,  companies,  banks  and 
governments.  
The Bank’s advice to Canadians has been consistent. We have weathered a severe crisis – 
one that required extraordinary fiscal and monetary measures. Extraordinary measures are 
only a means to an end. Ordinary times will eventually return and, with them, more normal 
interest rates and costs of borrowing. It is the responsibility of households to ensure that in 
the future, they can service the debts they take on today.  
Similarly, financial institutions are responsible for ensuring that their clients can service their 
debts.  
More broadly, market participants should resist complacency and constantly reassess risks. 
Low  rates  today  do  not  necessarily  mean  low  rates  tomorrow.  Risk  reversals  when  they 
happen can be fierce: the greater the complacency, the more brutal the reckoning.  
The second line of defence is enhanced supervision of risk-taking activities. Stress testing in 
major  economies  should  focus  on  excessive  maturity  and  currency  mismatches,  look  for 
evidence of forbearance (such as ailing industries receiving a disproportionate share of loans 
or the loosening of standards for existing debtors) and analyse the impact of sharp moves in 
yield curves.  
These  efforts  will  be  aided  by  the  imposition  of  the  new  Basel  III  regulations.  Measures, 
including  a  leverage  ratio,  new  trading  book  rules  and  liquidity  standards,  will  help  curtail 
excessive leverage and maturity transformation.  
The  third  line  of  defence  is  the  development  of  and  selected  use  of  macro-prudential 
measures.  In  funding  markets,  the  introduction  of  through-the-cycle  margining  can  help 
curtail  liquidity  cycles.16  In  broader  asset  markets,  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  can  be 
deployed to lean against excess credit creation. Importantly, following the agreement of G-20 
leaders  in  Seoul,  the  Basel  Committee  endorsed  the  Canadian-led  proposal  for  this 
framework.17 
In the housing market, the Canadian government has already taken important measures to 
address household leverage. These include a more stringent qualifying test that requires all 
borrowers to meet the standards for a 5-year fixed-rate mortgage as well as a reduction in 
the  maximum  loan-to-value  ratio  of  refinanced  mortgages  and  a  higher  minimum  down 
payment on properties not occupied by the owner. In addition, the Bank of Canada’s interest 
rate increases reminded households of the interest rate risks they face. These measures are 
beginning to have an impact.  
Canadian  authorities  are  co-operating  closely  and  will  continue  to  monitor  the  financial 
situation of the household sector.  
These  defences  should  go  a  long  way  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  financial  excesses.  But  the 
question remains whether there will still be cases where, in order to best achieve long-run 
                                                 
16   See  “The  Role  of  Margin  Requirements  and  Haircuts  in  Procyclicality,”  a  report  prepared  by  a  study  group 
chaired by David Longworth and published by the Committee on the Global Financial System of the Bank for 
International Settlements, 23 March 2010. Available at: < http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs36.htm >. 
17   This is the result of work prepared by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s Macro-Variables Task 
Force, chaired by Mark Zelmer of the Bank of Canada. See Results of the December 2010 meeting of the  
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 1 December 2010. Available at:  
http://www.bis.org/press/p101201a.htm. 
 BIS Review 170/2010 
 7
price stability, monetary policy should play a supporting role by taking pre-emptive actions 
against building financial imbalances. As part of our research for the renewal of the inflation-
control  agreement,  the  Bank  is  examining  this  issue.  While  the  bar  for  further  changes 
remains  high,  the  Bank  has  the  responsibility  to  draw  the  appropriate  lessons  from  the 
experience of others who, in an environment of price stability, reaped financial disaster.  
Conclusion  
These  are  extraordinary  times.  A  massive  deleveraging  has  barely  begun  across  the 
industrialised world.  
Canada entered this crisis extremely well-positioned. Due to the sacrifice of Canadians and 
the foresight of successive governments, our public debt burden was the lowest in the G-7. 
Thanks to the courage of my predecessors, monetary policy had tremendous credibility. Due 
to the quality of public supervision and private risk management, our banks had one of the 
soundest capital bases in the world. And after more than a decade of success, our corporate 
balance sheets were in great shape.  
By combining these strengths with decisive policy actions, we have managed well through 
the turmoil. But the challenges we face have only just begun.  
Cheap money is not a long-term growth strategy. Monetary policy will continue to be set to 
achieve the inflation target. Our institutions should not be lulled into a false sense of security 
by current low rates.  
Households need to be prudent in their borrowing, recognising that over the life of a mortgage, 
interest rates will often be much higher.  
The  weight  of  the  adjustment  beyond  our  shores  means  that  demand  for  our  products  is 
weak  and  competition  fierce.  We  must  improve  our  competitiveness.  Recovery  after  a 
recession demands that capital and labour be reallocated. The surge in business investment 
that began this past summer can only be the start.  
Now is not the time for complacency.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 170/2010
