Ewart S Williams: Financial stability, crisis preparedness and risk 
management in the Caribbean 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and 
Tobago,  at  the  opening  session  of  the  42nd  Annual  Monetary  Studies  Conference  of  the 
Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance (CCMF), Port-of-Spain, 9 November 2010. 
 Salutations: 
Conference Honoree Professor CY Thomas 
Sir Courtney Blackman 
Dr. DeLisle Worrell – Governor, Central Bank of Barbados and Chairman of the CCMF 
Executive Committee 
Dr. Anselm London – Secretary of Finance and Enterprise Development, Tobago House of 
Assembly 
Senior Management of the Central Bank 
Conference participants 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  for  the 
42nd Annual Monetary Studies Conference of the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance. 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  express  condolences  to  my  Barbadian  colleagues  on  the 
recent  passing  of  their  beloved  Prime  Minister  David  Thompson,  a  true  Caribbean  patriot. 
Our sympathies and solidarity are also with our regional neighbours, who have been hard hit 
by hurricane “Tomas”.  
I am really delighted to see so many of you here coming from the region and further afield.  
A special welcome to the IMF contingent, (who we now consider friends in the region – how 
times have changed). 
This conference has become a flagship event in the region’s economic conference agenda. 
Over the forty-two years it has provided a unique opportunity for researchers from within and 
outside the Caribbean to examine economic and financial issues of critical importance to the 
region.  
Amidst concerns that the University of the West Indies is becoming more national and less 
regional;  and  with  the  passion  for  the  West  Indies  cricket  team  on  the  wane,  the  Annual 
Monetary  Conference  may  be  one  of  the  few  surviving  legacies  of  regional  co-
operation  and  I  congratulate  the  CCMF  for  its  success  in  keeping  this  regional  institution 
alive. 
This year’s conference finds the Caribbean in somewhat of a quandary. Even as the region 
struggles  to  emerge  from  the  worst  international  financial  crisis  in  a  century,  several 
neighbouring economies find themselves further buffeted by a range of natural disasters – 
the latest being hurricane Tomas.  
And while, in principle, these development challenges should be pulling us closer together, 
the  reality  is  that  the  move  towards  deeper  regional  integration  appears  to  have  lost 
momentum. In fact, many of the regional gains of the past several years seem to be under 
threat. 
As  Europe,  Asia  and  more  recently  Latin  America  are  demonstrating,  the  economic 
challenges of the day require more and even deeper regional cooperation. For us here in the 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 1
Caribbean, regional cooperation may not merely be a desirable policy option, it may be 
vital for our very survival.  
The theme of this year’s conference – Financial Stability, Crisis Preparedness and Risk 
Management in the Caribbean – is both appropriate and timely. Just when we thought we 
had survived the worst of the international financial crisis, we were blindsided by the collapse 
of  the  Stanford  bank  and  the  demise  of  CL  Financial,  the  largest  conglomerate  in  the 
Caribbean.  The  later  crisis  has  involved  not  only  Trinidad  and  Tobago  (with  Clico,  British 
American and the Clico Investment Bank), but it has also touched Barbados, Guyana and 
Suriname (that have Clico subsidiaries) as well as the OECS and the Bahamas, where the 
BAICO insurance companies operated. 
While the impact is still unfolding, there is no doubt that, when the numbers are in, the crisis 
of CL Financial would have had an enormous human and fiscal cost. If there is any positive, 
it is that the crisis should finally constitute a long awaited wake-up call; one that we cannot 
ignore and one that carries powerful lessons that we need to address immediately. 
In passing, I would like to identify three main lessons: 
 
The  first  is  the  urgent  need  for  all  regional  jurisdictions  to  strengthen  national 
financial legislation and regulatory practices; 
The  second  imperative  is  the  establishment  of  a  framework  to  facilitate  closer 
collaboration among regional regulators in the regulation of cross-border institutions; 
and 
The third imperative is the establishment of a national crisis management plan which 
details  how  regulatory  authorities  would  react  in  the  event  of  a  systemic  financial 
crisis. 
  An examination of the conference agenda indicates that these issues will be fully covered in 
the next three days. One couldn’t help but notice also the impressive list of presenters and 
participants.  This  should  provide  for  stimulating  discussion  such  that,  at  the  end  of  this 
conference  we  should  be  able  to  benefit  from  new  insights  for  assuring  regional  financial 
stability.  
It  is  indeed  fitting  that  this  year’s  conference  will  honor  the  work  of  a  great  Caribbean 
economist and intellectual – Professor C.Y. Thomas. Let me congratulate C.Y. for his sterling 
contribution to the region, in a career spanning more than four decades. Your early work in 
the area of monetary and financial economics has helped shape the minds of generations of 
students and policy-makers in the Caribbean and in other parts of the world. 
I  do  look  forward  to  hearing  from  both  yourself  and  your  celebrant,  Sir  Courtney  later  this 
morning. 
Once again, we are delighted to have you here in Port of Spain to participate in the 42nd 
Annual  Monetary  Studies  Conference.  I  sincerely  hope  that,  in  addition  to  your  fruitful 
conference  deliberations,  you  find  some  time  to  enjoy  the  country.  [Please  spend  freely, 
domestic demand is sluggish and we need the money].  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2010
