Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Global rebalancing, asset prices and policy 
responses 
Opening remarks by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
Fifth  High-Level  Seminar  of  the  Eurosystem  and  Latin  American  Central  Banks,  Madrid, 
10 December 2010. 
 Good morning and welcome again.  
More  than  three  years  after  the  global  financial  system  started  to  show  serious  signs  of 
instability  and  two  years  after  being  on  the  verge  of  a  global  economic  and  financial 
meltdown,  the  world  economy  seems  to  have  avoided  that  risk,  backed  by  a  strong  and 
coordinated policy response. Nevertheless, the strengthening has been uneven and the risk 
of economic and financial instability is still persistent and significant in some regions, like the 
euro area. Indeed, it is hard to emphasise sufficiently the challenges ahead and how crucial 
the present juncture is for the future of our Monetary Union.  
On  the  contrary,  Latin  American  economies  had  learned  the  lessons  from  the  severe 
financial  and  economic  disruptions  they  experienced  in  the  not  so  distant  past,  and  the 
challenges  they  currently  face  are  more  similar  to  those  that  characterised  the  period  of 
strong growth prior to the financial crisis. These very different sets of present circumstances 
make today’s exchange of mutual experiences and policy discussion particularly interesting.  
The title of today’s Seminar was chosen almost a year ago, but it couldn’t be more timely: 
Global  Rebalancing,  Asset  Prices  and  Policy  Responses.  From  today’s  perspective, 
these three issues refer – more or less directly – to the basic challenges that will have to be 
tackled to make the present uneven and unbalanced global recovery sustainable.  
With this in mind, I will organise my Opening Remarks around these three topics. First, I will 
deal  with  global  rebalancing  and  how  to  achieve  it  in  a  context  of  diverging  economic 
prospects for advanced and emerging market economies. Second, I will address the recent 
behaviour of global financial flows and the challenges that emerging market economies face 
in this regard, including the risk of asset price overvaluation. And finally, I will touch briefly 
upon  the  need  to  enhance  policy  cooperation  at  the  global  level,  especially  as  some 
economies progressively leave the worst of the crisis behind. 
Let me move now to the first issue: global rebalancing and the world economic outlook. 
Although  global  imbalances  were  considered  one  of  the  major  risks  facing  the  world 
economy  before  the  crisis,  such  risks  did  not  finally  materialise  in  the  expected  form  of  a 
disorderly adjustment of exchange rates, with disruptive effects on global financial stability. 
Nevertheless,  even  if  large  and  unsustainable  deficits  financed  by  the  accumulation  of 
reserves by surplus emerging economies were not the ultimate cause of the global economic 
and financial crisis, it can still be argued that they provided support for the build-up of the 
financial excesses that led to it.  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  global  imbalances  were  reduced  as  a  consequence  of  the 
financial  retrenchment  and  the  severe  downturn  in  activity  worldwide.  However,  a  large 
portion  of  the  correction  is  likely  to  have  been  merely  cyclical.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  as  the 
global recovery is taking hold, a new widening of imbalances is starting to be perceived this 
year  and  is  foreseen  to  continue  into  2011.  Indeed,  the  basic  structural  factors  underlying 
global  imbalances  remain  essentially  in  place;  but  the  crisis  has  brought  about  some 
potentially important changes in the nature of the imbalances.  
As trade and capital flows experienced a sudden stop during the crisis, the immediate impact 
was  deeper  in  those  economies  more  open  to  trade  –  which  collapsed  –  and  those  with 
higher  net  external  financing  needs.  When  trade  recovered,  export  economies  tended  to 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 1
rebound strongly, but countries with large external deficits generally lagged behind. In many 
advanced economies, particularly in those running deficits, private domestic demand remains 
severely  impaired  by  the  adjustment  process  and  the  need  for  the  private  sector  to 
deleverage.  As  a  result  of  this  process  private sector  saving  rates  have  increased  sharply 
and  public  sector  balances  have  rapidly  deteriorated.  In  the  end,  external  deficits  do  not 
reflect anymore the large financing needs of the private sector – as they did before the crisis – 
but those of the public sector. 
High fiscal deficits and rapidly increasing debt levels in most advanced economies are both a 
consequence of the crisis and of the policy response to it, as Governments tried to make up 
for  the  sharp  collapse  in  private  sector  activity  and  to  support  their  financial  sectors,  in  a 
context  of  rapidly  shrinking  public  revenues.  Given  the  deep  concerns  about  public  debt 
sustainability brought about by these developments, a key policy challenge in most advanced 
economies is to achieve fiscal consolidation, even at a time of expected lasting weakness in 
domestic demand.  
European  economies  have  been  acting  resolutely  in  the  pursuit  of  fiscal  consolidation.  In 
particular, Spain is undergoing an intense adjustment process which has halved the current 
account deficit (from 9,6% in 2007 to around 5% this year). The Government is implementing 
an ambitious fiscal consolidation plan, combining some tax increases with sizable spending 
cuts  and,  more  importantly,  adjustments  to  long-term  expenditures,  in  particular  to  the 
pension system, all of which will have a strong positive impact on the long-term sustainability 
of public finances.  
But the success of the adjustment will depend first and foremost on achieving a solid and 
sustainable growth rate. This goal requires implementing the necessary structural reforms to 
increase productivity and the efficiency of the economy, and establishing a more balanced 
and stable pattern of growth. The most important of these reforms have already begun to be 
introduced,  in  particular  those  bearing  on  the  labour  market  and  the  financial  sector,  but 
continuous progress is needed. 
The third pillar of the Spanish action plan is the restructuring of the financial sector and its 
adaptation to an economy less dependent on credit and leverage for growth. Restructuring 
turns  on  two  essential  aspects:  the  downsizing  of  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole,  and 
maintaining a sufficiently large backstop as to ensure the capital that is required, but using 
only that necessary so as not to overburden public debt, no matter how small the Spanish 
public debt is. 
The hard times that characterise a protracted process of economic and financial  adjustment 
are  familiar  to  many  Latin  American  countries,  which  have  experienced  sovereign  and 
banking  crises  over  the  past  decades.  But  they  have  avoided  it  this  time.  Indeed,  Latin 
America has proved outstandingly resilient at a time of global hardship, as too have many 
emerging  economies  –  perhaps  with  the  exception  of  some  Eastern  European  countries. 
Before 
their 
vulnerabilities, precisely as a result of the lessons learnt in the previous crisis. Accordingly, 
there  were  no  severe  problems  of  overborrowing  or  external  imbalances  of  the  sort 
experienced by industrial countries, and the current adjustment, while significant in size, has 
been swift. Recovery in Asia and Latin America is proving strong and driven increasingly by 
domestic demand.  
All in all, improved fundamentals relative to industrial countries have placed emerging market 
economies in a much better position to resume high levels of growth. Going back to a debate 
that was popular in the first half of 2008, we can say that, after all, emerging countries have 
been able to “decouple” from the dire growth prospects of advanced economies.  
But it is still uncertain whether solid growth in emerging economies can be sustained over the 
medium  term  if  external  demand  from  major  industrial  economies  remains  subdued  for  a 
protracted period. Moving one step forward, we can ask to what extent emerging economies 
can  act  as  an  effective  engine  for  growth  in  advanced  economies  through  their  external 
the  crisis,  most  Latin  American  countries  had  dramatically  reduced 
2 
 BIS Review 172/2010
demand. There are clear incentives for emerging market economies to forcefully promote the 
growth of their domestic demand and contribute, at the same time, to rebalancing the world 
economy and to rendering global growth more sustainable.  
Let me now turn to the second topic: financial flows and financial globalisation. Increased 
capital  inflows  into  emerging  market  economies  at  a  time  of  strong  domestic  growth  is 
probably the central concern for these economies today; however, coming from a situation in 
which  the  risk  of  a  “sudden  stop”  became  very  serious,  at  the  end  of  2008,  the  current 
bonanza does not appear such a bad outcome after all.  
Yet large capital inflows together with strong domestic demand pressures combine to make 
for  very  expansionary  economic  conditions,  posing  risks  to  economic  management  in  the 
form  of  overheating,  inflation  and  appreciation  pressures,  credit  booms  and  asset  price 
overvaluation.  Emerging  economies  have  traditionally  been  more  prone  to  “booms  and 
busts”  and  “sudden  stops”  than  more  mature  economies,  and  this  helps  to  explain  policy 
awareness when dealing with strong credit growth and currency volatility. 
Total  capital  inflows  into  emerging  market  economies,  and  also  into  Latin  America,  have 
strongly rebounded from the fall in late 2008 and 2009, and are expected to continue to grow 
over  the  medium  term.  Driving  these  developments  are  a  combination  of  solid  economic 
prospects  and  sizable  interest  rate  differentials  relative  to  advanced  economies.  Which  of 
these two factors dominates is hard to say ex-ante but has important implications in terms of 
economic policy management of the situation.  
On the one hand, if current capital inflows to emerging markets simply reflect their perceived 
relative economic strengths going forward, they should be expected to be largely permanent, 
and therefore, an appreciation of their exchange rates would be taken as granted. Such a 
choice  would  provide  monetary  policies  with  more  degrees  of  freedom,  allowing  for  a 
tightening more suited to their cyclical conditions, and for a rebalancing of growth towards 
domestic demand.  
However, should short-term interest rate differentials also be playing a role in explaining this 
new  wave  of  inflows,  then  the  reluctance  of  emerging  market  countries  to  tolerate  large 
appreciations would be understandable, also because the most dynamic components of the 
inflows  –  portfolio  equity  and  debt  flows  –  are  the  most  volatile  and  subject  to  eventual 
reversals. However, limiting upward exchange rate flexibility may attract more capital inflows, 
on the expectation of future appreciations, turning thereby into a self-defeating strategy. 
In summary, choosing the right policy mix has become a challenging task for many emerging 
market economies, all the more so in the absence of a globally coordinated policy response.  
Faced with these uncertain times, Latin American economies are applying a mix of policies to 
attain their multiple objectives and minimise risks. The mix includes, to differing degrees of 
intensity,  monetary  policy 
reserve 
accumulation, macro-prudential policies and, in some cases, capital controls.  
The use of capital controls has traditionally been controversial, because they distort markets 
while their effectiveness is not backed by empirical evidence. But we must acknowledge that 
there has been a shift in opinion in their favour – at least as a last-resort instrument – even 
among  institutions  such  as  the  IMF.  In  turn,  this  shift  probably  reflects  a  change  in  the 
perceived balance of benefits and costs associated with financial excesses.  
Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  capital  controls  can  also  entail  negative 
externalities  for  the  global  economy.  While  fully  convinced  of  the  benefits  of  financial 
globalisation, a topic to which we devoted our Seminar in 2006, I am concerned by the risks 
of financial deglobalisation arising in the wake of the crisis. There is much discussion on the 
risks  of  trade  protectionism  as  a  consequence  of  the  crisis,  but  the  risks  of  financial 
protectionism  are  at  least  as  significant  and  probably  more  evident.  For  instance,  national 
rescue plans to address the financial crisis may have jeopardised the level playing field that 
must underpin cross-country financial flows. In a similar vein, capital controls could induce 
foreign  exchange 
interventions  and 
tightening, 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 3
market segmentation and trigger a spiral which would erode some of the progress achieved 
in financial integration over the past decades.  
Let me be more specific on banking flows and the lessons from the global financial crisis. 
The crisis has emphasised the vulnerability of cross-country banking flows, and how quickly 
they  may  retrench  in  times  of  stress.  Such  retrenchment  was  an  important  transmission 
channel of financial strain during the global financial crisis. However, not all banks behaved 
equally;  lending  by  some  proved  more  resilient  than  others.  Recent  research1  on  the 
performance of cross-border lending to emerging markets during the recent crisis has yielded 
a  number  of  interesting  conclusions.  Among  them,  that  lending  by  Spanish  banks  to  Latin 
America was more resilient than lending by other international banks, and that by behaving 
like  domestic  banks  they  did  not  contribute  to  the  impact  of  foreign  shocks  on  credit  and 
interest rates.  
The  relative  stability  of  Spanish  banking  flows  has  to  do  with  both  the  banking  business 
model  and  the  quality  of  supervision.  Spanish  banks  in  Latin  America  have  traditionally 
operated under a subsidiary model, whereby they are financially autonomous from the head 
office  and  they  have  to  comply  with  the  host  country’s  capital  requirements  and  deposit 
insurance  schemes.  In  turn,  supervisory  responsibility  is  shared  between  the  host  country 
and the home country supervisors. 
Another factor of resilience behind the business model of Spanish banks in Latin America is 
their focus on retail banking, which tends to be less volatile and more closely linked to the 
real  economy  than  wholesale  or  investment  banking.  Both  the  emphasis  on  retail  banking 
and the principle of financial autonomy of the subsidiaries induce banks to fund themselves 
primarily through the deposit base in the host country. This reliance on domestic funding has 
favoured  “business  as  usual”  even  if  the  home  country  was  enduring  financial  stress,  and 
has helped to reduce the financial vulnerability of the host country by mitigating the exposure 
to external flows.  
I am aware that even if the subsidiary model has proved its resilience during the crisis, it may 
involve  some  costs  in  terms  of  liquidity  management,  and  that  alternative  banking  models 
may have their virtues depending on the nature of the banking business. With due attention 
to limiting financial vulnerabilities, the question of models for cross-border banking has to be 
addressed with the necessary flexibility. 
In any case, the relatively mild recession and the favourable prospects for banking business 
in Latin America have encouraged Spanish banks to maintain or even increase their activity 
in  the  region  at  a  time  of  hardship  at  home.  This  last  factor  is  indeed  an  example  of  the 
benefits  of  preserving  financial  globalisation:  strong  economic  prospects  in  Latin  America 
have helped Spanish companies to build an important buffer against the deterioration in the 
domestic market, with an important contribution to our own financial stability.  
Let me briefly address my third and final point today: the need to maintain the highest degree 
of global policy cooperation. The immediate crisis response by the international community 
was  first  coordinated  in  the  revamped  G20.  The  crisis  showed,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the 
national  policies  of  systemic  economies  had  long  neglected  the  spillovers  of  their  own 
policies  on  other  countries  and,  at  the  same  time,  that  some  of  these  policies  entrenched 
unsustainable  patterns  of  growth.  In  addition,  as  mentioned  before,  the  crisis  exposed 
countries  to  sudden  and  severe  liquidity  shortages.  Against  this  background,  the  G20  has 
pledged  a  significant  strengthening  of  both  global  surveillance  and  global  financial  safety 
nets.  
The measures taken and the coordination involved highlight the remarkable unity achieved in 
response  to  the  crisis. However,  as  the  recovery  gathers  steam  at  different  speeds,  some 
                                                 
1  See Kamil and Rai (2010), Galindo, Izquierdo and Rojas-Suarez (2009). 
4 
 BIS Review 172/2010
dissent  has  surfaced.  Although  differences  in  policies  are  not  completely  unexpected  now 
that  the  collapse  scenario  has  been  reduced,  they  do  show  that  the  international  financial 
architecture still lacks sufficient leverage to coordinate the interests of the different countries.  
Symptoms of imperfect coordination can be seen across the board today and, unfortunately, 
the euro area is no exception. As I have mentioned and illustrated above, a lack of coordination 
leads to national responses which can generate negative externalities. Recovering the sense 
of common purpose shared at the height of the crisis remains of the essence when designing 
the  right  policies  at  the  global  level.  In  these  circumstances,  it  would  be  of  paramount 
importance to reinforce the efforts to keep cooperation and dialogue open, and this Seminar 
is intended to contribute to that goal.  
The other area where international cooperation is definitely needed is in the construction of 
global safety nets as a way to reduce global financial risks. A wider use could help mitigate 
certain policies that may be detrimental to global stability from a collective standpoint, such 
as excessive reserve accumulation. In that respect, additional work is needed to improve the 
incentives  associated  with  IMF  lending  facilities  for  emerging  market  economies  and  to 
address  more  effectively  the  traditional  problems  associated  with  them  (for  instance,  the 
stigma problem). International fora are well suited for resolving these coordination problems. 
That  brings  me  to  the  end  of  my  introduction  to  the  Seminar.  As  you  can  see  in  the 
programme,  there  will  be  three  sessions  which  will  take  up  each  of  the  topics  I  have  just 
addressed. Each session has been organised as a panel discussion so as to facilitate the 
presentation  and  exchange  of  different  views,  with  three  panellists  from  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic.  After  each  panel,  we  have  allotted  sufficient  time  for  an  open  general  discussion. 
Finally, at the end of today’s proceedings, President Trichet will make the closing remarks of 
the Seminar. I hope we will have an intense and very productive day’s discussion.  
Without further delay, I give the floor to my friend Governor Carlos Costa, who will chair the 
first session of the seminar on global rebalancing. 
Thank you 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 5
