Bandid Nijathaworn: Rethinking the role of financial soundness –  
financial infrastructure and long-term sustainable growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
8th Bank Indonesia Annual International Seminar 2010 on “Rethinking Macroeconomic and 
Financial Policies”, Jakarta, 22 October 2010.  
 Thank you Chair,  
Let me begin by thanking Bank Indonesia for the invitation. It is a pleasure to be here.  
On  the  issue  of  financial  soundness,  it  is  certainly  hard  to  overstate  the  importance  of  a 
sound  financial  infrastructure.  In  normal  times,  the  financial  sector  plays  a  critical  role  in 
driving the real economy. But during times of stress, having a sound financial infrastructure is 
all the more important, because it is the viability of financial institutions that typically draws 
the line between a mild economic setback versus a full-blown crisis.  
But what are the essential features of a sound financial infrastructure? Let me highlight three 
key elements that I believe constitute financial system soundness.  
First is the efficiency aspect. The financial sector must perform its core functions efficiently. 
To  this  end,  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  Asian  emerging  markets,  partly  by 
default as globalization and the rapidly growing economies in Asia have raised competition 
among financial institutions, and also by design given the continuing efforts by the authorities 
to  deregulate  and  develop  the  financial  sector.  Making  further  headway  on  these  fronts, 
therefore, should be a continuing process. And I think this is what Bank Indonesia is doing. 
Similarly, in our case, the Bank of Thailand recently launched the Financial Sector Master 
Plan 2, in which we outline the key principles and guidelines for further strengthening of the 
financial sector over the next five years. Chief among the agenda are our commitments to 
bring  down  financial  transaction  costs  through  further  deregulation  and  promotion  of  more 
competition in the banking industry.  
The  second  element  of  financial  soundness  is  the  integrity  aspect.  That  is,  financial 
institutions  must  be  sufficiently  immune  to  “runs”,  which  I  define  loosely  as  correlated  and 
large-scale withdrawals of deposits, triggered by sudden loss of confidence in the solvency of 
banks concerned. On this, a key lesson for emerging markets from the global financial crisis 
is that the push for financial market development must be accompanied by constant efforts to 
review and bolster as necessary the supervisory framework and standards, so that financial 
soundness can be ensured without compromising the financial system’s integrity.  
The third and last element of financial soundness is the stability aspect. The financial sector, 
while playing an important role in supporting the real economy, can at the same time be the 
source  of  risk  and  instability  to  the  real  sector.  As  we  know,  the  spillover  effects  from 
financial  to  real  sector  can  take  many  forms.  For  example,  the  tendency  for  financial 
institutions  to  extend  more  credit  during  economic  upswings,  and  scale  back  lending 
precisely  during  downturns,  can  contribute  to  the  amplitude  of  the  business  cycles.  This 
“procyclicality”  mechanism  works  to  exacerbate  real  shocks,  raise  the  degree  of  economic 
fluctuations, and in extreme cases can play a part in leading to financial or economic crises.  
One remedy to this problem is to utilize the supervisory and regulatory function in pursuit of 
macroeconomic and system-wide stability objectives, particularly by reducing the degree of 
procyclicality. Such “macroprudential” approach to regulation is rapidly becoming a received 
wisdom among academics and practitioners, and indeed is the guiding principle underlying 
the recently finalized Basel III proposal. While it is encouraging that practical implementation 
has  already  been  set  in  motion,  there  remains  a  degree  of  opaqueness  at  the  conceptual 
BIS Review 143/2010 
 1
level about the desirable features that should govern the design of macroprudential policy. 
This  point  leads  me  to  my  second  topic  that  I  want  to  focus  my  talk  on  today,  that  is 
macroprudential policy and long-term financial stability.  
In my view, there are three important issues regarding macroprudential regulation. The first is 
the objective of macroprudential policy, which conceptually is to safeguard financial stability. 
But, for practical purposes, the notion of financial stability is much more obscure compared to 
price stability, and the question of how macroprudential policy should be designed to target 
something that is loose in concept and difficult to measure in practice remains a challenge.  
To address this, one approach has been to distinguish between the two facets of financial 
stability:  the  systemic  importance  of  a  given  financial  institution  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
procyclicality  of  the  overall  financial  system  on  the  other.  Such  taxonomy  implies  that 
macroprudential policy should aim to improve the resilience of the financial infrastructure in 
these two aspects.  
With  respect  to  systemic  importance,  various  measurement  tools  have  been  developed, 
ranging from the network externality approach to the concept of conditional value-at-risk or 
CoVaR associated with the works of Adrian and Brunnermeier. The latter method has since 
been  applied  to  the  cases  of  Hong  Kong  and  Thailand,  by  their  respective  central  bank 
staffs.1 On the second facet, there have also been attempts to get a handle on procyclicality 
quantitatively. Notably, credit-to-GDP ratio has been proposed as an intermediate indicator 
around which macroprudential policy such as countercyclical capital buffer can be designed.  
While scientific work on the conceptual and measurement issues are still progressing, central 
banks  implementing  macroprudential  policies  will  need  to  be  content  with  something  less 
holy.  At  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  implementing  macroprudential  policy  involves  monitoring  a 
large set of indicators, covering seven important areas in which experience and history have 
shown are prone to financial vulnerability. Such a wide coverage is designed to make up for 
any  shortfall  in  terms  of  scientific  measurement  and  increase  the  chance  of  detecting 
financial imbalances as they begin to develop. This systematic monitoring framework is then 
augmented by careful deliberation of the policy measures that integrates analyses from both 
our supervision and monetary policy groups. So far, our experience with such approach has 
been positive.  
Let me now turn to the second issue: Should the implementation of macroprudential policy 
be based on discretion or subject to rules?  
To me, this is a complex and is still an unsettled issue. On the one hand, given the complex 
nature  of  how  financial  instability  develops,  regulators  may  understandably  wish  to  retain 
some  degree  of  freedom  in  choosing  the  timing  and  instrument  to  address  the  sources  of 
risks as they emerge. In this sense, there appear to be good cases for the use of discretion. 
On the other hand, there is also a danger that discretionary prudential measures can add to 
the multitude of shocks and exacerbate rather than absorb them. Therefore, a sound practice 
of macroprudential policy should at least be partially governed by rules, in order to minimize 
the chance of adverse outcomes and to ensure that policy is consistent with the promotion of 
long-term financial stability. As you can see, there are strong validities on both sides.  
The  third  issue  is  the  international  dimension  of  macroprudential  policy.  As  I  see  it,  going 
forward, the major source of risk to financial stability in Asian emerging markets is likely to be 
external. For example, the recent upsurge of capital flows can be a prelude to a number of 
common  shocks  to  financial  stability  that  can  hit  in  the  region  in  the  future.  In  this 
environment,  a  unilateral  approach  to  deal  with  the  issue,  through  macroprudential  policy, 
can be inefficient and may lead to more volatility as investors engage in regulatory arbitrage 
                                                 
1  Roengpitya  and  Rungcharoenkitkul  (2009)  “Measuring  Systemic  Risk  and  Financial  Linkages  in  the  Thai 
Banking System”, Bank of Thailand Discussion Paper. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2010
across different economies. To address this dimension of the challenge, a more coordinated 
approach  to  macroprudential  measures  may  be  needed.  Although  steps  towards  formal 
coordination  have  yet  to  be  established,  ongoing  close  cooperation  amongst  regional 
economies  has  already  resulted  in  a  number  of  common  platforms  through  which  greater 
policy coordination can be conducted. For example, the Asean+3 Macroeconomic Research 
Office  (AMRO)  to  be  launched  next  year  is  already  mandated  to  conduct  economic  and 
financial surveillance across the region. The office will be in a good position to study this type 
of policy coordination. In the meantime, more discussion among policy makers in the region 
should be encouraged, as we increasingly are facing common problems that are of a global 
nature. To this end, I would like to commend Bank Indonesia for organizing this international 
conference, which contributes tremendously to the region’s discussion and efforts along this 
line.  
It is on this note that I would like to end my remark. Thank you. 
BIS Review 143/2010 
 3
