Xolile P Guma: South Africa’s financial regulatory environment 
Introductory  remarks  by  Dr  Xolile  P  Guma,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank,  at  the  launch  of  the  September  2010  Financial  Stability  Review,  Pretoria, 
7 October 2010. 
 Members of the press, guests and colleagues 
On behalf of the South African Reserve Bank, I would like to welcome you to the release of 
the September 2010 edition of the Financial Stability Review. The Bank has been publishing 
its  Financial  Stability  Review  on  a  bi-annual  basis  since  2004,  and  this  is  the  fourteenth 
publication of its kind. The Financial Stability Review aims to identify and analyse potential 
risks to financial system stability, communicate such assessments and stimulate debate on 
pertinent  issues.  The  Bank  recognises  that  it  is  not  the  sole  custodian  of  financial  system 
stability,  but  believes  that  it  can  contribute  significantly  towards  a  larger  effort  to  achieve 
stability  involving  the  government,  other  regulators,  self-regulatory  agencies  and  financial 
market participants.  
As a result of the recent global financial and economic crisis there have been considerable 
developments  that  have  influenced,  and  quite  radically  changed,  the  theoretical  thinking 
about  financial  stability  and  its  integration  with  the  other  tasks  of  central  banks.  The 
extraordinary measures taken to resolve the most impaired financial systems have changed 
the thinking about a central bank’s role in financial crisis management. The very high fiscal 
cost of resolving the crisis and stimulating growth when it led to a global slowdown has also 
caused politicians to be more involved with the inevitable process of regulatory reform that 
has followed. Several of the most affected jurisdictions have announced substantial changes 
to  their  financial  regulatory  policy  processes  and  regulatory  structures,  and  the  manner  in 
which these are integrated with monetary and macroeconomic policies.  
Not  only  have  more  powers  been  given  to  some  central  banks  to  monitor  and  coordinate 
financial stability, but governments in some jurisdictions have chosen to oversee the process 
of resolving “too big to fail” financial institutions in future crises. Common features of most of 
the  thinking  reflected  in  recent  discussion  forums,  literature  and  structural  changes  are  an 
increased  emphasis  on  the  formulation  of  macroprudential  policy  and  tools,  and  a 
recommendation for the creation of an independent policy decision-making structure to help 
consider financial stability issues and integrate any necessary policy decisions with monetary 
policy.  
Crucial  to  the  approach  to  be  developed  by  the  Bank  is  the  concept  of  macroprudential 
policy.  There  have  been  many  different  attempts  to  define  this  concept  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements recently referred to “an orientation or perspective of regulatory and 
supervisory  arrangements  that  is  systemic  rather  than  institutional”.1  A  macroprudential 
approach  firstly,  has  a  time  dimension  which  deals  with  how  risk  evolves  over  time,  with 
procyclicality  as  the  primary  source  of  risk.  Secondly,  it  has  a  cross-sectional  dimension 
dealing  with  how  risk  is  allocated  within  the  financial  system  at  a  given  point  in  time,  with 
common exposures and inter-linkages between financial firms as the primary sources of risk. 
In simple terms, a macroprudential policy approach is therefore one where fiscal, monetary 
and regulatory policy are all aimed at either changing or countering the collective behaviour 
                                                 
1   Borio, C. 2010. Implementing a macroprudential framework: blending boldness and realism, Bank 
for International Settlements, July. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 1
of financial institutions in order to reduce the systemic risk emanating from such behaviour. 
This is a very complex task which poses big challenges for policymakers and regulators.  
I turn now to the Financial Stability Review and the key issues it addresses. During the first 
half of 2010 downside risks to the steady economic recovery and improving macrofinancial 
conditions  rose  sharply  in  advanced  economies.  Concerns  about  the  fiscal  positions  of  a 
number of euro area countries soon turned into a sovereign debt crisis. Reprieve only set in 
with  the  announcement  of  a  comprehensive  rescue  package  by  the  joint  European 
authorities and the International Monetary Fund.  
In  emerging  market  economies  GDP  growth  has  been  robust  and  incentives  for  capital 
inflows  are  expected  to  remain  strong.  As  a  result  asset-price  bubbles,  financial  market 
instability  and  uncertainty  and  fragility  of  financial  systems  in  general,  present  risks  to  the 
outlook in emerging economies. Generally, conditions in the global financial system are still 
influenced  by  above-normal  levels  of  uncertainty,  highlighting  the  fact  that  the  process  of 
repairing impaired financial systems is far from complete.  
In  South  Africa,  despite  positive  signs  of  economic  recovery,  employment  continued  to 
decline,  placing  a  significant  damper  on  the  domestic  financial  system.  Nevertheless,  the 
banking  and  insurance  sectors  maintained  high-quality  capital  buffers  well  above  the 
minimum  prudential  requirements,  and  remained  profitable.  Growth  in  bank  credit  granted 
has  begun  to  increase,  the  growth  rate  in  impaired  advances  is  decelerating  and  lending 
standards  of  banks  are  showing  signs  of  loosening.  Although  indications  are  that  initial 
expectations of a vigorous recovery in real economic activity were too optimistic, business 
confidence rebounded in the third quarter of 2010.  
Despite the negative sentiment brought about by rising unemployment, the level of consumer 
confidence remained almost unchanged in the second and third quarters of 2010, following a 
strong recovery in the first quarter. Consumers also remained optimistic about the prospects 
for the economy as a whole, although they were still somewhat reluctant to commit to the 
purchase of durable goods.  
Current  developments  in  enhancing  the  strength  of  the  financial  regulatory  environment 
include the publication of the Companies Amendment Bill, with the purpose of improving the 
administration  and  effectiveness  of  the  Companies  Act;  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
Amendment  Act  to  enhance  the  Bank’s  governance  framework  and  to  uphold  its  public 
interest  role;  and  the  proposed  draft  Banks  Amendment  Bill,  taking  into  account  new 
international  best  practices  and  standards  as  issued  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Bank 
Supervision, and to align the provisions of the existing Banks Act with the new Companies 
Act.  
In  addition  to  international  efforts  to  strengthen  the  overall  robustness  of  the  regulatory 
environment,  some  countries  have  responded  by  reforming  national  regulatory  systems. 
These  reforms  include  the  extension  of  central  banks’  powers  with  regard  to  supervision, 
market conduct and consumer protection; the provision of more appropriate structures and 
policy instruments to assess and mitigate “systemic risks”; the need to address the “too-big-
to-fail”  moral  hazard  problems  associated  with  systemically  important  financial  institutions; 
and the need to close the regulatory gaps that were prevalent in the build-up to the financial 
crisis.  Although  some  countries  are  proceeding  with  regulatory  changes,  a  degree  of 
international convergence around a common international framework is needed.  
I  have  briefly  highlighted  the  key  issues  raised  in  the  Financial  Stability  Review.  More 
detailed analyses are available in the publication itself, and will be highlighted by the authors’ 
presentations.  I  trust  that  you  will  find  these  interesting,  stimulating  and  relevant  to  the 
current environment and invite you to provide comment as part of the important process of 
ongoing debate on financial stability.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2010
