Mark Carney: Looking back, moving forward – Canada and global 
financial reform 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the International Center 
for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 9 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
There  is  an  old  saying,  “Knowledge  is  gained  from  experience,  and  experience  is  gained 
from mistakes”. In Canada, we made our mistakes early and often in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Our  fiscal  situation  deteriorated  sharply,  inflation  surged  to  double-digit  levels,  and  a  few 
small regional banks collapsed. 
The  core  lesson  we  learned  from  those  difficult  years  was  the  importance  of  coherent, 
principle-based policy frameworks. Such frameworks discipline policy-makers and enhance 
credibility.  In  Canada,  this  approach  yielded  several  attributes  that  helped  the  financial 
system weather the storm, including: 
 
 
 
 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  elaborate  on  these  elements,  many  of  which  are  now  being 
incorporated into new global regulatory and supervisory standards. I will also discuss other 
measures – including more robust market infrastructure, better resolution mechanisms and 
macroprudential  instruments  –  that  have  the  potential  to  enhance  the  efficiency  and 
resiliency of all our systems. 
a commitment to higher and better-quality capital, 
an active supervisory regime with close co-operation amongst authorities, 
a well-regulated mortgage market, and 
a limited shadow banking sector. 
Lessons from the crisis 
The  crisis  demonstrated  the  importance  of  incentives,  the  dangers  of  conformity,  the 
imperative that core markets are continuously open, and the value of matching risk to risk-
bearing  capacity.  It  exposed  the  fallacy  of  composition  that  strong  financial  institutions 
collectively ensure the safety and soundness of the system as a whole. 
The crisis also clearly illustrated the fundamental interconnectedness of the global economy. 
Strains that emerged in a few countries quickly spread around the world, resulting in a deep, 
synchronous recession. It is in all of our interests to get these proposed reforms right. That’s 
the value of sharing experiences, such as Canada’s, and I am grateful to the International 
Center for Monetary and Banking Studies for this opportunity.  
The  fundamental  objective  of  the  reforms  should  be  to  create  a  system  that  efficiently 
supports economic growth while providing financial consumers with choice. The system must 
be robust to shocks, dampening, rather than amplifying, their effect on the real economy.  
Such  a  system  needs  resilient  financial  institutions  and  robust  markets,  since  both  play  a 
central  role  in  financing  and,  if  properly  structured,  each  can  support  the  other.  New 
measures  should  promote  competition  rather  than  concentration,  and  build  systemic 
resilience rather than entrench indispensable institutions. 
Given  the  frameworks  that  we  had  at  the  time,  Canada  has  largely  achieved  these 
objectives. Given the perspective we have gained from the crisis, there are some promising 
new avenues to extend this advantage. 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 1
Even  though  it  experienced  a  short,  sharp  recession,  Canada  fared  relatively  well.  
The cumulative fall in real GDP of 3.4 per cent in Canada compares with declines of over 
4 per cent in the United States, 5 per cent in the euro area, and 8 per cent in Japan. Today, 
employment and economic activity in Canada are back at their pre-crisis levels – a situation 
unique in the G-7.  
Canada’s better performance during the crisis can be explained by two factors. First, with a 
highly credible monetary policy and the strongest fiscal position in the G-7, Canadian policy-
makers  were  able  to  respond  swiftly  and  effectively  with  extraordinarily  accommodative 
measures. 
Second, Canada’s sound financial system continued to function throughout the period. It was 
not  just  that  no  Canadian  bank  failed  or  required  government  capital  injections  –  or  that 
extraordinary liquidity was a fraction of that in other jurisdictions.1 It was that credit continued 
to grow throughout the crisis period and into the recovery.2  
The obvious question is, why? 
In our view, it was the result of a combination of good policy and, in retrospect, some good 
fortune. Allow me to expand. 
Looking back: some lessons from Canada 
Higher and better-quality capital 
Risk-based capital adequacy – that is, the amount and quality of capital and the level of risk 
and leverage – emerged as a key source of strength as the turmoil intensified. 
Canadian banks were required to meet supervisory targets for the level and quality of capital, 
which more than exceeded international minimums. Canadian capital requirements were set 
at 7 per cent and 10 per cent for Tier 1 and Total Capital ratios instead of the 4 per cent and 
8 per cent prescribed in the Basel II Capital Accords.  
In  practice,  Canada’s  banks  typically  held  more.  All  financial  institutions  had  to  establish 
internal targets to provide an operating cushion against volatility and unexpected losses from 
inherent risks – and to avoid breaching supervisory targets.  
Capital adequacy depends on a bank’s risks – which the Basel framework tries to measure. 
While  Basel  II  had  higher  risk-weighted  assets  for  riskier  businesses,  Canada’s  bank 
supervisor, the Office of the Superintendent for Financial Institutions (OSFI), also demanded 
that banks with higher risks should further offset that risk with higher capital.  
Capital not only had to be higher, it also had to be higher quality. OSFI insisted that common 
equity form the predominant share (at least 75 per cent) of Tier 1 capital.3  
Focusing on risk-based capital adequacy ensured that banks with greater risks entered the 
turmoil with larger cushions against unexpected losses. At the time of the Lehman failure, the 
                                                 
1   At its peak, the Bank of Canada liquidity extension represented just under 3 per cent of GDP. This compares 
to  peak  liquidity  extensions  of  about  8.5  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  United  States,  about  13  per  cent  in  the 
European Union and nearly 23 per cent in the United Kingdom. 
2   For  example,  credit  issued  by  the  chartered  banks  to  Canadian  households  and  businesses  has  exhibited 
monthly year-over-year growth of around 5 per cent, on average, from the beginning of 2007 to the present. 
3   Prior to the crisis, OSFI rules required common equity to account for at least 75 per cent of Tier 1 capital. In 
other  words,  other  components  (preferred  shares  and  innovative  and  hybrid  instruments)  were  limited  to 
25 per cent. In January 2008, OSFI relaxed the rules, allowing non-common sources to account for as much 
as  30  per  cent  of  Tier  1  capital.  Then,  in  November  2008,  that  limit  was  raised  again  to  40  per  cent. 
See: http://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2010
average Tier 1 capital ratio at Canadian banks was about 10 per cent and their total capital 
ratio stood at almost 13 per cent. During the turmoil, all major Canadian banks maintained, 
without  reducing  dividends,  capital  in  excess  of  supervisory  targets,  and  none  required 
injections of government capital. Again, crucially, this capital was predominantly made up of 
tangible common equity.  
During the panic, investors understandably lost faith in Basel risk weights. Gallingly, on the 
day  before  each  went  under,  every  bank  that  failed  (or  was  saved  by  the  state)  reported 
capital  that  exceeded  the  Basel  II  standard  by  a  wide  margin.  By  the  autumn  of  2008, 
investors had already seen far too many major institutions hobbled by losses on purportedly 
risk-free securities such as leveraged super senior tranches of securitizations. Many turned 
instead to simple leverage ratios to assess capital adequacy.  
Canadian banks were already subject to such a stringent test. As a supplement to Basel II, 
they were required to ensure that the ratio of total assets to total capital reached no more 
than 20 times. In practice, banks had to maintain their ratios well below this level.  
As Swiss authorities understand, a leverage ratio corrects a fundamental shortcoming and 
serves  as  a  useful  complement  to  the  Basel  requirements.  It  recognizes  the  limits  of  our 
knowledge  and  protects  against  understated  risks  by  operating  fully  independently  of 
sophisticated (and error-prone) risk assessments and modelling. It is an objective measure 
that complements the ultimately subjective risk-based Basel II.  
In  an  ideal  world,  we  would  take  into  account  the  riskiness  of  banks’  assets  in  setting 
leverage. But who lives in a world where risks are known with certainty and can be measured 
with precision?  
In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  when  concerns  about  risks  were  at  their  lowest  (and  risks 
themselves were, in fact, at their highest), Canadian banks were constrained by the leverage 
ratio.  
Elsewhere, absolute leverage soared. From 2002 to 2007, simple asset-to-capital multiples 
at U.S. investment banks, U.K. banks and major European banks, rose by 10 to 15 turns. 
Actual leverage, including off-balance-sheet transactions, was even more extreme. In many 
cases,  higher  leverage  fully  accounted  for  the  entire  increase  in  banks’  returns  on  equity. 
This  proved  to  be  a  mirage  as  the  assets  funded  by  this  increased  leverage  contributed 
much to the staggering losses revealed in the crisis.  
When the financial panic intensified, investors increasingly simplified their judgments about 
capital  adequacy.  In  the  end,  only  true  loss-bearing  capital  and  simple  leverage  tests 
mattered.  In  this  light,  many  financial  emperors  around  the  world  were  seen  to  have  no 
clothes. Canadian banks were comparatively draped in full winter regalia.  
Basel III incorporates many of the advantages of the Canadian system, such as a leverage 
ratio and substantially higher quantity, quality and transparency of Tier 1 capital.  
Beyond making the global system look more Canadian, Basel III introduces some important 
innovations, including:  
 
 
 
a tighter definition of intangible assets; 
new global standards for liquidity; 
a  capital  conservation  buffer  that  is  above  the  minimum  capital  requirement  to 
ensure that banks and supervisors take prompt corrective action and that banks can 
absorb losses during periods of financial and economic stress; and 
a complementary countercyclical buffer that would vary over time and help smooth 
the economic cycle. 
 BIS Review 147/2010 
 3
An active and co-operative supervisory regime 
Of course, systemic resilience is about much more than capital. Similarly, the success of the 
Canadian  financial  system  was  the  product  of  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and 
sound  risk  management  by  the  banks  themselves,  underpinned  by  an  effective  regulatory 
and supervisory regime. Four aspects of this regime were particularly important.  
First,  supervision  was  focused.  Consolidated  supervision  concentrated  on  prudential 
supervision  and  was  not  burdened  by  other  objectives  such  as  the  promotion  of  home 
ownership or community reinvestment. It also ensured that the leverage ratio and other tests 
applied equally to banking and investment banking operations, which helped limit regulatory 
arbitrage. 
Second,  supervision  was  active.  Following  the  failure  of  some  small  regional  banks  in  the 
1980s, a framework for early intervention was established. This so-called staged intervention 
enabled supervisors to work with institutions to correct problems at an early stage, while they 
were still manageable. Board-level interaction, capital penalties and restrictions on business 
all helped to concentrate the minds of management to address issues in a timely fashion. 
Third,  supervision  was  coordinated.  Staged  institutions  were  reviewed  regularly  by  a  joint 
micro-prudential  committee  composed  of  the  bank  regulator,  the  central  bank,  the  deposit 
insurer, the consumer protection agency and the Department of Finance. This coordination is 
a  central  element  of  our  regime.  In  general,  there  is  close  co-operation  amongst  all  the 
entities responsible for financial stability, including mandated information sharing among all 
of these parties.4  
Finally, the entire financial framework was regularly reviewed and updated. In Canada, there 
is a statutory requirement to renew the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial 
system every five years. This has proven invaluable given the pace of change in the financial 
system.  In  addition,  Canada  regularly  subjects  its  system  to  rigorous  external  examination 
under the International Monetary Fund’s Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), and 
Canadian authorities conduct regular system-wide stress tests. 
Many of these elements are now being adopted internationally. The G-20 has made FSAPs 
mandatory. Many jurisdictions are adopting committees to oversee their financial systems.5 
Based  on  a  working  group  report  chaired  by  Canada’s  Superintendent  of  Financial 
Institutions,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  will  propose  to  G-20  leaders  in  Seoul  a  series  of 
recommendations to strengthen oversight and supervision.6  
Well-regulated mortgage market 
Given the genesis of the crisis in U.S. subprime mortgages and its subsequent potential to 
taint everything related to mortgages and securitization, the structure of Canadian mortgage 
finance also proved to be a major advantage. Common-sense attributes include mortgagors 
being  personally  liable  for  their  debts  and  mortgage  interest  not  being  tax-deductible.  In 
addition,  key  lending  standards  are  effectively  set  by  the  terms  of  government-backed 
mortgage insurance.7 Banks are required to have insurance on the mortgages of purchasers 
                                                 
4   Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Act, 1985. Published by Minister of Justice. 
5   Examples with an explicit macroprudential focus include the European Systemic Risk Board for the European 
Union,  the  Systemic  Risk  Council  in  the  United  States,  and  unitary  models  housed  in  central  banks  in  the 
United Kingdom and Australia. 
6   Financial  Stability  Board,  “Intensity  and  Effectiveness  of  SIFI  Supervision;  Recommendations  for  Enhanced 
Supervision” , 1 November 2010. 
7   The publicly owned mortgage insurer, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, has an explicit sovereign 
guarantee  and  is  the  largest  insurance  provider.  Lenders  relying  on  private  mortgage  insurers  receive  a 
government guarantee for losses (from insurer failure) on amounts above 10 per cent of the original mortgage. 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2010
with loan-to-value ratios of over 80 per cent. All borrowers must satisfy an incomes test, and 
insurance premiums vary with loan-to-value and amortization periods.  
Leading up to the crisis, the principal-agent problems that developed in originate-to-distribute 
models  were  absent  in  Canada.  Banks  largely  retained  the  risks  of  their  underwriting, 
maintained their standards, and held onto credit skills. Most mortgages originated by banks 
were for their own balance sheets and, as a result, underwriting standards remained high. 
Banks  obtained  natural  geographic  diversification  of  their  loan  portfolios  through  their 
nationwide branch system, which eliminated one motivation for securitization.  
Only about 30 per cent of mortgages in Canada are securitized. Moreover, securitization in 
Canada is dominated by government-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (about 85 per 
cent  pre-crisis).  As  a  consequence,  the  mortgage-backed  security  market  in  Canada 
continued to function well during the crisis.  
Other  private-label  securitization  markets  were  less  developed.  Similarly,  there  was  little 
usage  of  credit  default  swaps  to  hedge  Canadian  corporate  risk.  With  exposures  largely 
staying on balance sheet, Canadian bankers remained bankers rather than warehousers or 
traders.  
Consider what happened elsewhere.  
The severing of the relationship between originator and risk holder lowered underwriting and 
monitoring  standards.  In  addition,  the  transfer  of  risk  itself  was  frequently  incomplete,  with 
banks  retaining  large  quantities  of  supposedly  risk-free  senior  tranches  of  structured 
products.  
These exposures were compounded by the rapid expansion of banks into over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivatives. In essence, banks wrote a series of large out-of-the-money options.8 With 
pricing and risk management lagging reality, there was a widespread misallocation of capital. 
As credit standards deteriorated, the tail risks embedded in these strategies were realised.  
The magnitude of these developments was remarkable. In the final years of the boom, as 
complacency  about  liquidity  reached  its  zenith,  the  scale  of  shadow  banking  activity 
exploded. The value of structured investment vehicles, for example, tripled in the three years 
to  2007.  Credit  default  swaps  grew  six-fold.  On  the  eve  of  the  crisis,  assets  in  the  U.S. 
shadow banking sector were roughly equivalent to those in the regulated sector.9  
Limited shadow banking sector 
This  brings  me  to  where  Canada,  in  hindsight,  was  fortunate.  With  sound,  bank-based 
finance much more important than in the United States, Canada was much less exposed to 
the drying up of private-label securitization and the collapse of the shadow banking sector.10  
Canada’s  banking  system  is  highly  concentrated,  with  six  major  banks  holding  almost 
90 percent of total bank assets. Banks are the most important suppliers of credit. Direct and 
indirect  bank  finance  accounts  for  58  per  cent  of  credit  provision,  while  other  regulated 
financial institutions supply 14 per cent, and traditional market instruments, 28 per cent.  
                                                 
8   See  A.  Haldane,  “The  Contribution  of  the  Financial  Sector  –  Miracle  or  Mirage?”  Speech  delivered  at  the 
Future of Finance Conference, London, England, 14 July 2010. 
9   Z. Pozsar, T. Adrian, A. Ashcraft, and H. Boesky, “Shadow Banking”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff 
Report No. 458, July 2010. 
10   An exception was the Canadian non-bank asset-backed commercial paper market  which did freeze up and 
had to be restructured. However, this paper financed offshore assets and the restructuring did not have any 
significant effect on credit creation in Canada. 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 5
The major banks also lead securities underwriting and merchant banking in Canada, and are 
among  the  country’s  largest  asset  managers  –  evidence  that  commercial  and  investment 
banking can be successfully combined within one organization. Following mergers in the late 
1980s in Canada, dealers became more like commercial banks, rather than the reverse.  
The structure of Canadian funding markets also made a difference. Canadian banks relied 
less than their American and universal banking peers on unsecured interbank transactions 
and short-term repos. For example the repo market in Canada is one-fifth the size of other 
jurisdictions and the commercial paper market is relatively small.  
In  contrast,  short-term  money  markets  were  the  predominant  source  of  financing  for  the 
one-third increase in the gross leverage of U.S. investment banks, U.K. banks and European 
banks.  It  is  a  simple  fact  that  banks’  reliance  on  wholesale,  collateral-based  finance  rose 
from  $200  billion  to  a  peak  of  $4  trillion  during  this  decade.  By  borrowing  in  short-term 
wholesale  markets  to  fund  asset  growth,  banks  became  more  dependent  on  continuous 
access  to  liquidity  in  money  and  capital  markets.  The  system’s  exposure  to  market 
confidence was enormous.  
Moving forward: what else is required? 
The collapse in confidence necessitated a host of extraordinary measures and bank rescues. 
A  common  motivation  was  fear  of  contagion  through  bilateral  counterparty  relationships  in 
funding and derivatives markets. With U.S. investment banks at the hubs of so many crucial 
markets, such as tri-party repos, the system was profoundly fragile.  
Ultimately, the historic G-7 commitment to use all available tools, including public capital, to 
support systemically important financial institutions and prevent their failure was necessary to 
keep  the  system  functioning.  The  cost  has  been  enormous  moral  hazard  that,  if  left 
unchecked, will distort private behaviour and inflate public costs.  
A series of concerted measures will be required to build resilient, continuously open funding 
and derivatives markets and to restore market discipline to financial institutions.  
Keeping  markets  continuously  open  requires  policies  and  infrastructure  that  reinforce  the 
private generation of liquidity in normal times and facilitate central bank support in times of 
crisis.  The  cornerstones  are  central  clearing  counterparties  or  “CCPs”  for  repos  and  OTC 
derivatives.  Properly  risk-proofed  CCPs  act  as  firewalls  against  the  propagation  of  default 
shocks across major market participants. Through centralised clearing, authorities can also 
require the use of through-the-cycle margins, which would reduce liquidity spirals and their 
contribution to boom-bust cycles.  
To  develop  a  robust,  collateral-based,  short-term  financing  market,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is 
supporting the creation of a domestic CCP for Canadian-dollar repos.  
The  Bank  is  working  with  its  domestic  and  international  partners  to  develop  a  similar 
infrastructure for OTC derivatives markets. Current G-20 efforts to transfer standardized OTC 
derivatives  to  clearing  houses  have  great  potential  to  reduce  contagion  from  counterparty 
risk and to improve the transparency, pricing and management of risk.  
At the same time, G-20 countries will need to ensure that linkages between different CCPs 
do  not  increase  the  degree  of  market  concentration  amongst  dealers.  Access  and 
interoperability  criteria  must  be  carefully  developed  in  order  to  maximise  the  systemic 
benefits of this important reform.  
Addressing too big to fail and re-instilling market discipline 
There is a firm conviction among policy-makers that losses incurred in future crises must be 
borne by the institutions themselves. This means management, shareholders and creditors, 
rather than taxpayers.  
6 
 BIS Review 147/2010
Better  market  infrastructure  alone  will  not  be  sufficient  to  re-instill  market  discipline. 
Ultimately,  a  series  of  measures,  including  living  wills  and  better  cross-border  resolution 
regimes, will be required to expose fully firms to the ultimate sanction of the market.  
All  jurisdictions  need  the  tools  to  intervene  safely  and  quickly  to  ensure  the  continued 
performance of a firm’s essential functions and to sell, transfer or restructure part or all of a 
firm  while  apportioning  losses.  Statutory  bail-in  authority  could  fill  a  crucial  gap  in  the 
resolution toolkit and should catalyze private alternatives to the restructuring process.  
An  example  of  a  promising  market-based  mechanism  is  to  embed  contingent  capital  and 
bail-in  features  into  unsecured  market  debt  and  preferred  shares  issued  by  financial 
institutions. Contingent capital is a security that converts to capital when a financial institution 
is  in  serious  trouble,  thereby  replenishing  capital  without  the  use  of  taxpayer  funds. 
Contingent conversions could be embedded in all future new issues of senior unsecured debt 
and  subordinated  securities  to  create  a  broader  bail-in  approach.  Its  presence  would  also 
discipline management, since common shareholders would be incented to act prudently to 
avoid having their stakes diluted by conversion.  
Conclusion 
The scale and complexity of the crisis and the multiple points of failure all demonstrate that 
there are no panaceas. Wholesale reforms of regulation, changes to policy and adjustment of 
private  behaviour  are  required.  We  should  all  approach  these  tasks  with  a  measure  of 
humility.  
While  Canada’s  experience  offers  some  important  lessons  (on  capital,  leverage,  mortgage 
finance, and supervision), we recognise that we do not have all the answers.  
Responding to challenging events, Swiss authorities, particularly President Hildebrand, are to 
be  commended  for  their  vision  and  leadership  on  such  global  innovations  as  contingent 
capital, bail-ins and cross-border supervisory frameworks.  
All  policy-makers  should  redouble 
continuously open, competitive markets.  
Finally, while these official initiatives are essential, systemic resilience importantly depends 
on  the  oversight  of  private  parties  ranging  from  investors  to  management  and  boards. 
Ultimately, the private sector will remain the first line of defence. A focus on improving these 
oversight functions is thus required.  
As we look back and move forward, we would all be advised to remember that pride goes 
before  the  fall.  Risks  are  usually  the  greatest  when  they  appear  the  least;  and  financial 
market  participants  the  most  vulnerable  when  they  think  they  know  all  the  answers.  In  a 
dynamic 
identifying 
vulnerabilities and improving resilience. Our work has just begun.  
financial  system,  all  participants  need 
focus  continually  on 
infrastructure 
their  efforts 
to  achieve 
to  reform 
to 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 7
