Yves Mersch: Shaping a new regulatory framework – international 
banking at the crossroads 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the conference 
“The  Emerging  Framework  to  Strengthen  Banking  Regulation  and  Financial  Stability”, 
organised by the Financial Stability Institute, BIS, and hosted by the Arab Monetary Fund, 
Abu Dhabi, 8 November 2010. 
 Let me start by thanking the Arab Monetary Fund and the FSI of the BIS for providing 
the opportunity to present my views on financial sector reform in the post crisis era 
from the perspective of international banking. The topic is vast, and I shall not attempt to 
deal exhaustively with its numerous dimensions, but rather concentrate myself on one key 
component,  namely  cross-border  banking  flows.  I  will  describe  their  main  drivers,  explore 
their impact on financial stability, and review major reforms currently discussed and aimed at 
maximizing the benefits of international banking. 
International banking: drivers, effects and impact on financial stability 
Cross-border  flows  have  expanded  enormously  in  the  last  three  decades.  Since  the 
second half of the 19th century, the internationalization of banking has proceeded in several 
waves.  The  most  recent  waves  followed  the  liberalization  of  the  early  1980s  and  the 
expansion  of  subsidiaries  and  branches  in  emerging  and  developing  economies  since  the 
second half of the 1990s. Measured by the expansion of cross-border lending and the local 
claims of foreign banks, the scale of international banking increased dramatically since the 
beginning of 1980s, also in the Gulf States (Figure 1). 
While international claims vis-à-vis developing countries are less than 20 percent of claims to 
developed countries, there has been a recent acceleration of the former. In the last half of 
this decade, the increase in the share of loans to non-banks in the Gulf States is noticeable, 
and it reflects the internationalization strategy of banks which have favored extending credit 
by  local  affiliates  to  cross-border  lending.  Until  the  beginning  of  this  decade,  international 
banking  growth  tracked  well  the  increasing  world  integration  as  measured  by  international 
trade  growth.  More  recently,  however,  cross-border 
than 
international  trade  reflecting  the  emergence  of  risk  transfer  and  securitization  thus  making 
international  banking  an  important  component  of  a  broader  process  of  globalization  and 
integration. Capital flows have not been uniformly distributed across countries, and a cross-
country  analysis  of  net  international  positions  show  large  imbalances  and  persistent  net 
creditor and debtor positions (Figure 2). 
The most important ultimate macroeconomic drivers of international banking are the 
regulatory  environment  and 
technological  developments.  While  maximizing 
shareholders’  value  is  banks’  objective,  the  ultimate  drivers  of  international  banking  are 
macro drivers in home and host countries, and micro drivers related to bank-level efficiency. 
A 2008 survey of internationally active banks in Europe conducted by the ECB indicates that 
the  international  expansion  of  banks  is  driven  primarily  by  the  pursuit  of  new  business 
opportunities  and  by  incentives  to  follow  their  non-financial  customers  abroad.  Consistent 
with  the  results  of  the  empirical  literature,  economies  of  scale  and  scope  play  a  relatively 
minor  role.  The  liberalization  of  international  trade  and  capital  markets  has  increased 
economic  integration  and  interdependence.  Restrictions  to  foreign  bank  entry  have  been 
gradually  eased  by  bilateral  and  regional  trade  and  investment  agreements  as  well  as  by 
multilateral liberalization efforts under the umbrella of the World Trade Organization. During 
the last quarter of a century, deregulation and a trend toward the international harmonization 
flows  have  grown 
faster 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 1
of banking supervision and market  infrastructure have enhanced economic integration and 
international banking activities. 
By  reducing  the  costs  of  foreign  operations,  deregulation  has  fostered  M&A,  greenfield 
investment and the provision of cross-border financial services and new products. This was 
clear in the EU with the “single banking license” of 1989 and the 27 directives implemented 
by  member  states  under  the  Financial  Services  Plan.  This  has  also  been  the  case  with 
innovation  through  Islamic  banking  financial  products  (e.g.,  sukuk)  which  have  increased 
integration and interconnectedness of monetary and capital markets and is further pursued 
by  recent  initiatives  like  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM). 
Traditional banks have opened affiliates in Islamic countries and banks from these countries 
have  entered  traditional  markets.  These  developments  have  led  several  EU  countries, 
including  Luxembourg,  to  modify  their  legal  frameworks  to  facilitate  these  transactions  by 
reducing instances of double taxation. In addition, wholesale activities were boosted in the 
Euro  area  by  the  creation  of  TARGET,  a  platform  for  an  efficient  cross-border  payment 
system,  TARGET  2,  a  completely  integrated  IT  platform  for  cross-border  payments,  and 
starting  in  2013,  T2S,  a  single  IT  platform  for  cross-border  security  settlement.  Finally, 
technological  advances  have  boosted  the  effects  of  economic  integration  on  international 
banking by improving access to information on borrowers and on collateral, and by facilitating 
the development of models to value credit risk, price new securities, and manage risks more 
efficiently. 
The  macroeconomic  conditions  in  home  and  host  countries  also  drive  international 
financial flows. First, regulatory and economic developments in home countries affect the 
international  activities  of  banks.  For  instance,  the  development  of  the  Eurodollar  market 
resulted  from  U.S  restrictions  on  interest  paid  on  deposits  within  the  U.S.,  and  the  U.K. 
government  restrictions  on  sterling  lending  by  U.K.  banks.  Similarly,  prior  to  1999,  U.S. 
banks established subsidiaries abroad to undertake investment activities that restrictions on 
universal  banking  made  impossible  at  home.  Second,  there  exists  ample  evidence  of  a 
positive  correlation  between  economic  development  and  financial  sophistication.  Third, 
increases  in  domestic  market  competition  are  behind  the  international  expansion  of  banks 
faced with the decline in their margins. All that said, in deciding on their internationalization 
strategy,  banks  also  take  into  account  the  growth  prospects  and  the  state  of  economic, 
political,  and  legal  development  of  the  potential  host  country.  First,  macroeconomic  and 
financial  stability  in  host  countries  are  important  drivers  of  foreign  bank  lending.  It  is 
estimated  that  the  elimination  of  currency  risk  increased  banking  activity  in  the  Euro  area 
25 percent. Second, banks prefer countries that have a low cost of information gathering; the 
existence of credit bureaus has been found significant in making a country more attractive to 
international banks. Third, international banks tend to prefer countries with attractive deposit 
insurance  regimes  otherwise  they  operate  through  non  bank  vehicles  for  market  sensitive 
funding  sources.  Finally,  banks  that  are  successful  in  incorporating  host  country’s 
characteristics can boost their comparative advantage vis-à-vis other banks. These factors 
may be cultural or geographical proximity, for example. As an illustration of some of these 
factors  as  well  as  of  the  interconnectedness  of  world  capital  markets,  Figure  3  displays 
nodes to describe countries/regions of banks’ location with the size of the nodes proportional 
to the size of the share of banks’ cross-border assets and liabilities, and the thickness of the 
lines as a measure of the amount of finance across nodes, both in U.S. dollars and in Euros. 
In the lower panel, cumulative net capital flows are depicted by the thickness and direction of 
the arrows. Up to mid-2007, capital flew out of Japan, the Euro area, Asian financial centers 
and oil-exporting countries (via offices in the U.K. and the Caribbean) toward the U.S. and 
emerging  markets.  After  the  crisis,  the  direction  of  most  capital  flows  was  reversed.  In 
particular, funds flew out of the U.S. and back toward the U.K. 
Luxembourg  is  not  on  the  picture, not  because  of  non  availability  of data  as  a  recent  IMF 
paper wrongly states, but because the IMF has neither consulted the ECB, or the BCL, its 
website, or its publications. 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2010
International banking has enhanced economic growth and efficiency, but has affected 
the distribution of risks as well. Cross-border flows have facilitated the transfer of financial 
innovations and increased income in recipient countries; have improved allocative efficiency 
by making it possible for host borrowers to tap international funding sources and by reducing 
their costs of funding owing to increased competition. Finally, international banking has been 
a catalyst of financial sector reforms in host countries, which have in turn increased potential 
growth.  On  the  other  hand,  reliance  in  foreign  lending,  as  exemplified  in  recent  times  of 
stress,  can  be  riskier  than  reliance  on  purely  domestic  lending  sources.  During  times  of 
turmoil,  overseas  funding  may  dry  up  for  financial  and  non-financial  firms,  while  banks 
supplying funding overseas may experience credit losses and liquidity hardships. During the 
last quarter of 2008, for instance, cross-border lending fell by nearly two trillion U.S. dollars 
(at constant exchange rates) against a drop of 0.5 trillion U.S. dollars of foreign banks’ local 
claims in local currencies. From the banks’ viewpoint, the risk profile and resilience of banks 
is also affected. Diversification of a bank’s counterparties does reduce its risk profile; it has 
been  observed  that  during  the  crisis  more  diversified  banks  suffered  lower  losses  (this 
despite that research has found that more diversified banks tend to hold riskier portfolios). 
Similarly, although cross-border banking induces banks to exploit the riskreturn frontier along 
its international dimension, the ensuing efficiency increase has not always been associated 
with better risk measurement and management practices. 
The  profile  of  systemic  risk  has  been  also  affected  by  the  increase  in  the  financial 
system interconnectivity inherent in international banking. The international activities of 
banks allow risk sharing, reducing thereby the probability of financial crises, and according to 
the literature, also the procyclicality of lending. Parent-subsidiary relations make it possible, 
as exemplified during the last crisis, that whether due to reputation or other considerations, 
parent companies support their affiliates in times of duress. However, as experienced in my 
own country, it would not be wise to expect that behavior consistently at all times. The health 
of the parent company may not allow it to support its affiliates, and even force it to rely on its 
affiliates  for  funding.  In  Luxembourg,  a  traditional  net  provider  of  liquidity  to  banks’  parent 
companies, this risk is less serious, but cases of sudden stoppages of cross-border funding 
are too numerous to be ignored. They offer clear lessons as to the potentially very damaging 
impact of sudden halts in cross-border capital flows on countries’ credit supply and growth. 
By  its  own  nature,  international  banking  increases  the  degree  of  interconnectivity  of  the 
financial  system  and  may  exacerbate  contagion  risk,  and  increase  the  speed  with  which 
shocks are transmitted. In addition, a current concern is the fluidity and comprehensiveness 
of  information  flows  among  national  supervisors,  between  supervisors  and  financial 
institutions, and among financial institutions. This aspect of cross-border banking increases 
systemic  risk.  As  documented  by  a  recent  CGFS  study  on  funding  patterns  and  liquidity 
management of internationally active banks, information frictions were at the origin of large 
currency  mismatches  of  international  banks  which  complicated  the  crisis  management. 
Information 
resolution  and,  especially,  burden-sharing 
arrangements. So, I turn now to what is being done to design a new, more robust, regulatory 
framework for international banking. 
issues  also  plague  crises 
International banking and the emerging regulatory framework 
The  crisis  highlighted  deficiencies  in  the  way  certain  international  banks  conducted 
their business and managed financial risks, but also disclosed regulatory failures. The 
interconnectedness  of  the  global  financial  system  became  evident  during  the  crisis  as  the 
geographically diversified portfolios of certain internationally active banks became channels 
of transmission of distress across borders; cross-currency mismatches put severe pressure 
on some banks’ capital and transmitted liquidity shocks across markets; underpricing of risk 
led  to  unsustainable  leverage  levels;  opaque  and  complex  asset  positions  plagued  certain 
large  international  banks’  balance  sheets;  reliance  on  international  capital  markets  for 
funding  grew  enormously  in  the  run  up  to  the  crisis  so  that  capital  markets  and  banks 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 3
became  inextricably  linked  well  beyond  their  usual  complementarities;  international  trade 
flows  suffered  from  sudden  reversals  of  capital  flows  as  banks  took  remedial  actions, 
including  by  curtailing  credit.  National  supervisory  frameworks  and  pre-crisis  world  capital 
and  liquidity  standards  were  insufficient  for  preventing  the  crisis;  were  revealed  to  be 
inefficient and costly for managing it and; offer no clear way out of the current situation due to 
the lack of a harmonized set of rules for crisis resolution and burden sharing. 
Despite the fact that the new Basel proposals aim to improve the regulatory framework on for 
instance  capital,  liquidity  and  leverage  requirements  and  are  expected  to  increase  the 
resilience of banking systems in the near future, this new regulatory regime contains some 
questionable  elements.  In  this  regard,  it  is  worth  recalling  that  the  leverage  ratio  does  not 
account  for  the  real  risk  of  assets  in  addition  to  ignoring  bank-specific  business  models  – 
even if universal banks have been proven to be more resilient than investment banks (see 
figure 4) 
Indeed, diversified banks were not the main channel underlying the spread of the subprime 
crisis that originated in the United States. Rather it was the investment financial institutions, 
including  the  shadow  banking  system,  that  seemed  to  be  the  main  vehicle  of  contagion. 
Recent  IMF  figures  displayed  at  the  last  IMFC  meeting,  usefully  underpinned  by 
2 documents “Understanding Financial Interconnectedness”, (see figure 5) provide evidence 
that the level of financial interconnectedness of the shadow banking system, in contrast with 
banking system linkages, might explain the rapid process of crisis transmission. 
The crisis occurred against a background of EU financial stability frameworks built on 
a  national  basis.  In  the  EU,  each  country’s  supervisory  authorities  derive  their  legitimacy 
from  national  parliaments,  are  subject  to  national  accountability  mechanisms,  and  are 
financed  nationally.  A  set  of  MOUs  make  each  country’s  authority  responsible  for  the 
consolidated  supervision  of  financial  institutions  domiciled  in  that  country,  the  home 
supervisor, while host supervisors are responsible for subsidiaries of institutions from other 
countries operating in their territories. Each national central bank is responsible for providing 
ELA to financial institutions domiciled in its territory with the obligation of informing the ECB. 
The EU had concluded two MOUs to deal with crossborder issues in crisis management: the 
2003 MOU on high-level principles of cooperation between banking supervisors and central 
banks, and the 2005 MOU on cooperation between banking supervisors, central banks and 
finance  ministries.  MOUs  have  been  signed  to  deal  with  banks  of  regional  systemic 
importance as well. In turn, colleges of supervisors are responsible for monitoring insurance 
groups and some banks. Committees in charge of developing guidelines for the functioning 
of  supervisory  colleges  and  the  assessment  of  financial  sector  vulnerabilities  report  to  the 
Financial  Stability  Table  of  ECOFIN.  EU  regulations  are  applicable  to  all  EU  countries 
(e.g., CRD,  MiFID,  and  Solvency  II),  but  countries  can  choose  the  form  and  methods  by 
which  to  implement  those  regulations  nationally.  The  EU  Commission  has  enforcement 
powers in matters related to the completion of the common market, and thus on mergers and 
acquisitions  of  financial  institutions  and  injections  of  state  capital.  Finally,  international 
organizations and international standard setters such as the BIS, the IMF, the FSB, IAIS and 
IOSCO also affect EU legislation. But the crisis made it clear that in the EU as well as in an 
increasingly integrated world, uncoordinated national policies and highly disparate regulatory 
regimes are inconsistent with the objective of preserving financial stability. 
The crisis exposed the costs of the national model of crisis prevention, management 
and  resolution  prevailing  in  the  integrated  EU  market.  When  the  crisis  hit,  crisis 
prevention  was  underdeveloped  in  the  EU.  While  there  had  been  significant  progress  in 
setting  standards  (e.g.,  via  the  CRD),  there  was  no  agreement  on  a  common  set  of 
procedures for early action or for remedial action; it existed in various different degrees of 
discretion  in  the  use  of  sanctions  across  member  countries  as  well  as  a  wide  degree  of 
central  banks’  involvement  in  national  liquidity  surveillance.  Regarding  crisis  management, 
the CRD, the FCD, and the 2005 MOU had set the trend toward more information sharing 
and  improved  allocation  of  responsibilities  in  case  of  crisis.  However,  a  harmonization  of 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2010
incentives 
rules  for  remedial  action  based  on  early  intervention  and  rapid,  low  cost,  decision-making 
was missing. In the case of existing ELA arrangements, host countries, while responsible for 
ELA  for  subsidiaries  and  branches,  did  not  have  access  to  supervisory  information  about 
branches,  and  had  some  difficulty  in  assessing  the  risks  involved  in  their  ELA  operations. 
Costs of intervention remained opaque; host country authorities did not have the incentive to 
provide  liquidity  support  because  of  EU  ring-fencing  prohibitions;  home-country  authorities 
delayed provision of information or taking crisis-management actions to avoid capital losses, 
reputational  effects  or  political  backlashes;  the  home  authority  did  not  always  have  the 
incentive to keep host authorities reasonably informed. Finally, given that crisis resolution is 
fundamentally  national,  countries’  approaches  to  financial  institutions’  failure  vary.  Most 
countries have only a few bank-specific regulations; instead, general commerce bankruptcy 
laws often apply which delays the process of dealing with insolvent banks, even prohibiting in 
some  cases  their  recapitalization.  In  the  case  of  a  large  and  complex  financial  institution 
(LCFI), the focus of bankruptcy law is in some countries on the right of claimholders and in 
others  on  the  right  of  debtors,  often  incompatible  with  a  cost-efficient  solution.  In  addition, 
there  were  differences  across  countries  regarding  deposit  insurance  (e.g.,  definition  of 
deposits, co-insurance, risk-based premia, and funding).1 This state of affairs increases the 
regulatory  burden,  provides 
for  regulatory  arbitrage,  hinders  competition, 
exacerbates moral hazard, uses taxpayer money to save inefficient firms, endangers the EU 
integration process, and is inconsistent with financial stability. 
World  and  EU  financial  stability  frameworks  are  evolving  with  the  aim  to  enhance 
crisis prevention, management and resolution for cross-border financial institutions. 
In 2008, given the costs of the crisis and the Nordic experience, the EU proposed an MOU 
on cooperation among supervisors, central banks and ministers of finance on cross-border 
financial stability. This was a key step in establishing a series not only of principles, but also 
procedures  to  exchange  information  and  cooperation  among  countries  in  normal  times  in 
order  to  prevent,  as  well  as  to  manage  and  resolve,  cross-border  crises.  The  2008  MOU 
includes prescriptions for coordinating public information, conducting stress-testing exercises 
and establishing contingency plans. It remained, however, a voluntary framework which does 
not  fully  solve  the  tension  between  home  country  lead  responsibility  for  integrated 
supervision and the host country responsibility for financial stability. In 2009, the Larosière 
Report and the European Council agreed on the need to build a comprehensive cross-border 
framework for the prevention, management and resolution of financial crises in the EU. The 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  published  principles  for  cross-border  cooperation  on  crisis 
management stressing the role of supervisory colleges. These principles enhance incentives 
for financial institutions to behave prudently; promote private sector solutions and limit public 
intervention  only  when  necessary  to  preserve  financial  stability  and;  keep  a  level  playing 
field.  Supervisory  cooperation  took  a  big  step  forward  with  amendments  to  the  CRD  as  a 
2009  EC  Directive  made  compulsory  the  colleges  of  supervisors  for  banks  with  significant 
subsidiaries and branches in the EU. Chaired by the consolidating supervisor, the colleges 
have the objective of exchanging information; determining risk assessment programs of the 
banking  groups;  leveling  the  playing  field  in  terms  of  application  of  the  Directive  in  the 
concerned  Member  States.  Finally,  last  May,  the  Council  of  the  EU  decided  the 
establishment of Cross Border Stability Groups for all large EU cross-border groups by mid 
2011 accompanied by the signature of Cross-Border Cooperation Agreements. 
Recognizing the insufficiency of the microprudential approach to deal with systemic 
risks,  the  European  Parliament  approved  a  new  crisis  prevention  framework  which 
also  considers  the  systemic  risks  posed  by  international  banks.  It  is  now  generally 
accepted  that  microprudential  regulation  and  supervision  of  individual  institutions  and 
                                                 
1   A 2009 EC Directive increased the coverage of deposit protection to 100.000 Euros starting end-2010. A July 
2010  EC  proposal  of  Directive  seeks  a  further  harmonization  of  EU  deposit  insurance  schemes  and  a 
reduction of the reimbursement period, as well as mechanisms to guarantee the financing of the schemes. 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 5
markets,  while  necessary,  is  not  sufficient  because  it  does  not  take  into  account  the 
interactions among financial institutions and between financial institutions and the real sector. 
The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), a key component of an integrated micro-macro 
European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  (ESFS),  will  be  operational  at  the  beginning  of 
2011.  It  will  be  responsible  for  macro-prudential  oversight  to  prevent  or  mitigate  systemic 
risks, enhance early warning mechanisms and facilitate the translation of risk assessments 
into action so as to avoid episodes of widespread financial distress, to enhance the smooth 
functioning  of  the  internal  market,  and  ensure  a  sustainable  contribution  of  the  financial 
sector to economic growth. The ESRB can issue warnings and recommendations for action, 
which  while  not  binding  for  the  addressee,  inaction  by  the  addressee  will  have  to  be 
explained.  The  three  microprudential  components  of  the  ESFS  will  start  their  supervisory 
activities  at  the  beginning  of  next  year.  These  new  authorities  will  be  born  from  the 
transformation of the existing 3L3 committees into a European Banking Authority (EBA), a 
European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA),  and  a  European  Insurance  and 
Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA). The network of national financial supervisors will 
work together with the new European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs). The new bodies will be 
built  on  shared  and  mutually-reinforcing  responsibilities,  combining  nationally-based 
supervision  of  financial  institutions  with  specific  tasks  at  the  European  level;  will  foster 
harmonized rules and coherent supervisory practice and their enforcement. 
Other  initiatives  at  the  world  level  are  intended  to  promote  sound  practices  for 
colleges  of  supervision.  The  EU  supervisory  framework  addresses  cooperation  in 
supervision  in  general  and  also  by  colleges.  The  Committee  on  European  Banking 
Supervisors (CEBS) is currently developing guidelines for their operational functioning. The 
CEBS has also developed an MOU template to be signed at the end of 2010 not only by EU 
supervisors,  but  also  by  EEA  relevant  authorities.  However,  many  EU  financial  institutions 
are truly global, and thus it is important to mention that also the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision  (BCBS)  has  put  out  a  set  of  eight  good  practice  principles  on  supervisory 
colleges.  The  objective  of  supervisory  colleges  is  to  enhance  information  exchange  and 
cooperation among supervisors in order to support the effective supervision of international 
banks. 
In the EU, a framework for cross-border crisis management in the banking sector is 
just  in  its  gestation  period.  Research  unequivocally  shows  that  coordination  failure  is  a 
distinct  possibility  in  a  cross-border  setting.  Therefore,  ex-post  negotiations  on  burden 
sharing  lead  to  under-provision  of  recapitalization;  in  contrast,  an  ex-ante  burden-sharing 
mechanism  might  encourage  moral  hazard.  In  this  vein,  measures  have  been  taken  to 
upgrade deposit insurance, as I said earlier, to strengthen capital requirements and to reform 
the EU infrastructure to prevent crises. Yet, a framework to enable authorities to control the 
impact of a failing cross-border financial institution is still missing. Therefore, mindful that the 
costs of uncoordinated national resolution increases with the degree of interconnectedness 
and integration of financial institutions, last month, the EC issued a communication proposing 
the building blocks of an EU framework for cross-border crisis management in the banking 
sector. According to this communication, the objectives of the framework are twofold: first, to 
ensure that national supervisors have tools to identify problems in banks at an early stage so 
as  to  be  able  to  intervene  to  restore  the  institution’s  health  or  to  prevent  its  deterioration; 
second, to make crossborder banks’ failure possible without contagion and without disruption 
of  banking  activities.  The  framework  is  very  ambitious  as  it  covers  early  preparedness, 
preventive  as  well  as  intervention  measures,  resolution  and  insolvency  principles.  The  full 
implementation of the framework would pose significant challenges under the present state 
of European integration, in particular with regard to issues related to burden sharing, intra-
group asset transfers during periods of crisis and heterogeneity of insolvency laws within the 
EU. In this context, it may be more realistic to pave the way for a second best approach i.e. a 
nationally  based  framework  for  cross-border  crisis  management  associated  with  a  binding 
process for cooperation and information exchange. 
6 
 BIS Review 149/2010
The  establishment  of  ex-ante  bank  resolution  funds  may  also  contribute  to  the 
reduction of moral hazard and increase financial stability. The EC communication to the 
EU  bodies  proposes  the  establishment  of  national  bank  resolution  funds.  These  would  be 
funded by a levy on banks so as to facilitate the resolution of failing banks avoiding thereby 
contagion  and  sales  of  bank  assets  under  stress.  Bank  resolution  funds  should  not  be 
viewed, however, as insurance against failure or to bail out failing banks. Funds are part of 
the set of tools of a financial stability framework that includes crisis management, and are 
intended  to  palliate,  at  least  partly,  the  stability  implications  of  the  failure  of  LCFIs.  In 
Luxembourg, the Central Bank has suggested an innovative framework for an ex-ante bank 
resolution fund through the establishment of a privately pre-funded structure covering both 
issues  of  an  orderly  resolution,  i.e  Deposit  guarantee  scheme  (DGS)  and  Bank  resolution 
fund. In order to avoid any conflict of interest or misallocation of DGS reserves, this shall be 
an  earmarked  component  of  the  fund.  In  addition,  this  framework  is  designed  such  that 
liquidity constraints taking effect during a transitional period would be minimized in order to 
safeguard the flow of capital into the bank resolution fund. This can be ensured via a dual 
mechanism which allows for the substitution of loans granted to the fund by the purchasing of 
an equivalent amount of bonds issued by contributing credit institutions. 
At the global level, the Cross-border Bank Resolution Group of the BCBS issued last March 
ten recommendations for addressing the challenges posed by cross-border bank resolution. 
Concluding remarks 
I remain confident that the new macroprudential architecture will contribute to a more stable 
financial system that will permit maximizing the benefits of capital flows. Let me finish with a 
pragmatic  quotation  from  Goethe:  “Knowing  is  not  enough;  we  must  apply.  Willing  is  not 
enough;  we  must  do.”  I  believe  we  are  applying  what  we  learnt;  I  also  believe  we  are 
establishing a new foundation for safeguarding financial stability. However, it should be noted 
though, that the views on the new micro-prudential regulation framework are still diverging. 
Questions  are  still  under  discussion  especially  in  view  of  global  standards  applied  to 
heterogeneous  financial  systems.  Level  playing  fields  considerations  loom  not  least  in 
accounting  rules.  And  the  European  authorities  have  made  it  clear  that  this  time  around 
geographical implementation has to be done time congruently. 
Cross border financial activities have played a positive role in the process of globalization. At 
the same time they have enhanced the need for ever closer cooperation among competent 
authorities.  Bodies 
include 
representatives from international financial centers. Systemically important financial centers 
should  clearly  play  a  distinguished  role  in  the  international  post  crisis  architecture.  In  this 
respect, I fully concur with the suggestions for the way forward in the latest IMF paper. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
international  standard  setting 
therefore  ought 
for 
to 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 7
 8 
   BIS Review 149/2010
 9
BIS Review 149/2010 
 