Norman T L Chan: Master’s degree 2009–2010 graduation ceremony 
Speech  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  
at The Chinese University of Hong Kong master’s degree 2009–2010 graduation ceremony, 
Hong Kong, 17 December 2010. 
 Professor Wong, Professor Lee, Faculty Members, Graduates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour to be invited to speak at today’s Graduation Ceremony. I am so happy to 
see  so  many  fine  men  and  women  graduating  today.  All  of  you  have  made  well  earned 
accomplishments that make your parents and families feel very proud. On this joyful day, it is 
clearly  a  time  for  celebrations  and  photograph-taking  with  families  and  friends.  However, 
some of you may, when you have a few quiet moments of your own, ask yourselves these 
questions : What would I become in 10, 20 or 30 years’ time? Have I chosen the right field or 
career? What does it take to succeed and make a name in the society as so many of my 
CUHK seniors have done before me? These are very pertinent questions and certainly I did 
ask  myself  these  questions  when  I  attended  my  own  graduation  ceremony  in  the  CUHK 
some 34 years ago.  
In  talking  about  successful  people,  I  am  sure  all  of  us  have  our  own  idols.  But  very  few 
people will disagree with me if I refer to Bill Gates as a prime example of success. We all 
know  who  Bill  Gates  is  and  how  he  set  up  the  most  profitable  software  company  called 
Microsoft. Bill Gates is now the richest man in the world and is spending most of his time 
doing charity work worldwide. Bill Gates is clearly an idol for lots of people, old and young, 
and a symbol of great success. But how come Bill Gates has become so successful? Many 
say  he  is  a  genius,  both  in  computer  programming  and  in  doing  business.  But  is  it  that 
simple?  I  have  just  recently  come  across  a  book  written  by  Malcolm  Gladwell,  who  has 
referred to an interesting thesis called the 10,000 hours rule. To understand this thesis, you 
have  to  look  closer  at  Bill  Gate’s  life.  No  doubt  Bill  Gates  is  very  clever  and  is  extremely 
talented in computer programming. However, what made him so special as distinct from so 
many other equally clever and talented people in the past three to four decades is that by the 
time Gates dropped out from Harvard in his sophomore year in mid-1970s to set up his little 
backyard  software  company,  he  already  had  8  solid  years  of  non-stop  computer 
programming experience, something that was exceptionally unique at that time for a young 
man  just  over  20.  For  a  number  of  very  peculiar  reasons,  Gates  started  his  programming 
venture in as early as 1968 when he was just an eighth grade kid in a high school in Seattle. 
In those days, even university students in the USA would not find it easy to have access to 
mainframe computers, let alone doing non-stop programming. But Gates had the opportunity 
and  the  advantage  of  having  done  lots  and  lots  of  programming,  probably  more  than 
10,000 hours,  when  he  started  Microsoft,  which  subsequently  outperformed  all  other 
competitors in the field by huge margins. 
The question that I have is this: Would Bill Gates still be the same Bill Gates that we now 
know if he did not have the opportunities that were opened to him in these early years of his 
adolescence that enabled him to jump start on his programming career ahead of so many 
other equally clever and talented people in the USA? I don’t quite know the answer, but let 
me turn to another example of great success in the last century in the musical world – the 
Beatles. 
Being a person born in the 1950s, it is not surprising that I am very fond of the Beatles. John 
Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr were clearly very, very talented. 
Ever  since  they  launched  their  hugely  successful  tour  of  the  USA  in  February  1964,  the 
Beatles had for several decades became the centre of the rock and roll world. But is it true 
that Beatles became so good and so successful simply because they were music geniuses? 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 1
Is  it  that  simple?  Let’s  look  closer  at  the  days  before  they  became  the  idol  of  the  world. 
Before  1960,  the  Beatles  was  still  a  struggling  high  school  band.  However,  through  some 
strange  connections,  Beatles  got  invited  to  play  at  some  night  clubs  in  Hamburg  in  
1960–1962. Within a year and a half’s time, the Beatles played in these Hamburg clubs for 
270 nights. These Hamburg clubs were not the kind of music halls in which proper concerts 
are conducted. They were more like drinking clubs where lots of people came in and went 
out constantly as live entertainment on stage was performed. The Beatles had to perform 4, 
6 or even 8 hours each night. Because of so many live performances of very long hours, the 
Beatles  had  greatly  improved  their  stamina  and  team  work.  Moreover,  they  had  to  try  out 
different varieties of music and songs in order to satisfy the customers. So, by the time the 
Beatles made their celebrated US tour in February 1964, they had already done an amazing 
1,200 live performances. This is an astonishing and unusual number. In those days and even 
now, very few rock and roll bands are able to do that many live performances in their entire 
careers.  
Again the question that I have is: Would the Beatles be just as good and as talented without 
Hamburg?  
There was an enlightening study conducted by Ericsson in the 1990s. The study showed that 
out of the violin students in the elite Berlin Academy of Music, those who were ranked as top 
of the class and attained performer soloist standard were students that had practised most: 
over 10,000 hours by the age of twenty. Students ranked at the next level, i.e. professional 
but not quite soloist standard, had practised less, with 8,000 hours by the age of twenty. For 
students at the next level down, they had practised for just around 4,000 hours. The results 
of this study seem to suggest that, once a student had reached a certain level of aptitude and 
talent, at least good enough for admission into an academy of music, those who practised 
most  diligently  tended  to  yield  the  best  outcome.  The  study  did  not  find  students  that  had 
practised more than 10,000 hours had failed to reach the top level. On the other hand, the 
study did not find students who achieved the top level without putting in a huge amount of 
practice.  
The reason why I wish to share these fascinating stories with you today is not out of pure 
academic  interest  or  curiosity.  To  me,  these  stories  carry  a  message  with  profound 
importance. The message is that success or more precisely, great success, does not come 
naturally.  It  is  often  too  easy  to  say  Bill  Gates  or  the  Beatles  became  idols  of  the  world 
because  they  were  born  geniuses.  Since  very  few  of  us are  geniuses,  it is  only  natural  to 
conclude that we cannot and should not ever aspire to succeed the way they did. However, if 
you really dig deeper into the stories of great success, you will probably find that even very 
clever and talented people have to make use of every opportunity they have come across to 
develop  and  perfect  their  talents  before  they  can  transform  from  good  to  great,  and  from 
great to awesome. While one cannot turn himself into a genius if he is not one, he can still 
decide, on his own, how hard he works to upgrade and excel in whatever profession that he 
is  pursuing.  There  is  of  course  no  guarantee  that  if  we  work  really  hard  we  will  definitely 
achieve great success, but at least we will have a chance. If we don’t even give it a try, there 
is no hope. It does not matter which way you may wish to go as long as you are fully aware 
that you do have a choice. That choice, which will shape your careers and your whole life, is 
yours and yours alone.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 174/2010
