Caleb M Fundanga: The Financial Sector Development Plan 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the 
Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  National  Financial  Education  Strategy 
Consultative Workshop, Lusaka, 20 October 2010. 
 The Guest of Honour, Honourable Situmbeko Musokotwane, Minister of Finance and 
National Planning M.P.;  
The  FSDP  Steering  Committee  Chairman  &  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  Mr.  Likolo 
Ndalamei;  
Distinguished Excellencies; 
Co-operating partners;  
Chief  Executive  Officers  and  Representatives  from  Banks  and  Non-bank  Financial 
Institutions;  
FSDP Working Group Chairpersons and Vice Chairpersons; 
Distinguished Invited Guests;  
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure,  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  to  welcome  you  all  to  the 
Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  National  Financial  Education  Stakeholders’ 
Consultative Workshop.  
Honourable  Minister,  this  very  important  workshop  comes  at  the  time  when  the  FSDP  is 
gearing  up  to  implement  many  of  its  activities  under  phase  II  which  the  Government 
approved earlier this year.  
As you are aware, one of the activities identified under the FSDP II is the development of a 
national  financial  education  strategy  for  Zambia.  Let  me  hasten  to  say,  financial  education 
needs in Zambia are many and varied. They stem from inadequate understanding, by a good 
proportion of the population, of basic financial terms and concepts on the one hand, and a lack 
of knowledge of financial products and services that are increasingly available, on the other.  
At the moment, there is no structured response to address the financial education needs in 
Zambia.  There  are  currently  some  financial  educational  programmes  being  conducted  by 
financial institutions, including the Bank of Zambia, but these are generally limited in scope 
and  are  not  being  implemented  in  a  coordinated  manner.  These  un-coordinated  initiatives 
leave gaps that can properly be addressed through the development and implementation of a 
cohesive financial education strategy.  
Ladies and gentlemen, with this realization, the Bank of Zambia, with financial assistance 
from the Financial Education Fund under the United Kingdom Department For International 
Development  (DFID),  is  taking  the  leadership  role  in  identifying  and  developing  a  national 
financial education strategy that will be cohesive for the country.  
As  the  formulation  of  both  the  first  and  second  phases  of  the  FSDP  was  done  through  a 
national  stakeholder  consultative  process,  we  have  taken  a  similar  approach  in  the 
development of our national strategy on financial literacy. The FSDP process has already built 
a  wide  network  of  stakeholders,  and  a  platform  of  institutional  and  individual  membership 
through its working groups and committees which can take this agenda forward. We believe 
that the multi-stakeholder consultative process is a critical component of the strategy.  
Distinguished Guests, let me give you a few examples of how the consultative process has 
shaped the success of financial literacy strategies in other countries.  
In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  country’s  national  strategy  is  led  by  the  Financial  Services 
Authority.  The  implementation  of  this  strategy  is  funded  through  levies  on  the  financial 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 1
services  industry  and  through  partnership  programmes  with  a  range  of  stakeholders, 
including financial services providers. There appears to have been little contestation of the 
strategy, with broad support from the industry, the Treasury and other stakeholders.  
In South Africa, the Financial Services Board (FSB), the regulator for non-bank, non-credit 
financial  services,  has  developed  and  championed  two  national  strategies;  a  strategy 
developed in 2001 and a revised version in 2008. The 2001 strategy received limited support 
from  stakeholders  and  the  FSB  revised  it  in  2008.  However,  the  revised  strategy  did  not 
receive much support and is currently under review.  
Contestation of the South African strategies arose mainly from the fact that the FSB is not 
the regulator for the banking sector, and banks were against having their activities regulated 
through  a  non-bank  regulator.  Contestation  also  came  from  civil  society  organizations  and 
other regulators, in particular, the credit regulator.  
Ghana  has  had  an  approved  strategy  for  financial  literacy  and  consumer  education  since 
January 2009. In the first attempt, largely consultant driven, it appears there was insufficient 
stakeholder  buy-in.  However,  in  the  second  process  which  was  driven  through  the  Ghana 
Micro-Finance Institutions network, there appears to have been sufficient stakeholder buy-in, 
and in due course, the Ministry of Finance accepted responsibility for the strategy and has 
been  tasked  with  its  implementation.  I  am  informed  that  there  is  a  resource  person  from 
Ghana who will be able to shed more light on this matter.  
In New Zealand, the development of the financial literacy strategy was led by the Retirement 
Commission which was mandated by a broader group at a symposium on financial literacy. 
There appears to have been no contestation by other regulators, possibly because there was 
high level involvement.  
The  examples  I  have  outlined  above  indicate  how  successful  or  otherwise  the  strategy 
development  process  can  be.  However,  a  common  feature  for  successful  strategy 
development among all the above processes is the multi-partner consultative process.  
Mr. Chairman,  in  recognising  the critical  role  played  by  various  stakeholders,  the Bank  of 
Zambia believes that a multi-partner stakeholder process is the most appropriate for Zambia, 
as it would enable greater mobilization of stakeholders and resources for the promotion of 
financial  literacy  in  the  country.  The  Bank  of  Zambia,  will  therefore,  provide  the  initial 
leadership but it will be critical for all stakeholders to support, and buy-in into the strategy 
development process.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the tremendous support of the various stakeholders to the agenda 
of the FSDP cannot go un-noticed. The technical and financial support provided by a number 
of  our  development  partners  including  the  Swedish  Government,  the  Finnish  Government, 
the  World  Bank,  IMF,  DFID,  the  United  States  Treasury  and  First  Initiative,  and  now  the 
Financial Education Fund have gone a long way in slowly making this vision a reality. The 
Bank  of  Zambia  and  the  Government  are,  therefore,  most  grateful  to  our  cooperating 
partners for helping us build capacity in our financial sector.  
Honourable  Minister,  it  is  also  our  view  that  the  FSDP  provides  a  unique  opportunity 
through  its  structures,  operating  on  the  principle  of  private-public  partnership,  to  take 
responsibility for overseeing the development of the financial education strategy for Zambia. 
One of the key issues that this partnership should help address is achieving consensus on 
resource  requirements  for  implementing  financial  education  programmes  and  agreeing 
suitable  funding  models  that  can  generate  a  stream  of  resources  to  support  sustained 
provision of financial education over the long-term.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, It is now my pleasure to call upon the Guest of Honour, to give us his 
key note address and to officially open this workshop. 
Honourable Minister Sir. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2010
