Svante Öberg: Potential GDP, resource utilisation and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Svante  Öberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Statistics Sweden’s annual conference, Saltsjöbaden, 7 October 2010. 
 It is always a pleasure to take part in Statistics Sweden’s conferences in Saltsjöbaden. This 
is  the  tenth  conference  in  which  economic  analysis  and  economic  statistics  meet  in  a 
constructive  dialogue.  Questions  regarding  productivity  have  been  in  focus  ever  since  the 
first conference in 2001. At that time I was Director General of Statistics Sweden and I had 
been  inspired  by  the  analyses  of  productivity  made  by  Statistics  Canada.  I  thought  there 
should be scope for more of this in Sweden, too. It is therefore very gratifying to see that this 
work is continuing.  
My main message today can be summarised in two points. The first is that I wish to show 
that it is difficult to estimate potential GDP and resource utilisation. Different methods give 
different  results.  At  present  this  is,  moreover,  particularly  difficult  because  of  the  financial 
crisis and the deep recession we are now recovering from. Secondly: despite the difficulties 
in making such estimates, I would nevertheless like to claim that potential GDP has probably 
fallen as a result of the crisis, which is significant for monetary policy.  
My own assessment is that the GDP gap was around + 2 per cent in 2007, prior to the start 
of  the  crisis,  and  that  potential  GDP  has  declined  by  around  4  per  cent  as  a  result  of  the 
crisis. The GDP gap therefore only fell by around 6 per cent between 2007 and 2009, despite 
actual GDP declining by around 10 per cent in relation to the trend. The GDP gap was thus 
approximately – 4 per cent in 2009 when the recession was deepest. According to current 
forecasts, the GDP gap will have closed by the end of the forecast period three years from 
now.  
I intend to begin by talking about what the real economy – in other words, production and 
employment  –  means  for  monetary  policy.  I  shall  then  go  on  to  talk  about  how  one  can 
measure potential production and resource utilisation – two central concepts in this context. 
Then I shall discuss what has happened to GDP in conjunction with the financial crisis. After 
that,  I  will  describe  what  different  methods  can  tell  us  about  potential  GDP  and  resource 
utilisation. Finally, I intend to talk about the significance of resource utilisation for inflation and 
current monetary policy. 
What does the real economy mean for monetary policy?  
The overall principles for monetary policy are described in the publication Monetary Policy in 
Sweden.1 It states the following:  
 
“According  to  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act,  the  objective  for  monetary  policy  is  to 
maintain  price  stability.  The  Riksbank  has  specified  this  as  a  target  for  inflation, 
according  to  which  the  annual  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  to  be 
2 per cent.”  
“At the same time as monetary policy is aimed at attaining the inflation target, it is 
also to support the objectives of general economic policy with a view to achieving 
sustainable growth and high employment. This is achieved through the Riksbank, in 
addition  to  stabilising  inflation  around  the  inflation  target,  also  striving  to  stabilise 
production and employment around long-term sustainable paths.”  
                                                  
1   Monetary Policy in Sweden, Sveriges Riksbank, 3 June 2010. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 1
Production and employment are thus included in the monetary policy analysis in two ways. 
Firstly, stable production and employment around levels that are sustainable in the long run 
are  important  objectives  for  economic  policy.  Secondly,  the  level  of  production  and 
employment  in  relation  to  potential  production  and  employment  –  or  put  another  way, 
resource utilisation – is an indicator of future inflationary pressures.  
How are potential GDP and resource utilisation measured?  
Resource utilisation can be measured in many different ways. I would like to focus on the 
GDP gap. The GDP gap has the advantage of providing the most comprehensive picture of 
the  extent  to  which  resources  in  the  economy  are  being  used  and  GDP  is  the  central 
forecasting variable. The GDP gap is the difference between actual GDP and potential GDP. 
By  potential  GDP,  I  mean  the  level  of  GDP  that  is  compatible  with  a  use  of  the  available 
resources that is sustainable in the long term and that does not push up inflation. Resource 
utilisation may be either positive or negative.  
Potential GDP is often measured by using what is known as an HP trend. This is a statistical 
method  used  to  show  the  underlying  trend  in  GDP.  By  simultaneously  trying  to  minimise 
deviations  from  actual  GDP  and  to  show  the  most  even  curve  possible,  the  HP  trend 
provides  something  in-between  the  often  jagged  curve  which  shows  the  actual  GDP 
outcomes and a linear trend. An HP trend is a fairly good measure of the underlying long-
term development in GDP during normal cyclical fluctuations.  
One  problem  with  an  HP  trend  as  a  measure  of  potential  GDP  is  that  its  terminal  point  is 
normally close to the terminal point of the actual time series. This makes it a poor measure of 
potential GDP towards the end of the series. Often, it is precisely the terminal point that one 
is interested in. Another problem with an HP trend is that it is not a good measure if there are 
structural shifts in potential GDP – and it is natural to believe that such shifts take place in 
connection with a deep recession. 
These problems are clearly visible if one compares the most recent calculation of the GDP 
gap in the September Monetary Policy Update with the estimates made in real time. In the 
years before the crisis, resource utilisation was probably higher than the HP gap indicated at 
that point. This view is also suggested by the fact that GDP growth was high, employment 
was  increasing  rapidly,  underlying  inflation  was  rising  to  above  2  per  cent,  and  that 
household borrowing and house prices were similarly rising rapidly. (Figure 1. GDP gaps in 
September and in real time). 
This  is  a  widely  known  problem  that  occurs  internationally,  and  not  just  here.  Orphanides 
says that one should not use the GDP gap as a measure of resource utilisation, due to the 
uncertainty in estimates of the gap. He shows, for instance, that the International Monetary 
Fund’s  (IMF)  calculations  of  the  GDP  gap  for  the  United  States  at  different  points  in  time 
have  yielded  conflicting  results  with  regard  to  resource  utilisation  and  that  these  have 
therefore led to incorrect economic policy recommendations. He draws the conclusion that 
one should focus more on GDP growth than on the GDP gap, which, he claims, may provide 
more robust decision-making data.2  
There are also other ways of measuring resource utilisation. A common method is to use a 
production function where potential GDP is determined by potential labour productivity and 
the  potential  number  of  hours  worked.  Other  possibilities  include  using  so-called  UC 
   
2  
 
                                           
  
See, for example, Orphanides, A. (2010) “Monetary Policy Lessons from the Crisis”, Central Bank of Cyprus, 
May 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2010
models,3  principal  component  methods4  or  models  where  one  estimates  a  flexible-price 
output  gap.5  Resource  utilisation  can  also  be  measured  by  the  employment  rate, 
unemployment and other measures. I will return to a number of these measures later.  
What has happened to GDP in connection with the crisis?  
During  the  years  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  productivity  growth  in  Sweden  was  rapid.  At 
earlier  conferences  here  in  Saltsjöbaden,  I  have  pointed  to  possible  causes  of  the  rapid 
growth in productivity.6 Examples of structural causes are deregulation of product markets, 
increased competition through globalisation, increased use of information technology or – the 
theme of this year’s conference – a rising level of education and a changed work structure.  
However, productivity also varies over the business cycle. In June 2007 – before the financial 
crisis  began  –  our  assessment  was  that  productivity  growth  would  be  lower  in  the  coming 
years. But we did not foresee that productivity would fall as heavily as it did. In June 2007, 
we were assuming that productivity would increase by a total of around 5 per cent during the 
years 2008 and 2009. Instead, it fell by around 5 per cent. The main reason for this fall was 
an exceptionally steep decline in demand. GDP fell by a total of 5.5 per cent during the years 
2008 and 2009, instead of increasing by an almost equivalent percentage, as predicted.  
Experiences from previous deep recessions in Sweden in recent decades indicate that such 
steep declines in GDP have long-lasting consequences. During the recessions of the second 
half  of  the  1970s  and  the  early  1990s,  the  GDP  level  did  not  return  to  the  previous  trend 
during the ten-year period following the decline in GDP. (Figure 2. Historical GDP trends). 
In connection with financial crises, it is normal for GDP growth to be significantly lower and 
unemployment  higher  for  an  extended  period  after  the  crisis,  as  compared  to  a  period  of 
equivalent  length  before  the  crisis.  Reinhart  and  Reinhart  have  described  this  in  a  paper 
recently  presented  at  a  conference  at  Jackson  Hole.7  This  is  partially  because  credit 
expansion  and  increasing  real  property  prices  prior  to  a  crisis  tend  to  be  followed  by 
tightening and falling prices after the crisis. They also note that dampened growth and higher 
unemployment after a financial crisis may result in lower investment and the depreciation of 
human capital, which, in turn, may lower both the level and the rate of increase of potential 
production.  
Also in connection with the current crisis, the Riksbank expects lower GDP in the long term 
than  we  did  before  the crisis.  We  are  now  expecting  GDP  to  be  approximately  4  per  cent 
                                                 
3   UC models (UC = Unobserved Components) involve using economic theory to identify which development of 
the non-observed potential variables is compatible with the development of observed variables, such as GDP, 
employment, unemployment and inflation. 
4   Principal component analysis is a statistical technique for compressing information, reducing the number of 
variables  and  examining  systematic  variations  in  data.  The  method  entails  calculating  new  latent  variables, 
principal components, which can explain most of the variation in the process. 
5   The  flexible-price  output  gap  is  mentioned  in  modern  research  into  monetary  policy,  where  one  often  talks 
about flexible-price production instead of potential GDP. Flexible-price production means the production that 
would arise if both prices and wages were entirely flexible. However, determining this gap is sensitive to how 
one  models  the  economy  and  interpretation  may  be  difficult  in  the  absence  of  in-depth  knowledge  of  the 
model's properties. For a discussion of the flexible-price output gap and monetary policy, see Jonsson, M., 
Nilsson,  C.  and  Palmqvist,  S.  (2008),  “Should  monetary  policy  stabilise  resource  utilisation?”  Economic 
Commentaries 1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
6   Öberg, S. (2007), “Productivity and monetary policy”, 7 June 2007 and Öberg, S. (2008), “Monetary policy and 
productivity”, 29 January 2008. 
7   Reinhart, C. M. and Reinhart, V. R. (2010), “After the Fall”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working 
Paper  No.  16334.  See  also  Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  Rogoff,  K.  S.  (2008),  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises”, 
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14656. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 3
lower at the end of the forecast period than we expected two years ago. Lower productivity is 
responsible for virtually the entire decline, while the number of hours worked is estimated to 
remain largely the same. However, it should not be assumed that this fall can be attributed 
solely to the crisis. Many other events have also affected the assessment. (Figure 3. GDP, 
hours worked and productivity). 
How large is potential GDP and how high is resource utilisation?  
I now intend to discuss what different methods have to say about the levels of potential GDP, 
the GDP gap and resource utilisation, and I will start by comparing the GDP gaps based on 
HP  trends  (HP  gap)  that  the  Riksbank  usually  presents  with  the  GDP  gaps  used  by  the 
National  Institute  of  Economic  Research  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  The  pre-crisis  GDP 
gaps  reported  by  the  latter  two  are  less  positive  than  the  GDP  gap  we  publish,  namely 
around 2 and 3 per cent respectively, as opposed to approximately 4 per cent. The f
all up to 
2009 is roughly the same according to all three, with the negative gap in 2009 thus being 
greater for them than it is according to our HP gap. (Figure 4. The GDP gap according to the 
Riksbank, the National Institute of Economic Research and the Ministry of Finance). 
The  OECD,  the  IMF  and  the  European  Commission  also  report  GDP  gaps  for  Sweden. 
According  to  the  OECD  and  the  European  Commission,  the  GDP  gap  for  2007  is  on 
approximately  the  same  level  as  the  Riksbank’s  HP  gap,  approximately  +  4  per  cent.  The 
negative gap at the recession’s lowest point in 2009 has been estimated at – 4 per cent by 
the European Commission and at – 7 per cent by the OECD. The GDP gaps of 2010 and 
2011  according  to  both  of  these  institutions  can  be  disregarded,  as  their  reports  were 
compiled before the summer and, since then, GDP outcomes have been surprisingly high. In 
its  latest  report,  the  IMF 
reckons  with  a  GDP  gap  of  approximately  2.5  per  cent  for  2007, 
followed  by  a  decrease  to  almost  –  5  per  cent  in  2009  before  reaching  –  1.5  per  cent  in 
2011.8  (Figure  5.  The  GDP  gap  according  to  the  Riksbank,  the  OECD,  the  IMF  and  the 
European Commission). 
All three organisations reckon that potential GDP has fallen in conjunction with the crisis. For 
example,  the  OECD  estimates  that  potential  GDP  has  decreased  by  an  average  of 
approximately 3 per cent for the countries in the OECD area, as a consequence of the crisis. 
Approximately two-thirds of this decrease is due to higher capital costs caused by the return 
to normal risk and interest rate levels after the abnormally low levels prevailing prior to the 
crisis, which is having a dampening effect
 on capital intensity. The remaining third is due to 
an  increase  in  structural  unemployment  and  a  decrease  in  labour  supply.  As  regards 
Sweden,  the  dampening  effects  of  structural  unemployment  and  falling  labour  supply  are 
deemed to be below average, however.9  
Another  question  is  whether  long-term  GDP  growth  has  fallen  as  a  result  of  the  crisis. 
Experiences  from  previous  financial  crises  indicate  that  there  frequently  is  a  connection. 
However, in the report  mentioned, the OECD  writes that it does not expect any  decline in 
tes  that  it  will  indeed 
long-term  GDP-growth  (after  2015)  due  to  the  crisis.  The  OECD  sta
decline, but as a result of demographic developments. At the Riksbank, the crisis has not led 
us  to  make  any  new  assessment  of  the  long-term  GDP  growth  used  in  our  models.  We 
expect long-term GDP growth to be just above two per cent per year.  
Resource  utilisation  can  also  be  measured  in  the  labour  market  by,  for  instance,  the 
employment  rate ,  unemployment, 
the  hours  gap.  The 
the  employment  gap  and 
10
IMF (2010), World Economic Outlook October 2010. 
                                                
 
8  
9   See OECD (2010), OECD Economic Outlook, no. 87, May 2010. 
10   The employment rate is defined as the proportion of the population aged 15–74 in employment, expressed as 
a percentage. 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2010
employment gap and the hours gap have been estimated with the aid of HP trends and are 
thus  subject  to  the  problems  entailed  by  such  estimates.  In  contrast,  the  employment  rate 
and unemployment are not associated with the same type of technical problems, but here it 
is  instead  difficult  to  know  what  can  be  considered  to  be  normal  levels  for  the  respective 
variables.  In  the  Figure,  they  have  been  included  as  deviations  from  the  average  in  
2000–2007, without taking a stance on which levels should be considered normal. They may 
have  been  affected  both  by  the  reforms  made  and  by  the  deep  recession.  These  are,  of 
course, important issues to be addressed, but I will not go into them today. (Figure 6. Labour 
market gaps). 
The various labour market gaps co-vary for natural reasons. However, the employment rate, 
the  employment  gap  and  the  hours  gap  reach  zero  at  the  start  of  2011  and  are  faintly 
positive for the rest of the forecast period, while unemployment is above average over the 
entire  forecast  period.  It  is  common  for  unemployment  to  increase  rapidly  in  a  deep 
recession and decrease slowly during the recovery. However, it is also possible that we are 
t – as, indeed, we have done 
underestimating the strength of the recovery in the labour marke
recently. It can also be noted that the positive deviations from the average are of the same 
magnitude in 2007 as they were at the previous peak in 2001.  
The National Institute of Economic Research’s Economic Tendency Survey can also be used 
es in 
to describe resource utilisation. There exists a clear connection between various variabl
the  Survey.  For  example,  companies’  planned  price  increases  co-vary  with  the  other 
variables, for example shortage of labour. (Figure 7. Indicators for the business sector). 
However,  most  of  these  reported  variables  are  ones  that  show  changes.  This  is  true  of 
demand,  for  example.  The  question  is  whether  it  is  expected  to  become  better  or  worse. 
Consequently, these variables are not good measures of the level of resource utilisation, but 
rather of whether this is increasing or decreasing. However, the business tendency surveys 
also  include  variables  that  measure  levels.  For  example,  this  applies  to  the  shortage  of 
labour  in  the  business  sector  and  capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing  industry.  These 
t be ruled out that these will reach normal levels by 
have both increased recently and it canno
the  end  of  this  year.  (Figure  8.  Shortage  of  labour  in  the  business  sector  and  capacity 
utilisation in the manufacturing industry). 
It  is  also  interesting  to  compare  shortage  of  labour  with  unemployment.  These  co-varied 
significantly  before  the  crisis.  However,  shortage  of  labour  is  now  increasing  more  rapidly 
significant matching problems 
than unemployment is falling. This indicates that there may be 
in  the  labour  market  long  before  unemployment  comes  down  to  a  normal  level.  (Figure  9. 
Shortage of labour in the business sector and unemployment). 
At the Riksbank, we have also developed a special indicator to measure resource utilisation, 
the  so-called  RU  indicator.11  This  uses  a  principal  component  method  to  extract  common 
information from a large number of business cycle indicators in levels. The RU indicator also 
7 as at the previous 
indicates that resource utilisation in Sweden was about as high in 200
peak in 2000. This contrasts with the GDP gap based on HP trends, which was much higher 
in 2007 than in 2000. (Figure 10. The GDP gap and the RU indicator).  
An indication of the significance of the crisis for potential industrial production can also be 
obtained by combining statistics on industrial production and capacity utilisation.12 Industrial 
production fell by a maximum amount of 24 per cent from its peak in the first quarter of 2008 
to its lowest point in the second quarter of 2009. Potential industrial production fell by 14 per 
cent with a time lag of two to three quarters and by approximately 20 per cent in relation to 
                                                
 
11   A more detailed description of the RU indicator and its characteristics will be published shortly. 
12   Potential  industrial  production  has  been  calculated  as  [Industrial  production]  x  [Average  capacity  utilisation 
1996–2007]/[Capacity utilisation]. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 5
the  previous  trend.  Such  a  fall  in  potential  industrial  production  could  explain  a  fall  of 
approximately 4 per cent in potential GDP, as the level of value added in the manufacturing 
industry was equivalent to approximately 20 per cent of GDP prior to the crisis. (Figure 11. 
Industrial production, capacity utilisation and potential industrial production).  
To sum up, I can note  that potential GDP and resource utilisation are difficult to estimate. 
Different  methods  give  different  results.  This  is  particularly  difficult  right  now  due  to  the 
financial crisis and the deep recession from which we are emerging. At the Riksbank we are 
more detail 
continuing to work with these issues and expect to take up resource utilisation in 
in the next Monetary Policy Report in October. Uncertainty surrounding resource utilisation 
also makes it difficult to assess whether or not monetary policy is well-balanced.  
My own assessment is that resource utilisation was more or less as high before the crisis as 
during the previous boom in 2000 and that the GDP gap was thus in the range of + 2 per 
cent  in  2007.  Here,  I  assume  that  the  GDP  gap  based  on  HP  trends  provides  a  reliable 
measure  of  the  GDP  gap  for  2000  and  that  other  series,  for  example  the  RU  indicator, 
indicate that the level of resource utilisation was approximately the same in 2007 as in 2000.  
I also assess that potential GDP decreased by approximately 4 per cent in conjunction with 
the crisis. This is slightly above the OECD’s calculations, but the OECD has only calculated 
the effect of certain identified changes within the framework of a production function. It has 
not considered other possible effects of the crisis on potential GDP, such as, for example, an 
abnormally  high  level  of  capital  consumption.  Swedish  experiences  of  previous  deep 
recessions and international experiences of financial crises both indicate that the effects can 
be greater. The difference from the GDP forecasts we made before and after the fall of GDP 
in 2009, as well as estimates of the manufacturing sector’s potential production also indicate 
 think that this reduction in potential GDP should 
an effect of approximately 4 per cent. I also
be ascribed to the recession of 2009, rather than being spread out over a longer period of 
time before and after the recession.  
This  means  that  the  GDP  gap  was  approximately  –  4  per  cent  when  the  crisis  was  most 
severe in 2009. Instead of increasing according to trend by over 4 per cent between 2007 
and 2009, GDP fell by 5.5 per cent. This resulted in a fall in actual GDP of approximately 
10 per cent in relation to the trend. However, potential GDP also fell as a result of the crisis 
by around 4 per cent. This means that the GDP gap only fell by around 6 per cent. The level 
 both that 
of the GDP gap is significant for monetary policy. A large negative gap indicates
inflationary pressures can be expected to be low and that there are more compelling reasons 
to support production and employment through an expansionary monetary policy.  
My assessments indicate that the GDP gap was lower before the crisis than appears from a 
GDP gap based on HP trends. HP gaps do not work well as measures of resource utilisation 
in deep recessions. However, despite this, my own assessment corresponds fairly well with 
the  level  that  the  HP  gap  indicates  for  2009.  It  is  also  compatible  with  current  forecasts 
eriod. Total 
indicating that the GDP gap should be largely normal by the end of the forecast p
GDP  growth  for  the  three  years  2010–2012  is  just  above  10  per  cent,  which  is  four 
percentage points more than growth according to trend of just above 6 per cent.  
What does resource utilisation mean to inflation and current monetary policy?  
Previously,  I  said  that  the  Riksbank  also  strives  to  stabilise  production  and  employment 
around development paths that are sustainable in the long term, and that by potential GDP I 
mean the level of GDP that is compatible with a utilisation of available resources sustainable 
in  the  long  term  and  that  will  not  push  inflation  up  or  down.  As  you  know,  the  target  for 
monetary policy is to keep inflation at a low and stable level. However, one problem when 
onetary policy in practical terms is that the link between resource utilisation and 
shaping m
inflation  is  not  particularly  clear.  I  will  now  discuss  what  resource  utilisation  means  to 
inflation.  
6 
 BIS Review 130/2010
In Sweden, the link between resource utilisation and inflation has been weaker since the mid-
1990s than it was previously. This is due to the fact that monetary policy has gained a high 
level of credibility. As long-term inflation expectations among households and companies are 
now solidly anchored around the inflation target of 2 per cent, there is simply not much scope 
for  other  variables  to  affect  inflation.  However,  it  is  also  due  to  the  fact  that  inflation  is 
affected by many other factors than resource utilisation, such as variations in energy prices, 
exchange rate fluctuations and changes in interest rates.13  
However, the fact that it is difficult to estimate stable links between resource utilisation and 
inflation  using  econometric  methods  does  not  mean  that  these  links  do  not  exist. 
International experience indicates that minor variations in resource utilisation in normal times 
do not significantly affect inflation, but that a very low level of resource utilisation noticeably 
dampens  inflation.  In  the  current  crisis,  with  a  very  low  level  of  resource  utilisation  in  the 
United States and the eurozone, underlying inflation has fallen from normal levels of around 
2  per  cent  to  around  1  per  cent.  As  far  as  Sweden  is  concerned,  it  appears  that,  despite 
everything,  there  is  a  relatively  strong  link  between  u
nderlying  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation measured using the RU indicator with a time lag of one to two years. (Figure 12. 
The RU indicator and HICP inflation excluding energy14).  
In  Sweden,  underlying  inflation  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPIF  (the  CPI  with  a  fixed 
mortgage rate) has stayed at, and even above, 2 per cent over the last two years despite the 
fall in resource utilisation. This is probably related to the substantial weakening of the krona 
in  the  most  acute  phase  of  the  crisis.  This contributed  to  rising  import  prices  measured  in 
 now strengthened again and is more 
Swedish kronor, which kept up inflation. The krona has
or  less  back  to  its  pre-crisis  level  against  the  euro,  and  CPIF  inflation  has  fallen  back  to 
below 2 per cent. (Figure 13. CPI and CPIF inflation).  
During the forecast period, we expect CPIF inflation to first fall to around 1 per cent, but then 
to  rise  again  to  around  2  per  cent  at  the  end  of  the  forecast  period.  CP
I  inflation  fell 
dramatically during the crisis as a result of our repo rate cuts, but it will increase to a level 
higher than CPIF inflation as we increase the repo rate to a more normal level. 
When we compare various measures of resource utilisation with the forecasts we make for 
inflation  in  the  latest  Monetary  Policy  Update,  the  following  picture  emerges.  Underlying 
inflation  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPIF  begins  to  rise  in  2011.  By  that  time,  resource 
utilisation measured in terms of variables such as the RU indicator, shortage of labour in the 
in the manufacturing industry, the employment rate and 
business sector, capacity utilisation 
the HP trend-based measures the employment gap and the hours gap will probably already 
have risen to above-normal levels.  
Underlying  CPIF  inflation  will  then  rise  to  2  per  cent  at  the  end  of  the  forecast  period. 
Resource  utilisation  measured  using  the  GDP  gap  based  on  HP  trends  will  then  have 
reached a normal level. The HP gap will then be more or less zero. My own assessment is 
 gap will then have reached the zero level. However, even by the end of 
also that the GDP
the  forecast  period,  unemployment  will  not  have  reached  the  average  level  in  the  years 
before the crisis.  
Our  forecasts  thus  paint  a  rather  complex  picture.  There  is  no  simple  link  between  one 
measure of resource utilisation and one measure of inflation. Resource utilisation can instead 
be measured in several ways, each of which has its strengths and weaknesses. Inflation can 
 ways and we regularly utilise a large number of measures 
also be measured in a number of
                                                
 
13   For a more detailed discussion see Adolfson, M. and Söderström, U. (2003) “How is the economy affected by 
the inflation target?” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 1/2003. 
14   The HICP is the EU-harmonised consumer price index and largely corresponds to the CPIF, but is not affected 
by weighting changes at the end of each year. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 7
of underlying inflation. In this multi-faceted world, we make the best assessments we can of 
the direction of monetary policy.  
At the latest monetary policy meeting on 1 September, we decided to raise the repo rate by 
0.25  percentage  points  to  0.75  per  cent,  and  our  assessment  was  that  the  repo  rate  will 
gradually be increased to more normal levels as resource utilisation increases. The repo rate 
will nevertheless be abnormally low for some time to come in order to support the recovery in 
the economy. I supported the forecast for the repo rate made in the latest Monetary Policy 
Update – a forecast that I believe is well in line with the picture of a stable economic upturn in 
Sweden. (Figure 14. Repo rate).  
For my part, I have felt very convinced of two things, which I clearly explained in the most 
recent  minutes.  Firstly,  we  ought  to  increase  the  repo  rate  in  the  months  ahead,  as  the 
Swedish  economy  is  developing  so  strongly.  Resource  utilisation  is  increasing,  which  will 
increase  inflationary  pressures  over  time.  We  should  therefore  ease  up  in  order  to  avoid 
excessive  inflation  in  the  period  ahead.  Secondly,  the  long-term  repo  rate  should  be 
te of 
approximately 4 per cent, corresponding to inflation of 2 per cent and a real interest ra
2 per  cent.  The  latter  figure  is  what  the  short  real  interest  rate  on  government  bonds  has 
been, on average, in both the United States and the eurozone for long periods of time.  
On the other hand, it is difficult to have a definite opinion of what the repo rate ought to be in 
two  or  three  years.  Neither  our  own  nor  the  market’s  forecasting  abilities  are  sufficient  to 
make  solid  forecasts  over  such  a  period.  Among  other  reasons,  the  repo  rate  will  be 
dependent  upon  developments  in  the  eurozone  and  in  the  United  States,  and  the  impact 
these  may  have  on  the  Swedish  economy.  Weaker  international  development  could  entail 
den  and  a  lower  repo  rate  path  in  the  long  term.  However, 
weaker  development  in  Swe
stronger development of the Swedish labour market could entail higher inflationary pressures 
and a higher repo rate path. 
Despite this uncertainty, my view is that we should report the assumptions we make about 
the repo rate in conjunction with our forecasts. It would be remarkable if we reported all other 
circumstances surrounding the forecasts except the repo rate itself, which is the only one of 
these we take decisions on. Furthermore, it would not be wise to base our forecasts on the 
market’s forward rate curve in those cases in which our assessment of the repo rate – as at 
present – deviates from the forward rate curve. We are also careful to point out that the repo 
of  steering  interest  rates 
rate  is  a  forecast  and  not  a  promise.  However,  our  possibilities 
further ahead on the repo rate path are highly limited. What we can do is to communicate our 
own assessment, which is also associated with great uncertainty.  
The statistics that have been reported after the most recent Monetary Policy Update indicate 
a  stronger  development  in  Sweden  than  we  had  expected.  According  to  the  National 
Accounts from September, GDP growth was more rapid in the second quarter of 2010 than 
was  reported  in  August’s  flash  estimate.  The  Economic  Tendency  Survey  and  purchasing 
managers’  index  for  the  manufacturing  sector  in  September  were  positive  and  exceeded 
market expectations. According to the Labour Force Survey, unemployment fell in August by 
slightly  more  than  we  had  expected.  As  regards  international  developments,  however,  the 
situation continues to be uncertain. Statistics and other information are occasionall
y above 
and  occasionally  below  expectations.  We  will  not  present  any  new  overall  assessment  of 
economic developments until after the next Monetary Policy Meeting on 25 October. 
8 
 BIS Review 130/2010
Figure 1 
GDP gaps in September 2010 and in real time 
Per cent 
Source: The Riksbank. 
Figure 2 
Historical GDP trends 
Index 2000 = 100 
  Source: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 9
Figure 3 
GDP, hours worked and productivity 
Index 2007 Q4 = 100 
Note: Broken lines denote the Riksbank’s forecasts in MPU September 2008. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 Figure 4 
The GDP gap according to the Riksbank,  
the National Institute of Economic Research  
and the Ministry of Finance 
Per cent  
10 
  BIS Review 130/2010
Figure 5 
The GDP gap according to the Riksbank,  
the OECD, the IMF and the European Commission 
Per cent 
Figure 6 
Labour market gaps 
Percentage deviation from the HP-trend and  
from the average 2000–2007, seasonally-adjusted data 
  Note. Broken lines denote the Riksbank’s forecast in MPU September 2010.  
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 11
Figure 7 
Indicators for the business sector 
Deviation from the average, percentage points 
Note. Companies’ inflation expectations 12 months ahead are denoted in tenths of a percentage 
point. 
Source: National Institute of Economic Research. 
Figure 8 
Shortage of labour in the business sector and  
capacity utilisation in the manufacturing industry 
Deviation from average 1996–2007 
  Source: National Institute of Economic Research. 
12 
 BIS Review 130/2010
Figure 9 
Shortage of labour in the business sector and unemployment 
Deviations from the average 2000–2007 
Sources: National Institute of Economic Research and Statistics Sweden. 
Figure 10 
The GDP gap and the RU indicator 
Percentage deviation from HP trend and  
number of standard deviations from the average 
  Note. Broken line denotes the Riksbank’s forecast MPU September 2010. 
Source: The Riksbank. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 13
Figure 11 
Industrial production, capacity utilisation  
and potential industrial production 
Per cent 
 
* Calculated as industrial production x (average capacity utilisation 1996–2007/capacity utilisation). 
Sources: National Institute of Economic Research and Statistics Sweden. 
Figure 12 
The RU indicator and HICP inflation excluding energy 
Per cent, deviation from average 1997–2007 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
14 
  BIS Review 130/2010
Figure 13 
CPI and CPIF inflation 
Annual percentage change 
Note. The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate. The broken lines denote the Riksbank’s 
forecasts in MPU September 2010. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
Figure 14 
Repo rate 
Per cent, daily data and quarterly averages 
  Note. Broken line denotes the Riksbank’s forecast in MPU September 2010. 
Source: The Riksbank. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 15
