Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Recent developments and emerging trends in 
Asia 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the Second Annual South East Asian Institutional Investment Summit – “Recent 
developments and emerging trends in Asia”, Kuala Lumpur, 2 December 2010. 
 Let  me  first  thank  Asian  Investor  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  this  institutional  investment 
forum. I am honoured to be given the opportunity to speak before such a distinguished group 
of investors, fund managers and government officials at this important gathering.  
My remarks will consist of three parts – the first part, on the current trend of rising capital 
inflows to Asia and its implications, secondly on regional market developments and lastly, I 
will make some observations on the region’s institutional and central bank investing space. 
Asia as the investment destination and its implications 
It has been three years since the financial crisis first erupted. Emerging market economies 
have  demonstrated  resilience,  showing  a  steady  growth  path  to  recovery,  well  ahead  of 
major  developed  countries  which  face  challenges  of  low  growth,  high  unemployment  and 
mounting fiscal burdens. Such large disparities in the growth rates and economic environment 
have inevitably led to divergence in monetary and fiscal policies. Where developed countries 
had  maintained  low  interest  rates,  expanded  quantitative  easing  policies  and  implemented 
stimulus programmes to revive their economies, emerging markets had started normalising 
their interest rate policies. 
The  recent  financial  crisis  differed  from  the  1997–98  crisis  in  many  aspects.  Emerging 
market  countries  have  a  much  stronger  fundamentals,  better  growth  prospect  and  higher 
interest  rates.  These  differences  in  fundamentals  have  attracted  growing  and  significant 
capital flows to these parts of the world. Net private capital flows into emerging markets was 
projected  by  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  to  rise  to  USD825  billion  by  the  end  of 
2010, representing a 42% increase from last year. Many analysts expect the recent Federal 
Reserve’s policy decision to purchase another USD600 billion of US Treasury bonds under 
“QE2” will intensify further flows to the region. Economists estimated that between a quarter 
to  half  of  the  QE2  liquidity  will  flood  into  emerging  markets.  The  inflows  if  not  managed 
properly  will  pose  difficulties  to  Asian  and  emerging  markets.  Policymakers  would  face 
several predicaments from policy perspectives.  
The influx of capital inflows, have led to a rapid expansion of liquidity translating into rising 
prices, leading to concerns on asset bubbles and the possibility of overheating the economy. 
However, the impact on each economy will differ depending on the size of the inflows and 
the  ability  of  those  markets  to  manage  the  flows.  The  upward  pressure  on  the  exchange 
rates  has  also  been  significant  as  seen  by  the  appreciation  of  regional  currencies  at  an 
average of 4% on a real trade-weighted basis since beginning of the year. Understandably, 
such pace of appreciation has raised some concerns among businesses especially in highly 
open  economies,  where  movements  of  exchange  rates  will  certainly  impact  businesses. 
Under  this  new  normal  situation,  the  agility  of  businesses  and  the  economy  to  adapt  and 
adjust to the challenging environment is critical. There are a number of possible adjustments 
which can be done including raising productivity and efficiency. In formulating public policy, 
policymakers  are  faced  with  the  challenge  to  strike  a  fine  balance  in  handling  the  capital 
flows and its impact to the economy. Because of the enormity of the flows, a combination of 
approaches  had  been  adopted  by  emerging  economies  to  manage  capital  flows.  Even 
measures regarded as unorthodox at one time are now being implemented. Most countries 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 1
have  allowed  greater  currency  flexibility;  and  many  have  ended  up  accumulating  foreign 
reserves.  These  inflows  were  typically  sterilised  by  the  central  banks  to  avoid  pressure  to 
domestic liquidity and price level.  
Regional market developments 
Turning now to the second part of my remarks on key developments in the regional financial 
markets. The ability of regional economies to weather the recent financial crisis has its root in 
the aftermath of the 1997–98 crisis. Many had use the past financial crisis period to embark 
on bold financial reforms and restructure their financial landscape. Of particular importance 
were the successful efforts and policy initiatives to develop the bond market. As a result of 
these initiatives, the depth and breadth of regional capital markets have reached a level of 
maturity which can now absorb and intermediate large and volatile flows without posing risks 
to financial stability. The recent financial upheavals offers the most striking evidence given 
that  there  was  no  disruption  to  the  financial  intermediation  process,  credit  flows  and 
transmission mechanism.  
There are, of course, pockets of risks in individual countries, inflation and property market 
bubble,  to  name  a  few,  where  different  policy  instruments  could  be  used.  Central  to 
managing these challenges are macro-prudential tools, which have been deployed by Asian 
countries, to prevent, amongst others, price inflation in the real estate sector. A number of 
Asian policymakers recently had tightened lending standards by lowering loan-to-value ratio, 
imposing limits on non-owner-occupied property purchases and increasing transaction costs, 
as  pre-emptive  measures  to  temper  speculative  property  investments  and  to  manage  or 
prevent  excessive  build-ups  in  household  debt,  at  a  time  of  fairly  low  interest  rates  and 
abundance of liquidity. 
At the regional level, safeguards have also been enhanced. Among the lessons drawn from 
the 1997–98 Asian financial crisis are the importance of early detection of cross-border risks 
and vulnerabilities, followed by a collectively cohesive and firm action to avert any potential 
crisis.  Over  the  years,  the  region  has  developed  an  integrated  surveillance  and  crisis 
management framework through various groupings such as the Executive Meeting of East 
Asia Pacific (EMEAP) members and the South East Asian Central Banks. For example, the 
EMEAP surveillance framework focuses closely on regional monetary and financial systems 
which  also  connect  international  financial  institutions  and  member  central  banks’  reserves 
management  and  money  market  teams  through  the  Dealing  Room  Network.  Safety  nets 
have also been developed and enhanced, such as in the form of liquidity support to member 
countries  via  the  ASEAN+3  Chiang  Mai  Multilateral  Swap  initiative  which  consists  of  a 
USD120  billion  currency  swap  facility,  aimed  to  support  countries  with  short-term  liquidity 
needs  and  to  supplement  existing  international  financial  arrangements.  These  various 
developments  certainly  have  significantly  enhanced  the  region’s  capability  to  holistically 
manage the inflows and to safeguard against the risk of sudden capital flow reversal and the 
instability that it would bring. 
Malaysian market developments 
Let  me  turn  to  some  recent  key  developments  in  the  Malaysian  financial  sector.  The 
domestic  financial  landscape  is  undergoing  transformation  due  to  our continuous efforts  in 
financial  deregulation  and  liberalisation.  Pursuant  to  financial  liberalisation  measures 
announced  by  Prime  Minister  Dato’  Sri  Najib  Tun  Razak,  the  central  bank  has  granted 
5 commercial banking licences to foreign banks in June this year, with mega Islamic banking 
licences to follow suit. Foreign equity limits in investment banks, Islamic banks and insurers 
have  been  raised  while  more  operational  flexibilities  have  been  granted.  In  addition,  the 
government has announced plans to increase foreign investment limits for the government 
linked  investment  companies  such  as  the  Employee  Provident  Fund.  Importantly,  these 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2010
liberalisation  measures  will  further  strengthen  our  inter-linkages  with  financial  markets  in 
other parts of the world. Contrary to the approach taken by  many during the recent crisis, 
Malaysia had further liberalised the foreign exchange administration (FEA) rules in our efforts 
to  promote  efficiency,  reduce  costs  and  create  a  more  conducive  environment  for  trade, 
business and investment activities. The accomplishments in financial sector reforms and the 
many policy changes made have augured well for the country, as evident by our ascent into 
the top-20 bracket in the World Economic Forum’s financial development index this year. 
As with other countries within the region, we have also been a recipient of capital flows. As a 
result  of  continuous  effort  to  strengthen  the  financial  sector,  our  ability  to  manage  the 
volatility and other impacts of capital flows has been enhanced. The financial markets and 
banking sector have proven their ability to absorb and intermediate these inflows while the 
Central Bank is always monitoring the market on a daily basis and is also well positioned to 
manage  the  situation.  The  domestic  economy  stands  resilient  and  inflation  remains  under 
control.  Furthermore,  the  pace  of  ringgit  appreciation  also reflected  the  positive  underlying 
fundamentals of the economy.  
Trends of investing by central banks and institutional investors  
The concept of diversification 
i) 
Let  me  now  share  some  thoughts  on  portfolio  diversification.  Nearly  60  years  since  the 
proposition of Modern Portfolio Theory by Harry Markowitz, many investors are still grappling 
with  the  challenges  of  portfolio  diversification.  Among  the  sands  in  the  wheel  of  a  well-
diversified portfolio are transaction costs and information asymmetry. In tandem with greater 
financial  market  integration  and  improved  information  access  in  the  advent  of  information 
technology,  these  obstacles  have  significantly  diminished  over  the  decades.  The  recent 
financial turmoil however, has ignited a debate on whether the benefit of portfolio diversification 
is overstated considering the relatively low idiosyncratic risk vis-a-vis systemic risk in times of 
high  volatility,  and  prevalent  correlation  breakdowns  that  occurred  among  asset  classes, 
especially at the height of the financial crisis. 
In  my  view,  the  emergence  of  such  findings  does  not  question  the  desirability  of 
diversification, but rather, heightens the need for new and expanded methods to fine-tune the 
traditional  portfolio  optimisation  approach.  A  growing  class  of  investors  are  steering  away 
from  the  traditional  portfolio  theory’s  emphasis  on  a  normal  bell-curve  distribution  and 
choosing instead to embrace the “Black Swan” idea expounded by author Nassim Taleb or 
the “New Normal” proposition by PIMCO, in which the distribution of outcomes are flatter with 
fatter tails. The idea basically characterises higher likelihood of outlier events following the 
observed  major  structural  breaks  from  historical  trends.  To  my  mind,  such  non-normal 
distribution even further underscores the importance of diversification strategies to attain a 
reasonably stable return and the necessity for investors to be nimble in the face of uncertainty. 
Diversification by regional central banks and institutional investors 
ii) 
Central banks reserves continue to serve as an important safety buffer for the country and 
reflect  the  strength  of  the  economy.  Nevertheless,  the  issue  of  diversification  continues  to 
strike a chord among regional central banks and major institutional investors, driven by the 
accelerated pace of reserves accumulation in the past decade, low-yield environment in the 
G7 economies and changing trends in trade pattern and currency regimes. This necessitates 
a  rethinking  on  how  reserves  should  be  invested.  The  fast  pace  of  reserves  accumulation 
and low yields on G7 assets remained the most compelling reasons for diversification in the 
quest  to  seek  better  risk-adjusted  returns  in  alternative  asset  classes,  such  as  emerging 
market debt, commodities and equities. 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 3
Intra-regional trade in Asia has surged from 32% of total exports in 1995 to an average of 
50%  in  2008,  while  the  use  of  regional  currencies  for  trade  settlement  has  started. 
Furthermore, most Asian economies have gradually shifted from a US dollar focus to a more 
flexible  exchange  regime  against  broad  basket  of  currencies,  a  trend  which  underlies  the 
rationale of diversifying away from US dollar. In tandem with the rising savings and reserves 
accumulation by regional central banks, these reinforce the argument for more intra-regional 
investments  which  will  contribute  to  the  goals  envisioned  by  the  Asian  Bond  Fund  (ABF) 
initiatives. The ABF was a fund launched by EMEAP, comprising foreign reserves held by 
regional central banks for investments in regional bonds with the aim of contributing to the 
development of regional bond markets. Today, we are near the juncture of achieving a key 
milestone, where formal setting is no longer required to mobilise intra-region fund flows such 
as in the case of ABF1 and ABF2. 
Instead the intra-regional investments are becoming more self-reinforcing. As a proof of this, 
we now have more anecdotal evidence on the rising proportion of the regional central banks’ 
reserves invested in Asian local currency debt. 
Credit risk assessment approach 
iii) 
As  we  tread  into  uncharted  territories  of  new  asset  classes,  there  is  a  growing  need  to 
enhance  analytical  capabilities,  resources  and  risk  controls.  For  example,  many  central 
banks  and  institutional  investors  have  gradually  moved  away  from  over-reliance  on  credit 
rating  agencies  to  an  internally-based  credit  rating  assessment  practice  in  portfolio 
management. In the wake of the US financial crisis and recent European sovereign issue, 
one  would  question  the  credibility  of  credit  rating  agencies  in  flagging  the  risks  built  up  in 
banks  and  sovereigns,  ahead  of  the  crisis.  Most  credit  rating  agencies  also  tend  to  apply 
ordinal  ranking  of  credit,  rather  than  specific  risk  metrics  that  can  be  mapped  to  default 
probabilities or expected losses. In my  view, one of the major weaknesses of credit rating 
agencies  is  their  objective  to  establish  rating  stability  by  applying  smoothing  methodology 
that can potentially delay minor downgrades, but trigger cliff-like and abrupt downgrades in 
the event of sharp credit deterioration. The abrupt regrading of credits tend to spook markets 
and is certainly not good for investors with a heart condition. 
Regional central banks and major institutional investors are aware of such limitations; hence 
the best way forward is to complement rating-embedded investment guidelines with a more 
robust and rigorous internal credit risk evaluation framework. In tandem with diversification 
into alternative asset classes, there is a growing emphasis to improve the sophistication of 
risk  modelling,  taking  into  account  how  risk  can  be  initially  understated  when  herding 
behaviour dominates, but rears its ugly head during reversals.  
The growing importance of Islamic finance 
iv) 
As  events  unfolded  in  the  midst  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  sustained  expansion  of  global 
growth  and  development  in  Islamic  finance  has  emerged  as  one  of  the  most  prominent 
trends in global financial landscape. The industry continues to draw significant interests from 
all  corners  of  the  world.  The  global  financial  crisis  underscores  the  potential  role  and 
relevance of Islamic finance as a viable approach in investing. Due to the Shariah prohibition 
of  excessive  leverage  and  unproductive  cash  hoarding,  Shariah-compliant  funds  have 
outperformed  their  conventional  peers  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  As  a  result,  there  has 
been greater appreciation of the principles of Islamic finance, as evidenced by the expansion 
of interest and demand for Islamic financial products on a global scale. In line with the rapid 
growth of Islamic finance, emphasis has been placed on the development of the international 
financial infrastructure such as setting prudential standards and international best practices, 
a  role  spearheaded  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board.  The  most  recent  significant 
development was the establishment of International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation 
in  Kuala  Lumpur.  This  corporation  will  act  as  a  conduit  to  issue  highly  rated  short-term 
4 
 BIS Review 162/2010
Islamic  instruments  to  enhance  cross-border  liquidity  management  and  provide  Islamic 
financial institutions with an additional avenue to manage their short-term liquidity. 
Complemented by other initiatives under the “Malaysian as an Islamic Financial Centre”, I am 
quite  confident  that  Islamic  financial  markets  in  Malaysia,  for  both  ringgit  and  foreign 
currency, is set to thrive in the coming years.  
Recently,  we  have  allocated  a  small  portion  of  funds  to  be  disbursed  to  prospective  and 
existing Islamic Fund Management Companies to invest primarily in foreign currency sukuk. 
This will provide a platform for fledgling fund managers to build track records and spur their 
growth  of  asset  under  management,  besides  broadening  the  sukuk  market  in  Malaysia.  In 
parallel, this initiative is also expected to catalyse the development of end-to-end value chain 
capabilities,  encompassing 
trading  and  supporting 
infrastructures.  
the  areas  of  secondary  market 
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  end  my  remarks  by  concluding  that  in  the  current  global  economic 
environment, uncertainties loom large and we have to be mindful of the challenges ahead, 
either  as  an  investor  or  policymaker.  This  conference  is  indeed  very  timely  to  encourage 
open  discussions  on  key  themes  in  global  investing,  and  hopefully  we  can  all  gain  new 
insights in managing the exciting and challenging times ahead.  
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 5
