Brian Wynter: Economic issues and short-term trends for Jamaica 
Speech  by  Mr  Brian  Wynter,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  the  Quarterly  Press 
Briefing, Kingston, 10 November 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
This  morning  we  are  releasing  the  Quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report  for  the  three  months 
ended 30 September 2010. Similar to the previous reports, we have outlined the economic 
developments  that  characterised  the  review  quarter  and  some  insights  into  the  Central 
Bank’s view of the near-term. In addition, we have updated and reprinted some articles on 
issues which have been in the forefront of many discussions in recent months. These articles 
relate to the role of a credit bureau in enhancing the efficiency of credit markets as well as 
the Bank’s role in preserving financial stability. 
Review of the September 2010 quarter 
The process of transformation in the economy has largely continued in line with the objective 
of less volatility in domestic prices, lower interest rates and stable financial markets. Indeed, 
economic developments in the September 2010 quarter were, in the main, positive. Annual 
inflation continued to fall in line with expectations, interest rates trended down, the foreign 
exchange market was relatively stable, net international reserves increased substantially and 
the  process  of  fiscal  consolidation  continued.  However,  real  GDP  is  estimated  to  have 
continued to decline in the review quarter, albeit at a slower rate than in the June quarter. 
The Bank is also estimating that the pace of recovery in the international economy slowed in 
the review quarter. 
Monetary policy 
In  the  context  of  these  developments,  the  Bank  continued  to  ease  monetary  policy  in  the 
review  quarter.  The  Bank’s  actions  continued  to  be  supported  by  the  strengthening  of 
investor confidence, which has been reinforced by Jamaica meeting successive performance 
targets under the Stand-by Arrangement with the International Monetary Fund. In this regard, 
the  interest  rate  payable  on  the  Bank’s  30-day  certificate  of  deposit  was  reduced  by  an 
additional 1-percentage point to 8.00 per cent per annum during the quarter. The interest rate 
on  overnight  placements  was  also  reduced  by  a  quarter  of  a  percentage  point  from  an 
already  very  low  0.5  per  cent  per  annum.  In  addition,  the  Bank  reduced  the  cash  reserve 
requirement  on  Jamaica  Dollar  prescribed  liabilities  of  deposit  taking  institutions  by 
2 percentage points to 12 per cent and the liquid assets requirement also by 2 percentage 
points to 26 per cent. 
Financial markets 
The  foreign  exchange  market  was  relatively  stable  for  the  review  quarter  despite  some 
demand pressures in September. This stability was evidenced by the marginal depreciation 
of 0.27 per cent in the weighted average selling rate for the review period as investors, in the 
main, continued to exhibit a preference for Jamaica Dollar assets. The demand pressures in 
September resulted in a 0.78 per cent depreciation for the month and occurred in the context 
of reduced net private inflows as well as lower foreign exchange supplies from tourism. 
The Bank sold approximately US$20.0 million net to the market during the quarter. Despite 
this, the NIR increased by US$177.9 million resulting mainly from the proceeds of an Inter-
BIS Review 164/2010 
 1
American Development Bank loan of US$200.0 million to the Government. At end-September 
the NIR stock was US$1.91 billion, substantially exceeding the end-September target under 
the IMF  Stand-by Arrangement. At  that date, gross reserves amounted to US$2.79 billion, 
representing 20.5 weeks of projected goods and services imports, comparing favourably with 
the international benchmark of 12 weeks.  
In the context of relatively buoyant Jamaica Dollar liquidity conditions, stability in the foreign 
exchange  market  and  improved  investor  sentiment,  market-determined  interest  rates 
continued to decline in the September quarter. At the end of September the average yield on 
the  benchmark  6-month  Treasury  bill  was  7.99  per  cent  a  decline  of  1.27  percentage 
points relative to the yield at the end of June. Similarly, the average yields on the 1-month 
and  3-month  instruments  fell  by  0.72  percentage  points  and  0.77  percentage  points  to 
8.26 per cent and 7.75 per cent, respectively.  
Inflation 
Headline  inflation  for  the  September  quarter  was  1.3  per  cent,  below  the  range  of  
1.5 per cent – 2.5 per cent that we were projecting when we met in August. The out-turn for 
the  quarter  is  also  significantly  below  the  rate  of  2.6  per  cent  recorded  for  the  June  2010 
quarter as well as the 3.8 per cent average inflation for the previous five September quarters. 
Similar to headline inflation, the Bank’s measures of core inflation were all below the rates in 
the previous quarter as well as the rates in the corresponding quarter of 2009. 
The  lower  than  expected  inflation  for  the  review  quarter  was  against  the  background  of  a 
decline in energy prices, relative stability in the exchange rate and continued weak consumer 
demand. Lower energy  prices in the quarter were typified by a 2.6 per cent decline in the 
average  West  Texas  Intermediate  crude  oil  price.  Partly  offsetting  the  impact  of  the  lower 
energy  prices,  however,  were  increases  in  the  prices  of  some  agricultural  products, 
particularly  in  July.  This  mainly  reflected  the  lagged  impact  on  food  prices  of  drought 
conditions from late-2009 to mid-2010.  
We  are  projecting  that  there  will  be  an  up-tick  in  inflation  in  the  December  quarter  with 
headline inflation expected to be within the range of 2.0 per cent to 3.0 per cent. The projected 
acceleration in inflation in the December quarter is largely influenced by the above average 
rainfall experienced by the Island at the end of September caused by the passage of Tropical 
Storm  Nicole,  which  led  to  severe  damage  to  local  crops  and  the  road  network.  In  this 
context,  there  is  expected  to  be  some  increase  in  the  prices  of  select  agricultural 
commodities,  particularly  in  November  and  December.  However,  the  Government  has 
announced  plans  to  import  certain  food  items,  which  could  partly  mitigate  some  of  these 
increases.  In  addition,  the  recent  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil,  corn  and  wheat  on  the 
international market are expected to continue in this quarter.  
Real sector 
Economic activity is estimated to have remained weak during the September quarter, with 
real GDP contracting in the range of 0.0 per cent to 1.0 per cent relative to the sharp decline 
in the June 2010 quarter. In fact, real GDP contracted by 2.0 per cent in the June quarter 
relative  to  the  Bank’s  estimate  of  a  decline  in  the  range  0.0  per  cent  to  1.0  per  cent.  The 
decline in the June quarter followed three consecutive quarters of deceleration in the pace of 
decline.  The  areas  in  which  the  declines  were  sharper  than  we  had  estimated  were 
Agriculture,  Forestry  &  Fishing,  Manufacture,  Transport  Storage  &  Communication  and 
Financing & Insurance Services. 
The  estimated  out-turn  in  the  review  quarter  reflected  continued  contraction  in  the 
nontradable  industries  as  the  tradable  industries  are  estimated  to  have  recorded  marginal 
growth. In particular, Construction, Manufacture, Finance & Insurance and Electricity & 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2010
Water Supplies are estimated to have been the major industries to decline in the quarter. 
Mining & Quarrying was the major influence on growth in some tradable industries. 
In  the  context  of  the  excessive  rainfall  at  the  end  of  September,  the  Bank’s  projections 
indicate  that  real  GDP  will  marginally  contract  or  expand  in  the  December  quarter  in  the 
range  –0.5  per  cent  to  0.5  per  cent.  Most  industries  are  projected  to  contract,  with  the 
exceptions being Mining & Quarrying and Hotels & Restaurant.  
Outlook 
Looking  ahead,  there  are  concerns  about  the  continued  weakness  in  the  international 
economy. However, the consensus forecast is that the prospects for global growth for 2010 
have not changed for the worse. Growth in this year is largely expected to come from the 
emerging  market  economies,  such  as  China  and  India,  as  the  advanced  economies  are 
projected to experience low to moderate growth.  
In  light  of  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy  and  recent  adverse  weather  conditions,  the 
Bank has revised its projection of the performance of the domestic economy for this fiscal 
year. The domestic economy is currently being forecasted to contract marginally in the range 
of  0.0  per  cent  to  1.0  per  cent  for  fiscal  year  2010/11.  This  is  in  contrast  to  our  earlier 
forecast of marginal growth for the fiscal year. The change in projection is largely due to the 
extent  of  the  fall-out  in  the  June  quarter  and  the  impact  of  Tropical  Storm  Nicole  in  the 
December quarter. The forecast for a marginal decline in the fiscal year as a whole therefore 
depends on there being growth in the March 2011 quarter.  
Domestic inflation for FY2010/11 is expected to be at the upper end of the revised forecast 
range of 6.0 per cent to 8.0 per cent and within the original target range of 7.5 per cent to 
9.5 per  cent.  This  projection  is  underpinned  by  continued  low  consumer  demand,  a  stable 
exchange rate and continued moderation in inflation expectations. The risks to the inflation 
projection  are  balanced.  The  downside  risks  continue  to  be  a  greater  than  anticipated 
contraction in demand due to sharper than expected reductions in real incomes. The upside 
risks  include  adverse  weather  conditions  and  higher  than  anticipated  increases  in 
international commodity prices. 
Given the above factors, the Central Bank will remain vigilant in monitoring developments in 
the international and domestic economy. In addition, despite the projected uptick for inflation 
in the December quarter, the medium-term outlook indicates a resumption of the downward 
path. Against this background, the Bank will continue to be cautious in easing its monetary 
policy stance. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the successes we have had to date in the macroeconomic indicators 
have  been  assisted  by  the  on-going  consolidation  of  the  fiscal  accounts.  The  fiscal 
authorities have been meeting their targets under the IMF Stand-by Arrangement and from 
all indications the quantitative targets under the September review have also been met. 
Both local and foreign investors continue to monitor the country’s progress carefully. They 
have so far indicated their approval by the preference shown for Jamaican financial assets. 
This must not be taken for granted. The success we expect hinges on implementation of the 
full slate of reforms that will support lasting stability in the economy. In this regard, the orderly 
financial  markets  and  stable  consumer  prices  fostered  by  the  Bank  of  Jamaica’s  efforts  in 
collaboration  with  its  partners  and  stakeholders  will  provide  the  foundation  for  sustainable 
growth and development.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 3
