Charles Bean: Measuring recession and recovery – an economic 
perspective 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy at the Bank of England, 
at  the  Royal  Statistical  Society  (RSS)  Statistics  User  Forum  Conference,  London,  
27 October 2010. 
 Good morning! It is a great pleasure to open this conference dedicated to exploring the way 
statistics are used in the study and control of the business cycle and, in particular, the issues 
thrown up by the Great Contraction of 2008–9. Before I turn to that topic, however, it might 
be  useful  if  I  start  by  saying  a  few  words  about  the  sort  of  information  that  the  Bank  of 
England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) relies on when it sets the level of Bank Rate 
(or the amount of asset purchases) each month. 
First, and most obviously, there is the wealth of official statistics on the economy generated 
by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and other national statistical agencies, covering 
such variables as output, employment, pay and prices. That is the absolute bedrock on which 
our analysis and policy rests, and without it we would struggle to do our job. 
But  the  picture  they  provide  is  rarely  perfect.  Series  often  do  not  quite  correspond  to  the 
appropriate economic concept, either because they are conceptually difficult to measure or 
else  because  only  imperfect  proxies  are  available.  As  an  example,  take  output.  In  the  old 
days,  when  the  economy  was  dominated  by  manufacturing,  it  might  have  been  relatively 
easy  to  measure  the  volume  of  output  and  value  added  of  different  industries.  But  our 
economy  today  is  dominated  by  services.  Conceptually  even  defining  the  value  added  in, 
say, the financial sector, let alone measuring it, is not straightforward. Moreover, the meaning 
of a series often changes subtly over time as the economy evolves. Manufacturing today is a 
very  different  animal  from  manufacturing  30  years  ago:  for  instance,  the  value  added  of 
Rolls-Royce aero engines today comes as  much from the after-sales and maintenance as 
from the engine assembly itself. 
Finally, and most saliently for real-time policy analysis, the official data invariably appear with 
a delay of some months and can be substantially revised as more information accrues and 
the  ONS  improve  their  methodology.  For  that  reason,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
supplements the official data with two other sources of information that are more timely, even 
if  they  lack  precision  compared  with  the  official  data.  The  first  are  the  regular  business 
surveys from the likes of the Confederation of British Industry and the British Chambers of 
Commerce.  As  many  of  these  have  been  going  for  quite a while,  we  have  in  many  cases 
been  able  to  establish  their  usefulness  as  predictors  of  the  not-yet-available  official  data. 
Second,  we  also  rely  on  the  information  provided  by  our  network  of  regional  Agents  who 
have  about  8000  business  contacts  across  the  country.  They  can  often  help  the  MPC 
understand  what  lies  behind  puzzling  movements  in  the  official  data  or  in  the  business 
surveys. And, though the evidence they provide is more qualitative rather than quantitative, 
they  can  give  us  early  warning  of  major  cyclical  developments.  The  outstanding  example 
here is in the aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the subsequent near-seizure 
of the global financial system in early October 2008, when our Agents reported many of their 
contacts saying that “orders had fallen off a cliff” – the first real indication of the severity of 
the contraction that was to follow over the next nine months. 
The sharpness of that contraction, as well as its unexpected nature, can be seen in Chart 1, 
which plots the path of four-quarter real GDP growth on top of the fan chart associated with 
the  MPC’s  projection  for  growth,  conditioned  on  prevailing  market  interest  rates,  made  in 
August 2008. Given that each shade of green corresponds to 10% of the possible outcomes 
and the whole fan covers 90% of the possible outcomes, it can be seen that the MPC had 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 1
collectively  assessed  the  probability  of  contraction  over  the  four  quarters  to  2009  Q2  as 
about a half, but the probability of growth being less than –1½% as just 1 in 20. Now the 
MPC does not attempt to calibrate the probabilities associated with tail events precisely. But 
it is a fair bet that, if we had, then we would have put the chances of a contraction as large as 
the ONS’s current estimate of 6% as being virtually negligible. 
It is worth stressing that we were not alone in thinking a very severe contraction in activity 
was unlikely. Almost all forecasters were in the same boat. For instance, when we prepare 
our projections each quarter, we also canvass the views of outside forecasting bodies. Their 
assessment of the probabilities of various ranges of possible outcomes was very similar to 
ours.1  Chart  2  illustrates  the  same  point,  but  puts  it  into  a  broader  context.  The  blue  line 
shows the actual path of four-quarter GDP growth over the period since the creation of the 
MPC,  while  the  pink  line  shows  the  Committee’s  central  (mean)  projection  from  a  year 
earlier. The green bars show the range of end-year forecasts for the following year produced 
by  about  25  other  organisations,  together  with  their  corresponding  average  (the  green 
diamonds).  The  striking  feature  is  the  close  proximity  of  the  MPC’s  projections  and  the 
average  of  the  outside  forecasts  throughout  the  sample.  For  most  of  the  period  –  one  in 
which,  it  should  be  said,  growth  was  unusually  stable  –  those  forecasts  are  close  to  the 
subsequent  outturns.  The  two  exceptions  are  the  Great  Contraction  of  2008–9  and  the 
“phantom” slowdown after the 1997–8 Asia/LTCM crisis, when early vintages of the official 
data  for  output  as  well  as  business  surveys  pointed  to  a  slowing  in  growth  that  was  not 
subsequently borne out in mature vintages of the official data. And for both these episodes, 
no forecaster came close to predicting the outcome.2 
The generic point here – which holds true in fuller analyses over longer time periods – is that 
the  big  divergences,  when  they  occur,  are  not  between  the  central  forecasts  made  by 
different bodies, but rather between those forecasts and the corresponding outturns. And that 
is  as  it  should  be:  deviations  of  outturns  from  central  (mean)  forecasts  should  be 
unpredictable  if  those  forecasters  are  using  the  information  that  is  available  to  them 
efficiently. 
Why then, as the Queen famously asked at the London School of Economics in November 
2008, did no-one see the Great Contraction coming? Some economic downturns are broadly 
predictable in nature. In particular, that is the case when they are deliberately policy-induced 
in  order  to  squeeze  inflation  down,  though  even  then  it  may  still  be  difficult  to  get  the 
magnitude and timing right, and there will always be other unexpected events that perturb 
the path of the economy. But downturns associated with financial or banking crises are rather 
different  animals.  Rapid  growth  in  credit  and  asset  prices  can  act  as  a  warning  sign  of 
building vulnerabilities, but frequently appear to be validated by developments in underlying 
economic fundamentals. In the case of the present crisis, those developments included: low 
long-term  real  interest  rates  associated  with  high  savings  rates  in  emerging  market 
economies; an unusually stable macroeconomic environment, with an associated apparent 
reduction in risk; and financial innovation which purported to distribute risk more widely rather 
than leaving it concentrated in the banking system. 
With  hindsight,  we  now  know  that  much  of  that  financial  innovation  in  fact  left  risk 
concentrated in the banking sector; it was in effect simply shifting maturity transformation off 
balance sheet, where it was not subject to the same regulatory requirements. To that must 
be added: the underestimation of risk, coupled with inadequate risk management; distorted 
incentives  facing  the  originators  of  US  sub-prime  mortgages  and  the  ratings  agencies 
                                                 
1   See page 48 of our August 2008 Inflation Report. 
2   One forecasting organisation in the sample was consistently more pessimistic than others throughout the latter 
part of the sample. Though that organisation therefore did better at forecasting the Great Contraction when it 
came, it only did so by systematically underestimating growth in the years preceding the crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2010
responsible for assessing complex structured finance assets. Finally, the complexity of those 
products and the high degree of interconnectedness between financial institutions meant that 
the financial system, instead of becoming more stable, had in fact become more vulnerable 
to failure. 
The lesson I want to draw from this is not that the problems in financial markets which began 
in  August 2007  and  culminated  in  the  near-meltdown  of  the  global  financial system  a  little 
over  a  year  later  were an  inherently  unpredictable  Act  of God.  Rather  it  is  that one  would 
need  to  be  endowed  with  perfect  foresight  to  have  been  able  to  predict  how  the  financial 
crisis  would  unfold,  spilling  over  from  one  institution  to  another,  and  from  one  market  to 
another. And who knows what would have happened if, for instance, Lehman Brothers had 
successfully found a buyer that weekend in September 2008? 
Moreover, the impact on the real sector, which is what concerns us here, was also extremely 
difficult to judge. While it was predictable that the availability of credit would tighten as risk 
aversion rose and financial institutions rushed to de-leverage their balance sheets, it was far 
harder  to  know  by  how  much.  And  much  of  the  contraction  in  household  and  business 
spending  appears  to  have  been  down  to  a  sharp  rise  in  precautionary  saving  and  the 
postponement  of  investment  projects  and  the  running  down  of  inventories  as  uncertainty 
rose. Again, while such a reduction in spending was plausible, it was nevertheless extremely 
difficult to judge its likely magnitude. 
The moral from this is that one should not expect to be able to predict the timing and scale of 
these  sorts  of  events  with  any  precision.  But  financial  institutions  and  policymakers  could  
– and should – have been more alert to the vulnerabilities that were building during the years 
leading up to the crisis and therefore to the possibility of a major shock to the financial sector 
and  to  the  economy  more  generally.  It  is  somewhat  analogous  to  seismologists  trying  to 
predict earthquakes along a fault line. It is impossible to predict the day and magnitude of a 
shock with any precision, but it may be possible to say something about the likelihood of an 
earthquake  occurring  within  a  given  period  from  seismic  measurements  and  indicators  of 
latent stress. 
Now it might seem natural to measure the severity of a recession by the magnitude of the fall 
in output. Indeed, a recession is sometimes characterised in the media as being two or more 
consecutive quarters of falling output, with the end of the recession being marked by a return 
to expansion. But that is not a very useful definition, as the mere resumption of growth will 
still leave some plants idle and some workers unemployed. From an economic perspective, it 
should be the margin of unused resources in the economy – the difference between actual 
and potential output – that we care about. And it is also the margin of unused resources that 
determines how much the economy can grow during the recovery before it puts significant 
upward pressure on inflation3, the control of which is the MPC’s primary objective. 
The  problem  is  that  the  level  of  potential  output  is  inherently  difficult  to  measure.  For  an 
individual  firm,  the  notion  of  capacity  is  slippery.  A  car  manufacturer  might  be  able  to  say 
how many units can be produced if all production lines are operating 24/7, but he knows that 
to do so would prevent essential maintenance and impair the firm’s ability to produce output 
later.  And  in  the  service  sector,  the  notion  of  capacity  is  even  more  complex.  What  is  the 
capacity of a law firm, for instance? One might be able to say how many hours the existing 
partners  could  work,  but  that  is  not  the  same  as  how  much  output  they  could  produce. 
Moreover, 
to  unfilled  vacancies 
instantaneously, so it is not appropriate to ask what level of output could be achieved if all 
to  match  unemployed  workers 
impossible 
is 
it 
                                                 
3   Of course the margin of spare capacity is only one determinant of inflation. Other factors include commodity 
prices, the  exchange rate  and inflation  expectations. And the rate  at  which the margin of spare capacity is 
closed may also matter – so-called “speed limit” effects. 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 3
those who wanted a job were actually in one. The frictions and the institutional characteristics 
of labour and product markets need to be taken into account too. 
Economists studying business cycles have used a variety of approaches to construct proxies 
for potential output. One is to assume that potential output evolves smoothly over time and 
that actual output fluctuates around this; potential output can then be proxied by a smooth 
trend line fitted through the more jagged path of actual output. A more structural approach 
takes measures of capital and the available labour force (after allowing for any labour market 
frictions) and then assumes something about the nature of the technology with which they 
are combined to produce output. A third approach eschews direct measurement of potential 
output  altogether  and  instead  uses  survey-based  measures  of  the  margin  of  unused 
resources to draw inferences about the evolution of potential output. 
While  judging  the  margin  of  spare  capacity  is  always  a  problem  for  policy  makers,  it  is 
particularly difficult at the current juncture because a banking crisis accompanied by a deep 
recession is likely to lead to some impairment of the economy’s supply capacity. Moreover, 
different approaches presently suggest very different degrees of supply impairment. Suppose 
we use the first of the approaches above, assuming both that the economy was operating 
around potential in the years leading up to the crisis and that potential output had continued 
to  rise  at  broadly  the  same  rate  throughout  the  recession,  reflecting  continued  growth  in 
human  knowledge.  That  approach  would  point  to  output  being  a  little  under  10%  below 
potential at the current juncture, an enormous margin of unused resources. 
But  we  get  a  very  different  picture  if  we  look  at  direct  measures  of  the  margin  of  unused 
resources. Chart 3 shows a swathe of alternative indicators of capacity utilisation drawn from 
business  surveys.  They  suggest  that  the  margin  of  spare  capacity  within  firms  is  now 
relatively modest. As far as the labour market goes, the rise in unemployment has been only 
a little over two percentage points, notably less than in earlier UK recessions even though 
the fall in output has been greater; see Chart 4. Together, these observations suggest a far 
more  modest  margin  of  unused  resources  and,  by  implication,  a  substantial  depression  of 
potential output resulting from the Great Contraction. 
There  is,  however,  an  important  qualification.  The  counterpart  to  the  modest  rise  in 
unemployment is a much smaller fall in employment than would have been expected on the 
basis of past experience, in part reflecting a high degree of wage moderation in the private 
sector. This can be seen in Chart 5, which contrasts the evolution of employment and output 
with  the  experience  during  the  recession  of  the  early  90s,  when  output  fell  less  but 
employment more. The corollary is that productivity growth has been extremely weak during 
this downturn. That is in stark contrast to the United States, where productivity growth has 
remained strong and there has been a large shake-out of labour. Now this could be indicative 
of  a  fall  in  potential  output.  But  it  could  also  indicate  a  considerable  degree  of  labour 
hoarding, which would be consistent with a rather greater margin of underutilised resources 
than suggested by Charts 3 and 4.  
A number of recent cross-country studies4 have documented the substantial and long-lasting 
effect on output of past recessions caused by banking crises. That is illustrated in Chart 6. 
The dark blue line shows the mean fall in output relative to a continuation of the pre-crisis 
trend (calculated omitting the three years preceding the crisis) across 88 previous systemic 
banking crises in advanced and emerging market economies. The average decline in output, 
relative to a continuation of the pre-crisis trend, is around 10% and remarkably persistent, 
suggesting that ultimately aggregate supply follows aggregate demand down, even if it does 
not  fall  immediately.  The  UK  experience  (red  line)  has  so  far  been  fairly  similar  to  that 
average past experience, although the most recent quarterly outturns have been somewhat 
                                                 
4   See, for instance, the IMF’s October 2009 World Economic Outlook and Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff, 
This Time Is Different. 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2010
stronger  than  one  might  have  expected.  Chart  6  also  reveals,  however,  a  very  marked 
heterogeneity  across  episodes,  with  the  blue  swathe  covering  the  central  50%  of  the 
distribution  of  outcomes  and  the  grey  swathe  90%  of  the  distribution;  a  substantial 
permanent loss in output is by no means pre-ordained. 
There are a variety of ways that a banking crisis might impair an economy’s supply capacity. 
Reduced availability of credit and lower activity are both likely to depress investment, which 
has indeed fallen sharply. They are also likely to result in more business bankruptcies and 
fewer  new  firms  being  formed,  though  here  the  evidence  is  rather  more  positive,  with 
liquidations rising much less during the recession than one would expect (Chart 7). Finally, 
as we saw in the eighties, high levels of unemployment can become entrenched if the long-
term  unemployed  are  allowed  to  become  disconnected  from  the  labour  market.  But,  as 
Chart 4  shows,  the  rise  in  longterm  unemployment  has so  far  been  modest,  while  the  exit 
rate from long-term unemployment into jobs has been broadly flat. 
So, at the current juncture, some indicators seem to suggest a rather large margin of spare 
capacity,  while  others  point  to  a  much  smaller  margin.  Now  it  may  be  possible  partly  to 
reconcile these apparently conflicting observations once one allows for the fact that in some 
businesses,  especially  in  manufacturing,  it  may  be  possible  to  shut  down  some  capacity 
temporarily, reactivating it at relatively low cost once conditions improve. To the extent that 
the  survey  responses  relate  to  the  immediately  operable  capacity,  rather  than  potential 
capacity, it would be possible to have simultaneously a modest margin of spare capacity in 
the short run, but rather more in the long run. Even so, the generic point remains that we 
presently have only an imprecise idea of the margin of unused resources in the economy. 
But this is a key determinant of how much the economy can grow before igniting inflationary 
pressure, as well of the size of the structural fiscal deficit that needs to be closed. 
Would better or different statistics have helped us in anticipating the recession, in monitoring 
its  evolution  and  in  setting  policy?  Aside  from  the  important,  but  unfortunately  rather 
challenging, matter of measuring the margin of unused resources in the economy, I do not 
believe  that  the  recession  has  highlighted  any  obvious  lacunae  in  our  conventional 
macroeconomic indicators, though it has certainly presented us with plenty of puzzles. (It has 
highlighted shortcomings in economic models, but that is a different story.) Rather the key 
information gaps have been inside the financial sector. Some of these we have been able to 
fill. For instance, in 2007, following the example of the Federal Reserve and the European 
Central Bank, we had happily just decided to launch a regular survey of the banks in order to 
provide  more  information  on  credit  conditions.  That  has  proved  invaluable  during  the 
recession  as  a  guide  to  how  the  availability  of  credit  was  evolving.  If  we  hadn’t  already 
decided to launch such a survey, we would certainly have needed to introduce one. 
We were already quite well served with information of key monetary and credit aggregates, 
which have naturally taken a more prominent role in our analysis during the crisis. We did, 
however, find that following the collapse of Lehman’s, we needed a richer and timelier picture 
of banking sector developments. We therefore instituted an additional regular survey of just 
the major lenders; some of the resulting data appears in our publication Trends in Lending, 
together with a commentary on credit developments informed by the associated discussions 
with the lenders. We would, however, have liked access to more information on the evolution 
of credit by industry and firm size so as to get a better handle on where credit constraints 
were biting hardest. Gaining access to micro-prudential supervisory data relating to individual 
institutions  collected  by  the  FSA  has  proved  invaluable  in  assessing  the  resilience  of  the 
banking system and thus its ability to supply the credit to support the recovery. 
One area where more information would be useful is on the activities of the shadow banking 
sector.  Almost  inevitably,  one  has  less  knowledge  of  these  institutions  than  of  regulated 
entities.  But  we  have  seen  that  serious  problems  can  arise  in  such  hidden  corners  of  the 
financial sector. High-quality flow of funds data, similar to that available in the United States, 
would also be valuable. That would facilitate a better understanding of the factors influencing 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 5
changes in agents’ balance sheets, and thus be valuable in the pursuit of both monetary and 
financial  stability.  Cross-sectional  information  on  balance  sheets  within  the  household  and 
business  sectors  could  also  be  useful  in  evaluating  the  seriousness  of  financial  strains. 
Finally,  I  think  it  is  worth  noting  that  if  so-called  macro-prudential  policies  are  to  be  used 
successfully  to  improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  to  moderate  the  credit 
cycle,  financial  data  collection  will  need  to  be  more  flexible  in  future.  Almost  certainly  the 
seeds of the next financial crisis will sprout in a different corner of the financial system from 
this  one.  Collecting  data  dedicated  to  helping  fight  the  last  war  will  not  serve,  if  those 
emerging risks are to be identified early and dealt with appropriately. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2010
