Durmuş Yilmaz: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the press conference for the presentation of the Inflation Report, Ankara, 26 October 2010.  
 Distinguished Guests and Members of the Press, 
Welcome to the press conference held to convey the main messages of the October 2010 
Inflation Report. 
The  report  typically  summarizes  the  economic  framework  addressed  in  monetary  policy 
decisions, elaborates global and domestic macroeconomic developments and presents the 
medium-term  inflation  forecasts,  which  have  been  revised  in  view  of  previous  quarter 
developments, along with the monetary policy stance.  
Before  moving  on  to  the  Central  Bank’s  assessments  of  inflation  outlook  and  economic 
activity,  which  I  will  share  with  you  in  detail  shortly,  I  would  like  to  summarize  the  current 
global conditions that continue to be determinant of the domestic economic outlook. 
Data released in the third quarter indicate that the recovery will be quite slow and gradual 
albeit  a  second  contraction  in  global  economic  activity  is  not  very  probable.  The  marked 
decoupling  between  the  developed  and  developing  countries  in  terms  of  growth  dynamics 
persisted  through  the  second  quarter;  where  global  growth  continued  to  be  driven  by 
developing  countries  (Figure  1).  Meanwhile,  the  persisting  negative  outlook  in  the  labor 
markets of developed countries confirms the slow pace of rebound in these economies on 
one hand; and leads us to believe that the improvement in employment conditions will take a 
long time, on the other (Figure 2).  
Parallel  to  the  weak  outlook  in  economic  activity,  core  inflation  indicators  in  developed 
countries maintain their historically low levels in the third quarter of 2010 (Figure 3). 
 BIS Review 159/2010 
 1
 In line with the outlook I have summarized, the probability that many developed economies, 
which  are  already  pursuing  exceptionally  loose  monetary  policies,  would  adopt  a  second 
phase  of  monetary  easing  has  increased.  This  has  strengthened  the  investors’  inclination 
towards risky assets and therefore has boosted capital inflows to emerging markets, leading 
to currency appreciation in these countries accompanied by marked increases in commodity 
prices.  
Ample global liquidity and accelerated capital flows that are driven by the increasing search 
for yield have affected many emerging markets, including Turkey. Favorable developments 
specific  to  Turkey  have  further  exacerbated  these  effects.  In  particular,  a  better-than 
expected recovery in economic activity, indications of a possible upgrade from credit rating 
agencies, an ease of political uncertainty with the completion of the referendum process, and 
the signal given by the updated Medium Term Program (MTP) that the fiscal discipline would 
be maintained, have all contributed to Turkey’s relatively better performance. Turkey’s risk 
premium  indicators  performed  better  than  many  countries  and  continued  to  remain  below 
pre-crisis  levels  (Figure 4).  Consequently,  interest  rates  have  declined,  the  stock  market 
soared, and the Turkish lira strengthened (Figure 5).  
2 
  BIS Review 159/2010
Inflation developments 
1. 
Dear Members of the Press, 
Having summarized the current global conditions, I would now like to share my evaluation of 
inflation developments in Turkey that occurred in the last quarter.  
In the third quarter of 2010, consumer prices and the annual inflation rate went up to 1.15 
percent and 9.24 percent, respectively (Figure 6). This rise in inflation can be attributed to the 
sharp  increases  in  unprocessed  food  prices.  Meanwhile,  the  decline  in  annual  services 
inflation and the positive outlook in prices of staple goods continued; and the main trend of 
inflation  maintained  its  course  consistently  with  the  medium  term  targets.  Thus,  rates  of 
quarterly change in all sub-categories remained well below the average figures of past years 
with the exception of food prices (Figure 7). 
 In  the  third  quarter,  food  prices  recorded  a  sharp  increase  driven  by  unprocessed  food 
prices. Thus, the contribution of food prices to annual inflation reached 4.2 percentage points 
(Figure 8). Unprocessed food prices, which saw sharp slumps in the second quarter, showed 
substantial increases in the third quarter, bringing annual unprocessed food prices inflation to 
the  historically  highest  level  of  28.74  percent  (Figure  9).  While  fresh  fruits  and  vegetables 
prices  became  determinant;  the  persisting  surge  in  meat  prices  became  another  factor 
influencing  the  rise  in  the  group  prices.  At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  the 
fluctuating  course  in  unprocessed  food  prices  increases  the  volatility  of  consumer  inflation 
and thus creates significant forecast uncertainty. 
BIS Review 159/2010 
  3
In the third quarter, while energy prices followed a horizontal course due to the developments 
in oil prices, the inflation trend in core goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, 
tobacco and gold maintained its low level. Meanwhile, the decline in annual services inflation 
became more marked than expected. Services prices excluding food and transportation, the 
sensitivity of which is relatively higher against demand, recorded its lowest level (Figure 10).  
The steady downward tendency in core inflation indicators continued in the third quarter due 
to this beyond expected slowdown in services prices (Figure 11). The reverberations of the 
strong  course  of  the  Turkish  lira  on  core  goods  prices  were  also  influential  in  this 
development. In this respect, the underlying inflation implied by the core indicators continued 
to slow down and followed a course consistent with the medium term targets. Accordingly, 
the gap between Turkish core inflation indicators and those of other developing economies 
continued to narrow in the third quarter (Figure 12). 
 Medium-term  inflation  expectations,  which  displayed  a  downward  trend  from  the  second 
quarter  in  the  framework  of  these  developments,  registered  a  limited  decline  in  the  third 
quarter  (Figure  13).  Core  inflation  indicators  that  steadily  went  down  despite  the  rise  in 
consumer  inflation  prevented  deterioration  of  the  medium-term  expectations  in  this  period. 
While  recent  inflation  expectations  showed  a  limited  quarter-on-quarter  decline,  it  appears 
 4 
 BIS Review 159/2010
that despite longer maturities, expectations are not differed from their previous quarter level 
so far (Figure 14). Nevertheless, 12 and 24 month-forward expectations are slightly higher 
than the figures implied by inflation targets for the ends of 2011 and 2012. 
 Monetary policy response 
2. 
Dear Members of the Press, Dear Guests, 
After commenting briefly on inflation developments, I would like to cover the policies pursued 
by the Central Bank during the last quarter.  
Although  domestic  demand  was  relatively  stronger  during  the  third  quarter  of  2010, 
aggregate demand conditions continued to support disinflation due to weak external demand, 
bringing  core  inflation  to  historically  low  levels.  Therefore,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
maintained its stance of keeping policy rates constant for some time, and to keep them at low 
levels for a long period. 
Observing the surge in capital inflows as the last quarter of the year began, in anticipation 
that the combination of strong domestic demand and weak external demand will continue, I 
would like to remind you that rapid credit growth coupled with the risks regarding the current 
account  deficit  and  financial  stability  necessitates  caution.  In  this  respect,  considering  the 
favorable developments in credit markets and the ongoing recovery in economic activity, the 
CBT  has,  to  a  large  extent,  completed  the  process  of  reversing  the  temporary  liquidity 
measures implemented during the crisis period. Accordingly, overfunding of the markets was 
halted  and  the  required  reserve  ratios  were  increased.  Moreover,  to  facilitate  the  use  of 
alternative  macroprudential  policy  tools,  the  remuneration  of  required  reserves  was 
terminated and the operational framework of liquidity management was changed. Finally, in 
order  to  be  more  flexible  against  the  variability  of  capital  flows,  a  new  method  for  foreign 
exchange purchase auctions was designed and put into effect on 4 October 2010. To this 
end, a total of USD 1.76 billion was purchased in the first three weeks, USD 1.2 billion of 
which was additional purchase. 
Within the framework of these developments, while the yield curve has shifted down across 
all  maturities  during  the  third  quarter,  the  decline  was  more  significant  for  longer-term 
interest.  Although  surging  capital  inflows  towards  emerging  markets  have  been  effective, 
factors specific to Turkey have also contributed to the downward shift in the yield curve, as I 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 5
mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech.  Lower-than-expected  core  inflation  has 
contributed  to  the  downside  movement  in  the  short  term,  while  the  drop  in  longer-term 
interest 
relative 
creditworthiness of Turkey would become permanent (Figure 15). 
reflects  perceptions 
rates  mostly 
improvement 
that 
the 
the 
in 
Dear Guests, 
Along with decreasing nominal interest rates, real interest rates have continued to hover at 
historically low levels during the third quarter. Moreover, Turkey’s real interest rates do not 
differ significantly from those of other emerging markets (Figure 16). 
  6 
  BIS Review 159/2010
Meanwhile, with the removal of extra tightness in financial conditions that emerged during the 
crisis, the effectiveness of the monetary policy on credit market enhanced; thus, the low level 
of real market rates were better reflected in credit interest rates (Figure 17). Moreover, the 
lending  appetite  of  banks  has  improved  and  expectations  for  further  loosening  of  lending 
conditions  in  the  upcoming  period  have  arisen.  Accordingly,  under  the  current  conditions, 
where  commercial  loans  tend  to  increase  and  this  increase  is  spreading  across  more 
sectors,  the  spread  between  the  interest  rates  of  commercial  loans  and  deposits  are 
hovering at historically low levels, pointing to less tightness in credit supply (Figure 18).  
 Inflation and monetary policy outlook 
3. 
Dear Guests, 
After  summarizing  our  monetary  policy  stance  and  its  impacts  on  the  financial  markets,  I 
would now like to share with you the financial outlook and our assumptions underlying our 
forecasts. 
National  income  data  released  pertaining  to  the  second  quarter  of  2010  are  broadly 
consistent with the outlook presented in the July Inflation Report. While the relatively stable 
recovery in domestic demand continues, exports of goods and services have accelerated. In 
this context, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 10.3 percent compared to the 
same period last year, (Figure 19). Following the slowdown in the first quarter, the quarterly 
growth rate of national income began to reaccelerate on the back of high rate increases in 
exports  and  public  construction  sectors  compared  to  the  previous  quarter,  while  private 
growth  pursued  a  relatively  more  moderate  course  (Figure  20).  Hence,  while  the  GDP 
reached  its  pre-crisis  level  by  the  second  quarter,  the  GDP  excluding  public  expenditures 
hovers below the pre-crisis level. 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 7
Recent data suggest that the recovery in domestic demand is slightly stronger than expected 
and  that  a  more  moderate  growth  process  was  assumed  in  the  second  half  of  the  year. 
Indicators pertaining to private sector demand indicate that private sector consumption and 
investments  continued  to  rise  rapidly  in  the  third  quarter  in  annual  terms  (Figure  21). 
Consumption and investment expenditures are likely to accelerate in the final quarter of the 
year with the support of the counter-cyclical stance of monetary and fiscal policies as well as 
strengthening capital inflows.  
 The  steady  rise  in  credits  confirms  continuing  recovery  in  economic  activity  (Figure  22). 
Another  noteworthy  point  about  this  period  is  that  credit  expansion  continues  to  extend 
across a greater part of our economy in terms of both sectors and scale. Low interest rates 
and easing credit risk indicators suggest that credit growth will be strong, and therefore, the 
credit channel should continue to underpin domestic demand over the forthcoming period. 
 8 
 BIS Review 159/2010
 As  supply-side  constraints  have  widely  subsided,  we  believe  that  credit  realizations  rather 
reflect the dynamics pertaining to credit demand. The Loans Tendency Survey suggests that 
the  borrowing  motivation  of  firms  tends  to  change  in  the  post-crisis  period.  Firms  used  to 
demand credits to facilitate debt rollover or to finance their working capital during the crisis. 
However, as the effects of the crisis tapered off, loans for rolling over debts decreased while 
loans for investment purposes increased (Figure 23). Actually, GDP data for the first half of 
the year and other indicators of economic activity suggest that demand for investment loans 
is on the rise and this outlook is consistent with the recovery in credit demand for investment 
purposes. 
Despite the relatively robust course of domestic demand, external demand remains subdued 
in line with the signals for a sluggish recovery in global economy. In other words, lingering 
problems in the global economy further accentuate decoupling between the pace of recovery 
in domestic and external demand. In this framework, the negative contribution of net exports 
 BIS Review 159/2010 
 9
in  growth  is  predicted  to  increase.  Moreover,  forecasts  for  global  economic  activity,  which 
have  been  revised  in  the  last  three  months,  indicate  that  there  has  been  no  significant 
improvement  in  the  growth  outlook  of  our  trade  partners  (Figure  24).  Therefore,  revised 
forecasts were based on the assumption that external demand conditions would not display a 
significant change compared to the previous Report. 
 Dear Guests, 
Continued  recovery  in  economic  activity  fuelled  by  rapid  growth  in  domestic  demand 
underpins the improvement in employment conditions. Although the rapid recovery observed 
in non-farm employment since the second quarter of 2009 halted in the third quarter of 2010, 
leading indicators suggest that this is only temporary (Figure 25). Nevertheless, we expect 
unemployment  rates  to  remain  high  for  quite  some  time  compared  to  the  pre-crisis  period 
due  to  the  relative  slowdown  employment  growth  and  high  labor  force  participation  rates 
(Figure  26).  Therefore,  we  envisage  no  significant  pressure  on  unit  labor  costs  in  the 
upcoming period. 
In light of these assessments, our revised inflation forecasts are based on a framework in 
which  domestic  demand  is  stronger  compared  to  the  previous  period,  external  demand 
continues  to  restrain  domestic  economic  activity,  and  thus  aggregate  demand  conditions 
continue to support disinflation, albeit to a lesser degree. 
 10 
 BIS Review 159/2010
As for fiscal policy, MTP (Medium-Term Program) projections revised in October constitute 
the  basis  of  our  forecasts.  In  this  respect,  we  envisage  a  temporary  acceleration  in  public 
expenditures  for  the  rest  of  the  year,  to  be  followed  by  a  gradual  decline  in  the  ratio  of 
primary expenditures to national income starting from 2011. We also assume that any fiscal 
space  that  may  arise  due  to  stronger-than-expected  economic  activity  would  partially  be 
used  to  reduce  government  debt  stock,  congruent  to  the  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policy 
approach. It was envisaged that the ratio of debt stock to GDP would continue to decline and 
no significant change would be observed in the risk premium throughout the forecast horizon. 
Moreover,  our  forecasts  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  tax  adjustments  would  be 
consistent with the inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms.  
Distinguished members of the press, 
Important  developments  since  the  July  Inflation  Report  warranted  a  revision  of  the 
assumptions,  which  our  forecasts  are  based  on.  I  would  like  to  provide  some  detailed 
information on these factors to ensure that our forecasts are better understood.  
Worse-than-expected  outcomes  regarding  vegetable  prices  and  the  slower-than-expected 
downward correction in meat prices in the third quarter necessitated an upward revision in 
the  assumption  for  food  inflation  in  the  short-term.  In  this  respect,  we  revised  our  food 
inflation  assumption  from  7.5  percent  to  10.5  percent  for  end-2010,  while  keeping  our 
assumptions  for  food  inflation  for  2011  and  2012  at  7  percent  (Table  1).  The  revision  in 
question pushed our inflation forecast for end-2010 up by 0.8 percentage points. 
 Although unprocessed food inflation was markedly higher than expected in the third quarter, 
the deceleration in core goods and services inflation was more significant than envisaged. In 
other  words,  the  core  inflation  trend,  which  pins  down  the  initial  point  of  the  medium-term 
forecasts, has decreased at a faster-than-expected pace. This development necessitated a 
downward  revision  of  the  inflation  forecasts  for  end-2010  by  0.8  percentage  points,  while 
also favorably affecting medium-term forecasts.  
With stronger-than-expected domestic demand data in the last period, the output  gap was 
revised upwards compared to the previous forecast (Table 1). In other words, we base our 
assumptions  on  an  outlook,  in  which  the  contribution  of  aggregate  demand  conditions  to 
disinflation  in  the  revised  forecast  is  slightly  more  limited  as  opposed  to  the  July  Inflation 
Report. This development has not affected short-term inflation forecasts, but has had some 
upward impact on medium-term forecasts.  
Increased  expectations 
to  pursue 
expansionary  monetary  policy  have  led  to  rapid  increases  in  commodity  prices.  However, 
crude  oil  prices  in  the  futures  markets  as  of  October  are  still  largely  aligned  with  the 
the  developed  economies  would  continue 
that 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 11
assumptions in the July Inflation Report. In this context, our previous assumption of oil prices 
are kept unchanged, as you can see on the slide (Table 1). Moreover, based on commodity 
prices in the futures market, we assume that import prices will exhibit a gradual upward trend 
throughout the forecast horizon (Figure 27). 
 Now I would like to share with you our inflation and output gap forecasts produced in line with 
the framework that I have outlined so far. While producing our forecasts, we assumed that 
the measures outlined in our exit strategy would be completed during the rest of the year, 
and that policy rates would be kept constant at current levels for some time to be followed by 
limited  increases  starting  from  the  last  quarter  of  2011,  with  policy  rates  staying  in  single 
digits  throughout  the  3-year  forecast  horizon.  Within  this  framework,  we  project  that,  with 
70 percent  probability,  inflation  will  be  between  7  and  8  percent  with  a  mid-point  of 
7.5 percent at end-2010, and between 3.9 and 6.9 percent with a mid-point of 5.4 percent by 
the end of 2011. Furthermore, inflation is expected to decline to 5.1 percent by the end of 
2012 (Figure 28).  
12 
  BIS Review 159/2010
Overall, the impact of the upward revision in the food price assumption is offset by lower-than-
expected non-food inflation, leading to an unchanged inflation forecast at 7.5 percent for end-
2010. Similarly, the impacts of factors affecting the medium-term inflation outlook have balanced 
each other out, and consequently there has not been a significant revision in the forecasts. 
I think comparison of the forecasts by the ones in the previous Report period would help us 
to  better  understand  the  changes  in  forecasts.  As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  considering  a 
relatively  stronger  recovery  in  the  domestic  demand  outlook  and  the  second  quarter  GDP 
data, our output gap estimates have been revised upwards as of the second quarter of 2010 
(Figure 29). The impact of the upward revision in the output gap was largely offset by the 
downward  revision  in  the  underlying  inflation  trend.  Consequently,  there  has  not  been  a 
significant  change  in  medium-term  inflation  forecasts  and  the  monetary  policy  outlook 
compared to the previous Report (Figure 30). 
 In sum, assuming that policy rates would stay constant for sometime and remain at low levels 
for  a  long  period,  our  revised  forecasts  suggest  that  aggregate  demand  conditions  would 
continue  to  support  disinflation  for  a  while.  Under  current  conditions,  inflation  is  expected  to 
follow a marked downward trend over the next two quarters and decline to levels consistent with 
medium-term targets as of mid-2011, as the adverse impact of the temporary price movements 
taper off. Considering that the increases in unprocessed food and tobacco prices – which are 
beyond  the  control  of  monetary  policy  account  for  5  percentage  points  of  current  annual 
inflation, it is clear that there is sizeable room for disinflation from this channel (Figure 31).  
BIS Review 159/2010 
  13
Factors that are beyond the control of monetary policy, such as fluctuations in unprocessed 
food  prices  and  tax  adjustments  related  to  tobacco  products,  created  significant  forecast 
uncertainty  by  increasing  the  volatility  of  consumer  inflation.  This,  in  turn,  has  created  a 
challenge for us to understand the underlying inflation correctly and to manage expectations. 
In this context, I believe that it would be useful in terms of transparency and predictability, to 
share  with  the  public  the  assumptions  we  make  relating  to  the  said  groups  while  making 
forecasts and our inflation expectations excluding these groups. Accordingly, we assume that 
annual inflation in unprocessed food products will be 17 percent for end-2010 and 9 percent 
for  the  following  two  years.  Meanwhile,  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  tobacco  and 
alcoholic  beverages  group  index  is  expected  to  be  24  percent  at  end-2010  and  to  hover 
around  levels  consistent  with  inflation  targets  in  subsequent  years.  Within  this  scope,  we 
expect  the  inflation  indicator  excluding  unprocessed  food  and  tobacco  and  alcoholic 
beverages to follow a volatile trend in the first half of 2011 due to the base effect and to gain 
stability slightly above 4 percent in the medium term (Figure 32). 
 At this point, I would like to underline once more that any new data or information regarding 
the inflation outlook may lead to a change in the monetary policy stance. Therefore, I would 
particularly  like  to  highlight  that  assumptions  regarding  future  stance  of  monetary  policy 
underlying the inflation forecasts should not be perceived as a commitment on behalf of the 
CBT. 
Risks 
4. 
In the last part of my speech, I would like to elaborate the risks regarding the inflation outlook 
in the upcoming period and prospective monetary policy strategies to be implemented should 
these risks materialize. 
Developments  regarding  global  economic  activity  would  continue  to  be  the  main  factor 
shaping inflation dynamics and the monetary policy outlook. Recently, leading indicators of 
economic activity continue to slow down, underscoring downside risks especially regarding 
the  US  economy.  Furthermore,  ongoing  problems  in  credit,  real  estate,  and  labor  markets 
across developed economies and uncertainties regarding the impact of fiscal consolidations 
suggest that the downside risks regarding the pace of global growth are likely to persist for 
some  time.  Should  the  global  economy  face  a  longer-than-anticipated  period  of  anemic 
growth,  the  monetary  tightening  envisaged  to  start  in  the  final  quarter  of  2011  under  the 
14 
 BIS Review 159/2010
baseline  scenario  might  be  postponed.  Moreover,  an  outcome  whereby  global  economic 
problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic activity, may trigger 
a  new  easing  cycle.  By  contrast,  monetary  tightening  may  be  implemented  at  an  earlier 
stage, should the recovery in economic activity turn out to be faster than expected.  
The weakness in the global economic outlook not only delays recovery in external demand 
but also leads to continuing expansionary monetary policies across developed economies, 
which in turn fuel domestic demand through an acceleration of capital inflows to emerging 
markets.  Should  capital  inflows  continue,  the  divergence  in  the  growth  rates  between 
domestic  and  external  demand  is  likely  to  intensify  in  the  forthcoming  period.  Additional 
policy  instruments,  other  than  the  short-term  policy  rates,  would  be  needed  to  curb  risks 
emanating from this channel. In this respect, should the disparity between domestic demand 
and  external  demand  continue  and  be  accompanied  by  rapid  credit  expansion  and 
deterioration of the current account balance, all to lead to financial stability concerns, it would 
be necessary to utilize other monetary policy instruments such as reserve requirement ratios 
and liquidity management facilities more effectively.  
Food and commodity price inflation has accelerated recently. The aggregate demand is not 
yet at a level to exert inflationary pressures. Along with this, the strength of the Turkish lira 
limits  the  pass-through  from  food  and  commodity  inflation  to  core  goods  and  services 
inflation. However, the potential second-round effects continue to pose a risk, if increases in 
food and commodity prices persist. Should such a risk materialize and lead to a deterioration 
in  price  setting  behavior,  which  in  turn  hampers  the  attainment  of  medium-term  inflation 
targets,  a  tightening  earlier  than  the  one  envisaged  in  the  baseline  scenario  would  be 
considered.  
Dear Guests, 
The  CBT  will  continue  to  monitor  fiscal  policy  developments  closely  while  formulating 
monetary policy. Increasing public savings and maintaining the fiscal discipline are essential 
to control the current account deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and external 
demand.  The  medium-term  perspective  included  in  the  revised  Medium  Term  Program 
(MTP) is seen as an important step in this direction. Accordingly, our revised forecasts take 
the  projections  of  public  expenditures  in  the  MTP  as  given,  while  tax  adjustments  are 
assumed to be consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms. Should 
the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework in a way to have adverse effects on 
the  medium-term  inflation  outlook,  a  revision  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  may  be 
considered.  
Monetary policy will continue to focus on achieving lasting price stability in the period ahead. 
Strengthening  the  commitment  to  fiscal  discipline  and  the  structural  reform  agenda  would 
support the improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and 
price stability. In this respect, on closing my remarks, I would like to remind you once more 
that timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the MTP and the European 
Union  accession  process  remain  to  be  of  utmost  importance.  Thank  you  for  your 
participation. 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 15
