Agustín Carstens: Interview in Central Banking Journal 
Interview  with  Mr  Agustín  Carstens,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  in  Central  Banking 
Journal,  United  Kingdom,  conducted  by  Ms  Claire  Jones  on  8  October  2010, 
Washington DC. 
This article was originally published in: Central Banking Journal, Volume 21, Number 2. For more information contact: 
Claire Jones, deputy editor (cjones@centralbanking.co.uk) or visit: http://www.centralbanking.com/static/central-banking. 
 The  governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico  tells  Claire  Jones  about  how  the  central  bank  is 
improving its capacity to safeguard financial stability. 
You have had several spells working at the Bank of Mexico. I was wondering if you 
could tell me about how the central bank has changed over your career.  
It  has  changed  dramatically.  I  started  in  the  early  1980s.  Then  the  concept  of  the  central 
bank was to be a kind of black box where there was little communication with the market. We 
only published data on reserves three times a year, for instance. 
There was a view that the markets didn’t know how to administer the information. 
The  central  bank  was  also  fully  dependent  on  the  government.  We  had  virtually  no 
independence. Now it’s almost the opposite. 
We have complete autonomy. We’ve moved from being a very interventionist central bank, in 
terms of the way we conducted monetary policy, to a market-orientated monetary policy with 
a  fully  fledged  flexible  exchange  rate  regime.  And  a  very  important  component  of  this  is 
having a precise communications strategy.  
Since you’ve taken over what has changed? 
Going back to communications, we’ve tried to be clearer in expressing the motivations for our 
policy decisions. We’ve tended to keep rates on hold this year, but still we’ve tried to be more 
precise in saying why that’s been the case. 
We’ve also tried to express the issues that are concerning us. The market has appreciated 
this, judging by the feedback we’ve had from analysts and commentators. 
We’ve also done an internal restructuring, the most important feature of which is the creation 
of  a  department  which  will  concentrate  fully  on  financial  stability.  We’ve  increased  our 
resources there.  
Can you tell me a little bit more about the new department?  
The department will have around 60 or 70 people and a very important part of its work will be 
to  gather  information  and  organise  this  in  a  way  that  will  better  enable  us  to  see  whether 
firms are complying with regulation. 
Also, we need to ensure we have sufficient information to judge whether there are systemic 
vulnerabilities in the Mexican financial system. It is a field that’s not very developed in Central 
Banking though many central banks are taking similar steps. 
You must have all the evidence at hand to do the analysis for macro and micro issues. You 
also need to have coordination between the authorities. 
In addition to information gathering, we’ll have more resources devoted to analysis and also 
have the ability to make policy recommendations. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 1
When  you  say  policy  recommendations  do  you  mean  just  in  terms  of  regulation  or 
also in the context of monetary policy?  
The idea is to see the whole map and even to make policy recommendations in areas that 
might not be in the direct control of the central bank. 
It  is  not  only  the  central  bank  that’s  focusing  on  financial  stability.  It  is  also  the  finance 
ministry  and  the  financial  regulatory  agencies.  Through  a  presidential  decree  a  financial 
stability board has been created, on which there are representatives from the central bank, 
the ministry, the deposit insurance institute and the regulators. 
The secretariat is housed within the central bank and a lot of the work in the financial stability 
department will feed into the financial stability board. The idea of the department is therefore 
not only to deal with areas in the domain of the central bank, but also to contribute to the 
discussion that will occur at the level of the financial stability board, the Council for Stability of 
the Financial System. 
What powers will that financial stability board have? 
More than anything, the motivation for setting it up was to have a structure through which you 
could have formal coordination of policy between the financial authorities. 
The  policies  that  will  be  agreed  at  that  level  will  be  implemented  through  the  authorities 
represented on the board.  
The idea is to evaluate the system as a whole and then to quell any vulnerabilities as they 
emerge. 
There  are  some  grey  areas  among  the  authorities,  but  the  idea  behind  this  is  that  you’re 
more likely to have a coordinated, timely response rather than overreacting. 
Does the fact that the financial stability board could in theory call for a rate hike to 
tackle financial imbalances not conflict with your inflation targeting framework? 
Not  really.  The  idea  is  to  respect  as  much  as  possible  the  mandates  of  each  authority.  If 
there is, say, asset-price inflation and there is a threat to financial stability, then it might be 
possible to address the issue through regulatory aspects rather than interest rate hikes. The 
idea  is  to  align  the  policy  response  as  much  as  possible  to  the  primary  mandates  of  the 
respective authorities. 
Our primary mandate is inflation targeting and it will remain so. As you know, Mexico wasn’t 
hit by a financial crisis in 2008 but nevertheless we felt the need to be prepared. By having a 
much stronger preventive attitude, we want to stop the events that really could compromise 
our inflation targeting objective. If we were to have a financial crisis, then the central bank 
might be forced to guide monetary policy by other considerations rather than inflation per se. 
We want to avoid that distraction by making sure the financial system remains strong. We 
see it as a serious attempt to fully gear monetary policy actions to inflation considerations. 
It’s difficult to say that you can avoid crises, but there is less chance if the authorities are 
making a coordinated attempt to stop them. 
As  much  as  we  can  we  want  to  keep  the  price  stability  and  financial  stability  mandates 
distinct. That might not always happen but you have to at least try. What we want to avoid is 
a  full-blown  financial  crisis  because  then  you  might  not  have  the  option  to  use  monetary 
policy solely for controlling inflation. 
We  have  seen  this  at  other  central  banks,  which  have  used  monetary  instruments  for 
financial sector issues. 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2010
Perhaps not in Mexico, but elsewhere a lot of criticism has been directed at inflation 
targeting and central banks’ focus on CPI inflation. Is this criticism at all justified? 
Right now I would say that we have to learn the lessons of recent episodes. At least from my 
first stock-taking of the issue, the conclusion that I’ve come to is that we, as central banks, 
have to pay close attention to what’s happening in financial markets. And, as much as there 
is compatibility between inflation fighting and maintaining a sound financial system, a central 
bank should act on it. 
When  you  were  talking  about  data  gathering  before,  what  sources  of  data  were 
neglected pre-crisis perhaps not just in Mexico but elsewhere as well? 
In  Mexico  we  already  have  a  pretty  good  system.  We  learnt  our  lesson  in  1995  with  the 
Tequila Crisis. Right now Mexico’s at the forefront of data gathering. We’ve taken care of the 
granularity  of  information.  We  have  pretty  much  transaction-by-transaction  information. 
However,  we  need  to  hold  more  information  on  transactions  between  Mexican  companies 
and their foreign counterparties. During 2008, the most severe glitch that we had – I mean it 
wasn’t  systemic  at  all  –  was  some  exotic  derivatives  that  the  big  Mexican  corporations 
contracted  with  foreign  counterparties.  We  didn’t  know  about  these.  They  didn’t  disclose 
these exposures to stockholders. It impacted the volatility of the foreign exchange markets. 
So we need more information on such positions. At this stage, that is all settled and the risk 
isn’t there anymore but we don’t want to risk a repetition of this. 
Are there any concerns that you have about the structure of your financial industry? 
We have a very healthy banking system and I don’t have any concern about its structure. 
However,  I’m  quite  concerned  about  the  non-banks  that  are  involved  in  the  mortgage 
business. Some of them tend to fund themselves in the market and so the maturity mismatch 
here is a concern. It only accounts for 2–3% of GDP in terms of loans, but it is still worth 
looking at. That’s the most important factor. 
About 70% of our banks are foreign owned but we have a very clear subsidiary scheme and 
so  far  our  system  has  been  thoroughly  ring-fenced  from  the  home  countries  so  we’ve 
prevented  contagion.  We’ve  also  been  able  to  prevent  the  foreign  subsidiaries  of  Mexican 
banks taking risks with the home banks’ capital. So there’s not so much of a problem here. 
The  macroprudential  toolkit  still  appears  to  be  in  the  very  early  stages  of  its 
development.  People  aren’t  quite  sure  yet  how  the  tools  will  take  shape,  or  at  least 
there’s no consensus on this. What are your thoughts on what tools there should be? 
It’s very much a work in progress for us too. What we want to strengthen first of all is our ability 
to monitor the financial system in a very precise way, find out what the vulnerabilities are, find 
out what the tail risks are, and then after that devise the tools. That may involve leaning against 
the wind, but we’re not at that stage yet. All options are on the table at the moment. 
What’s your view on Basel III? 
We’re  broadly  supportive.  Our  banking  system  complies  pretty  much  with  it  already  so  it’s 
appropriate  for  the  rest  to  catch  up!  We  have  some  concerns  about  the  impact  of  the 
measures on systemically important financial institutions, however. Why? Because since we 
have local subsidiaries of systemically important financial institutions, we still don’t know how 
this will impact their Mexican operations. 
We  also  want  to  avoid  a  form  of  taxation  without  any  benefit.  If  home-country  regulation 
causes  the  cost  of  credit  to  rise  without  this  benefiting  Mexico,  if  they  have  to  hold  more 
capital  at  the  homecountry  level,  we  don’t  want  that  to  apply  to  Mexico  if  they’re  not 
systemically important here.1  
                                                 
1   The CSFS first session was held on 11 August 2010. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 3
