European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
10 October 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting. 
Based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council continues to 
view the current key ECB interest rates as appropriate. It therefore decided to leave them 
unchanged. Considering all the new information and analyses which have become available 
since  our  meeting  on  2  September  2010,  we  continue  to  expect  price  developments  to 
remain moderate over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon. Recent economic data are 
consistent with our expectation that the recovery should proceed at a moderate pace in the 
second half of this year, with the underlying momentum remaining positive. At the same time, 
uncertainty is still prevailing. Our monetary analysis confirms that inflationary pressures over 
the  medium  term  remain  contained,  as  suggested  by  weak  money  and  credit  growth.  We 
expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the 
purchasing power of euro area households. Inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in 
line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The 
firm anchoring of inflation expectations remains of the essence.  
Overall,  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  remains  accommodative.  The  stance,  the 
provision  of  liquidity  and  the  allotment  modes  will  be  adjusted  as  appropriate,  taking  into 
account the fact that all the non-standard measures taken during the period of acute financial 
market  tensions  are  fully  consistent  with  our  mandate  and,  by  construction,  temporary  in 
nature. Accordingly, the Governing Council will continue to monitor all developments over the 
period ahead very closely. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro area real GDP grew strongly on a quarterly basis, increasing by 1.0% in the second 
quarter  of  2010,  supported  mainly  by  domestic  demand,  but  partly  reflecting  temporary 
factors. Recent statistical releases and survey evidence generally confirm our expectation of 
a moderation in the second half of this year in the euro area and elsewhere. Nevertheless, 
the  positive  underlying  momentum  of  the  recovery  in  the  euro  area  remains  in  place.  The 
global recovery is expected to go on, and this should imply a continued positive impact on 
the demand for euro area exports. At the same time, private sector domestic demand should 
gradually strengthen further, supported by the accommodative monetary policy stance and 
the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  However,  the 
recovery in activity is expected to be dampened by the process of balance sheet adjustment 
in various sectors.  
In the Governing Council’s assessment, the risks to this economic outlook are slightly tilted to 
the downside, with uncertainty still prevailing. On the one hand, global trade may continue to 
grow more rapidly than expected, thereby supporting euro area exports. On the other hand, 
concerns  remain  relating  to  the  emergence  of  renewed  tensions  in  financial  markets.  In 
addition, downside risks relate to renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, and 
protectionist  pressures,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of  global 
imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.8% in September, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  compared  with  1.6%  in  August.  The  increase  in 
inflation  was  anticipated  and  reflects  base  effects  mainly  stemming  from  the  energy 
component.  In  the  next  few  months  HICP  inflation  rates  will  hover  around  current  levels 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 1
before  moderating  again  in  the  course  of  next year.  Overall,  in  2011  inflation  rates  should 
remain moderate, benefiting from low domestic price pressures. Inflation expectations over 
the medium to longer term continue to be firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s 
aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
Risks to the outlook for price developments are slightly tilted to the upside. They relate, in 
particular, to the evolution of energy and non-oil commodity prices. Furthermore, increases in 
indirect taxation and administered prices may be greater than currently expected, owing to 
the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  coming  years.  At  the  same  time,  risks  to  domestic 
price and cost developments are contained.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 rose to 1.1% in August 2010, 
from 0.2% in July. The annual growth rate of loans to the private sector also rose, standing at 
1.2%,  after  0.8%  in  the  previous  month.  In  both  cases,  the  rise  reflects  relatively  strong 
monthly  flows.  The  still  low  growth  rates  continue  to  support  the  assessment  that  the 
underlying pace of monetary expansion is moderate and that inflationary pressures over the 
medium term are contained. 
The  yield  curve  has  remained  fairly  steep,  but  the  downward  impact  of  this  on  monetary 
growth  is  gradually  waning.  Moreover,  while  spreads  between  different  short-term  interest 
rates are still generally narrow, they have been widening somewhat between rates paid on 
short-term time deposits and overnight deposits. As a result, the annual growth rate of M1 
has  continued  to  moderate  from  high  levels,  and  stood  at  7.7%  in  August  2010, while  the 
annual growth rate of other short-term deposits has become less negative.  
The rise in the annual growth rate of bank loans to the non-financial private sector reflects 
both a further slight increase in the positive growth of loans to households and a gradually 
less  negative  annual  growth  rate  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations.  The  latest 
developments  are  consistent  with  the  lagged  response  of  loan  developments  to  economic 
activity over the business cycle that was also observed in past cycles.  
Banks  have  gradually  increased  the  overall  size  of  their  balance  sheets  recently,  but  the 
challenge  remains  for  banks  to  expand  the  availability  of  credit  to  the  non-financial  sector 
when demand picks up further. Where necessary, to address this challenge, banks should 
retain  earnings,  turn  to  the  market  to  strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  or  take  full 
advantage of government support measures for recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. We therefore decided to 
leave  them  unchanged.  Considering  all  the  new  information  and  analyses  which  have 
become  available  since  our  meeting  on  2  September  2010,  we  continue  to  expect  price 
developments  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon.  Recent 
economic  data  are  consistent  with  our  expectation  that  the  recovery  should  proceed  at  a 
moderate  pace  in  the  second  half  of  this  year,  with  the  underlying  momentum  remaining 
positive. At the same time, uncertainty is still prevailing. A cross-check of the outcome of 
our economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis confirms that inflationary pressures 
over the medium term remain contained, as suggested by weak money and credit growth. 
We  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the 
purchasing power of euro area households. Inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in 
line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The 
firm anchoring of inflation expectations remains of the essence.  
Turning to fiscal policies, we take note of the recent announcements made in some euro 
area  countries  with  regard  to  measures  to  tackle  the  existing  fiscal  imbalances.  Indeed,  a 
number  of  countries  have  to  meet  major  challenges,  and  immediate,  ambitious  and 
convincing corrective action is required. Credible multi-year consolidation plans are needed 
and will strengthen public confidence in the capacity of governments to return to sustainable 
public finances, reduce risk premia in interest rates and thus support sustainable growth over 
the  medium  term.  For  all  euro  area  countries,  the  2011  budgets  need  to  reflect  the 
commitment  to  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  in  line  with  countries’  pledges  under  the 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2010
excessive deficit procedures. Any positive fiscal developments that may emerge, reflecting 
factors such as a more favourable than expected environment, should be exploited to make 
faster progress with fiscal consolidation.  
The  urgent  implementation  of  far-reaching  structural  reforms  is  essential  to  enhance  the 
prospects  for  higher  sustainable  growth.  Major  reforms  are  particularly  needed  in  those 
countries that have experienced a loss of competitiveness in the past or that are suffering 
from  high  fiscal  and  external  deficits.  The  removal  of  labour  market  rigidities  and  the 
strengthening of productivity growth would further support the adjustment process of these 
economies. Increasing product market competition, particularly in the services sectors, would 
also  facilitate  industrial  restructuring  and  encourage  innovation  and  the  adoption  of  new 
technologies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 3
