Choongsoo Kim: Asia’s role in reviving global growth and financial 
stability 
Dinner speech by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the international 
conference organized by the Asian Development Bank, the Institute of International Finance, 
the KB Financial Group and the Institute for Global Economics, Seoul, 17 May 2012. 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a privilege and a pleasure for me to speak here this evening. I am extremely grateful to 
Chairman SaKong for inviting me.  
As we have just enjoyed some splendid food, to boost our health and energy, I hope that my 
address now may serve as substantial food for thought for everyone in this room. I may risk 
ruining  your  appetites  for  dessert  and  coffee,  but  being  a  central  bank  governor,  as  you 
know, it is my job to take away the punch bowl when the party gets going.  
I would like to first briefly review recent economic and financial developments in the global 
economy, before addressing the challenges and opportunities faced by Asia in repositioning 
itself in the new global financial scene. 
Where do we stand? 
I. 
After four years of financial turbulence and economic uncertainty, the global economy is still 
in trouble, despite some signs of recovery from the fallout of the global financial crisis. The 
global economic outlook is improving only slowly, and the pace of recovery is uneven across 
regions.  The  US  economy  appears  to  have  turned  the  corner,  with  improved  risk  appetite 
and  real  activities,  while  Asia  is  leading  world  economic  growth,  albeit  at  a  level  below  its 
potential so far.  
The  euro  area,  on  the  other  hand,  has  yet  to  escape  the  specter  of  its  twin  crises  and 
stagnant growth. Given its sheer economic size and dominant share in global banking, the 
euro area has been the major source of risk to global growth and financial stability over the 
past  two  years  or  so.  The  recent  large-scale  liquidity  operation  by  the  ECB,  the  so-called 
LTRO, has helped to calm the financial markets and stabilize sovereign debt dynamics, at 
least  temporarily.  The  LTRO’s  purpose,  as  I  understand  it,  is  to  buy  precious  time  for  the 
conduct of necessary fiscal reforms and bank restructuring.  
Unfortunately,  the  positive  effects  of  the  LTRO  seem  to  have  been  waning  recently.  The 
sovereign spreads of the highly-indebted countries are on the rise again, while the abundant 
liquidity is being hoarded by banks amid little signs of any increase in lending. I hope that the 
time bought by the ECB through the LTRO is used wisely, to put an end to the fiscal crises 
and the resultant financial instability. 
A natural question at this juncture would be how to consolidate the financial gains achieved 
so far, and what to do to pull the world economy out of its current troubles. I think revisiting 
the dynamics of the global financial crisis, and the ensuing fiscal crises in advanced market 
economies – or AMEs in short – could offer us clues to help answer these questions.  
Reversing the direction of real-financial and cross-border linkages 
II. 
Let me be more specific.  
Some  eighty  years  of  macroeconomic  research  and  policy  lessons  guided  us  to  the 
deployment of extraordinary monetary and fiscal stimulus measures in response to the global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial  crisis,  and  these  policies  did  pay  off  by  enabling  us  to  avoid  another  Great 
Depression.  Success  was  short-lived,  however,  as  the  world  economy  instead  fell  into  the 
Great Recession. Adverse feedbacks through real-financial linkages triggered fiscal crises in 
AMEs,  particularly  in  the  euro  area,  which  pose  threats  to  global  financial  stability  even 
today.  
Despite their own sound fundamentals, meanwhile, emerging market economies – or EMEs 
in  short  –  have  become  the  hostages  of  cross-border  linkages,  both  real  and  financial,  as 
they have faced weak and highly uncertain external demand, sharp reversals in capital flows, 
and heightened foreign exchange market pressures. As you may have noticed here, and as I 
should highlight now, there have thus been two types of linkages at the heart of the post-
crisis  economic  and  financial  developments  –  real-financial  linkages,  and  cross-border 
linkages. And the implication is thus that a global solution is necessary if we hope to return to 
a sustainable path of growth and financial stability.  
We  live  now  in  an  interconnected  world.  And  in  an  interconnected  world,  stagnant  growth 
and fiscal crisis occurring in one region is no longer an isolated problem of that region alone. 
Rather,  it  is  a  global  problem,  that  has  far-reaching  implications  for  other  regions  and, 
ultimately, the world economy as a whole.  
I believe that our search for a global solution to the problems we now face should begin with 
a  focus  on  reversing  the  directions  of  these  two  types  of  linkages  –  so  that  in  place  of 
negative spillovers we instead see positive feedbacks. And in fact, powerful real-financial and 
cross-border linkages are a basis for positive feedbacks just as much as they are a vehicle of 
negative spillovers. I also believe that the role of EMEs – and particularly of emerging Asia – 
is of crucial importance in this regard. 
Over the next several years at least, AMEs will find themselves constrained by limited policy 
space for dealing with macroeconomic challenges. It would not be unreasonable to predict 
that,  to  put  their  public  finances  in  order,  AMEs  will  need  to  undergo  periods  of  fiscal 
consolidation.  Monetary  policy  is  also  unlikely  to  offer  more  stimulus,  since  policy  interest 
rates remain near zero while major central banks’ balance sheets are already over-stretched. 
New financial regulations are being implemented, with stronger standards applied to liquidity 
and  capital  requirements.  And  while  all  of  these  developments  are  certainly  conducive  to 
financial  stability,  they  are  less  conducive  to  growth  –  at  least  in  the  short  run.  Without 
growth, however, financial stability gains will likely prove elusive.  
EMEs  are  in  contrast  doing  better  than  AMEs  in  many  respects,  although  their  economic 
growths  and  financial  stability  have  been  adversely  affected  by  developments  in  AMEs. 
Economic growth is yet to reclaim its pre-crisis level, due in part to weak external demand, 
but  it  does  nonetheless  remain  modest.  Inflation  is  well  under  control  by  now.  And  EMEs 
have  in  addition  ample  policy  space,  on  both  the  fiscal  and  the  monetary  fronts,  for  use 
should  adverse  shocks  occur.  EMEs  have  been  cautious 
their  macroeconomic 
management, however, in consideration of the significant tail risks stemming from the euro 
area  fiscal  crisis,  financial  deleveraging,  the  high  and  very  volatile  price  of  oil,  and  other 
factors.  
Now  given  this  broad  picture,  if  you  agree  on  its  accuracy,  I  would  like  to  suggest  the 
possibility of EMEs playing a role in reviving world economic growth, and solidifying financial 
stability. I believe EMEs’ dynamic growth can also be a source of growth for AMEs, that is 
relatively  free  from  the  vagaries  of  the  Keynesian  multiplier.  And  the  higher  and  more 
sustainable  growth  in  AMEs  would  then  help  AMEs  to  address  their  fiscal  and  financial 
challenges at lower costs than otherwise.  
To put this view in perspective, let me point out some numbers. In 2011, EMEs accounted for 
53 percent of world GDP, and 70 percent of world economic growth. According to a recent 
study by the Bank of Korea, a one percent increase in EMEs’ GDP will boost AMEs’ growth 
by 0.3 percentage point. The corresponding number for the contribution of AMEs to EMEs’ 
growth  is  0.4  percentage  point.  This  same  study  also  shows  that  structural  reforms  can 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
enhance  growth  in  both  groups  of  countries.  Therefore,  stronger  autonomous  growth  by 
EMEs – driven by domestic demand – combined with structural reforms in both AMEs and 
EMEs, would clearly help maximize positive feedbacks that benefit all. 
Challenges and opportunities for Asia 
III. 
That  said,  the  next  question  to  ask  is  who  should  take  the  first  step,  to  initiate  the 
propagation of such positive feedbacks for growth. And I would argue that Asia – particularly 
emerging Asia – is well positioned for this job. Asia is large in economic size, represents the 
most vibrant economic region in the world, enjoys high rates of savings, and has strong trade 
linkages  with  AMEs.  It  is  also  the  region  with  the  greatest  potential  to  grow  through 
expansions  in  domestic  demand.  Asia,  in  short,  has  tremendous  potential  to  lead  world 
economic growth going forward.  
But  having  great  potential  is  only  a  necessary  condition  for  Asia  to  become  a  source  of 
positive feedbacks for growth. To realize this potential to the fullest extent, Asia needs to do 
much  more  on  the  financial  front.  Asia  is  a  region  in  which  negative  financial  and  real 
spillovers from AMEs are the rule rather than exceptions. Asia has been subject to volatile 
capital  flows  driven  by  global  liquidity  cycles.  From  the  second  quarter  of  2008  to  the  first 
quarter of 2009, for example, foreign claims of euro area and UK banks on Asian economies 
fell by around 37 percent and 21 percent, respectively (IMF, REO April 2012).  
Asia’s  international  trade  and  finance  is  invoiced  and  settled  in  dollars  predominantly,  and 
this  results  in  currency  and  maturity  mismatches.  Risk  management,  however,  except 
through  the  holding  of  large  amounts  of  foreign  reserves,  remains  relatively  poor.  Finally, 
domestic  financial  markets  in  Asia are  less  developed,  with  only  limited  capacity  to  create 
high quality safe assets. And as a result the high level of savings in Asia has been invested 
in  foreign  assets  produced  by  AMEs.  These  financial  weaknesses  and  imbalances  render 
Asia  very  vulnerable  to  global  liquidity  disruptions  and  market  uncertainty.  And  it  is  more 
likely now than ever that the global financial market will continue to face significant tail risks, 
until the euro area finds its way out of the fiscal crisis.  
Given this, Asia needs to be better prepared to deal with financial shocks of external origin. 
This would be Asia’s biggest challenge should it endeavor to lead the world economy along a 
sustainable  path  of  growth  and  financial  stability.  The  challenges  facing  Asia  are  also 
opportunities  for  Asia,  however.  My  view  is  that  the  next  decade  or  so  will  prove  to  be  a 
critical window of opportunity for Asia, to upgrade its financial system so as to make it a new 
source of growth and strengthened financial stability. 
Before  concluding,  let  me  briefly  discuss  what  Asia  should  do  to  live  up  to  such  a  vision. 
First, Asia should push ahead with more financial liberalization and greater integration into 
the  global  markets.  If  we  agree  that  the  new  global  financial  regulations  will  make  cross-
border capital flows less volatile, we should expect Asia to be able to reap the benefits of 
financial  integration  at  lower  risk.  Financial  integration  will  bring  new  knowledge  into  our 
domestic financial markets and policy circles. Financial liberalization is also consistent with 
the  changes  in  development  strategy  in  Asia  toward  greater  dependence  on  domestic 
demand than on exports. 
Second,  Asia  should  upgrade  its  domestic  prudential  regulations  with  newly  developed 
macro-prudential frameworks that can address FX risk in particular. Macro-prudential policies 
should be employed rather than capital controls, which could prove highly distortionary and 
run counter to financial integration. And in this regard, Korea’s recently implemented macro-
prudential policies would be good reference for many Asian countries.  
Third, Asia should implement structural reforms – which can enhance its growth potential in 
the face of population aging, increase its labor productivity, and help to stimulate its domestic 
demand. Pension reform, for example, could help to reduce the unduly large precautionary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
savings in countries where income uncertainty is high. Increased labor market flexibility can 
meanwhile contribute to job creation, and facilitate necessary economic adjustments.  
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
Now let me conclude.  
We have already seen how the powerful real-financial linkages have led to output collapses 
in AMEs following the global financial crisis, and how they have driven the sovereign debt 
dynamics  in  the  euro  area  to  their  critical  limits.  We  have  also  seen  how  cross-border 
linkages – both real and financial – have transmitted adverse shocks originating in AMEs to 
the shores of EMEs in matters of months if not days.  
But the directions of these linkages can be reversed, I believe – so that they facilitate not 
negative spillovers but positive feedbacks. Exploiting the reversal of linkage effects should I 
think be the first step toward finding a global solution to the current economic and financial 
troubles that we all face. I also believe that Asia should be the region taking this first step, in 
light of its potential for doing so.  
In the next decade or so, Asia will face greater challenges, but also greater opportunities, as 
it repositions itself in the new global financial scene. The primary task that remains is to seize 
this opportunity with courage.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
