Ardian Fullani: Strengthening the capacities of the Bank of Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Closing Ceremony of 
the  IPA-funded  Twinning  Project  on  strengthening  the  capacities  of  the  Bank  of  Albania, 
Tirana, 16 July 2012. 
 Dear guests,  
Central banks, since their inception, have been vested with a “veil of mystery”. This relates to 
their exclusive right to issue money, set a loan interest rate and control liquidity in the market. 
Precisely, this important role of central banks and the recent global developments put these 
institutions on the spotlight. Responding to these developments, central banks worldwide, in 
perfect  coordination  with  one  another  and  in  addition  to  traditional  instruments,  took 
extraordinary measures that had never been employed before. 
Through  those  measures,  they  intended  to  provide  sufficient  liquidity  in  the  market,  with  a 
final goal, which has remained unchanged since ancient times, to restore public confidence 
in financial institutions. The Emperor Tiberius, dating to A.D. 33, had to inject one million gold 
pieces of public money into the financial system to keep it from collapsing.  
Today, cooperation and coordination among central banks have become an integral part of 
institutional  management.  Technological  developments  and  the  globalisation  process  have 
aroused  the  need  for  coordination  among  decision-making  institutions  all  over  the  world. 
Imagine the developments following the World War II, when central banks widely accepted 
their transition from private to public ownership and when they realised that it was not only 
necessary  but  also  imperative  to  cooperate,  regardless  of  physical  barriers.  Imagine,  for 
example, the president of the Federal Reserve, who wasted three months to travel to Europe 
and two weeks to receive a letter from his homologues overseas. 
Actually, central banks have increased their efforts for a better and more fruitful cooperation. 
This is an undeniable truth. It has been a distinct feature of our work in recent years. Since 
my  first  public  appearance  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  I  have  pronounced  my 
ambition for Bank of Albania’s legal and institutional transformation in line with the model of 
the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). 
I  am  fully  confident  that  the  successful  conclusion  of  the  Twinning  Project  with  the  Banca 
d’Italia  and  Banque  de  France  is  another  determinant  step  forward  in  the  joint  efforts  to 
strengthen cooperation and elevate our work standards to European levels. Today, we see 
that, in a few months, a brilliant idea has turned into reality and the project has been crowned 
with success.  
The project objective was to improve our work practices in the field of banking supervision, 
statistics,  payment  systems,  interbank  market,  coordination  of  EU  integration  process  and 
financial literacy.  
More specifically, cooperation in banking supervision focused on implementing major reforms 
in  areas  such  as  consolidated  supervision,  approval  of  new  regulations  and  staff  training. 
This  cooperation  has  fostered  our  relations  with  foreign  supervisory  authorities  and 
international  institutions.  Staff  capacity  building  and  development  in  this  area  was  another 
priority of the project. Our institution should take relevant measures to increase their skills for 
preventing or handling deficiencies or threats to financial system stability. 
In terms of statistics, this cooperation has led to a thorough review of the existing regulatory 
framework to completely fulfil ECB standards on compilation and dissemination of monetary 
and  financial  statistics.  The  review  aimed  to  identify  items  of  noncompliance  with 
EU standards and to subsequently draft a solid  agenda for comprehensively reviewing our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
methodology  and  infrastructure  to  compile  the  Balance  of  Payments  in  accordance  with 
EU standards. 
Payment systems constitute another priority of our work under this project. In this area, our 
practices further improved, aiming at approximating them to the ESCB practices on payment 
systems. Also, pertinent legal acts and their compliance with the EU regulatory framework 
were reviewed. 
Cooperation  on  interbank  money  market  consisted  in  analysing  the  experience  of  other 
central  banks  in  handling  market  obstacles  and  difficulties  in  relation  to  the  regulatory 
framework. Other useful aspects for adapting, including identification of necessary actions to 
be taken by our institution in the interbank money market were also addressed. 
Coordination of the EU integration process is another major area that was broadly addressed 
by this project. Thanks to this cooperation, our staff capacities were enhanced as regards the 
handling  of  responsibilities  arising  from  the  implementation  of  the  Stabilisation  and 
Association Agreement, approximation to the ESCB standards, and the challenges that we 
may  encounter  when  Albania  receives  the  status  of  a  candidate  country  and  starts 
negotiations of EU accession. 
Last but not least, financial literacy is of key importance to the Bank of Albania. Thanks to 
support from and cooperation with the project team, an action plan was designed to promote 
financial  literacy  and  enhance  awareness  of  market-economy  principles  across  various 
groups of the society. Also, a system for monitoring financial literacy in schools was set up.  
Further on, due to complexity of our work and new developments in the banking and financial 
area, it is clear that the project has strengthened our institution and has helped us cope with 
new  situations.  Moreover,  the  cooperation  and  communication  between  our  institutions 
intensified from both viewpoints, professionally and personally. We do live in a global society, 
where  financial  developments  take  place  at  a  rapid  pace.  Therefore,  central  banks  should 
possess  strong  and  reliable  mechanisms  of  coordination  and  communication,  which  may 
prepare our institutions to cope with such situations. 
A proverb says: “No matter how long the journey is, one has to take the first step to start off.” 
This  philosophy  was  made  concrete  through  this  twinning  project,  which  along  with  the 
assistance in the afore-mentioned areas, was also the first step on the path of our institution 
to EU standards, as one of the priorities of the Stabilization and Association Agreement.  
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the Banca d’Italia and the Banque de France for 
the outstanding cooperation we have had during the project implementation. I commend the 
efforts  of  both  honoured  institutions  and  hope  that  the  successful  implementation  of  this 
project will provide us with an example to involve more in such initiatives in the future.  
Also,  I  want  to  extend my  thanks to  the  Delegation  of the  European  Union  for  its  ongoing 
assistance  and  prudence  throughout  the  project  performance.  I  am  deeply  confident  that 
these are only the first steps towards a close cooperation.  
I would like to conclude by bringing to your attention a statement of Mr. Shimon Peres, who, 
listening to his advisor, Agassi, who was speaking about developing alternative oil sources in 
the absence of oil, interrupted him by saying: Nice speech, but what are we going to do?  
In  light  of  this,  we  should  think  about  what  to  do  in  the  future.  I  think  that  the  political 
coverage of this approximation process is important, with which I mean Brussels’ probable 
acceptance of Albania’s application for membership in September. This is an important step 
that  would  provide  additional  room  for  the  country’s  rapid  convergence  and  for  Bank  of 
Albania’s  rapid  and  irreversible  development  in  line  with  the  models  of  its  European 
counterparties. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
