G Padmanabhan: Global convergence of banking regulations and its 
impact on the Indian banking system 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Bankers Club, Raipur, 13 July 2012. 
 Assistance provided by S/Shri P R Ravimohan, Nirmal Chand and D Kamatchi Pandian gratefully acknowledged. 
I am very happy to be here to address the Bankers Club at Raipur. Chhattisgarh is a fast 
developing state and the banking system here has to play its role in ushering in economic 
growth of the state. The outreach programme in which I participated yesterday at Makanpur 
was  an  eye  opener  for  me  regarding  the  active  role  played  by  the  banks  towards  this 
direction. 
Global financial crisis – A curtain raiser 
As  we  are  passing  through  difficult  but  challenging  times  as  far  as  the  financial  sector  is 
concerned, I thought of sharing with you some of the issues which are currently engaging the 
attention of the regulators around the world including the Reserve Bank of India for ensuring 
the stability and resilience of the financial sector. Though, it has been analyzed threadbare in 
different fora, it would not be out of place to start with a bird’s eye view of the global financial 
crisis to put the recent developments in proper perspective.  
The global financial crisis, though brewing for a while, started to show its severe effects from 
the  latter  part  of  2007  and  into  2008.  Under  its  impact,  world  stock  markets  fell,  large 
financial  institutions  collapsed  or  were  bought  out  and  Governments  in  most  developed 
countries  had  to  use  public  funds  to  formulate  rescue  packages  to  bail  out  their  financial 
systems. There has been a broad consensus that regulatory failures are among the causes 
underlying the recent global financial crises. Some of the more salient weaknesses identified 
as  drivers  of  the  turmoil  include  lack  of  oversight  of  systemic  risk,  over-reliance  on  credit 
rating  agencies,  procyclical  tendencies  of  regulatory  frame  work,  shortcomings  in  risk 
management  practices,  laxity  in  oversight  of  shadow  banking  entities,  financial  innovation 
outpacing regulation and weaknesses in accounting and disclosures. 
As a result, there has been an international endeavor to strengthen regulation of banks and 
financial institutions and bring about a greater element of convergence therein. Against this 
backdrop,  firstly,  I  would  outline  the  drivers  for  changing  regulation  of  banks.  Secondly,  I 
would  briefly  present  the  global  efforts  aimed  at  formulating  a  regulatory  reform  agenda. 
Thirdly,  I  would  analyze  the  likely  impact  of  the  evolving  convergence  in  terms  of 
implementing the said-agenda. Fourthly I will touch upon certain issues which are specific to 
Chhattisgarh before concluding my speech.  
Regulatory reforms – A global endeavour 
The magnitude of this crisis has clearly signaled the need for major overhaul of the global 
financial  regulatory  architecture.  The  G-20  leaders  have  mandated  the  international 
regulatory  agencies  and  standard-setters, 
including  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS), Financial Stability Board (FSB), Committee for Payment and Settlement 
Systems (CPSS) and International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) to take active part in 
this  process.  The  Washington  Summit  of  G-20  in  November  2008  was  the  first  global 
initiative  in  this  regard.  Subsequently,  various  committees  were  set  up  to  make  relevant 
recommendations. Amongst the most influential reports on the subject are: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Report  of  the  High  Level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  European  Union 
(Chairman: Jacques de Larosiere)  
The  structure  of  Financial  Supervision:  Approaches  and  Challenges  in  a  Global 
Market Place (Group of Thirty – Chairman: Paul Volcker)  
The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation (The Geneva Report)  
The Turner Review: A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking Crisis (Financial 
Services Authority of the UK)  
The Report of Working Group I of the G-20 on “Enhancing Sound Regulation and 
Strengthening Transparency (G-20)”; and finally  
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (CPSS and IOSCO) 
vi. 
Responding  to  the  unfolding  situation,  international  regulatory  agencies  are  working  on 
strengthening  the  resilience  of  financial  system,  especially  on  bridging  the  gaps  in  the 
regulatory framework revealed by the current crisis. The broad contours of the international 
initiatives  on  regulatory  reforms  envisage  strengthening  the  quality  of  capital,  introducing 
minimum  liquidity  standards  and  leverage  ratio,  countercyclical  measures  in  the  form  of 
capital  buffers  and  forward  looking  provisioning,  developing  a  framework  for  systemically 
important  entities  including  cross-border  resolution  arrangements,  extending  the  regulatory 
perimeter  to  unregulated  pools  of  money,  de-risking  the  OTC  derivatives  trading  through 
central counterparties and new framework for regulating employee compensation within the 
financial sector.  
This  crisis  has  underscored  the  importance  of  effective  contingency  planning  and  open 
cross-border  dialogue  between  authorities.  Lack  of  information  can  quickly  lead  to 
uncoordinated measures to the detriment of all. Under the aegis of the FSB, central banks, 
supervisors  and  Governments  are  maintaining  close  dialogue  and  co-operation  during  this 
period of heightened uncertainty. The overarching objective of the recommendations of the 
above mentioned committees has been to reduce the probability of occurrence of the crisis in 
future and to enable the banking industry to withstand in case crises are to occur. Drawing 
from these recommendations, the major stands of the regulatory reforms underway are:  
i. 
BCBS has formulated what is called the Basel III framework aiming at increase the 
resilience of banks through prescription of a higher quality, quantity, consistency and 
better risk coverage of capital.  
The set of reforms for Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs) are aimed 
at reducing the probability of failure of these large and complex financial institutions 
and at putting in place a robust resolution framework so that the institutions can be 
winded down in an orderly manner, should they fail.  
Regulatory  perimeter  issues  are  being  addressed  by  putting  in  place  a  regulatory 
framework for the shadow banking system.  
Another set of reforms are aimed at strengthening financial market infrastructures by 
addressing issues in the OTC derivatives markets by ensuring that the transactions 
in these markets are reported, centrally cleared and, where possible, settled through 
a central counterparty.  
A macro-prudential overlay to the entire regulatory framework is being proposed to 
address  issues  related  to  procyclicality  and  the  cross  sectional  dimensions  of 
systemic  risks.  Most  importantly,  organized  frameworks  for  pursuit  of  financial 
stability and crisis management, which promote inter agency co-operation, are being 
put in place both nationally and internationally.  
The G-20 Leaders re-emphasized the importance of achieving a single set of high 
quality  global  accounting  standards  and  called  on  the  International  Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) to 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
vii. 
complete  their  convergence  project  in  areas  where  differences  still  persist 
(impairment,  fair  value/amortized  cost  approach  for  classifying  and  measuring 
financial instruments). Similarly, BCBS  and IASB should coordinate for fine tuning 
countercyclical provisioning within modified accounting standards.  
G-20  members,  with  their  resolve  to  align  compensation  with  prudent  risk-taking, 
particularly  at  significant  financial  institutions,  endorsed  the  FSB  Principles  and 
Standards on compensation. In May 2011, the BCBS has published the final report 
on “Range of Methodologies for Risk and Performance Alignment of Remuneration” 
and  in  July  2011,  the  BCBS  in  consultation  with  FSB  has  also  published  Pillar  3 
disclosure requirements for remuneration.  
Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  globally,  these  reforms  are  at  different  stages,  the  broader 
endeavour  has  been  to  achieve  a  greater  degree  of  convergence  in  banking  regulation 
across  jurisdictions  with  a  view  to  address  the  issue  of  regulatory  arbitrage.  A  similar 
international effort is underway with regard to payment and settlement systems. As you are 
all  aware,  the  one  crucial  segment  of  infrastructure  which  functioned  effectively  during  the 
financial crisis was the payment and settlement system infrastructure. Payment Systems are 
the channels through which liquidity risks can get exacerbated and could very quickly turn 
into  credit  and  systemic  risks.  In  this  sphere  of  payment  systems,  the  measures  taken  by 
central  banks  the  world-over  in  strengthening  risk  management  in  payment  systems  by 
introducing Real Time Gross Settlement Systems and encouraging the private sector to set 
up  CLS  Bank  for  PvP  transactions  for  settling  foreign  exchange  transactions  is  indeed 
laudable.  
It was therefore found expedient in the wake of the financial crisis to revisit the existing three 
sets  of  standards  which  have  guided  the  development  of  risk  management  standards  in 
payment systems and securities settlement systems. Together the two international-standard 
setting bodies in this area the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  have  published 
the 
“Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures” (PFMI) in April 2012. The PFMIs replace the 
three existing sets of international standards set out in the Core principles for Systemically 
Important Payment Systems (CPSS, 2001); the Recommendations for Securities Settlement 
Systems  (CPSS-IOSCO,  2001);  and  the  Recommendations  for  Central  Counterparties 
(CPSS-IOSCO,  2004).  The  CPSS  and  IOSCO  have  strengthened  and  harmonized  these 
three  sets  of  standards  by  raising  minimum  requirements,  broadening  the  scope  of  the 
standards  to  cover  additional  risk  factors,  and  extending  the  scope  to  new  types  of  FMIs 
such as Trade Repositories.  
The  24  principles  outlined  in  this  report  are  categorized  into  nine  broad  categories: 
(a) general organization (b) credit and liquidity risk management (c) settlement (d) CSDs and 
exchange-of-value  settlement  systems  (e) default  management  (f) general  business  and 
operational risk management (g) access (h) efficiency and (i) transparency.  
Additionally CPSS-IOSCO has released the (i)  the CPSS-IOSCO Assessment methodology 
for  the  principles for  FMIs  and  the  responsibilities  for  authorities  and  (ii) the  CPSS-IOSCO 
Disclosure framework for FMIs for public consultation with a 60 days comment period. The 
public  consultation  period  ended  June  15,  2012.  Based  on  the  comments  received  the 
Assessment Methodology and Disclosure Framework will be updated and the final versions 
of both the documents will be released in end 2012. The PFMIs, along with the Assessment 
Methodology and the Disclosure Framework will form the bedrock for assessing whether a 
country’s Payment and Securities Settlement Infrastructure are compliant.  
It would not be out of place to mention here that RBI as a member of the Steering Group 
which  drafted  the  Principles  made  contributions  to  this  endeavor.  CPSS  and  IOSCO 
members  are  expected  to  strive  towards  adopting  the  new  PFMI  standards  by  the  end  of 
2012.  We  in  the  Reserve  Bank  with  the  co-operation  of  our  banking  industry  partners  are 
fully  geared  to  meet  this  challenge.  Consistent  with  our  international  commitments  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
G-20 and the Financial Stability Board, on OTC Derivatives Market reforms, we are rapidly 
moving  towards  implementing  a  centralized  clearing  and  settlement  framework  for  IRS 
trades.  The  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Limited  (CCIL)  would  act  as  the  CCP  for  IRS 
trades. Additionally, the industry is moving towards guaranteed settlement of forex forwards 
as well.  
Simultaneously, the Reserve Bank has also authorized CCIL to act as a Trade Repository for 
all forex and interest rate derivatives. This is in addition to its existing function as a Trade 
Repository for Credit Default Swaps.  
What I have provided is a broad-brush canvas of the myriad developments taking place in 
the  international  area  on  harmonization  and  development  of  better  standards  for  risk 
management both in the area of supervision and regulation of banks and financial institutions 
and in payment and settlement systems.  
Regulatory convergence and its impact on India 
The  direct  effect  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  Indian  banks/  financial  sector  was  muted 
because  of  limited  exposure  of  our  banking  industry  to  complex  innovative  products  and 
other  prudential  policies  put  in  place  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  The  relatively  lower 
presence of foreign banks in the Indian banking sector also minimized the direct impact on 
the  domestic  economy.  India  is  exposed  to  the  spill-over  effects  of  the  regulatory  polices 
adopted by the systemically important jurisdictions in the World. Volatile cross-border capital 
flows  are  one  such  manifestation.  To  the  extent  that  these  systemically  important 
jurisdictions harmonize and converge to agreed international best practices, there could be 
positive externalities from the Indian stand point.  
The need for convergence in banking regulation stems from the fact that while banking has 
become global, banking regulation is national. Therefore, addressing the issue of regulatory 
arbitrage  is  at  the  centre-stage  of  policy  concern.  The  international  standard  setters  have 
been  attempting  to  achieve  convergence  by  issuing  broad  principles  that  should  inform 
national  regulatory  frameworks,  which  are  peer  reviewed  under  the  aegis  of  the  Financial 
Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision for ensuring cross-border 
harmonization.  While  formulating  national  regulatory  policies,  national  authorities  are 
expected to exercise constrained discretion on certain aspects.  
As regards adoption of global regulatory reform agenda by India, it needs to be mentioned 
that  a  number  of  measures  based  on  the  principles  that  are  now  accepted  internationally 
were  already  brought  into  practice  even  before  the  recent  crisis.  These  included  stringent 
liquidity requirements, countercyclical prudential measures, not recognizing in Tier I capital 
many items that are now sought to be deducted internationally, amortization of profits from 
sale  of  securitized  assets  to  SPVs  over  the  life  of  the  securities  issued,  not  reckoning 
unrealized  gains  in  earnings  or  in  Tier  I  capital,  etc.  The  same  applies  to  payment  and 
settlement systems as well.  
Notwithstanding the above, the adoption of new principles will no doubt pose challenges in 
certain  areas.  A  concern  which  has  been  raised  globally  is  that  the  adoption  of  Basel  III 
capital  requirements  by  banks  would  push  down  their  RoE  to  an  extent.  This  could  have 
implications for investments into the banking sector. However, it is expected that by looking 
at  the  benefits  of  implementation  of  Basel  III  capital  requirements  by  way  of  increasing 
resilience of the banking system, investors will get adjusted to the new reality. Though Indian 
banks have an undisputed advantage of a strong starting base in the form of a higher CRAR 
with a larger component of Core Equity Capital therein, going ahead raising additional capital 
would be a big challenge. This has to be overcome by carefully calibrated capital planning 
exercise by the management of banks and RBI and the Government of India being the owner 
of public sector banks will have to play a proactive role in this process.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The broader endeavour of global convergence in the banking or payment system regulations 
would, however, have to account for the country-specific idiosyncrasies to enable customized 
adoption of guidance of international standard setters as already recognized in many cases. 
For instance, the BCBS guidance on the conduct of the countercyclical capital buffer for India 
may  require  some  adjustment/changes  as  the  recommended  matric  of  credit-to-GDP  ratio 
could  potentially  adversely  impact  the  structural  drivers  underlying  credit  growth  in  India. 
Thus,  there  may  be  a  need  for  some  adjustments  to  capital  buffer  guidance.  Similarly  the 
impact  of  new  capital  and  margining  rules  for  CCPs  and  OTC  derivatives  may  require  re-
adjustments in India. Again the developments relating to Trade Repositories and Lead Entity 
Indicator approach to trades have implications for India. These aspects are being examined 
within RBI. 
Issues specific to Chhattisgarh 
Economy and banking scenario of the state 
Chhattisgarh  is  one  of  the  youngest  States  of  the  Indian  Nation.  Constituted  on 
1st November, 2000, Chhattisgarh is located in the heart of India, and shares its borders with 
six States. I was very happy to note that Chhattisgarh has featured among the top 5 states in 
GDP growth for the past three years, in which the States GDP growth has been in double 
digits. As on March 31, 2012, there were 36 Commercial Banks (Public Sector and Private 
Sector),  3 Regional  Rural  Banks,  6 District  Central  Co-operative  Banks  and  12 Urban 
Co-operative  Banks,  operating  in  Chhattisgarh  in  addition  to  the  State  Co-operative  Bank 
and State Co-operative Agriculture and Rural Development Bank. The total number of bank 
branches in the State was 1912 as on the same date.  
It  is  gratifying  to  note  that  22 districts  out  of  27  have  achieved  100%  financial  inclusion. 
Remaining districts viz. Rajnandgaon, Dantewada, Bijapur, Narainpur and Sukma suffer from 
Left  Wing  Extremism  (LWE)  and  progress  is  relatively  slower  in  these  districts.  There  has 
been a consistent growth in the deposits and advances of banks over the last five years but 
the  CD  ratio  remains  below  the  expected  level  of  60%.  Another  significant  factor  is  that 
Chhattisgarh  has  been  one  of  the  few  States  where  the  target  for  provision  of  banking 
services  to  villages  having  population  above  2000  has  been  achieved.  There  were 
1050 villages identified for provision of banking services by March 2012.  
Opportunities in Chhattisgarh 
The  State  has  huge  deposits  of  minerals.  It  is one  of  the  few  power  surplus  States  in  the 
country.  The  gender  ratio  is  above  the  national  level  (991:1000).  Literacy  ratio  is  71.04% 
(Male  –  81.45%,  Female  –  60.59%)  and  it  has  improved  considerably  subsequent  to  the 
formation  of  the  State.  Steady  GDP  growth  over  the  past  few  years  has  created  a  good 
investment  climate  in  the  State.  Chhattisgarh  with  its  immense  natural  beauty  has  got  the 
potential to be one of the best tourism destinations in the country.  
Challenges 
The economy of the State is primarily agricultural but a major part of the agricultural land is 
mono-cropping  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  irrigation  facilities.  In  order  to  bring  more  land 
under multi-cropping, minor irrigation schemes should be focused upon. KCCs need to  be 
made available to all eligible farmers and we are quite far from that target. In cases where 
proper land records are not available or cases pertaining to “share croppers/oral lessees”, 
Joint Liability Groups (JLG) need to be formed so that crop loans are made available to these 
farmers.  Farm  mechanization  is  the  need  of  the  hour,  as  without  modern  techniques  and 
implements productivity cannot be enhanced. Chhattisgarh has been an under performer as 
far as Agricultural Term Loans (ATLs). Banks need to bring in more region specific products 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
so that ATL off-take is increased and field level functionaries need to be sensitized that there 
is more to agricultural credit than just crop loans.  
Besides agriculture, MSME is the second largest sector as far as employment is concerned. 
The Empowered Committee on MSME in Chhattisgarh has done a fairly good job and the 
State  has  witnessed  a  steady  growth  in  loans  to  this  sector.  Subsequent  to  the 
recommendations of High Level Task Force by Prime Minister, there is an increased focus 
on Micro and Small Enterprises (MSE). They are present in the State but the spread of these 
industries  is  very  limited  and  keeping  in  view  the  huge  employment  potential  in  these 
industries,  growth  of  MSEs  should  be  facilitated  by  banks  and  Government.  Workshops, 
meetings  and  sensitization  programmes  elaborating  various  Government  sponsored 
schemes, banks schemes and availability of collateral free loans should be organized in each 
block.  
Education loans should be extended to all eligible students. Recently a news item mentioned 
that, more than a hundred students from tribal community residing in LWE areas got selected 
for  engineering  colleges.  It  is  a  great  step  forward  and  to  ensure  that  such  a  process 
continues, the financial sector should provide all possible assistance.  
Financial inclusion has been a key performance area for all of us since the last few years. 
Chhattisgarh has made good progress on this front as 22 out of 27 districts have achieved 
100% financial inclusion and the remaining districts are expected to achieve this target soon. 
Bankers and Government agencies deserve appreciation for having achieved the target of 
provision of banking services to villages having population more than 2000. This is just the 
beginning, we need to go miles and there is no room for complacence. Opening at least one 
bank account in each family and providing banking services through business correspondent 
are  the  initial  steps,  we  need  to  make  sure  that  people  develop  a  habit  of  banking.  Their 
credit, remittance and insurance related needs are met and financial products delivered at 
their  doorstep.  Financial  literacy  and  awareness  plays  a  vital  role  in  holistic  financial 
inclusion. Bankers and Government agencies need to incorporate financial literacy as a part 
of their action plans at all levels. RBI has been organizing Outreach and similar programmes 
but they are just to show the way, it is for the banking industry to take it further to each and 
every  village.  A  proper  schedule  for  such  programmes  may  be  prepared  and  RBI  would 
extend  all  possible  assistance  to  such  initiatives  by  banks.  Financial  Literacy  and  Credit 
Counseling centers are being set up at district levels, the functioning of these FLCCs should 
be  monitored  closely  by  controlling  heads  of  banks  and  necessary  guidance  should  be 
provided.  FLCCs  should  not  function  only  at  their  office  but  they  need  to  step  out  at  rural 
markets, gram sabhas and schools to educate people about financial products.  
Looking at the banking statistics for the past five years it is observed that there is a gradual 
reduction  in  CD  ratio.  For  a  State  featuring  among  the  top  in  economic  growth  it  is  not 
comforting to note that the CD ratio is declining. It might be because of investments being 
made  in  the  State  resulting  in  greater  growth  of  deposits.  It  has  been  mentioned  that  few 
large projects operating in the State have credit limits sanctioned from other States hence 
they cannot be included in advances for Chhattisgarh. Bankers need to address this issue, 
with CBS any customer can access his account from any branch, and this can be utilized by 
bankers in Chhattisgarh to sanction big ticket advances. Banks should have an area specific 
action plan for growth in advances keeping in view the huge potential available in the State. 
The State Government has signed MoUs with some major industries and they are likely to 
setup  their  project  here,  this  opportunity  should  be  grabbed  by  banks  to  boost  up  their 
advances. Business correspondents can also play a  major part in increasing credit; banks 
can  extend  overdraft  facility  to  MGNREGA  workers.  Keeping  in  view  the  huge  number  of 
such beneficiaries the resultant credit growth will be substantial.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concluding observations 
In view of the fact that regulatory failures are among the causes for the recent global financial 
crisis,  globally,  an  endeavour  has  been  underway  to  adopt  regulatory  reform  agenda  and 
thereby  achieve  a  broad  convergence  of  banking  regulation  across  jurisdictions.  The 
prospects  of  regulatory  convergence  could  have  positive  implications  for  India  as  it  could 
potentially  address  the  negative  spill-over  effects  of  regulatory  policies  adopted  by 
systemically important jurisdictions. However, the paradigm of regulatory convergence has to 
accommodate  national  imperatives  of  the  individual  jurisdictions  to  account,  inter  alia,  for 
divergence  in  their  stages  of  economic  development,  status  of  their  financial  markets  and 
infrastructure. I would conclude by summing up the challenge in front of us by saying that the 
need of the hour is to think globally but act locally. In this backdrop it is important that all the 
regions of India are brought to the same level of economic growth and the banking sector 
has  to  play  a  catalystic  role  in  this  endeavour.  I  am  sure  that  the  banking  system  in 
Chhattisgarh will be able to meet this challenge and make this State a very prosperous and 
vibrant one in the coming days.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
