Lawrence Williams: Leveraging central banks’ IT investments for 
strategic advantage 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Lawrence  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Guyana,  at  the 
conference  of  regional  central  banks’  information  systems  specialists,  Bank  of  Guyana, 
Georgetown, 4 June 2012. 
 Chairman 
Deputy Governor 
Banking Manager 
Deputy  Programme  Manager,  Information  and  Communication  Technology,  CARICOM 
Secretariat 
Conference Delegates 
Directors and other Staff members of the Bank of Guyana 
Invitees 
I wish to join with the Chairman in welcoming you to this opening session of the Conference 
of Regional Central Banks’ Information Systems Specialists. A warm welcome is extended to 
those of you visiting Guyana and more so to those of you visiting for the first time. A special 
welcome  is  also  extended  to  Ms.  Jennifer  Britton  who  has  taken  time  off  her  demanding 
schedule to present the Conference Keynote Address. 
The Bank of Guyana deems it a privilege to be hosting the Conference of Regional Central 
Banks’ Information Systems Specialists for the second time in the history of the Group. We 
are grateful for the fact that nine central banks accepted our invitation to participate in this 
conference. I thank you for graciously accepting our invitation. It is my fervent hope that the 
activities over the next five days will provide a good opportunity to engage in the sharing of 
ideas  and  experiences,  as  well  as  to  gain  new  insights  that  would  be  beneficial  to  the 
wellbeing of your respective information technology functions in particular and, by extension, 
the institutions you represent. 
The  theme  of  this  conference  “Leveraging  Central  Banks’  IT  Investments  for  Strategic 
Advantage” is apt given the increasing reliance of central banks on information technology 
services  to  support  their  operations.  Information  Technology  competes  with  other  areas of 
the central bank’s activities for the allocation of scarce resources. It is only proper, therefore, 
that the investments made in the domain of information technology must be able to deliver a 
return that meets or exceeds that which would have been provided by the other alternative 
avenues  to  which  those  resources  could  have  been  applied.  In  the  final  analysis,  the 
information technology function is required to contribute to the organisation achieving specific 
outcomes  in  pursuit  of  its  mission  in  an  ever-changing  local,  regional  and  international 
landscape  by  connecting  personnel,  business  processes  and  data.  I  believe  that  these 
expectations are shared by all our central banks in the region. 
Putting  together  an  information  technology  services  organisation  can  be  a  considerable 
undertaking that requires the investment of significant levels of financial resources to procure 
the  right  people,  processes  and  technology.  For  this  reason,  from  a  management 
perspective,  it  is  imperative  that  the  investment  gives  the  organisation  value  through 
improved  productivity  and  efficiency,  enhanced  customer  experience,  reduced  costs, 
substantial risk mitigation, better compliance and business continuity. 
At the Bank of Guyana, we have made considerable investments in the area of information 
technology over the years and continue to do so. Despite their cost magnitude, we persist 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
with these investments because we believe that once properly leveraged they will enable the 
organisation  to  do  more  with  less  by:  (i)  increasing  staff  efficiency  and  productivity; 
(ii) strengthening  relationships  with  the  organisation’s  customers;  and  (iii)  fostering  more 
effective collaboration with various business partners to quicken the speed at which data that 
is required for decision-making can be provided. In striving to achieve these goals, we are 
exposed  to  the  likelihood  of  being  affected  by  the  major  risks  that  are  attendant  with 
information technology use. Consequently, the institution continues to allocate resources to: 
(a)  make  its  information  systems  and  the  supporting  technical  infrastructure  more  reliable 
and resilient; and (b) protect the integrity of the institution’s data assets.  
Achievement of the foregoing objectives is heavily dependent on all information technology-
related activities and investments being channelled in a manner that is consistent with the 
organisation’s goals and needs – the so called IT/business alignment challenge that appears 
to be so elusive in many cases. Here, from a management oversight perspective, one cannot 
overemphasise the necessity of embracing governance mechanisms that are fit for purpose. 
To  remain  relevant,  the  information  technology  function  must  continually  evaluate  and  if 
necessary enhance its existing capability to ensure that it can meet the requirements of core 
business  processes  while  being  in  tune  with  the  current  and  envisaged  directions  of  the 
organisation.  As  needs  and  roles  change,  the  organisation  must  be  able  to  customise  its 
information environment and modify its processes in response. This practice forms a good 
base to pursue new information technology initiatives. 
Allow me to share with you several prescriptive pointers which I am sure that you have heard 
several  times  before  and  are  probably  guided  by  these  and  similar  practices  in  your 
respective central banks. Notwithstanding, the familiarity, I believe that it is appropriate for 
me to repeat them at a forum such as this. During the course of this week, as you deliberate 
on  how  to  ensure  that  your  organisation’s  information  technology  investments  remain 
appropriate,  I  encourage  you  to  be  guided  by  the  following  pointers  which  are  self-
explanatory: 
• 
Understand  the  value  of  your  organisation’s  data  and  tie  information  technology 
investments to the value of that data. 
Tie information technology investments to factors that provide strategic value. 
Understand the business issues that affect the organisations you serve to the point 
that they become second nature. 
Develop  expertise  in  areas  of  business  so  that  you  can  better  contribute  to  the 
enhancement  of  the  various  business  functions  in  your  organisation  through  the 
application of information technology. 
Remain in a continuous state of dialogue with various areas of the organisation to 
facilitate  shared  learning  that  can  eventually  translate  in  the  deployment  of 
information  technology  in  a  manner  that  is  in  line  with  the  organisation’s  strategic 
directions. 
Capture  the  value  of  information  technology-related  projects,  and  adjust  these 
projects wherever necessary, to ensure that they deliver promised value. 
Create a learning environment where the information technology function and other 
areas  of  the  organisation  provide  feedback  to  each  other  which  is  then  used  to 
inform  information  technology  action  plans  that  are  intended  to  provide  strategic 
value. 
Consider the business implications of systems. How could the technology be used 
to execute/enable important business processes? 
      In  closing,  I  wish  to  reiterate  my  expectation  that  the  presentations,  deliberations  and 
workshop over the next five days would equip you with greater insights that will enable you to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
contribute  to  your  organisations  making  better  use  of  their  existing  and  future  information 
technology investments. Best wishes for fruitful deliberations. May your stay here with us be 
a  happy  and  memorable  one!  To  our  visitors  I  trust  that  you  will  use  every  opportunity  to 
experience the warmth of Guyanese hospitality. 
Welcome once again to all of you. 
I  now  declare  this  22nd  Conference  of  Regional  Central  Banks’  Information  Systems 
Specialists open. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
