G Padmanabhan: Managing currency risk in the new normal 
Special address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Iforex Leaders Summit, Mumbai, 28 July 2012. 
 Assistance provided by S/shri G Mahalingam, Sudarsana Sahoo and S Rath gratefully acknowledged.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am happy to be here today and share with you my perspectives on this interesting theme of 
the Seminar. It does take a lot of courage to coin anything as “normal” these days. 
What is “New Normal”? 
1. 
Mr.  Mohamed  El-Erian  and  Mr.  Bill  Gross  of  Pacific  Investment  Management 
Company (PIMCO)coined the phrase “New Normal” during early 2009 that basically signifies 
a  downward  shift  in  potential  growth  of  the  advanced  economies  post-crisis  and  the 
consequent change in the global economic order with the emerging economies moving to the 
centre  stage.  The  phrase  captured  the  imagination  of  the  world  and  started  to  be  used  in 
varied contexts to broadly underscore regime shifts and hard transformation. 
What is “New Normal” in the context of currency risk?  
2. 
The current level of INR-USD exchange rate is being talked as “New Normal”. Some 
people  also  cite  the  level  of  volatility  that  INR-USD  exchange  rate  has  been  witnessing 
during the recent period as “New Normal”. The Rupee has witnessed sharp depreciation and 
increased volatility during the recent period driven by both global and domestic factors. The 
episode  began  after the  historic  downgrade  of USA  by  S&P  in  August 2011  that  triggered 
heightened risk aversion and sell-off of assets of emerging economies including India by the 
foreign institutional investors (FIIs). The risk aversion environment has further heightened on 
escalating euro-zone concerns and falling global growth. The weakness in macro-economic 
fundamentals, bottleneck issues relating to infrastructure and concerns over implementation 
of GAAR have dented India’s appeal as an investment destination leading to further fall in 
capital inflows. Apart from the growth perception of the Indian economy, risk appetite of the 
global investors and growth prospects of competing economies have driven the magnitude 
and direction of capital flows to India. Thus, the flows are largely autonomous and remain 
beyond the reach of conventional policy instruments. On the other hand, the trade balance 
deteriorated despite depreciation of the rupee mainly due to relatively price inelastic nature of 
some of India’s imports, as well as a slowdown in exports reflecting falling global demands. 
The current account deficit (CAD) significantly widened during FY 2012–13 to touch the high 
of 4% of GDP. The widening of CAD in the backdrop of large decline in capital flows exerted 
severe downward pressure on Rupee with consequent volatility. 
3. 
In this context, it has to be appreciated that the volatility regime has undergone a 
significant  shift  and  volatility  in  most  of the  asset  classes  as  well  as  segments  of financial 
markets has risen significantly since the onset of the global financial crisis in August 2007. 
The  forex,  equity,  bond,  and  commodity  markets  have  been  extremely  volatile  during  the 
period  as  global  economic  outlook  remains  “unusually  uncertain”  making  it  difficult  for 
economic agents to make optimal and informed decisions. In the foreign exchange market, 
the  direction  of  Rupee’s  movement  has  remained  largely  in  sync  with  that  of  several 
emerging  market  currencies  and  more  so  with  some  of  the  major  currencies  but  the 
magnitude of depreciation has been far more pronounced. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
4. 
The  so  called  “New  Normal”  in  the  dynamics  of  INR-USD  exchange  rate  also 
reflects greater influence of the global financial markets on the domestic foreign exchange 
market mainly due to India’s growing trade and financial integration with the rest of the world. 
India’s  two  way  trade  (merchandize  exports  plus  imports),  as  a  proportion  of  GDP,  was 
40.7 per cent in 2008–09, the crisis year, up from 19.6 per cent in 1998–99. The ratio of total 
external transactions (gross current account flows plus gross capital account flows) to GDP  
– an indicator of both trade and financial integration – was 112 per cent in 2008–09 up from 
44 per cent in 1998–99. 
5. 
There is another fundamental aspect that we cannot lose sight of. Indian Rupee has 
to  adjust  its  value  vis-a-vis  other  major  foreign  currencies  to  reflect  inflation  and  growth 
differentials. In a market ruled by multiplicity of pressures, it is too optimistic to expect this 
adjustment  to  always  happen  in  a  smooth  and  secular  manner  spread  across  the  time 
horizon. The experience of the recent past should carry an important and valuable lesson for 
all of us. Any stability over an extended period of time could be a harbinger of volatility. If so, 
too  much  stability,  instead  of  breeding  complacency  among  corporates,  should  actually 
increase the state of alertness. 
Managing currency risk under the “New Normal” 
6. 
Excessive  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  makes  it  difficult  for  economic  agents  to 
make  optimal  inter-temporal  decisions.  The  economic  agents,  therefore,  need  to  properly 
understand  and  measure  the  nature  of  currency  risk  embedded  in  their  business  and  use 
appropriate derivative instruments to hedge their currency risks. The derivative instruments 
help  corporates  to  convert  uncertain  future  cash  flows  to  certain  ones  so  that  they  can 
optimise business decisions based on predictable revenues and costs. Reserve Bank, over 
the years has expanded the menu of derivative instruments, both OTC as well as exchange 
traded ones that has provided greater flexibility to the market participants in managing their 
currency risk. 
7. 
The  derivative  products  chosen  should  be  consistent  with  the  users’  business, 
financial operations, skill and sophistication, internal policies as well as risk appetite. Reserve 
Bank has cast responsibility on banks for carrying out suitability and appropriateness tests 
while  transacting  a  derivative  instrument  with  the  corporates  and  also  ensuring  that  the 
corporate  has  appropriate  risk  management  framework.  Though  the  RBI  has  imposed  the 
responsibility for due diligence and appropriateness of a derivative contract on the banks, the 
end-user corporates do have a great responsibility in this regard. Identification, measurement 
and management of risks should be an integral part of the corporate governance structure. 
Leaving risks unidentified and hence unmanaged is as much a sub-optimal phenomenon as 
using ill-understood products for managing risks. Inadequate understanding of the risks and 
future obligations under the derivative contracts has led to many legal disputes in the recent 
past.  
8. 
The  hedging  activities  of the  corporates  should  be  an  integral  part  of their  overall 
risk management policy and mechanism. There should be a board approved written policy in 
place which define the overall framework within which hedging activities should be conducted 
and  the  risks  controlled.  Such  policy  must  clearly  lay  down,  inter-alia,  guidelines  on  risk 
identification, management and control, prudent accounting and disclosure norms and must 
be capable of ascertaining the mark to market positions on an on-going basis. It is desirable 
that the board of directors and senior management should understand the basic attributes of 
different  forex  derivative  products  and  the  suitability  of  these  products  for  hedging  their 
underlying currency risks. It is also necessary to ensure that clear lines of responsibility and 
accountability are established for the hedging activity through use of derivatives. 
9. 
recent measures undertaken by Reserve Bank. 
Now let me spend a few minutes to reflect upon the current forex markets and the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Availability of hedging instruments 
10. 
The  availability  of  hedging  instruments  was  never  a  major  concern  for  the  Indian 
forex  markets.  Instruments  such  as  forwards,  swaps  and  options  have  been  available  to 
market participants since FERA days with cross-currency options available from 1993. In the 
OTC segment the last entry was that of FCY-INR rupee options way back in 2003. All the 
instruments  have  become  well  entrenched  in  the  market  with  different  segments  of 
corporates showing preference for different instruments.  
11. 
The recent entrant into the market, currency futures in 2008, has not only generated 
a  good  bit  of  interest  from  participants  but  also  queered  the  pitch  a  bit  on  account  of  the 
different  regulatory  environment  it  has  been  subjected  to.  First  launched  on  NSE  it  was 
subsequently  available  on  two  other  exchanges  (MCX  &  USE).  European  style  option  on 
USD-INR  pairs  was  launched  on  NSE  and  USE  in  October  2010.  While  presence  of  an 
underlying exposure is an essential requirement in the OTC segment, no such requirement is 
in place for the exchange traded derivatives segment. This has created two different markets 
for the same underlying currency pair namely USD-INR. On account of having a sub-set of 
participants common to both the markets, the volatility of one market gets imposed on the 
other. To deal with this, even if partially, position limits of banks were revised on exposures 
to exchange traded products. 
Liquidity in the market  
12. 
As far as liquidity in the forex markets is concerned, the turnover in the markets has 
increased  many  fold  during  the  last  ten  years  and  bid-offer  spreads  have  narrowed 
considerably in the same period. This not only reflects the substantial increase in global trade 
and  financial  interaction  with  the  outside  world  but  also  the  increasing  awareness  of  the 
corporates to foreign exchange risk and use of derivatives in managing such risks. The forward 
markets in India also are very liquid up to one year. The only concern in the market being the 
liquidity  of  the  long  term  forward  market  beyond  say  one  year  or  two  year.  However,  this 
concern can be negated practically by rolling over a short-term (say one year) contract till the 
maturity of the exposure which basically replaces the volatility risk of the spot exchange rate 
with the volatility risk of forward premia which is confined to a far narrower range. 
13. 
The liquidity took a slight beating from December last year when we imposed certain 
restrictions on the markets to curb the volatility that we witnessed. More on it later, but it was 
heartening  to  see  the  turnover  pick  up  again  in  recent  months  despite  the  fact  that  the 
restrictions continue to be in place. 
Flexibility in cancellation/rebooking/roll-over for genuine transactions 
14. 
Much has been spoken / debated / argued / discussed about the flexibility to cancel 
and rebook transactions and also on the facility of rolling over transactions in recent times. 
What is required is to put in perspective the raison d’être for these flexibilities. The point that I 
want  to  highlight  here  is  that  the  current  foreign  exchange  regulatory  regime  permits 
corporate  to  use forex  derivatives  for  hedging  their  underlying  exposure  only.  Cancellation 
and  subsequent  rebooking  were  allowed  for  all  transactions  undertaken  to  hedge  current 
account exposures and capital account exposures up to one year. This flexibility was allowed 
for  the  corporate  to  dynamically  manage  the  foreign  exchange  risk  the  corporate  was 
exposed  to  depending  on  the  medium  to  long  term  view  of  the  corporate  on  the  currency 
movements  and  not  to  speculate  on  the  intra-day  volatility.  However,  there  have  been 
instances in the recent past wherein the flexibilities in hedging provided by the Reserve Bank 
have been misused by the corporates with speculative intent for generating profits that had 
exacerbated the volatility of INR-USD exchange rate in the recent period. Finally, Reserve 
Bank was constrained to resort to administrative measures in December 2011 to curb such 
speculative practices.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Recent changes made to the Guidelines 
What are the changes? 
15. As stated earlier, global factors have been increasingly having an impact on the volatility 
of  the  forex  markets  with  significant  pass  through  of  global  volatility.  Moreover  what  is 
accorded as on add on facility during periods of stability needs to be reviewed during bouts 
of  extreme  volatility.  Accordingly,  to  ensure  that  such  disruptions  are  not  exacerbated  by 
action of domestic participants Reserve Bank had to act by taking several measures to calm 
the market. 
Why were these necessary? 
16. 
restrict myself to the measures affecting corporates.  
• 
As this gathering represents more of corporate interests rather than banks, I would 
the  same 
Restricting  cancellation  and  rebooking  –  It  was  observed  from  the  various 
transactions undertaken by corporates with banks that the turnover of transactions 
increased  during  volatile  periods  and  most  of  the  increase  was  on  account 
corporates  undertaking  a  hedge  and  reversing 
intra-day.  While 
undertaking a hedge in a volatile market stands to reason, reversing it on the same 
day does not in any way reflect the medium to long term view of the corporate. It will 
be well appreciated by this discerning audience that any position undertaken to take 
advantage of the one way movement intensifies the move adding to the demand / 
supply pressures in the market. While it is well appreciated when the move reflects 
the hedging intention of the corporate, it does not augur well for the market volatility 
if the same is undertaken to speculate on the market movements. 
It is a well known fact that given the Rupee’s strength in recent history (though not 
very recent), Indian importers generally stay unhedged or have a very small hedge 
ratio. Even corporates who have both import and export exposures prefer to have 
their import exposures unhedged while almost fully utilising their export exposures. 
The same approach is followed in case of probable exposures also. In the current 
depreciating trend of Rupee, these excess unutilised limits are a cause of concern 
when used for speculation. 
The  past  performance  facility  was  made  available  to  corporates  in  addition  to  the 
facility based on actual exposures so as to allow them to plan ahead for managing 
their foreign currency exposures. Both facilities together amounted to almost double 
the exposures of the corporates and without any delivery mandate on either could 
be / were used for speculative purpose.  
  Does it really constrain the corporates in managing forex risk or were the leeway given 
earlier enhancing the volatility and being misutilised? 
17. 
Let me emphasise here that the facility of rolling over the transactions continue to be 
in place to provide the corporate flexibility to alter the tenor of the hedge depending on the 
liquidity of the tenor, view on the forward premia, availability of pricing and also to match the 
tenor  of  the  transaction  to  that  of  the  underlying  exposure  in  case  delayed  payments, 
uncertain maturity date (for ex. in case of past performance) etc. 
18. 
Hence,  although  the  restrictions  imposed  take  away  certain  leeway  provided  in 
managing  the  forex  risk,  it  in  no  way  restricts  the  ability  of  the  corporate  to  do  so.  In  a 
manner of speaking, it only takes away the additional volatility that the P&L of the corporate 
was subject to on account of forex trading.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Reserve Bank’s philosophy on management of forex risk 
19. 
Reserve  Bank  has  always  advocated  for  better management  of forex  risks  by  the 
corporates.  From  making  available  different  kinds  of  instruments  to  providing  enabling 
conditions / regulations to effectively use such instruments in managing the foreign exchange 
risk, Reserve Bank has always striven to provide corporates with various choices.  
20. 
Further, Reserve Bank has been following a consultative approach while formulating 
new guidelines or amending old ones. The comments / suggestions received from various 
stakeholders are analysed and incorporated in to the guidelines if found suitable. 
21. 
Reserve Bank believes that corporates should be concentrating more on their core 
business  to  generate  returns  rather  than  looking  to  generate  alpha  from  diversifying  into 
trading in forex markets. As my fellow Senior colleague, Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director 
aptly observed, and I quote, “risk management is not about eliminating, or which is the same 
thing as completely hedging risk, but about first determining, like one’s pain threshold, risk 
tolerance threshold and then aligning an entity’s existing risk, be it currency, interest rate or 
commodity price risk, with its risk tolerance threshold. Having said that it would also be  in 
order to have a sense of how risk itself is defined and measured. Risk is uncertainty of future 
outcomes  such  as  cash  flows.  In  financial  theory  and  practice,  it  is  typically  measured  by 
annualised standard deviation of a time-series of percentage changes in asset prices. While 
courting financial risks in pursuit of financial returns is the staple and dharma of banking and 
finance  industry,  it  is  not  so  for  industrial  and  manufacturing  businesses!  The  staple  and 
dharma  of  business  and  industry  is  courting  their  normal  core  business  risks  in  pursuit  of 
delivering a market-competitive return on equity to shareholders”. There cannot be a better 
advice  for  the  Corporates  trying  to  come  to  grips  with  the  “new  normal”  in  the  changed 
financial market realities. 
22. 
It is therefore not only in the interest of market stability but also corporate balance 
sheet that the derivative products are used more responsibly for risk containment, more so 
on  account  of  the  increased  volatility  in  the  markets,  so  that  they  serve  the  purpose  they 
were designed for.  
23. 
Related to hedging from the accounting aspect is the issue of marking to market all 
the outstanding derivative contracts i.e. recording the value of outstanding financial contracts 
at fair value. In recent times, given the volatility  of Rupee much press coverage has been 
directed towards the Marked To Market (MTM) losses of corporates. The MTM is dynamic in 
nature and changes in line with market movements and represents the replacement cost of 
the  derivative  contracts.  These  accounting  losses  should  therefore  be  looked  at  in  totality 
along  with  the  economic  rationale  of  the  hedges  undertaken  wherein  the  corporate  had 
decided to lock in to a definite price and to forego the inherent forex risk. 
Conclusion 
24. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  I  have  attempted  to  explain  what  is  new  normal  in  the 
currency  market,  how  risk  management  needs  to  be  reviewed  and  adjusted  in  the  new 
scenario and responsibility of the Boards in putting in place appropriate policies to manage 
risks. I have also flagged the RBI moves to bring orderliness in the market and shared with 
you the thinking process that went behind these measures. In concluding, I want to leave the 
thought that we expect greater responsibility on the part of corporates in managing their risks 
which  calls  for  greater  understanding  of  their  actions  from  a  macro  perspective.  In  other 
words,  in  these  extraordinary  times  it  is  essential  for  the  central  bank  to  think  like  the 
corporates  and  for  the  corporates  to  attempt  to  think  like  the  central  bank  or  at  least 
understand their actions. 
25. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
