Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana, 
29 May 2012. 
 Today,  on  29  May  2012,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments,  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged at 4.25%. This decision reflects the Supervisory Council’s opinion that the actual 
monetary  conditions  are  adequate  to  meet  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  inflation  target  in  the 
medium  run.  It  holds  the  key  interest  rate  at  a  record  low,  thereby  maintaining  the  strong 
stimulating  nature  of  monetary  policy,  in  order  to  boost  aggregate  demand  and  economic 
growth.  This  decision  also  reflects  the  heightened  uncertainty  deriving  from  the  external 
economic environment and, particularly, from the recent economic developments in Greece.  
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  topics 
discussed at today’s meeting.  
 Annual inflation marked 1.6% in April, continuing to pursue an upward trajectory over the last 
two months and approaching the lower limit of the target band. After marking a minimum low 
in  February,  the  rising  trend  of  inflation  was  expected  and  communicated  by  the  Bank  of 
Albania. It reflects, to a large extent, the gradually subsiding supply-side shocks on inflation. 
The decelerated rise in primary commodity prices in the global markets, the low inflation in 
Albania’s trading partners and the stable exchange rate have generated reduced imported 
inflation rates.  
However,  despite  increasing,  inflation  remains  low  due  to  the  incomplete  utilisation  of 
capacities in the economy, which is reflected in weak pressures on the rise of wages and 
producer  prices.  At  the  same  time,  economic  agents’  inflation  expectations  are  low  and 
growth of money is in line with the demand of the economy for money. In addition, the absent 
rise in regulated prices has contributed to the low inflation rate over 2012.  
While making an analysis of the economic developments, the Supervisory Council noted that 
the  reappearance  of  stress  in  the  global  financial  markets  in  the  current  month  has 
heightened the uncertainties in these markets markedly, being translated into more strained 
financing  conditions  for  the  public  and  private  sector.  The  fall  of  foreign  demand  and  the 
higher perceived risk for the entire area have started to affect the performance of economic 
activity in the countries of the region.  
The  statistical  information  available  for  the  first  quarter  of  2012  provides  evidence  for  a 
sluggish  economic  activity.  This  performance,  among  others,  has  been  also  affected  by 
temporary  factors  arising  from  the  severe  weather  conditions.  However,  the  analysis  of 
available indicators reaches the conclusion that both domestic and foreign demand remain 
sluggish.  
After recovering in the last quarter of 2011, private consumption slowed down in the first 
quarter of 2012. The performance of imports of consumer goods and the low annual growth 
of  VAT  revenues  suggest  sluggish  consumer  demand  over  the  quarter  under  review.  This 
assessment  is  also  supported  by  qualitative  data  obtained  from  consumer,  business  and 
banking sector surveys. The dynamic of quantitative and qualitative indicators also suggests 
a sluggish performance of investment.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Against a background of low demand and spare production capacities, and in the presence 
of uncertainties for the developments at home and abroad, businesses have postponed their 
new  investment-related  decisions.  In  addition,  the  contribution  of  public  investment  to 
aggregate demand growth was negative in the first quarter of 2012.  
The Government pursued a prudent fiscal policy in the first four months of the present year, 
translated into the annual reduction of the budget deficit by 28% during this period. Budget 
revenues  continue  to  record  moderate  annual  growth  rates,  reflecting  the  performance  of 
economic  activity  and  providing  evidence  for  the  mutual  impact  between  the  public  and 
private  sector  dynamics.  The  Bank  of  Albania,  however,  points  out  that  pursuing  a  fiscal 
policy  oriented  toward  the  long-term  sustainability  of  budget  and  public  debt  figures  will 
provide clear medium- and long-term benefits to the Albanian economy, in the form of lower 
risk  premiums,  greater  room  for  private  sector  financing  and,  ultimately,  lower  financing 
costs.  This  policy  is  also  in  line  with  the  developments  in  domestic  and  foreign  financial 
markets.  
Foreign demand continued to contribute to the expansion of the economy in the first quarter 
of  2012,  albeit  to  a  markedly  lower  extent.  The  sluggish  increase  in  exports  remains  a 
concern as long as it affects the performance of the economy during 2012. It also provides 
evidence for Albania’s strong reliance on certain geographical markets or products.  
The analysis of monetary data suggests that the performance of monetary indicators was in 
line with the developments in the real economy. Money supply maintained the growth rate of 
end-2011, recording in March an annualized growth of 8.8%. Our analyses suggest that its 
growth  is  in  line  with  the  demand  of  the  economy  for  real  money,  signalling  contained 
monetary inflationary pressures in the medium run. Lending to the private sector recorded an 
annual  growth  of  9.0%  in  March.  Its  performance,  particularly  in  the  recent  months,  was 
determined  by  the  low  private  sector  demand  for  credit  and  the  cautious  bank  lending 
behaviour.  
Financial markets were liquid and stable. Interbank market rates dropped significantly in April 
and the trading volume in this market increased. The pass-through of easing monetary policy 
signals persisted in the lek deposit market as well, as reflected by the lower interest rates.  
Government security yields in the primary market remained at similar levels to the previous 
month.  Their  increase  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012  reflects  the  developments  in  supply  and 
demand-side structural factors, hence signalling no added inflation premiums. Interest rates 
on lek-denominated loans did not fully respond to the easing monetary policy signals due to 
the higher credit risk premiums in particular branches of the economy.  
New information supports our previous projection that the GDP growth will remain below its 
potential in the quarters ahead, owing to the moderate contribution of foreign demand, lack of 
fiscal  stimulus  and  sluggish  domestic  demand.  The  two  main  components  of  the  latter, 
consumption  and  private  investment,  remain  slow.  The  incomplete  utilisation  of  capacities, 
coupled with the slow rise in wages and unit labour costs, are expected to exert contained 
inflationary pressures in the period ahead.  
Economic  agents’  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  close  to  the  target.  They,  however, 
may  be  subject  to  the  response  to  global  developments  in  the  short  run.  The  gradually 
subsiding supply-side shocks in the period ahead, the termination of base effects’ impact and 
the extended effect of the Bank of Albania’s stimulating policy are expected to be followed by 
an rising inflation trend, thereby approaching the Bank of Albania’s target in the medium run.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  continuously  eased  the  monetary  policy  in  the  recent  months, 
aiming  at  meeting  the  inflation  target  in  the  medium  run,  and  keeping  the  inflation 
expectations  and  risk  premiums  in  the  economy  under  control.  This  policy  has  aimed  at 
responding to a situation where the main obstacle to the recovery of private sector demand 
and foreign direct investment relates to the uncertainty for the future and approach to risk, in 
the short and medium run. We consider that the provision of a cautious monetary stimulus, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
conditioned  by  the  control  of  risk  premiums  and  safeguard  of  financial  stability,  is  major 
contribution the Bank of Albania can make to the stable and long-term economic growth in 
Albania.  
 Based on the analysis of the information set out above, the Supervisory Council holds that 
the  risks  around  the  expected  inflation  trajectory  remain  balanced.  On  the  demand-side, 
below-potential economic growth will continue to generate low inflationary pressures, while 
supply-side shocks are also expected to remain contained. At the end of discussions, the 
Supervisory Council decided to keep the  key interest rate unchanged at 4.25%.  This 
decision aims to create adequate monetary conditions for meeting the inflation target in the 
medium run. It also provides proper support to boost aggregate demand.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
