K C Chakrabarty: ICT based financial inclusion – carving a new path 
through innovation 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Inaugural Plenary session of the 7th BANKing TECH Summit 2012, Mumbai, 28 June 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Radha Somakumar in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri N. Chandrasekaran, Chairman-CII BANKing TECH Summit 2012 and CEO & Managing 
Director,  Tata  Consultancy  Services  Ltd;  Shri  Pratip  Chaudhuri,  Chairman,  State  Bank  of 
India;  Shri  Pradeep  Bhargava,  Chairman  –  CII  Western  Region;  Mr  Manoj  K.  Kashyap, 
Executive Director, Pricewaterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd.; Mr Dev Ranjan Mukherjee, Director, 
CII; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
When the financial sector is going through perhaps the most chequered phase of its history 
and  the  usefulness  of  financial  innovation  is  itself  under  extensive  debate  globally,  it  is 
heartening  to  be  participating  in  a  seminar  which  is  endeavoring  to  carve  a  new  path  for 
Indian  banking  through  innovations.  Congratulations  to  the  organizers  for  choosing  this 
contemporary but forward looking topic. 
Let me begin by referring to a recent report by the World Economic Forum titled “Rethinking 
Negative  Innovation  –  Reducing  Negative  Outcomes  while  Retaining  the  Benefits”.  The 
report attempts to answer certain fundamental questions: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Is financial innovation needed? 
There is a thin line of demarcation between innovation and violation. 
What  is  needed to  ensure  that financial  innovation  better  emphasizes  the  positive 
outcomes and reduces adverse consequences? 
After the financial crisis, while it has become fashionable to condemn financial innovation in 
toto, we must recognize that without continued financial innovation, the financial markets in 
both  developed  and  developing  nations  will  perform  below  their  potential.  But  for  financial 
innovation  to  result  in  benefits,  it  needs  to  focus  not  on  the  treasury  incomes  but  must, 
instead, have customer orientation. When innovations have focused on better alignment of 
interests  between  the  bank  and  its  customers,  they  have  always  resulted  in  win-win 
situations.  I  can  say  that  most  of  the  innovations  in  payment  and  settlement  systems, 
particularly those which deal with one-time customer interface, had this customer focus. The 
results are visible across the globe. The only segment of the financial markets that came out 
unscathed  during  the  crisis  has  been  the  payment  and  settlement  system.  However,  the 
financial sector has not succeeded in innovating to bring in efficiency in products that engage 
customers  on  a  life  cycle  basis.  Finally,  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  financial  innovation 
cannot outpace the innovations in the real sector. 
Customer-centric technology 
You have assembled here to chart a new path for innovation. However, let us bear in mind 
that for innovation to be successful, it has to necessarily be customer focussed. In a country 
like India, where access to financial services remains an issue, Innovation should particularly 
focus  on  financial  inclusion  and  on  the  small  and  marginalized,  but  viable  sections  of  the 
society.  What  makes  innovations  feasible  at  a  rapid  pace  today  vis-a-vis  say,  the  last 
century? Undoubtedly, it is the advent of technology. But, as I have said in the past also, in 
the  financial  sector,  for  technology  and  innovation  to  be  of  true  value  to  the  customers,  it 
must lead to better customer service in three ways (a) faster and hassle free (b) safer and 
error  free,  and  most  importantly  (c)  easier  access  but  cheaper.  Have  these  happened?  If 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
asked to vote, I may cast a half vote to (a) abstain from vote to (b) and cast a negative vote 
to (c). Let me amplify. 
What  is  the  most  important  prerequisite  of  a  computer  or  an  electronic  device  from  the 
customer’s perspective and from an inclusion perspective? To me it is the standardization. 
Has  it  happened  across  banking  services?  Let  me  start  with  what  is  termed  as  the  best 
financial innovation of the recent times – the ATMs. Do they result in faster dispensation of 
cash? A definite “yes”. Is it hassle free? To me, “No”. What are the problems faced by the 
aam admi? The problem starts with the standardization of ATMs. Some swallow your card, 
some require only swiping, some reckon paise when you key in the amount, some do not, 
some drop the cash on to a tray, some do not , some retract the cash if you are not prompt, 
some require keys to be pressed, others have a touch-screen. All these are confusing to the 
man on the street. Why do we not think of standardization even in this basic product? When 
this  is  the  case  with  the  most  basic  of  the  products,  issues  arising  from  lack  of 
standardization  are  more  serious  in case  of  other  products. There  is  no  standardization  of 
even  the  account  numbering  convention  across  the  banking  system.  One  Core  Banking 
System of a bank is so different from another that a customer changing a bank will have to 
de-learn and re-learn banking operations all over again. 
Coming to (b), the attention paid by the banks to database migration has been so casual that 
the full benefits of computerization and technology are yet to be reaped. Is it not an irony for 
the  banks  to  claim  that  NPA  levels  in  a  particular  period  went  up  as  they  moved  over  to 
“system generated” NPA computation? As far as the customer is concerned, the systems fail 
at the most inappropriate time. Let us go back to ATMs. Even today, we continue to receive a 
large number of complaints on account of malfunctioning of ATMs. Is the incubation period 
for the ATMs installed by banks not yet over? Should the system continue to run based on 
fear of penalties for inefficient customer service? Or would White label ATMs, for which RBI 
has recently issued exhaustive guidelines, provide encouraging solutions to these issues? 
Technology and consumer protection 
One  developing  concern  is  the  increasing  number  of  frauds  in  our  electronic  banking 
payment scenario. As the banking and payment space becomes increasingly ubiquitous, the 
challenge is to maintain the quality of security at the highest level in the financial sector. In 
the recent survey conducted by the Bank for International Settlements, 55% of the financial 
market  infrastructures  surveyed  indicated  that  cyber  attacks  are  increasing  on  account  of 
phishing,  weaker  credentials  /  passwords,  trusted  insiders,  denial  of  service  attacks,  etc. 
Technology  should  result  in  reduction  in  risk,  not  otherwise.  This  situation  warrants  huge 
investments in IT security and I would urge the banks and the IT companies to work together 
in this regard. 
Another  angle  to  this  issue  is  the  protection  that  a  customer  has  to  be  assured  in  the 
electronic  banking  scenario. The  Reserve  Bank  expects  banks  to  put  in  place  checks  and 
balances  that  provide  confidence  and  protection  to  a  genuine  customer  against  frauds. 
Otherwise, the credibility of the entire system will come under scrutiny. The customer should 
be  afforded the  same kind  of  protection  in  an  electronic  transaction  that  he  now  gets  in  a 
paper-based transaction. The customer is not held liable if a signature is forged, whereas he 
is  held  responsible  when  a  fraudulent  transaction  takes  place  electronically  and  the  onus 
rests on the customer to prove that it was so. Is this fair? Will such a scenario encourage 
electronic transactions? We need to find a solution which provides a near zero liability to the 
customer. 
Let me now turn to the issue of technology and cost. Before I speak my mind on the issue, let 
me make it very clear that RBI does not support the argument that cash transactions in this 
country will disappear rapidly or that all paper based transactions would turn electronic if the 
financial sector was to offer electronic transactions free of cost. In fact, we firmly believe that 
anything  that  is  offered  free  of  charge  can  never  be  scaled  up  and  that  it  cannot  become 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
robust  and  efficient  unless  it  offers  commercial  viability  to  those  who  offer  the  product  / 
service.  Having  said  that,  I  also  do  not  support  the  principle,  ostensibly  being  followed  by 
some of the institutions, to recover a large part of technology expenses from the customers. I 
was  amused  at  the  action  of  banks  deciding to  waive  charges  on  “inter-core”  transactions 
hitting headlines in the media. It should have never happened in the first place. In fact, such 
charges,  rather  than  their  removal,  should  have  hogged  the  limelight.  Further,  in  an 
electronic banking scenario, ad valorem charge to customers is an issue which needs to be 
relooked.  In  fact,  in  a  country  like  ours,  part  of  the  cost  efficiencies  achieved  through 
technology must be passed on to the smaller customers. This calls for a rejig in the way in 
which banks approach technology. In a technology led financial sector, collaboration among 
all  stakeholders,  including  competitors,  could  prove  to  be  the  big  cost  saver.  With  rapid 
strides  in  security  standards  and  capabilities,  such  a  collaboration  and  sharing  of  IT 
infrastructure is feasible on a much larger scale than is happening today. 
It is always perceived by the industry that the handholding / intervening by RBI is necessary 
for  the  systems  to  be  operational  in  an  efficient  manner.  I  am  unable  to  understand  why 
collaborative  approach  cannot  be  the  guiding  force  for  success  in  adoption  of  shared  IT 
infrastructure.  Reserve  Bank  has  contributed  to  the  fostering  of  innovative  methods  to 
improve access to financial services through mobile and opened up and clarified the issue of 
Business Correspondent (BC) interoperability. 
Leveraging technology for making financial inclusion possible and a success 
Prior to the enablement of BC interoperability, the banks and technology providers had made 
a case that it was the lack of interoperability, that was a deterrent for financial inclusion and 
hence,  much  headway  had  not  been  achieved.  According  to  the  technology  providers, 
investment in a non-interoperable technology would be a costly proposition and they did not 
see  a  business  case  to  offer financial  services  at  low  cost.  But  now,  with  RBI  permitting  / 
clarifying  interoperability,  why  is  it  that  the  transactions  at  BCs  are  not  picking  up,  which 
ultimately, if increased, would change the cost and access equation, making it economically 
viable for financial service providers to reach poor and isolated individuals and communities? 
Banks  have  to  make  more  investments  in  technology  and  work  together  with  BCs  for  fast 
tracking initiatives under financial innovation. More importantly, focus of all innovations need 
to be customer, not process, system or employees. It must be recognized that only customer 
can bring business to the banks and contribute to their bottom lines. All other constituents 
such as technology, employees, BCs, etc only act as enablers to the process. 
Recently,  I  came  across  the  report  submitted  by  Consultative  Group  to  Assist  the  Poor 
(CGAP) and ACCESS based on the “Retreat on the Business Correspondent (BC) model” 
which was jointly organized by the College of Agricultural Banking (C.A.B.), Reserve Bank of 
India and ACCESS. The report spells out the challenges faced by both banks and BCs in 
extending  facilities  to  the  recently  financially  included  and  to  the  financially  excluded.  The 
findings indicate that the banks have to ensure that the BC model finds space in the business 
strategies of the banks and not in the footnotes of their annual reports and that the banks 
should make client acquisition under this model a business proposition; and not treat it as a 
CSR activity. An important observation indeed! 
Further,  it  has  become  imperative  for  the  banks  to  have  full  control  and  exercise  due 
diligence, especially when the front end customer contact points are not regulated entities. 
While the customer has some relief at point of sales when a card is swiped in his presence, 
the uncertainty of a transaction going through in an E-Commence transaction is very high. 
Given the constraints of lack of control with respect to internet connectivity while doing such 
a  transaction,  banks  have  to  step  in  to  protect  a  customer  when  the  transaction  fails  and 
ensure that the refund process is quick. Why is it that when a website like IRCTC can give 
the assurance to the customer through its terms and conditions that the refund will take place 
on  such  a  day,  other  websites  are  not  able  to  have  similar  efficient  and  transparent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
processes?  Financial  service  providers  should  disclose  key 
information  clearly,  at 
appropriate points before, during, and after a transaction is completed. Of course, some of 
the responsibility lies with consumers too – to make sound financial decisions to the best of 
their  ability.  However,  inexperienced  or  low-income  customers  with  lower  levels  of  formal 
education or literacy can be particularly vulnerable to unscrupulous conduct. 
Innovation through technology – creating a favourable ecosystem 
Technology  provides  the  opportunity  to  innovate  at  a  much  faster  pace  and  to  create 
products that are closely linked to the needs of the consumer. There is a need to create an 
enabling  ecosystem  which  will  encourage  and  foster  innovation  by  leveraging  the  best 
available  technological  platforms.  Here,  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  of  the  essential 
prerequisites that would help in creating this enabling ecosystem: 
i. 
Access  to  suitable  and  cost  effective  technology  which  can  support  multi-channel 
delivery system, particularly for low income groups. 
Standardized  systems,  structures,  products  and  processes,  at  least  for  the  small 
and marginalized customers. 
Efficient Business Models: viable but not exploitative. 
Efficient Delivery Models: having integrity, speed and low cost. 
Comprehensive  MIS  capable  of  meeting  all  management  information  requirement 
and which is reliable and fast: Integrity of Information. 
Information literacy at all levels, more particularly, for senior management and for all 
sections of the society including customers, technology vendors, banks, regulators, 
policy makers, etc. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Way forward 
Stepping into the shoes of a regulator, you would appreciate that the principal challenge for 
regulators  is  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  financial  openness  that  supports 
growth-enhancing innovation while at the same time implementing regulations and effective 
supervision that limits the potential risk of financial instability. Further, there can often be a 
thin line of difference between innovation and violation of regulation. This poses challenges 
on  regulatory  resources.  In  respect  of  payment  systems,  having  reached  a  critical  mass, 
attempt  has  to  be  made  by  the  stakeholders  to  provide  a  canvas  for  safe,  efficient, 
interoperable,  inclusive  electronic  payment  systems.  The  banks  will  have  to  firm  up  the 
business  model  with  appropriate  technology  and  definite  plan  of  action,  attract  more  and 
more  customers 
launch 
management,  give  top  priority  to  downstream  variants  and  conduct  electronic  banking 
financial literacy drives. All these require charting a totally new path through innovation. 
We  have  an  opportunity,  like  never  before,  to  harness  technology  for  the  benefit  of  the 
masses.  Responsible  innovation  is  the key. We  have  to  ensure that financial  innovation  is 
customer  focussed  and  results  in  faster,  safer  and  cheaper  access  to  financial  services, 
particularly  for  the  large  sections  of  our  population  that  are  still  excluded  from  the  formal 
financial system. Each one of us has a positive role to play in this process, including, banks, 
technology partners, customers, civil society, policy makers, regulators, etc. This alone can 
ensure financial and economic stability across the globe. 
I wish the deliberations at the summit great success. Thank you.  
through  reduced  charges, 
introduce  a 
for  post 
time 
line 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
