Patrick Honohan: Household indebtedness – context, consequence & 
correction 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Limerick 
Law Society, Limerick, University of Limerick, Limerick, 14 March 2012. 
 How quickly the lubricant of credit turns into the millstone of debt, the slingshot of leverage 
into a lethal boomerang. 
Dealing  with  debt  has,  throughout  history,  been  a  central  –  and  frequently  fraught  – 
challenge  for  economy  and  society.  Early  Ireland  provides  some  of  the  more  colourful 
examples: debts having been measured (according to some of the Brehon Laws) in units of 
cumail  –  female  slaves  –  a  point  made  much  of  by  one  recent  academic  commentator 
abroad using the example slyly to elide the difference between debt and slavery. Slavery did 
indeed exist as a possible penalty for non-payment of debts in early Ireland; apparently as an 
alternative  to  death!  As  Fergus  Kelly,  the  premier  scholar  of  early  Irish  law,  has  drily 
remarked, “the economic inducements for the wronged party to opt for enslavement rather 
than execution are considerable”.  
Fast  forward  a  thousand  years  or  so  and,  as  the  accumulation  of  debt  through  borrowing 
grew into a major force driving the direction and scale of economic development worldwide, 
so  society’s  approach  to  dealing  with  situations  of  overindebtedness  have  also  tended  to 
evolve, and this is so in the great crisis of debt generated in the new millennium.  
The Irish private sector was not alone in accumulating debt during the first decade of the new 
millennium. But, easily sourcing the funds from abroad – thanks to the impeccable national 
credit rating – the banks in Ireland readily accommodated the demand for credit from (a) big 
developers  and  from  (b)  house-purchasers  who  bought  the  houses  they  were  building,  in 
many cases risking over-extension in order to get onto the bottom rung of a property ladder 
that  seemed  to  be  soaring  out  of  reach;  in  other  cases  scrambling  up  that  ladder,  or 
branching  out  into  the  buy-to-let  market,  at  home  and  abroad  as  a  seemingly  promising 
investment  in  the  rising  market.  [Charts:  Household  debt-to-income  ratios  over  the  years, 
international comparison; (ii) bank net borrowing from abroad as % GNP 1999–2011] 
First to feel the cold draft of creditor withdrawals were the banks. Their borrowings from the 
international  market  had  been  mainly  at  short-term,  and  the  market’s  growing  reluctance 
after  2007  to  roll  over  these  funds  in  light  of  well-founded  concerns  about  the  banks’ 
solvency led the Government to assume the liabilities.  
As  has  often  been  remarked,  there  is  plenty  to  criticise  in  the  way  in  which  the 
September 2008  guarantee  was  put  in  place,  including  the  extent  of  the  guarantee,  its 
cast-iron nature, and the lack of consultation with official partners who might have agreed to 
share the burden. But what cannot – in light of subsequent events – be doubted is that there 
would, in any case, have been irresistible pressure from those partners to ensure that losses 
would not fall on depositors or senior bondholders, given the fragility of banking worldwide in 
those  frenetic  weeks  of  September  and  October  2008,  and  indeed  thereafter.  Whatever 
about  the  merits  of  such  an  international  policy,  it  has  been  in  place  ever  since,  greatly 
expanding the indebtedness of the Irish State. 
Although  the  burden  it  imposed  was  what  tipped  Ireland  into  losing  the  confidence  of  the 
bond  markets,  and  triggering  the  need  for  the  EU-IMF  Programme,  it  would  be  unwise  to 
focus  too  exclusively  on  the  debt  assumed  by  the  State  from  the  banks  as  a  determining 
factor  for  Irish  economic  prospects  and  the  current  situation  of  the  Irish  economy.  Indeed, 
much of the deterioration in the net fiscal position of the Government in 2009 is for reasons 
other  than  the  jump  in  debt  (though  of  course  associated  with  the  unwinding  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
credit-driven property bubble). And equally or even more important as the public debt per se 
is the fall in the numbers at work and the surge in unemployment, and the consequence that 
has  had  on  wellbeing,  and  on  the  affordability  of  debt  assumed  by  households.  [Chart: 
numbers at work and unemployment rate 1960–2011] 
The  jump  in  debt  certainly  began  to  hang  over  the  economy.  In  the  public  accounts,  debt 
reached the point where foreign investors lost confidence in the certainty of Irish Government 
debt, leading (against a background of wider concerns on public debt in the euro area) to the 
need for official financial assistance from the EU and IMF. For the private sector, the debt 
burdening many firms and families, who have got caught up in unaffordable levels of debt, 
hampers their ability – and even, in some cases, motivation – to resume their economic role 
in society at full potential. 
Not all economic crises have left as substantial a legacy of personal debt as has the current 
global crisis. In other crises initial levels of personal debt have typically been a lot lower than 
in Ireland. Furthermore, many of those crises were accompanied by currency devaluations 
and surges of high inflation which, albeit hugely disruptive and costly in themselves, had the 
side-effect, beneficial to debtors, of lowering the real value of their debt (at the expense of 
others in society). In less severe situations Government and banks could dig into capital or 
reserves  to  absorb  losses  coming  from  unrecoverable  debt.  The  sudden  emergence  and 
severity of the banking losses in Ireland since 2008 has greatly exceeded the banks’ capacity 
in this regard, and has pushed the Government to its limit.  
Thus, as far as the banks are concerned, they have run through their entire stock of initial 
shareholders’ capital, which has had to be topped-up by the State or by foreign shareholders. 
[Chart:  loss-sharing  for  banks].  This  process,  along  with  the  rest  of  the  deterioration  in  its 
finances,  has  pushed  the  Government  towards  the  limit  of  what  it  can  sustainably  borrow. 
The topping-up to the banks’ balance sheets has given the banks enough of a capital buffer 
to absorb what can be clearly foreseen as potential losses for the next few years,  but not 
enough for any broad strategy of debt forgiveness. That’s why we have been saying that the 
banks  must  husband  their  capital  and  work  out  their  problem  loans  in  a  measured  and 
realistic way that deals promptly and sensitively with the unrecoverable, but does not shrink 
from ensuring that affordable debts are properly pursued. 
The  economic  crisis  has  adversely  affected  most  people  in  Ireland.  Since  the  peak  in  
2007–8,  average  living  standards  have  fallen  by  some  17  per  cent,  and  aggregate  wealth 
has fallen by an estimated 59 per cent (the decline in the wealth of the household sector was 
smaller).  The  peak  activity  levels  reached  by  the  economy  were,  of  course,  altogether 
unsustainable, and it is unwise to expect too much sympathy from outsiders for the fact of 
having fallen back after such a rapid run-up. [Chart: 5-yearly bar chart: GNP growth and per 
capita personal disposable income growth] 
Some people have, however, been affected more than others. This is not only a question of 
there  having  been  an  increase  in  inequality.  Survey  data1  does  in  fact  show  a  jump  in 
inequality in 2010 reversing a downward trend which had been noted since 2005. Two large 
countervailing  forces  have  influenced  measured  relative  poverty  rates  since  the  peak:  the 
rise in unemployment and the offsetting growth in social transfers (job-seekers’ supports and 
the  like).  Had  it  not  been  for  the  social  transfers,  the  percentage  of  the  population  whose 
income is less than 60% of the national median (and as such deemed to be so low as to 
place them “at risk of poverty”) would have increased dramatically. In fact, this percentage, 
though  it  has  increased,  is  still  lower  than  it  was  before  2007.  [Chart:  from  CSO  SILC 
survey 2010].  
                                                 
1  CSO 
(2011)  Survey  on 
releasespublications/documents/silc/2010/prelimsilc_2010.pdf 
Income  and  Living  Conditions  2010.  http://www.cso.ie/en/media/csoie/ 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Of course, the poor are less able to cope with a given percentage fall in their spending power 
than the rich, so even a uniform percentage reduction in living standards bears more heavily 
on the poor. And of course, the impact has not been uniform.2 Among those who have lost 
disproportionately are families hit by job losses including in construction and other sectors 
which  have  seen  a  dramatic  shrinkage  in  demand,  those  who  are  self-employed  in  such 
sectors (some of them hit by bad debts from their customers), those who had been relying on 
dividends  from  bank  shares,  and  those  who  had  taken  leveraged  investment  positions  in 
assets whose value has declined, notably property. Except for the last group, debt per se has 
not been the driver of the deterioration in their circumstances, though – depending on their 
access to savings, assistance from family or other forms of support – indebted persons who 
lose their job are likely to be in a worse position than those without debt.  
There has been a lot of talk about negative housing equity, but of course this is a symptom 
which can be experienced both by those who have truly been placed in a difficult position by 
the  crisis,  and  by  those  who  have  emerged  relatively  unscathed.  There  are  people  who, 
though they paid a lot more for their house than it is now worth, have not experienced any 
decline in living standards since the crisis began.3 As a result, the increase in negative equity 
for owner-occupiers is not a reliable indicator of stressed living standards. By the way, even 
in  those  parts  of  the  United  States  where  mortgage  lenders  do  not  have  recourse  to  the 
borrower  beyond  the  ability  to  foreclose  on  the  mortgaged  property,  most  borrowers  in 
negative  equity  do  continue  to  service  their  loans;  as  of  course  indeed  happens  here  in 
Ireland. To quote some of my colleagues “Equity considerations have not been a major factor 
driving Irish mortgage arrears, and it is affordability issues, along with changes in the general 
macroeconomic environment, that is driving developments here”.4 [Table: crosstab showing 
negative equity and arrears]  
Moving forward decisively from here calls for sensitivity to household circumstances, as well 
as maintaining a clear vision of how the economic recovery can be strengthened so that the 
national  capacity  to  deal  with  the  myriad  aspects  of  debt  is  maximised.  A  full  discussion 
could  range  very  widely.  I  am  not  going  to  talk  here  about  such  aspects  as  the  currently 
topical issue of central bank-related debt. Nor do I want to go more into the treatment of the 
indebtedness of the big players, including those whose bank debts are now owed to NAMA 
and others besides. Ensuring that these debtors are held to their contracts and that as much 
as possible can be recovered for the benefit of the State in these cases is an important task 
which has been engaging many legal and financial minds for quite some time now.  
Instead I want to focus the remainder of my remarks on the policy actions being adopted to 
deal with the far more numerous cases of debt distress on the smaller-scale. Here too there 
are distributional issues: public policy could hardly countenance any debt relief arrangements 
that  in  practice  discriminated  in  favour  of  middle  and  high  income  people  when  so  many 
households – debtors and non-debtors – have had to fall back on social protection payments. 
No  doubt  the  necessary  increase  in  taxation  and  lowering  of  wages  and  salaries  in  some 
jobs  especially  in  the  public  sector  has  contributed  debt  distress,  and  indeed,  the  CSO’s 
SILC survey showed a relatively large number of non-poor5 households cutting back on what 
                                                 
2  The huge diversity in household circumstances and the diverse sources of their difficulties is well illustrated in 
studies such as that carried out by Michelle Norris and Simon Brooke for MABS and published late last year 
under  the  title  Lifting  the  Load.  MABS  is  a  key  part  of  the  State’s  infrastructure  for  advising  those  with 
indebtedness problems.http://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/downloads/lifting_the_load_sep11.pdf 
Indeed, there are some of those who are still on tracker mortgage rates, like the bulk of borrowers towards the 
end of the boom, may be paying much lower servicing costs on their mortgages than when they bought the 
house, offsetting at least some of the tax increases and – for some – wage and salary cuts that have occurred. 
“What  Lies  Beneath?  Understanding  Recent  Trends  in  Irish  Mortgage  Arrears”  Reamonn  Lydon  & 
Yvonne McCarthy, 2011 Conference Paper. 
In the CSO’s terminology “individuals at risk of poverty”. 
3 
4 
5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
would previously have  been considered normal expenditures. For example, 17 per cent of 
those in non-poor households reported themselves to have been unable to afford an evening 
out in the previous fortnight, up from 6 per cent in the boom; 9 per cent went without heating 
for some time (up from 4 per cent); and over 18 per cent couldn’t afford to replace worn-out 
furniture  (up  from  10  per  cent).  Not  measured  in  these  statistics  are  the  stress  and  other 
health issues and their ramifications for the wellbeing of the overindebted.  
Against  such  a  background,  the  policy  challenge  facing  any  Government  is  to  ensure  that 
arrangements for dealing with unaffordable debt are fair and technically efficient, and offer a 
viable pathway for over-indebted individuals and families to re-establish their solvency and 
resume  their  role  as  productive  members  of  society.  It  should  on  the  one  hand  avoid 
resulting in families losing their homes where this is not necessary, and on the other avoid 
creating a perverse incentive for those who can afford to pay their debts to exploit the system 
at  the  expense  of  the  rest  of  society.  The  last  caveat  is  especially  relevant  in  the  present 
situation where, although the banks have been provided with enough capital to allow for loan 
modifications in respect of loans that are clearly unaffordable, unnecessary debt forgiveness 
could quickly erode that buffer, placing a further burden on the Government finances, which 
they are in no condition to absorb. 
The approach sketched by the proposed legislation on personal debt, draft heads of which 
have  been  announced  by  the  Government,  is  consistent  with  this  approach.  But  banks 
should in most cases be able to arrive at arrangements with their debtors that do not require 
use  of  the  new  legislation.  Admittedly  it  is  a  major  and  complex  task  for  the  banks  to 
implement at sufficient scale a programme of effective engagement with troubled borrowers. 
The  banks  have  all  been  progressively  moving  towards  this,  encouraged  strongly  by  the 
Central  Bank  which  has  ramped  up  its  monitoring  of  these  efforts.  Early  engagement,  fair 
procedures, tailored forbearance or rescheduling adapted to individual debtor circumstances 
and which respect the current and future ability to pay are watchwords in the development of 
a sufficient response. That has not yet been achieved by the banks. Until it is, there is the 
risk that far too many debtors will bypass what should be in most cases a more efficient way 
of working out their problems and proceed directly to the new insolvency procedures being 
set  up  according  to  the  draft  legislation  that  has  been  published.  Ideally,  only  cases  that 
prove  impossible  to  resolve  in  bilateral  negotiation,  including  some  situations  of  complex 
indebtedness involving multiple creditors, would so proceed. 
For its part, the Central Bank is reviewing the Code of Conduct for Mortgage Arrears to see if 
any elements need to be refined to avoid hampering the fair and effective bank engagement 
with borrowers which is essential to a successful outcome for all. (Many other initiatives are 
under way including the establishment of a comprehensive credit registry which, looking to 
the future, will help improve the precision of lenders’ decisions, ensuring that credit is going 
to where it can be repaid and not otherwise.) 
The  legislation  streamlines  bankruptcy  and  shortens  both  the  period  before  discharge  and 
the post-discharge period during which a payments order can be in force. At last there will be 
a  clear  option  for  those  who  truly  cannot  pay  to  escape  from  unreasonable  creditors. 
Nevertheless, the fact that the family home would be forfeit would alone continue to make 
bankruptcy in Ireland very unattractive to debtors. Furthermore, a very strict interpretation of 
the “reasonable expenses” that the bankrupt is left with will no doubt continue to be applied 
to  the  bankrupt  before  discharge  (even  if  the  post-discharge  payments  order  might  be 
somewhat less onerous). 
The  non-judicial  Personal  Insolvency  Arrangement  holds  out  the  prospect  of  a  better 
balance,  though  the  devil  is  in  the  detail.  With  its  combination  of  debt  modification  and  a 
period of six years during which the debtor must pay a sum – potentially income-related – to 
the creditors, the proposed arrangement is flexible enough to allow a reasonable incentive 
for the debtor to get back on their feet as productive members of society, while not gifting a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
quick  escape  for  those  who  have  been  offered  a  reasonable  and  affordable  long-term 
mortgage arrangement. Much of the practical detail remains to be worked out, especially  
– 
how to define “affordability” of a payment arrangement, in the short and in the long 
run (in particular whether it leaves the debtor enough to live with dignity) and  
assessing both (i) the degree to which subsequent increases in income – and in the 
value of the home – might be partly clawed back, while still offering the debtor the 
opportunity to make a fresh start and (ii) practical ways of doing so.  
 inform 
the  debt  modification  arrangements  offered  by  banks  bilaterally 
Since  we  in  Ireland  have  very  limited  experience  of  such  arrangements,  these  issues 
deserve  detailed  public  discussion  and  debate.  (The  PIA  in  particular  is  a  home-grown 
innovation tailored to the reality that mortgage debt is the major problem; getting the various 
elements ideally balanced will not be easy.) The parameters that are arrived at would also, of 
course, 
to 
overindebted  debtors  before  they  get  to  thinking  about  seeking  access  to  the  new  formal 
procedures,  thereby  avoiding  what  could  become  a  large  administrative  burden  on  the 
proposed  Insolvency  Service.  In  addition  to  the  point  I  made  earlier  about  distributional 
consequences, administrative challenges abound in this area, and there will have to be an 
evolving system of review, feedback and learning as a fair, efficient and effective system is 
constructed.  
Other countries faced with similar problems are also struggling here. The US HAMP (Home 
Affordable Modification Program) programme was intended to incentivise lenders to provide 
realistic  loan  modifications  thereby  avoiding  unnecessary  foreclosures  and  repossessions. 
However this and other programmes have not succeeded in reaching their target coverage, 
and  repossessions  in  the  US  have  soared.  In  Ireland  the  number  of  repossessions  has 
traditionally  been  low,  and  while  it  has  increased  in  the  past  two  years,  in  2011  it  still 
amounted to less than 1 per cent of the number of mortgages. For owner-occupied houses 
the traditional Irish reluctance to foreclose is certainly not misplaced. There is every reason 
to play long when it comes to managing a distressed owner-occupier mortgage: versions of 
the  split  mortgage  concept  mentioned  by  the  Keane  Committee,  which  reduce  current 
servicing  costs  of  the  debt  to  manageable  levels  for  households  that  have  had  suffered 
adverse  income  shocks  but  with  the  potential  for  some  clawback  if  house  value  and 
household  income  recover,  while  a  bit  complex  to  implement,  could  be  the  key  to  a 
satisfactory solution for all, including the State. 
The  buy-to-let  sector  is  more  complex,  including  as  it  does  a  wide  range  of  different 
circumstances,  sometimes  including  extended  family  arrangements.  It  would  be  unwise  to 
generalise, but there are many circumstances in which there is less reason to be inhibited 
about repossessing buy-to-let properties. Where loan delinquency relates to pure investment 
type “buy-to-lets”, it is surely now past time for the banks to be dealing more proactively with 
the  situation  of  overindebted  buy-to-let  borrowers  no  longer  able  to  service  the  debts  they 
assumed in order to take investment positions – now loss-making – in property. It is in the 
long-term  interest  both  of  the  banks  (and  therefore  the  State)  and  the  borrowers  that  the 
banks continue to ramp-up their capacity to engage with and process such debtors in order 
to  determine,  on  the  basis  of  actual  and  prospective  income,  what  repayment  they  can 
realistically be expected to service fully, repossessing the collateral where necessary. While 
this  may  involve  the  banks  in  having  to  manage  a  portfolio  of  repossessed  buy-to-let 
properties, this is not an insurmountable task and should in any event facilitate the improved 
functioning of the property market and getting closer to a market-clearing price by bringing to 
the market (in an orderly and managed way) many of those properties which at present are 
implicitly hanging over it as an excess supply. 
Overall,  systematic  and  effective  engagement  can  bring  predictability  to  hopelessly  over-
indebted borrowers, restoring their ability and motivation to become productive members of 
society. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
With  almost  €100  billion  of  mortgage  debt  in  the  Republic  outstanding  in  the  banks 
guaranteed  by  the  Government,  the  working-out  of  troubled  mortgage  debt  is  a  matter  of 
immense national importance. Achieving the right balance between realism in what can be 
collected  and  prudence  in  managing  the  limited  but  adequate  capital  resources  that  have 
been provided to the banks by the Government is vital. Failure in this regard would press on 
the already fragile finances of the State. The new personal insolvency arrangements could 
underpin a good outcome here, but the final form of their precise architecture and especially 
the operational parameters (how to define affordability etc.) will be crucial. Much also falls on 
the  banks,  whose  role  in  ensuring  a  realistic  and  effective  approach  to  loan  recovery  –  in 
effect for the benefit of the State – must continue to be developed alongside the resumption 
of a less timorous approach to new loan approval, including for the newly approved negative 
equity mortgages for movers. 
Step-by-step  the  challenges  of  this  crisis  of  overindebtedness  will  be  overcome,  and  it  is 
crucial that, in the process, the fabric of Irish society and the contractual underpinnings of our 
economy  are  protected.  Thus,  fairness  is  a  key  objective,  which  means  both  that  debtors 
who can afford to pay do pay and that efficient and effective arrangements for ensuring that 
those  who  cannot  now  pay  fully  are  given  a  clear  and  coherent  path  forward  that  is 
consistent with affordability and sustainability.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
