Jean-Pierre Danthine: A world of low interest rates 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Money Market Event, Zurich, 22 March 2012. 
 I would like to extend  my thanks to Anna  Faber, Adriel Jost and Pierre Monnin for their support in  writing this 
speech. I also thank Carmen Kissling for providing research assistance and Marco Huwiler, Rita Kobel, Sébastien 
Kraenzlin,  Peter  Kuster,  Thomas  Maag  and  Barbara  Sutter  for  their  insightful  comments,  which  improved  the 
quality of the final version. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  (SNB)  eleventh 
Geldmarkt-Apéro.  For  the  third  consecutive  year  I  have  the  privilege  of  discussing  Swiss 
monetary  policy  with  you,  together  with  significant  aspects  of  the  context  in  which  it  is 
conducted.  Today,  my  deputy  and  fellow  board  member,  Dewet  Moser  will  provide  an 
overview of the SNB’s implementation of monetary policy in the last year. In particular, Dewet 
will highlight the measures we have taken to address the strong Swiss franc. Meanwhile, I 
will  concentrate  on  the  very  low  interest  rate  environment,  which  has  played  an  important 
part  in  guiding  economic  participants’  choices  for  some  time  now.  Beforehand,  however, 
allow me to make a few comments on our recent monetary policy decision.  
As  emphasised  on  15  March,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF 1.20  per  euro  remains 
front and centre of the SNB’s monetary policy agenda. The SNB will continue to enforce the 
minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro with the utmost determination. It is prepared to 
buy  foreign  currency  in  unlimited  quantities  for  this  purpose.  The  target  range  for  the 
three-month Libor remains unchanged at 0.00–0.25% and the SNB will continue to maintain 
liquidity on the money market at an exceptionally high level.  
The  SNB  has  taken  these  decisions  in  a  context  of  mixed  developments  in  the  global 
economy. While growth in the United States was surprisingly positive in the fourth quarter, 
GDP fell in the euro area and in Japan. In Switzerland, growth has slowed significantly in the 
past  year.  Added  value  declined  in  the  fourth  quarter  in  those  sectors  most  affected  by 
exchange  rate  movements.  While  the  high  value  of  the  Swiss  franc  continues  to  present 
enormous  challenges  to  the  economy,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  is having  an  impact.  It 
has reduced exchange rate volatility and given business leaders a better basis for planning. 
There are growing indications that the Swiss economy is stabilising. For 2012, the SNB is 
now forecasting moderate growth, at close to 1%.  
The  situation  on  the  financial  markets  has  also  eased  a  little  of  late.  It  remains  very 
uncertain,  however,  whether  the  advances  made  in  solving  the  European  sovereign  debt 
crisis  will  succeed  in  defusing  the  situation  permanently.  Moreover,  there  is  a  risk  that 
geopolitical tensions will lead to a further rise in the price of oil.  
The SNB’s latest analysis has led us to adjust our conditional inflation forecast downwards 
once again. As my first slide highlights, the most recent forecasts for 2012 show an inflation 
rate of –0.6%, as compared to a rate of 0.3% in 2013 and 0.6% in 2014. Price stability is 
therefore assured. That said, if developments in the international economy prove to be worse 
than foreseen, or if the Swiss franc does not weaken further, as it is expected to, downside 
risks for price stability could re-emerge. Whatever the case may be, the SNB stands ready to 
take  further  measures  at  any  time,  if  the  economic  outlook  and  the  risk  of  deflation  so 
require. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Explanations for low interest rates 
Today’s  low  interest  rates  are  a  defining  feature  of  the  current  economic  environment  far 
beyond  the  Swiss  borders  and  this  has  been  the  case  for  some  time.  I  will  hence  paint  a 
picture of the global situation with broad brushstrokes, before outlining the specifics of the 
Swiss  case.  The  current  low  interest  rate  levels  can  be  viewed  as  the  endpoint  of  a 
downward trend that has marked the last twenty years and which has been accentuated by 
the necessary policy responses to the current economic crisis. As my second slide shows, 
one can observe a significant and continued decrease in long-term nominal rates of various 
maturities since the early 1980’s. Several factors are responsible for this evolution. Let me 
first  discuss  the  roots  of  some  of  the  longer-term  trends,  before  focusing  on  post-2007 
developments. 
Long-term trends 
Central banks’ credible commitment to price stability could well explain the downward trend 
in nominal interest rates experienced by most mature economies in this period. As we see in 
slide 3, inflation in G7 countries declined from particularly high levels in the mid-1970’s, and 
again in the early 1980’s, to relatively low and stable levels since the mid-1990’s. Given the 
decreasing levels of inflation and inflationary expectations, the inflation premium included in 
nominal interest rates should have been reduced accordingly. Nevertheless, slide 4 shows 
that  this  explanation  does  not  suffice.  Real  interest  rates1  also  show  a  declining  trend,  as 
represented here in the average real return on the 10 year bonds of G7 countries. What is 
behind this evolution? 
Some attribute the low interest rate environment to a so-called savings glut. The crux of this 
argument is that there has been an excessive accumulation of global savings relative to the 
demand  for  fixed  capital  formation  since  the  mid-1990’s.  To  quote  Federal  Reserve 
Chairman Ben Bernanke “…the very substantial shift in the current accounts of developing 
and  emerging-market  nations  …  transformed  these  countries  from  net  borrowers  on 
international capital markets to large net lenders.”2 Indeed, it is interesting to observe that, in 
the  late  1990’s,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  crisis,  several  Asian  central  banks  started 
accumulating  significant  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  efforts  to  stabilize  their  capital  flows 
and their exchange rates, or to be in position to do so, should that prove necessary in the 
future. Meanwhile, some conjectured that mature economies with ageing populations would 
experience a peak in their savings rates.  
The  “savings  glut”  hypothesis  is  contested,  however.  A  first  point  of  contention  is  that  the 
impact of demographic change on savings and investments may be limited, compared to that 
of  other  factors.3  Indeed,  the  savings  rates  of  industrialised  countries  did  not  appear  to 
increase in this period (slide 5). In some cases, they even decreased. A second discrepancy, 
asserted by John B. Taylor and others, resides in the observation that the US savings gap, 
and  the  surge  in  savings  in  the  rest  of  the  world  effectively  cancelled  one  another  out.4 
Finally,  despite  the  significant  increase  in  savings  rates  in  China  and  other  emerging 
countries, there was no clear upward trend in global national savings.  
The stable output growth and historically low levels of inflation between the mid-1980’s and 
the onset of the financial crisis, a period often referred to as the “Great Moderation”, provides 
an alternative or complementary explanation for the downward trend in real rates. Here, the 
                                                 
1  Real interest rates were calculated using the observed market nominal rate minus CPI inflation. 
2  Bernanke (2005). 
3  Cf. IMF (2005). 
4  Taylor (2009). Cf. also Borio and Disyatat (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is 
that,  as  macroeconomic  volatility  decreased, 
investors  became 
basic  argument 
increasingly willing to accept lower term and inflation risk premia on their investments, which 
could translate into a decrease in observed interest rates. 
Whatever the precise explanation may be, the downward progression of long-term nominal 
and real interest rates over the last twenty years has been conspicuous. Let us now focus on 
more recent developments. 
Recent developments 
The financial crisis and the global economic decline we have observed subsequently have 
both  added  cyclical  pressure  to  this  long-run  trend.  Low  or  negative  output  growth  and 
dampened expectations of future growth naturally have a negative impact on long-term rates. 
In addition, the central banks of most mature economies have, of course, responded to the 
deteriorating economic situation, first by pushing short-term rates towards appropriately low 
levels and subsequently by exerting pressure on longer-term rates. As slide 6 illustrates, the 
first “conventional” monetary policy response was to bring short-term target interest rates to 
levels as close to zero as possible. However, confronted with the zero lower bound – that is, 
the  impossibility  of  using  conventional  monetary  policy  to  do  more  –  many  central  banks 
have supplemented their traditional policies with “unconventional” measures, often in order to 
impact  long-term  rates.  Central  banks  do  so  by  altering  the  composition  of  their  balance 
sheets (credit easing), or by expanding the balance sheet, i.e. by increasing liquidity via one 
form or another of asset purchasing (quantitative easing, QE) (slide 7).  
There  is  evidence  to suggest  that  these  measures  are  having  an  impact  on  private  sector 
borrowing costs. Often as intended, its effect has varied from one asset to the next. In the 
case of the Bank of England, the vast majority of assets purchased were gilts, and, analysis 
so far indicates that, gilt yields were some 100 basis points lower than they would have been 
without  QE  purchases  (slide  8).5  Several  US-centred  studies6  also  estimate  that  QE 
measures  had  a  similar  effect  there.  A  study  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York 
estimates,  for  example,  that  the  measures  reduced  the  ten-year  term  premium  on  US 
Treasuries by “somewhere between 30 and 100 basis points.” The findings also indicate that 
the effect of the asset purchasing on agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities 
was  even  more  significant.7  In  addition,  a  recent  internal  SNB  study  revealed  that  the 
doubling of SNB liquidity in August-September 2011 had a significant impact on the yield on 
10-year confederation bonds.8  
With this in mind, I would now like to discuss the specifics of the Swiss case in more detail.  
The Swiss case  
Historically,  Switzerland’s  long-term  interest  rates  have  usually  been  lower  than  those  of 
most other mature economies. Recently the 10-year Swiss government bond yields even fell 
below those of their Japanese equivalent and reached an all-time low (slide 9). 
Current low interest rates in Switzerland can largely be explained by negative developments 
in  the  global  economy,  which  have  progressively  increased  the  demand  for  “risk-free” 
investments, while decreasing their supply. On the demand side, increased financial sector 
risk  and  an  uncertain  economic  outlook  have  led  many  market  participants  to  seek  the 
                                                 
5  Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens and Tong (2010). 
6  For example, Krogstrup, Reynard and Sutter (2012, forthcoming). 
7  Gagnon, Raskin, Remache and Sack (2010). 
8  Krogstrup (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
protection of safe havens. On the supply side, the European sovereign debt crisis has also 
had a simultaneous, and not unrelated, impact. Investors have increasingly questioned the 
relative security of assets that were previously considered safe. This is reflected in the main 
credit rating agencies’ recent downgradings of several sovereign bonds that were formerly 
triple A-rated. 
This increased demand for, and decreased supply of, risk-free assets has directly affected 
Switzerland. The reasons for this are well known. The country has managed to maintain a 
longstanding reputation for stability. In relative terms, the Swiss economy has also withstood 
the 2007 financial crisis rather well (slide 10), its economic figures are healthy and, at less 
than 40% (slide 11), its GDP-to-debt ratio is relatively low (slide 12). All of this has prompted 
a surge in the demand for Swiss franc-denominated assets and put downward pressure on 
Swiss interest rates. 
At the policy level, the SNB used a range of instruments to increase the supply of liquidity on 
the  Swiss  money  market  and  exert  vigorous  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates, 
particularly  after  the  Swiss  franc  reached  an  all-time  high  in  early  August.  In  line  with  the 
goals stated in the SNB’s announcement of 3 August, the three-month Libor fell from 17.5 
basis points on 2 August to a low of 0.3 basis points on 5 September. Other money market 
rates then fell to historical lows. At that time, futures contracts on the three-month Libor even 
implied  negative  future  rates.  These  negative  levels  were  the  inevitable  result  of  the 
exceptional liquidity measures I mentioned earlier. 
Though the current liquidity levels in the Swiss franc money market are still extremely high, 
and interest rates are fluctuating around zero, conditions on the money markets have slowly 
started to normalize and extremely negative rates have disappeared. This is reflected in the 
recent  increase  of  the  three-month  Libor,  which  can  be  ascribed  to  a  normalisation  of  the 
rate’s  risk  premium  and  should  therefore  not  be  seen  as  a  change  in  monetary  policy. 
Though few loans are currently being concluded on the interbank market, the Libor remains 
an important benchmark for many credit transactions in the economy. 
Concluding remarks 
The  period  of  low  interest  rates  in  which  we  live  is  the  outcome  of  cyclical  and  secular 
circumstances  which  are  unlikely  to  last  forever.  Even  if  we  accept  the  “savings  glut” 
hypothesis,  the  demographical  and  regional  factors  to  which  it  refers  could  soon  lose 
relevance.  While  the  call  for  deleveraging  should  prompt  increased  savings  in  advanced 
economies, the demographic forces in the west are likely to have an opposite effect on the 
supply  of  savings.  Similarly,  the  maturing  of  emerging  markets  in  the  east  should  lead  to 
smaller current account surpluses and to a gradual reduction in the build-up of precautionary 
reserves by public authorities. It is also clear that the increased risk appetite associated with 
the “Great Moderation” was, at least to some extent, based on over-optimistic assumptions. 
These conditions are unlikely to recur in the future, therefore implying that we will probably 
not observe again the very low risk and term premia that characterized the end of the 1990’s 
and the beginning of the 21st century. 
At the cyclical level, the present low interest rates are the appropriate “full throttle” response 
to  a  very  severe  global  economic  crisis,  which  occurred  on  the  back  of  the  most  acute 
financial crisis since the “Great Depression” of the 1920’s and 1930’s. However, even if there 
are implicit or explicit calls for interest rates to remain “low for long” everywhere – including 
Switzerland – the corresponding monetary policy remains a cyclical response to a cyclical 
phenomenon, which, from a historical perspective, should be relatively short-lived.  
Thus, as most mature economies gradually return to their normal growth path – and I do not 
dispute the diagnosis that this demands more time after a severe financial and banking crisis 
than it would in more normal business cycle circumstances – one can reasonably expect real 
rates to return to higher levels than those observed recently. This is good news for savers 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  pension  funds  alike.  It  should  also  be  taken  into  account  by  borrowers,  especially 
long-term borrowers, such as those active in the mortgage market. From their perspective, it 
is  inappropriate  to  consider  the  current  low  rates  as  representative  of  a  so-called  new 
normal. The intended economic stimulus provided by low interest rates will only last for a few 
years, not decades. It is crucial for long-term financial stability that those who make long-run 
debt commitments are fully aware of this reality and that they plan accordingly.  
What  about  inflation  risk?  Personally,  I  do  not  share  the  view  that  the  current  period  of 
central bank activism will be followed by a resurgence of inflation. First, contrary to common 
assertions,  persistent  -  as  opposed  to  unanticipated  -  inflation  is  limited  in  its  capacity  to 
reduce  sovereign  debt  burdens.  Second,  the  low  levels  of  inflation  we  are  currently 
experiencing  are  the  result  of  improved  monetary  policy,  combined  with  a  general 
acknowledgement  that  inflation  does  not  buy  durable  economic  performance.  Neither  of 
these factors are affected by recent events. We can therefore anticipate that, with current or 
enhanced levels of understanding of monetary mechanisms, and central bankers’ continued 
preference for price stability, future inflation levels will resemble those of the last 20 years.  
References 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  2005.  The  Global  Savings  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit. 
Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia. 
10 March 2005. 
Borio, C., and P. Disyatat. 2011. “Global imbalances and the financial crisis: link or no link?” 
Bank of International Settlements. Working Paper No. 346. May 2011. 
Gagnon, J., Raskin, M., Remache, J. and Sack, B. 2010. “Large-scale asset purchases by 
the Federal Reserve: did they work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 
441. 
IMF.  2005.  Building  Institutions.  World  Economic  Outlook  (International  Monetary  Fund). 
September 2005. 
Joyce,  Michael,  Ana  Lasaosa,  Ibrahim  Stevens  and  Matthew  Tong.  2010.  “The  financial 
market impact of quantitative easing.” Bank of England Working Paper No. 393. July 2010, 
revised August 2010. 
Krogstrup, Signe. 2012. “The effects of the SNB’s liquidity expansion on asset prices at the 
zero lower bound.” SNB Internal Note. February 2012.  
Krogstrup,  Signe,  Samuel  Reynard  and  Barbara  Sutter.  2012.  “Liquidity  Effects  of 
Quantitative  Easing  on  Long-term  Interest  Rates.”  SNB  Working  Paper.  January  2012. 
(forthcoming). 
Taylor, John B. 2009. Competing Explanations: A Global Savings Glut. pp. 6–7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 