Njuguna Ndung’u: HR challenges in the Kenyan banking sector 
Speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the opening 
ceremony of the Joint Kenya School of Monetary Studies (KSMS) and COMESA Monetary 
Institute  (CMI)  Symposium  for  central  banks’  human  resource  directors,  Kenya  School  of 
Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 24 January 2012. 
 HR Directors here present;  
Coordinator of CMI, Mr. Ibrahim Zeidy and Specialists;  
Distinguished Speakers;  
Invited Guests:  
It is my pleasure to preside over the opening ceremony of this HR Symposium, the first of its 
kind  in  the  region,  jointly  organized  by  the  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies  and  the 
COMESA  Monetary  Institute  (CMI).  This  is  the  first  meeting  and  KSMS  are  hosting.  We 
thank COMESA for having faith with CBK to deliver DMI for policy conveyance. At the onset, 
let me take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to all participants from the COMESA 
Region and speakers from different parts of the world who have found time and joined us 
today. Please feel very welcome and I trust you will find some time to enjoy the wonderful 
facilities  available  here  at  the  School  and  enjoy  some  of  the  beautiful  and  fascinating 
sceneries of Kenya.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  2008  global  financial  crisis,  coupled  with  the  ever  changing 
macroeconomic environment presented a complex financial and economic global landscape 
that was a challenge to central banks the world over. It therefore became clear that although 
the core mandate of central banks remains price and financial system stability, there should 
be  coordination  of  regulatory  structures  across  the  financial  system  in  totality.  The  idea  is 
that we should not impose more regulation but better regulation.  
What does better regulation entail? It is a system that:  
 
 
 
Can readily identify weaknesses and emerging vulnerabilities  
Is capable of analyzing risks and so adequately pricing risks  
Provides appropriate incentives (penalties) to induce prudent behavior in the market 
place  
Building  strong  institutions  that  can  withstand  shocks  and  give  confidence  to  the 
market: strong institutions of the regulated and strong institutions of the regulator  
 These  pillars  hinge  on  HR  capital  availability  and  application.  The  challenges  call  for 
enhanced human capital development to cope with this changing dynamic world. 
As  HR  Directors,  I  want  to  encourage  you  to  formulate  capacity  development  initiatives  to 
equip staff with necessary skills and competencies to effectively manage these challenges in 
a manner that guarantees a balance between efficiency and stability.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  For  maximum  impact,  these  initiatives  must  be  accompanied  by 
effective institutional governance oversight arrangements – a responsibility over which you 
as HR Directors have a direct contribution. As you deliberate on the important factors driving 
central banks in the 21st century, therefore, please pay attention to the need to distinguish 
between the external aspects of governance (mandate and accountability) and the internal 
ones (structure, management and staffing).  
Staff,  at  all  levels  must  understand  the  business  of  central  banks  and  understand  the 
environment  in  which  banks  operate  for  effective  performance  and  service  delivery  in  the 
fulfillment of central bank’s core mandate. Ladies and Gentlemen, one main issue that may 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
need to remain under closer focus throughout this three day Symposium is the daunting task 
Central banks face as they prepare to enter an era of institutional and modernization reforms 
arising from changes in government policies and changes in the global financial markets. For 
those of you who manage human resource, you may need to seek answers to the following 
questions:  
 
How  will  duties  of  central  banks  change  with  anticipated  global  development  and 
global responsibilities?  
How have demands on central banks changed – nationally and expectation?  
What capabilities need to be built?  
What can Human Resource do to facilitate the desired changes and ensure Central 
Bank executives have the right set of skills at all levels?  
 Central  banks’  modernization  to  conform  to  the  ever-changing  business  environment  and 
benchmarking against best practice is no longer an option. These changes will continuously 
take central banks into new horizons that bring forth both opportunities and threats that we 
need to mitigate against.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: In April 2011, I presided over a similar conference organized by the 
Indian  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance.  At  that  event,  I  acknowledged  the  importance  of 
such platforms for enabling banks to not only share experiences, but also to exchange ideas 
on innovations and other emerging issues that require the preparation of bank staff to cope 
with the ever evolving trends in the global financial scene. I therefore challenged institutions 
with  similar  mandate  to  embrace  such  platforms  as  an  avenue  for  bringing  together  HR 
practitioners  and  policy  makers  in  the  banking  sector  to  share  ideas  on  innovations  that 
require  proactive  HR  training  and  development.  I  am  therefore  very  pleased  that  KSMS 
together  with  the  CMI  took  up  the  challenge  to  organize  this  Symposium  as  a  forum  for 
participants  to  reflect  and  debate  current  and  emerging  HR  challenges  that  are  likely  to 
impact on the performance and service delivery of central banks in the region.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  There  are  a  number  of  salient  HR  issues  that  are  of  concern  to 
central bank operations and performance in the 21st century. Let me list them:  
1. 
Regional  Integration  and  Capacity  Development  –  As  you  are  aware,  the 
Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  (COMESA)  regional  integration 
process is progressing well. Milestones achieved so far include the establishment of 
the  COMESA  Monetary  Institute,  currently  hosted  here  at  the  Kenya  School  of 
Monetary  Studies  in  recognition  of  capacity  building  as  one  of  the  key  pillars 
necessary for achieving successful integration. Partner central banks have identified 
the need to revise the frameworks governing HR policies and strategies in line with 
international best practice. The call for the establishment of an integrated framework 
for  a  holistic  approach  to  capacity  building  among  central  banks  in  COMESA  is 
therefore a pertinent one. Implementation of such an approach will enable regional 
banks  to  realize  greater  economies  of  scale  by  taking  advantage  of  regional 
institutional and human resources. Capacity building must, therefore, take a unified 
approach, with regional central banks coming together to pool resources and take 
advantage  of  regional  diversity  to  achieve  greater  efficiency  in  organizational 
performance.  
Performance Management and Talent Development – Traditionally, central banks 
have had a multi-generational workforce with the older segment forming the majority 
of the workforce. HR managers are therefore faced with the challenge of balancing 
the  demands  of  the  older  workforce  with  that  of  the  younger  workforce  using 
recognized management principles. The younger workforce comes ready to take up 
responsibilities at a lesser age and experience, but with high bargaining power due 
to  their  knowledge  and  skills  at  hand  and  techno-savvyness.  A  clear  shift  is  thus 
2. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 3. 
4. 
  innovations  have  been 
implemented.  The  success  of 
seen  in  terms  of  organizational  career  commitment  to  individualized  career 
management. Managing this set of people is essential for the growth of any industry 
but  especially  for  central  banks  where  the  composition  of  the  workforce  is  rapidly 
changing. The challenge therefore is on the need to develop individuals who have 
performance potential on the basis of past record and knowledge-based expertise 
while at the same time tapping into the expertise of the younger generation without 
compromising staff morale.  
Furthermore, the hired for life  mentality of the  past is fast becoming obsolete as 
workers  increasingly  change  employers.  HR  must  therefore  place  emphasis  on 
proper work-life balance, while at the same time motivating staff through continuous 
learning opportunities and positive feedback.  
Managing  Change  –  Organizations  are  getting  more  and  more  technologically 
oriented.  The  banking  sector  particularly,  has  undergone  revolutionary  changes 
enabled  by  technology.  In  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  for  example,  a  number  of 
technological 
these 
interventions  is  no  doubt  heavily  dependent  on  managing  the  people  issues 
surrounding  the  process.  In  order  to  realize  acceptance  at  all  levels  in  the 
organization,  HR  has  a  major  role  in  preparing  the  workforce  to  understand  and 
endogenize the technological changes.  
Human Resource – The success of any organization depends on the resources it 
has,  one  of  them  being  human  capital.  This  boils  down  to  recruiting  the  best, 
developing, managing the best and devising an incentive mechanism for retention 
and career progression.  
The success of central banks in terms of service delivery and achievement of core 
mandate to the expectations of governments, the market and other stakeholders, is 
hinged  on  appropriate  governance  structures  and  practices 
that  guarantee 
professionalism in policy decision-making.  
A quick look at the Symposium programme, Ladies and Gentlemen, confirms that 
the organizers have identified some of these critical elements that are required to 
drive  regional  central  banks  through  the  next  decade  and  beyond.  Adequately 
themed  “Driving  Central  Banks  Through  the  21st  Century”,  the  Symposium 
brings  together  knowledgeable  speakers  from  across  different  sectors  including 
central  banks,  corporate  entities  and  academic  institutions  from  the  continent  and 
beyond.  I  therefore  have  no  doubt  that  this  Symposium  will  offer  cutting  edge  or 
frontier experiences and lessons learnt on strategies for confronting the challenges 
now facing several HR Departments in Central Banks. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  the  course  of  your  deliberations,  please  take  time  to  look  into 
some of the following issues and come up with appropriate recommendations:  
 
Identify  gaps  in  core  competency  areas  of  human  resource  development  and 
management  in  the  financial  sector  in  general  and  in  regional  central  banks  in 
particular.  
Propose  areas  of  regional  cooperation  and  strategies  for  forging  partnerships 
with  our  development  partners  which  will  allow  for  effective  coordination  of 
interventions in capacity building.  
Establish, preferably an annual, forum for discussing issues and processes, 
sharing experiences, ideas and best practices related to capacity building, creating 
awareness  and  mobilizing  resources  for  further  improvements  on  capacity  for 
growth in the region.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Establish an integrated framework for a holistic approach to capacity building 
for central banks within COMESA. This will support the financial markets in the 
COMESA Region with HR capacity building blueprint.  
With  these  few  remarks,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  to  declare  this 
Symposium officially open and wish you fruitful deliberations.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
