Matthew Elderfield: Solvency II – the impact in Europe and Bermuda 
Address by  Mr  Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 
Insurance Day Summit, Hamilton, 12 June 2012. 
 Thank  you  to  Insurance  Day  for  the  kind  invitation  to  join  you  at  this  event.  It’s  a  great 
pleasure to be back in Bermuda to have this opportunity to speak and also to spend a bit of 
time  meeting  the  Bermuda  firms  and  my  former  colleagues  at  the  Bermuda  Monetary 
Authority. In addition to my obvious personal interest in Bermuda, there are clearly close ties 
between  Bermuda  and  the  Irish  insurance  market.  A  number  of  Bermuda  insurance 
companies  have  a  significant  presence  in  Ireland  which  they  use  as  their  base  for  pan 
European  activity.  And  more  broadly,  wearing  my  hat  as  a  member  of  the  European 
Insurance  Regulators  or  EIOPA  Management  Board,  there  are  very  close  ties  between 
Bermuda and the EU. Bermuda is an important source of risk capital and insurance services 
into the European Union, and as such it is an important source of diversification of risk and 
provides benefits to wholesale and ultimately retail consumers across the European Union. 
For example, 37% of EMEA property cat risk was placed with Bermuda companies according 
to  the  most  recent  Aon  Benfield  data.  France,  Germany,  Spain  and  Benelux  each  place 
between 18–25% of their total premiums with Bermuda companies. 
It is therefore encouraging to see that in spite of difficult operating conditions last year the 
Bermuda Insurance market is continuing to play an important role internationally and that the 
Bermuda Monetary Authority is continuing to make good progress in its drive to enhance its 
regulatory regime. 
What  I  propose  to  do  today  is  to  start  with  a  brief  update  on  Solvency  II  implementation. 
Secondly, I want to choose 3 particular aspects of Solvency II to consider in a bit of detail. 
And, finally, I would like to take an opportunity to say a word about the equivalence process 
and what it means for Bermuda.  
By  this  time  almost  everyone  in  the  Insurance  Industry  from  chairmen  to  secretaries, 
underwriters  to  loss  adjusters  and  indeed  not  just  in  Europe  but  in  Bermuda,  the  US  and 
elsewhere, will have heard about Solvency II. It is the new regulatory framework for setting 
risk based solvency requirements for insurance and reinsurance companies operating within 
the  European  Union.  It  is  organised  around  three  pillars:  a  first  pillar  setting  quantitative 
solvency requirements covering all aspects of insurance business, including asset risks and 
prescribing  eligible  forms  of  capital.  The  second  pillar  is  aimed  at  qualitative  requirements 
concerning  risk  management  and  governance  standards.  And  a  third  pillar  is  designed  to 
encourage  market  discipline  by  requiring  a  high  level  of  transparency  and  disclosure  from 
regulated firms. This framework is a clear improvement on the current European Solvency I 
rule book. Unlike Solvency I, it is risk based, covers the asset side of the balance sheet and 
provides  an  incentive  for  investment  in  risk  management,  including  the  use  of  internal 
models. Importantly, it is founded on a balance sheet based on market consistent economic 
value. 
Solvency II is not a single piece of legislation but rather an interconnected group of laws and 
European rules. The Solvency II directive itself has been adopted but a supplemental piece 
of  legislation  known  as  Omnibus  II  is  concluding  the  process  of  approval  in  Europe  and 
makes important amendments to the core Solvency II law. In addition the directive framework 
will  be  supplemented  by  a  significant  raft  of  so  called  level  2  regulations  and  EIOPA,  the 
European Insurance Authority, will promulgate a wide range of binding technical standards, 
guidance and other materials to flesh out the detail of this regulatory framework, often known 
as level 3 measures.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This all adds up to what will certainly be a highly complex corpus of rules. While Solvency II 
has many benefits and is a distinct improvement on the current European Framework, that 
complexity is certainly a source of concern. Regulators, large firms and certainly small firms 
will  each  struggle  to  some  degree  to  assimilate  and  implement  this  significant  scale  of 
change.  This  complexity  is  indeed  impacting  the  implementation  timetable  of  the  directive. 
The process of finalising Omnibus II has unfortunately been delayed in the Brussels process, 
which has the knock on effect of squeezing the time available for consulting on, issuing and 
then  implementing  the  range  of  secondary  rules.  The  current  target  is  that  member  state 
governments will domestically implement the European framework by 30th June 2013 and 
then  the  directive  will  come  into force for  insurance  firms  themselves  at  the  start  of  2014. 
While this timeline is certainly challenging even if it does slip a little, it is certain that Solvency 
II is getting very close and will have significant implications for the insurance industry not just 
in Europe but globally.  
There are a lot of dimensions of Solvency II which could be discussed and which will impact 
on the industry, but I would like to take an opportunity to focus on just three in the brief time 
available.  
First, a word on the impact of Solvency II on the life industry, as this is the biggest open issue 
that remains in the final negotiations on the directive and its related rules. At question here is 
the impact of the market consistent economic valuation principle on the life industry business 
model,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  provision  of  long  term  guarantees.  Industry  has 
expressed concern that by prescribing a fixed common discount rate while at the same time 
requiring  mark-to-market  changes  in  asset  values,  then  long  term  guarantee  products  in 
particular could be exposed to spikes in solvency requirements in times of short term market 
volatility.  Similar  but  related  concerns  exist  regarding  the  impact  of  mark-to-market 
requirements on assets more generally and in light of recent experiences on sovereign debt 
in  particular.  Again:  short-term  the  concern  is  that  volatility  that  drives  mark-to-market 
changes  in  the  fixed  income  portfolios  of  insurance  companies  could  lead  to  volatility  in 
solvency buffers. This has caused concern among some observers on a number of fronts. 
First  there  is  the  worry  that  this  framework  will  discourage  the  provision  of  long  term 
guarantee  products,  which  provide  a  useful  source  of  savings  and  investment  for  retail 
consumers.  Second  there  is  a  worry  that  the  framework  may  be  inherently  pro-cyclical  by 
exacerbating pressure to dispose of assets in times of increased market volatility.  
These are real and reasonable concerns and are being tackled in the final negotiations on 
the directive. Discussions are underway to adapt the framework by allowing adjustments to 
applicable discount rates for certain matched assets and liabilities. Also, a so called counter 
cyclical  premium  is  being  developed  –  again  to  allow  an  adjustment  to  discount  rates  to 
offset excess short-term volatility in certain aspects of the fixed income portfolio. There are a 
number of different technical approaches to achieve this end and as ever the devil is in the 
detail, but the desired outcome is a framework that seeks to square the circle of providing a 
more  risk  sensitive  solvency  framework,  while  at  the  same  time  permitting  the  continued 
provision of guaranteed products and avoiding dangerous pro-cyclical effects. While this is a 
highly  technical  debate  about  the  detail  of  discounting  and  valuation  requirements  on 
particular  portfolios  of  assets  backing  certain  insurance  products,  I  think  it  is  important  to 
highlight it as one of the key outstanding issues because of the significant impact it will have 
on the development of long-term savings products and its relevance to the current turbulence 
in the euro sovereign debt markets. 
The  second  subject  I  would  like  to  mention  briefly  is  that  of  internal  models.  Solvency  II 
permits insurance companies to propose the use of their own internal model as an alternate 
to the directive’s standardised formula for calculating solvency requirements. The framework 
is calibrated to provide an incentive for firms to invest and develop more sophisticated risk 
management.  This  is  to  be  welcomed  and  encouraged.  But  there  are  risks  to  manage  as 
well. Solvency II’s use of internal models is broadly similar to that of the Basel Framework 
but  in  fact  provides  even  greater  scope  to  firms  in  their  modelling,  as  Basel  set  certain 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
minimum  correlation  assumptions  for  models  but  Solvency  II  does  not.  There  is  clearly  a 
strong incentive for insurance companies to optimise their use of capital under the directive 
and  to  do  so  through  the  adoption  of  models.  This  is  perhaps  stronger  in  the  general 
insurance  market  than  in  the  life  market  due  to  the  anticipated  relative  strengthening  of 
solvency  standards.  Internal  models  are,  however,  subject  to  supervisory  approval,  and  of 
course approval by the insurance company’s own board. To my mind it is important that the 
approval process doesn’t get bogged down in detail such as endless documentation reviews 
but stays focussed on the key drivers of the overall solvency calculation arising from the use 
of a model. 
Regulators  and  industry  spend  a  lot  of  time  arguing  about  the  detailed  calibration  of  very 
specific  risk  factors  under  the  Solvency  II  Framework.  But  it  is  when  the  solvency 
requirements for different lines of business and different aspects of risk are combined that 
the overall solvency requirement can swing significantly as a result of the judgements that 
are made regarding correlation and diversification. If this is where the big swings in numbers 
can occur, it should be at the forefront of the regulatory approval process and above all in the 
challenge from insurance companies’ boards.  
Diversification is of course an inherent part of the insurance business model but as you are 
aware, the risk is that diversification in times of stress is more apparent than it is real. The 
assessment of correlation and the level of diversification that is recognised is not a matter for 
a  black  box  or  a  theoretical  formula.  It  is  inherently  a  matter  of  expert  judgement  for  an 
insurance company’s senior management and boards, not just its quants and risk team. It is 
right  and  proper  that  boards  should  be  expected  to  challenge  vigorously  the  amount  of 
diversification benefit being claimed in internal models even if they don’t know the  internal 
plumbing of copulas or correlation matrices. Regulators should expect them to take a prudent 
and conservative approach and to ask challenging questions about how the models will hold 
up in times of stress. 
The third dimension of Solvency II I would like to mention briefly is the impact of the directive 
on  business  models  or,  more  narrowly,  corporate  structures.  As  I  have  mentioned,  capital 
optimisation will inevitably be a key theme for the management of companies impacted by 
the  directive.  In  addition  to  the  use  of  models,  revisions  to  corporate  structures  are  to  my 
mind likely to be a further avenue of exploration. In particular, in Ireland we see considerable 
interest in the so called Hub and Spokes Model. This involves choosing a single European 
jurisdiction  as  the  location  for  the  Hub  operating  company  and  conducting  pan  European 
insurance  business  on  a  branch  basis  throughout  various  EU  countries.  As  necessary, 
existing subsidiaries outside of the hub country are therefore transferred into branches. This 
has  the  dual  advantage  of  consolidating  operations,  thereby  reducing  costs  through 
economies  of  scale,  and  also  crucially  of  optimising  capital,  as  capital  is  no  longer 
fragmented in each individual subsidiary. 
There are some prominent examples of the Hub and Spokes structure in Europe involving 
Ireland  as  the  choice  of  Hub.  We  will  have  to  see  whether  this  trend  continues  or  not, 
although  as  I  say  there  appears  to  be  a  compelling  logic  behind  it.  A  challenge  for  the 
supervisor  is  the  effective  supervision  of  such  structures.  For  our  part,  our  starting 
proposition that the Hub must have substance and be able to deploy effective controls over 
the operations of its branches. Then, as a supplement, as a supervisor we too will assess 
branch  operations  directly  or  through  the  use  of  skilled  persons  such  as  auditors  and 
consultants. Finally there is a significant challenge of coordination between both home and 
host  supervisors  to  ensure  that  all  interested  stakeholders  are  kept  well  informed.  At  the 
Central  Bank  of Ireland we  are  very  committed to  ensuring that  the  appropriate  regulatory 
framework is in place for Hub and Spoke operations and that our supervisory resources are 
adequate to the task of overseeing such operations. It will be interesting to see whether this 
model will grow as Solvency II gets closer to implementation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I have by now given you a sense of where Solvency II stands in the implementation process 
and a few of the key issues that are currently being debated or considered. Let me conclude 
with  a  few  words  about  the  equivalence  process  and  where  Bermuda  stands.  Solvency  II 
requires  that  insurers  from  third  country  jurisdictions  must  be  subject  to  a  regulatory 
framework  that  is  broadly  equivalent  to  that  within  Europe  itself.  Absence  of  such  an 
equivalence  finding  provides  the  prospect  of  a  more  punitive  solvency  treatment  for  firms 
from such jurisdictions.  
Bermuda, along with Switzerland and Japan, is in the first wave of countries being assessed 
for equivalence and is making extremely good progress. The first assessment of Bermuda by 
EIOPA  was  largely  very  positive,  albeit  with  some  further  work  to  do  in  some  areas.  The 
protracted process of Solvency II implementation in Europe has in fact given more time for 
Bermuda and other countries to adapt their framework in order to be ready.  
Following a further assessment by EIOPA the ultimate decision will rest with the European 
Commission, in consultation with other EU institutions. My view is that Bermuda is very well 
placed for this assessment process and is to be commended for the work that Jeremy Cox 
and  his  team  have  undertaken  to  drive  forward  enhancements  to  the  Bermuda  regulatory 
framework. These are by no means insignificant and have included the development of a risk 
based  solvency  framework  and  introduction  of  group  solvency  requirements.  This  is  a 
significant accomplishment, although clearly more remains to be done. 
It may seem odd that recently Europe has proposed a transitional equivalence regime which 
will  allow  the  benefits  of  the  directive  to  be  enjoyed  on  an  interim  basis,  allowing  other 
jurisdictions to take a longer route to reforming their regulatory frameworks to broadly match 
that in Europe. I wouldn’t be distracted by those developments. By being in the first wave of 
the  equivalence  assessment  process  and  by  hopefully  winning  a  favourable  outcome, 
Bermuda will be in the enviable position of having definitively cleared the EU process before 
many other competitor jurisdictions are able to do likewise. That provides absolute certainty 
to the Bermuda Market as to the treatment it will receive under the EU rule book and unlike 
other countries means that the risk of adverse regulatory developments will not be hanging in 
the background. Moreover, full equivalence recognition will cement Bermuda’s reputation as 
a financial centre that is committed to high standards of regulation.  
There  will,  however,  be  continuing  challenges  in  implementing  the  new  framework  on  the 
ground. A regulatory framework is only effective as the supervision system that implements 
it. In Bermuda, the three issues that I have flagged earlier will have local ramifications that 
need to be worked through. The Bermuda solvency framework for life companies’ remains to 
be  finalised  and  the  implications  of  a  market  consistent  economic  valuation  approach  on 
balance sheets still needs to be fully developed. The internal model approval process will, as 
in  Ireland  and  Europe,  be  a  big  challenge  for  Bermuda  and  will  require  some  tough 
supervisory calls. And the new complex group structures of the post Solvency II world  will 
require adequately resourced and high quality supervisors. Let me reinforce that last point in 
the Bermudian context, given the likely significant number of groups for which the BMA will 
be  responsible.  Group  supervision  is  a  major  task  and  requires  high  quality  dedicated 
supervisors  who  understand  the  business  models  of  the  firms  they  supervise,  are  able  to 
periodically test governance and control frameworks, have a good understanding of complex 
intercompany  transactions,  can  oversee  the  assessment  of  group  solvency  requirements, 
closely  monitor  the  performance  of  internal  models  and  ensure  effective  coordination  and 
information flow between all relevant supervisors with an interest in the group. It is important 
that the Bermuda Market continues to provide support to the BMA as it builds up its capacity 
to undertake effective group supervision in practice, as the various tasks come on line and 
need to be executed. The Central Bank of Ireland is committed to working closely with the 
BMA  to  ensure  effective  cooperation  in  the  supervision  of  those  Bermuda  groups  with  a 
presence in Ireland and across Europe. There is also a good working relationship between 
EIOPA and the BMA on questions of Solvency II cooperation and implementation.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Solvency  II  –  while  its  implementation  is  not  yet  directly  upon  us  –  will  have  profound 
implications  for  the  shape  of  the  insurance  market  in  Europe  and  beyond.  The  new 
regulatory  standards  will  have  implications  both  subtle  and  profound  for  insurance  pricing, 
investment  strategy  and  risk  taking.  It  will  encourage  investments  in  risk  management 
capability and ever more sophisticated modelling. It may provide incentives for fundamental 
reshaping  of  corporate  structures.  These  are  big  challenges  for  regulated  firms  and  for 
supervisors  too.  It  is  essential  then  that  Ireland  and  Bermuda,  and  indeed  Europe  and 
Bermuda, work closely together through this process. It is encouraging to see the progress 
that has been made so far and I am confident that it will continue in the future.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
