Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana, 
28 December 2011. 
 Today, on 28 December 2011, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to leave the key interest rate 
unchanged at 4.75%. The Supervisory Council deemed that the actual monetary conditions 
are appropriate to meet the inflation target over the medium run and provide the necessary 
monetary stimulus and to support economic activity in Albania.  
(Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  economic  developments  and  main  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting.)  
 Inflation  rate  in  November  was  2.9%,  slightly  down  by  0.1  percentage  points  from  the 
previous  month.  Most  of  inflation  in  November  was  formed  by  higher  prices  of  processed 
foods and non-food consumption goods, whereas other items of the consumer goods basket 
had low inflation rates.  
Recent months were characterised by progressive reduction of inflationary pressures on the 
economy. On the supply side, prise rise slowdown for main products in international markets 
and national currency stability were reflected in dampened imported inflation. Moreover, the 
cancelling out of direct administered price increase effects contributed to lower inflation rates 
during this period. On the demand side, below-potential growth of the Albanian economy and 
under-utilised capacities in the labour and capital markets were reflected in limited pressures 
on production costs and ultimate prices in the economy. Furthermore, the Bank of Albania’s 
positive experience on inflation control and its reliable monetary policy have contributed to 
controlling  inflation  expectations  and  mitigating  transmission  of  supply  shocks  on  headline 
inflation. Overall, this trend is expected to continue in the period ahead.  
The absence of direct data on real economy indicators makes a comprehensive analysis of 
the Albanian economy difficult. Our judgement is thus based on indirect data, which proxy 
developments  in  various  sectors  of  the  economy,  as  well  as  information  filtered  from 
monetary  indicators,  fiscal  indicators,  external  sector  indicators,  and  businesses  and 
consumer confidence surveys.  
The  analysis  of  these  indicators  supports  the  assessment  for  positive-but-below  potential 
performance  of  the  Albanian  economy  in  the  second  and  third  quarters.  Economic  growth 
was  also  supported  by  external  demand  and  public  sector  demand,  whereas  private 
consumption and investments continued to be sluggish. Production growth was mainly driven 
by  the  industry  and  services  sectors,  whereas  the  construction  sector  continued  to  suffer 
from low demand for residential properties.  
Performance  of  private  consumption  and  investments  was  sluggish.  In  line  with  the 
performance  of  the  economy,  available  income  of  Albanian  households  were  assessed  as 
growing at lower rates in this period. The sluggish consumption has reflected mostly higher 
inclination  of  Albanian  households  towards  savings.  Private  consumption  was  more 
supported  by  consumer  credit  in  2011.  Nevertheless,  banks  report  feeble  demand  for 
consumer credits, while consumers continued their hesitation for large purchases in 2011.  
Moreover, investments in the economy are restricted by the ultimate demand, existence of 
spare capacities in production and added prudence by banks in lending.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In this context, monetary policy easing of the second half of 2011 is expected to be reflected 
in better lending terms to Albanian businesses and households to support their consumption 
and investment. I have often reiterated that their performance will condition economic growth 
in the short and medium run.  
Fiscal  policy  has  been  stimulating  in  2011,  though  this  stimulus  has  fluctuated  over  the 
quarters. As indicated by the expenditures and budget deficit performance, the fiscal stimulus 
was stronger in the first quarter and moderate in the second and third quarters. Data for the 
fourth quarter point to its acceleration.  
Budget  deficit  in  the  first  11  months  was  ALL  38  billion,  reflecting  mainly  public  spending. 
Their annualised increase rate for the first 11 months was 5.6%, with added contribution by 
capital expenditures during October–November. On the other hand, fiscal revenues continue 
to have slow annual increase, at 0.7% for this period.  
Foreign  demand  continued  to  contribute  to  aggregate  demand  growth  in  the  economy, 
albeit  less  than  in  earlier  periods.  Its  performance  was  affected  by  the  unfavourable 
economic situation of our main trade partners. In October, exports were up 16.3 %, recording 
slower annual growth rates.  
On  the  other  hand,  under  the  effect  of  high  prices  in  international  markets,  annualised 
imports  rates  remained  high  and  were  materialised  in  Albania’s  trade  deficit  expansion, 
which in October was 11.6% higher than a year earlier.  
Monetary sector’s analysis indicates contained inflationary pressures of monetary nature in 
Albania’s economy. Broad money expansion was 10.6% in October, lower than the average 
rates of 2011. In real terms, monetary supply growth rates were stable and are deemed to be 
in accordance with economic agents’ demand for real money. During the last months, public 
sector demand decelerated, whereas private sector demand for monetary assets increased. 
Private sector credit growth rates were upward and settled at 14.0% in October.  
Credit demand was higher both by businesses and by households; however, this growth is 
slow. Overall, lending terms offered by the banking system and parameters of capitalisation, 
liquidity  and  health  are  appropriate  for  funding  higher  demand  for  private  consumption  or 
investments in the future.  
Latest  developments  in  financial  markets  continue  to  be  characterised  by  controlled  risk, 
liquidity  and  inflation  premiums.  Successive  key  interest  cuts  appear  to  have  been 
transmitted  forthwith  in  the  money  market.  Government  securities  yields  in  the  primary 
market dropped further, reflecting the key interest rate cut in the economy and the low public 
sector  demand  for  funding.  The  key  interest  rate  cut  is  expected  to  be  transmitted  in  the 
future  to  interest  rates  on  deposits  and  loans,  in  accordance  with  the  time  lag  of  the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
Lastly, a positive development in financial markets at home is the reconfirmation of the actual 
government bond rating and the country’s stable outlook by Moody’s and Standard & Poor 
rating agencies.  
Projections for the economic outlook remain subject to high uncertainties, dictated mainly 
by developments in the global economy. Our analysis and estimates suggest continuation of 
moderate economic growth rates for the reminder of the year and the next year.  
Economic  slowdown  in  our  trade  partner  countries  may  be  reflected  in  weaker  foreign 
demand and further deceleration of Albanian exports.  
In addition, space for implementing fiscal stimuli narrowed in response to the growing need 
for  maintaining  fiscal  stability  and  controlling  public  deficit  and  debt  levels.  Consequently, 
public sector contribution to aggregate demand growth is expected to be downward in 2012. 
Under these circumstances, the extent and speed of recovery of private sector demand will 
be crucial for the country’s economic growth. As we have stated in earlier communications, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  actual  monetary  conditions  are  appropriate  to  encourage  private  consumption  and 
investments.  
 Taking  into  consideration  the  information  set  out  above,  in  the  Supervisory  Council 
assessment,  inflationary  pressures  remain  controlled  over  the  monetary  policy  relevant 
horizon.  
The  presence  of  the  negative  output  gap  in  the  period  ahead  will  be  accompanied  by  low 
inflationary pressures originating from internal demand.  
In  addition,  inflationary  pressures  from  global  economy  developments  are  projected  to  be 
more  moderate,  whereas  inflation  expectations  are  anchored.  These  assessments  are 
materialised  in  annual  inflation  projections  ranging  within  the  target  band  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania for the medium run.  
At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  leave  the  key 
interest  rate  unchanged  at  4.75%.  This  decision  serves  to  comply  with  the  medium 
term inflation target and provides the appropriate monetary conditions for Albania’s 
economic activity.  
Bank of Albania remains heedful to future economic and financial developments, both 
at home and internationally, as well as vigilant to fulfil its mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
