Vítor Constâncio: Shadow banking – the ECB perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
European  Commission  Conference  “Towards  better  regulation  of  the  shadow  banking 
system”, Brussels, 27 April 2012. 
 Dear Commissioner Barnier,  
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  at  this  conference  to  address  the  “better  regulation  of  the 
shadow banking system”. The term shadow banking is widely used to cover activities related 
to  credit  intermediation,  liquidity  and  maturity  transformation  taking  place  outside  the 
regulated  banking  system.  This  term  should  not  have  a  pejorative  meaning  as  shadow 
banking activities perform basic functions of the financial system. It has however the merit of 
clearly indicating the nature of the problem. Indeed, it is evident that before the crisis part of 
the shadow banking system has significantly expanded by moving from light into shadow, by 
shifting  regulated  banking  activities  into  institutions,  transactions  or  markets  which  are  not 
within the scope of regulation.  
In  this  context,  today  I  will  first  address  the  general  problems  created  by  the  unregulated 
shadow banking as well as the main guidelines for the necessary regulatory reform that is 
progressing internationally under the aegis of the FSB. In the second part of my remarks I 
will focus on repo markets, given their importance for the functioning of money markets and 
consequently  for  central  banks.  To  address  concrete  practical  issues,  I  will  make  some 
proposals on how to create a database, which I believe is indispensable to provide us with 
basic  information  about  the  functioning  of  the  European  repo  market,  at  least  on  a  similar 
basis  to  the  one  existing  in  the  US.  I  will  also  briefly  discuss  some  policy  proposals 
concerning repo markets that have been raised in the international debate. 
The relevance of shadow banking for European financial stability 
I. 
The  activities  of  shadow  banking  before  the  crises  were  widely  mentioned  as  triggers  or 
factors contributing to the financial crisis. These activities can be largely traced back to the 
prevalence of the originate-to-distribute banking model, which gave the possibility to transfer 
part of the balance sheet and the related regulatory requirements from the regulated to the 
unregulated part of the financial sector. 
Shadow banking includes entities involved in securitisation and other activities extending the 
intermediation  process,  such  as  special  vehicles  and  other  financial  intermediaries. 
Differently  from  the  U.S.,  in  continental  Europe  lending  activity  per  se  is  seldom  moved 
outside  the  regulated  financial  system.  Also,  securitisation  activities  in  Europe  and  in  the 
euro area never attained the level observed in the U.S., notwithstanding the large drop in US 
issuance after the financial crisis. 
On the funding side, a main component of shadow banking is the secured lending markets, 
particularly the repo market. In the U.S., the money market funds are usually included in the 
shadow banking sector and were an important source of funding for other shadow financial 
institutions, like securitisation vehicles, via the purchases of their short-term debt. They are 
much  less  important  in  the  euro  area.  However,  in  this  respect,  the  relevance  of  their 
intermediation  activity  varies  across  countries  and  they  are  more  closely  tied  to  banks, 
therefore providing a powerful link between the shadow and the regulated banking sector. 
As policy makers, we are interested in the possible dangers for financial stability arising from 
shadow  banking  activities.  In  particular,  we  are  concerned  about  the  implications  of  these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
activities for global liquidity. If shadow banks are involved in a large share of the activities of 
the financial sector, it is more likely that in periods of stress liquidity dries up very quickly in 
certain  markets  leading  to  sudden  stops  in  funding.  Also,  shadow  banking  extends  the 
intermediation chain and increases the associated contagion risks.  
There are various forms of interplay between the regulated banking system and the shadow 
banking system resulting in a substantial amplification of systemic risk. One of the elements 
for the US market, has been the “run on repos” of shadow banking entities that were funded 
using  asset-backed-securities  as  collateral.  When  the  value  of  these  assets  declined 
dramatically,  these  entities,  which  could  not  access  central  bank  liquidity,  got  quickly  into 
trouble.1 “Bank runs” involving shadow banking entities have systemic risk implications since 
they  can  quickly  spill  over  to  the  regulated  financial  sector.  This  happens  via  contagion 
propagating  through  market  dynamics  –  liquidity  squeeze,  fire  sales  –  or  via  the 
interconnectedness with the regulated banking sector. Shadow banking activities exacerbate 
the build-up of leverage and asset price bubbles and therefore amplify the procyclicality of 
the financial system.  
Based on these characterisation and the available data, recent estimates published recently 
by the ECB2 put the value of the assets of shadow banking in the euro area to about one half 
of the assets of the banking system. In the U.S., in view of the lower weight of banks in the 
overall financial system, the size of the shadow banking, although not much higher than in 
Europe in absolute terms, is practically equal to the total assets of the banking sector. In the 
euro area, there is a certain degree of heterogeneity and most importantly, there is a high 
degree  of  interconnectedness  between  the  European  banking  sector  and  the  shadow 
banking. Some segments of the shadow banking provide funding to the regulated banks and 
the liabilities of financial vehicles set up outside the balance sheet of banks may actually be 
guaranteed in some form by the originator banks.  
issues,  including 
The regulatory debate on shadow banking  
II. 
Following  the  mandate  received  by  the  G20,  the  FSB  has  made  remarkable  efforts  to 
prepare  policy  recommendations  addressing  shadow  banking.  It  has  been  clear  from  the 
outset  the  importance  of  pooling  expertise  and  resources  from  several  authorities,  as  a 
comprehensive assessment of all the financial sectors was needed to clearly understand the 
problem. This has been possible thanks to the steering of the FSB. To give an indication of 
the complexity of the matters, the FSB put in place five different workstreams, also relying on 
the  support  of  international  standards  setters.  Two  of  these  workstreams  address  specific 
regulatory 
funds  and 
securitisation. The other workstreams assess broader issues, such as the banks’ interactions 
with shadow banking entities, the need for new regulation on shadow banking entities, and 
systemic risks stemming from practices in securities financing and repo markets.  
This  last  topic  is  of  close  interest  for  central  banks,  and  I  will  devote  some  specific 
consideration to it. Before that, I would like to make some more general observations. 
First, given that one of the main risks stemming from shadow banking relates to regulatory 
arbitrage,  it  is  important,  and  indeed  crucial  in  Europe,  to  ensure  consistency  of  policy 
initiatives  across  countries.  In  this  context,  I  note  that  in  the  US  the  Dodd-Frank  Act 
prohibits banks from proprietary trading (the so-called Volcker rule) and restricts investments 
in hedge funds and private equity by commercial banks and their affiliates. The imposition of 
such restrictions is not being considered by the FSB, which is looking instead at a possible 
for  money  market 
the  regulatory 
treatment 
                                                 
1   Gorton and Metrick (2009), Securitised Banking and the Run on Repo, NBER Working Paper No 15223. 
2  See  Bakk-Simon  et  al.  (2012),  Shadow  Banking  in  the  Euro  Area:  An  Overview,  ECB  Occasional  Paper 
No 133, April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
enhancement  of  the  prudential  requirements  related  to  the  interplay  between  banks  and 
hedge funds. This could create the potential for an asymmetry leading to distorted regulatory 
incentives.  
Second, also on the basis of the FSB analysis, we need to look with new eyes at the EU 
regulatory  framework  and  ask  ourselves  whether  it  can  properly  address  systemic  risks 
stemming from shadow banking. In the past, regulation was sectoral-based, without specific 
consideration  of  the  interconnections  existing  in  reality  between  financial  sectors.  In  this 
context, I welcome the Commission’s Green Paper, which contains a very helpful preliminary 
analysis  on  whether  the  regulatory  initiatives  undertaken  so  far  in  Europe  are  addressing 
such new perspective. It also indicates outstanding policy issues on which further regulatory 
initiatives might be needed. 
The Green Paper is also referring to the need for Europe to establish a permanent process 
for the collection and exchange of information by all relevant authorities to address shadow 
banking  entities  and  activities.  In  this  regard,  I  note  that  the  ESRB,  as  the  EU  macro-
prudential body with authority over the whole EU financial sector, is well placed to conduct a 
continuous monitoring of systemic risks stemming from shadow banking. 
Policy issues concerning securities financing: the ECB’s views  
III. 
I  would  like  now  to  focus  on  the  repo  market,  which  is  of  particular  importance  for  central 
banks.  
The repo market is a key source of financing for the banking sector and the shadow banking 
system. Most recent estimates of the size of the repo market in the US are in the range of 
USD 12 trillions in early 2010.3 There are no official data on the overall size of the repo 
market in the euro area, but according to the latest December ICMA survey, the total value 
of  outstanding  repos  on  the  book  of  the  64  offices  of  59  financial  groups  in  the  EU  in 
December 2011 was of EUR 6.2 trillion in gross terms. Secured lending via repos has been 
increasing significantly in the past recent years in detriment of unsecured forms of interbank 
lending  in  money  markets.  Indeed,  we  estimate  that  since  2002  the  daily  turnover  of  the 
interbank  secured  lending  more  than  doubled  whereas  the  unsecured  part  of  that  marked 
decreased slightly.  
Secured  financing  provides  benefits  over  unsecured  lending,  especially  during  turbulent 
market  times.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  reliance  on  secured  financing  provides  a 
powerful channel of transmission of shocks in the financial system. The decline in collateral 
values translates in additional collateral calls possibly compounded with higher haircuts and 
margins requirements. A system in which financial institutions rely substantially on secured 
lending tends to be more pro-cyclical than otherwise.  
Government  bonds  accounts  for  two  third  of  the  EU-originated  collateral  used  in  repo 
transactions.4 The powerful shock amplification system of these markets became particularly 
evident over the last couple of years with the loss in value of the debt of some euro area 
countries.  
In Europe, an increasing share of repos is cleared via central counterparty clearing houses 
(CCPs) – with a share of 32% of outstanding amounts in December 2011 according to the 
ICMA survey, which is multicurrency in scope. CCPs’ share seems to be even larger, about 
50%  in  the  euro  repo  market,  according  to  the  ECB  annual  money  market  survey.  CCPs 
                                                 
3  Gorton  (2010),  “Questions  and  Answers  about  the  Financial  Crisis”,  paper  prepared  for  the  U.S.  Financial 
Crisis Inquiry Commission, February and Gorton, G. (2010), “E-coli, Repo Madness, and the Financial Crisis”, 
Business Economics, Vol. 45, No 3, pp. 164–173. 
4  See International Capital Market Association (2012), European repo market survey, No 22, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
increasingly  interpose  themselves  between  the  original  counterparties  in  repo  market 
transactions, although this trend may reverse if counterparty risk would recede to pre-crisis 
levels.  The  rest  of  the  euro  repo  market  relies  largely  on  bilateral  trading,  clearing  and 
settlement  modalities  (about  40%)  and,  increasingly,  on  triparty  repo  which  represents 
slightly  more  than  10%  of  the  market.  Triparty  repo  is  certainly  a  dynamic  segment  which 
after the 2008 contraction shows again a growing trend. 
I would like to make some preliminary considerations on three policy issues that are currently 
at the centre of the international debate on repo markets.  
First,  the  pro-cyclical  nature  of  margin  requirements  used  in  securities  financing 
transactions. 
Recent  analytical  studies  (largely  based  on  empirical  studies  on  US  markets)  have 
highlighted  that  margin  requirements  and  haircuts  in  repo  markets  are  pro-cyclical.  To 
counter this effect, it has been proposed that minimum haircuts could be applied permanently 
as  a  means  of  limiting  system  leverage  or  used  temporarily  in  response  to  overheated 
market conditions as a macro-prudential tool.  
However, when assessing such proposals, it should be noted that the main pro-cyclical factor 
may not be the level of the haircuts or margins but the level of market prices for collateral 
which can be irrationally high in a boom and correspondingly low amidst fire sales in a crisis. 
Moreover,  a  relevant  share  of  the  EU  repo  market  is  constituted  by  bilateral  trades  which 
cannot be easily controlled by a regulatory agency.  
Such  proposals  will  need  to  be  carefully  assessed  as  regards  their  impact  on  the  money 
market and the possible effect on monetary policy implementation.  
This brings me to my second consideration: should we encourage the use of CCP in 
repo markets? 
During the crisis, the volume of repos declined with the exception of a few market segments. 
The  reduction  in  outstanding  repo  values  was  however  less  pronounced  for  CCP-cleared 
repos  than  for  other  repo  segments.  It  is  well  known  that  some  CCPs  actually  saw  an 
increase  in  their  business  at  a  time  when  counterparty-risk  adverse  market  participants 
turned to safer avenues. 
The good performance of CCPs could be explained by the fact that it addresses effectively 
most  of  the  vulnerabilities  which  affected  repo  markets  during  the  2008  crisis.  When  cash 
lenders  withdrew  from  the  market  due  to  misperceptions  of  the  credit  and  liquidity  risk, 
CCP-cleared repos were significantly less affected. Amidst a general decline of repo market 
trading at the peak of the crisis, some euro area CCPs actually saw an increase of volumes. 
This  happened  because  CCPs  provide  effective  protection  against  counterparty  risk  by 
interposing themselves between the original repo parties.  
From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  properly  supervised  and  overseen  CCPs  act  as  a 
firewall against the propagation of default shocks and can mitigate counterparty credit risk, 
enhance  market  transparency,  facilitate  collateral  liquidation,  and  foster  standardisation  of 
repo terms and eligible collateral. There is also the advantage that policy makers can monitor 
the cleared repo markets since CCPs are regulated institutions.  
Therefore, moving repo clearing to CCP seems to be the appropriate solution which by 
the way is already gaining ground in Europe, having already attained half of the market.  
Third,  some  repo  and  securities  lending  market  practices  raise  concerns  from  a 
financial  stability  point  of  view.  This  is  the  case  for  practices  related  to  cash  collateral 
reinvestments  in  securities  lending  and  to  rehypothecation  by  prime  brokers  of  securities 
given  as  collateral  by  hedge  funds.  I  support  the  work  on-going  by  the  FSB  on  finding 
adequate regulatory responses, which should be aimed to constrain negative incentives and 
increase disclosure.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  three  issues  I  discussed  merit  careful  reflections.  The  ECB  will  support  the 
developments  of  policy  solutions  at  European  level  also  giving  its  contribution  to  the 
Commission’s consultation.  
How to enhance the monitoring of repo and securities financing markets  
IV. 
I would like now to focus on enhancing the monitoring of the repo markets. This market is 
largely an OTC market where rates and volumes are difficult to observe in real time with the 
implication that there is no comprehensive source of information in Europe. There are some 
important trading platforms where operations of short-term and more standard maturity take 
place,  which  can  provide  us  some  useful  information.  However,  significant  limitations  or 
shortfalls do exist as regards existing data sets. 
First, market data are not timely and hardly comparable. The ICMA survey is conducted 
every  6  months,  the  ECB  Money  Market  Survey  every  year  and  the  ECB  Money  Market 
Study biannually. Timelier sources of data are  available among others from CCPs or from 
trading  platforms  e.g.  Eurex  Repo  Euro  Market,  ICAP  BrokerTec  or  MTS.  As  regards  the 
ECB Money Market survey, there will be a pilot phase with a limited panel of banks to have a 
quarterly review. However, most data refers mostly or exclusively to the interbank market. 
Second,  there  are  significant  limitations  as  regards  data  stemming  from  market 
infrastructures. Data are fragmented and not complete, and are also not easily retrievable 
for analytical purposes5. 
Finally,  there  are  no  statistical  sources  available  as  regards  the  repo  and  securities 
financing markets. 
One  recent  initiative  will  be  of  some  help,  notably  the  global  initiative  coordinated  by  the 
Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS)  and  by  the  ECB,  together  with  other 
central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  plans  to  launch  a  qualitative  quarterly  survey  on 
credit  terms  and  conditions  in  euro-denominated  securities  financing  and  over-the-counter 
(OTC)  derivatives  markets.  This  survey  is  driven  in  particular  by  a  need  to  monitor 
developments  in  securities  financing,  i.e.  lending  collateralised  by  securities,  and  OTC 
derivatives markets, as well as in shadow banking more generally. The survey will provide 
information about changes in credit terms applied by the largest banks for lending against 
euro-denominated  security  collateral  and  for  OTC  derivatives  transactions  with  key 
counterparty types, as well as about main reasons behind the changes in those terms. This 
makes it a valuable monitoring and potentially early warning tool to support risk surveillance 
work and the risk identification process.  
                                                 
5  First, available data is not complete. Repos that are settled in the books of custodian banks or in commercial 
bank money are not reflected, for instance in payment systems settling in central bank money, as TARGET. 
Furthermore,  there  is  no  link  in  TARGET  data  to  the  settlement  of  the  securities  leg  of  a  repo  transaction, 
therefore  repo-related  cash  transfers  cannot  be  separated  from  other  payments.  Analytical  efforts  are  on-
going to design algorithms that identify the repo-related payments indirectly, but this may not be enough for 
repo market monitoring purposes. Repo-related deliveries of securities for collateral purposes are not singled 
out from other instructions to deliver securities, for instance from outright trades. Furthermore, participants in 
payment and settlement systems are largely banks; therefore the shadow-banking dimension is not reflected 
in  payment  balances  even  when  banks  act  as  intermediaries  for  non-bank  entities.  Second,  reflecting  the 
European market and the post-trade landscape, data is fragmented across infrastructures and countries. The 
euro repo market relies on a variety of securities clearing and settlement systems (CCPs, CSDs and ICSDs, 
triparty agents, custodian banks) and data may be available only in different formats. Third, data is not easily 
available. Even in those cases where the national supervisors and overseers may have access to the repo 
data available at the local market infrastructure (for example at CCPs) this is not enough to build a complete 
picture and timely monitor developments in the market. A central view is indispensable to gain insight from the 
wider financial stability perspective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Proposal for a database on the euro repo market  
V. 
The ECB has a keen interest in obtaining detailed information on repo market activity 
both for monetary policy implementation and financial stability considerations.  
Any  financial  transaction  that  significantly  affects  the  functioning  of  money  markets  is 
relevant  for  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  for  the  operational 
framework of monetary policy implementation. The continuous gain in importance of the repo 
market is consequently of great importance for the Eurosystem.  
An  assessment  of  financial  intermediaries’  funding  environment  and  financing  activities  is 
also  a  key  element  of  any  financial  stability  analysis.  The  monitoring  of  underlying 
developments  on  the  basis  of  a  regular  data  collection  would  benefit  the  ECB’s  tasks  in 
pointing to potential risks stemming from this market. 
While  differences  in  market  structure  ought  to  be  taken  into  account,  the  U.S.  model  may 
provide  a  starting  point  for  a  European  blueprint.  In  the  U.S.  primary  dealers  voluntarily 
report  on  a  weekly  basis  on  their  trading  activities,  as  well  as  on  their  cash  and  financing 
positions,  in  a  wide  variety  of  underlying  securities6  differentiating  according  to  the 
counterparty type.  
To  improve  the  data  availability  for  repo  markets,  it  could  be  argued  that  some  existing 
surveys  can  be  enhanced  and  the  frequency  of  the  reporting  increased.  However,  the 
information collected would not fill the information gap for the non-bank segment of the repo 
market.  
So how to improve the data availability to monitor the repo market? 
Ideally, a central database would serve the purpose. Trade repositories have been a solution 
adopted to foster transparency in other market segments, as in case of the OTC derivatives 
alongside the introduction of mandatory clearing. In the case of repos, however, it has to be 
considered that transactions are to a large extent already channelled to formal infrastructures 
for clearing and settlement purposes. For instance, Central Securities Depositories (CSDs) 
already  centralise in  their  systems, for  their  respective  market,  information  relating  to  repo 
that  can  be  derived  from  the  settlement  instructions.  It  could  be  argued  that  they  de  facto 
perform already a function that is similar to that of a trade repository. CCPs, triparty agents 
and custodian banks for the bilateral segment are in a similar position with respect to repos 
of their participants, or customers.  
A central database fed by infrastructures and custodian banks to the extent that they 
internalise  repo  settlement  in  their  own  books,  would  be  the  place  for  the  much 
needed central view on repo market and its participants, both banks and non-banks. 
This  solution  would  have  to  be  investigated  from  a  technical  point  of  view.  For  instance, 
infrastructures  would  have  to  report  data  based  on  a common  format  to  be  defined  taking 
into account their respective special focus. To name one, CCPs would have to report pre-
netting  repo  data,  whereas  CSDs  would  have  to  retrieve  and  report  data  on  the  ordering 
party, often a customer of the CSD participant.  
Therefore, I propose the creation of a EU Central Database on Euro Repos as a joint effort 
by public authorities and the financial industry, similarly to the model followed in the U.S. Due 
to its role in macro-prudential financial stability and the closeness of repo to monetary policy, 
and as it is the case with the Federal Reserve, the ECB would be well placed to centralise 
the data gathering for the euro repo market.  
For  a  solution  to  be  possible,  however,  it  would  be  required  the  support  of  the  European 
Commission by taking the necessary legislative initiative for the creation of a basic reporting 
                                                 
6  Underlying  securities  include  U.S.  Government,  Federal  Agency,  Government  Sponsored  Enterprise, 
Mortgage-backed, and Corporate Securities. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
framework at the EU level for market infrastructures. This would aim at ensuring that the data 
gathering would provide a complete and uniform picture of the euro repo market, while also 
safeguarding any legal and confidentiality requirements regarding the use of the data. The 
market would also benefit from this solution: reporting infrastructures would have to set-up 
procedure to retrieve and transmit the data, but they may offer an additional service to their 
participants given the economic value of information.  
Ultimately, not only authorities, but market participants and the financial markets more widely 
would benefit from the general increased transparency on the euro repo market. 
Conclusions 
VI. 
This conference today by the Commission is a crucial moment in setting the stage for some 
key policy decisions in order to avoid financial stability risks stemming from shadow banking.  
In my view, among the list of actions to be considered, the establishment of a set of timely 
data concerning the repo market would be of key importance for supervisors, central banks 
and market participants. In order to make a first step, I propose the preparation of a detailed 
feasibility study for the repo market database in cooperation with the European Commission.  
I hope that the preliminary considerations I developed today will foster further reflections and 
timely actions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
