Njuguna Ndung’u: Ongoing developments in the Kenyan financial sector 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Kenya 
Institute of Bankers National Banking & Finance Conference, Mombasa, 3 July 2012. 
 Hon. Robinson Njeru Githae, Minister for Finance; 
Hon. Kenneth Marende, Speaker of the National Assembly; 
Hon. Justice Willy Mutunga, Chief Justice of the Republic of Kenya; 
Hon.  Prof. Githu  Muigai,  Attorney  General  of the Republic  of Kenya; 
Mr. Richard Etemesi, Chairman, Kenya Bankers Association;  
Mr. John Waka, Chairman, Kenya Institute of Bankers; 
Chief Executives of Financial Sector Regulators here present; 
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am delighted  to join you this morning at the onset  of this landmark Conference.  At the 
outset,  I would  like to thank  the Kenya  Institute  of Bankers for inviting me to this forum. I 
also applaud all those who participated in organising this conference for their commendable 
efforts. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: My task this morning is to invite the Minister for Finance  to  deliver 
his  keynote address to  this gathering and  also officially open the forum. But before I do so, 
allow me to make some few remarks on the ongoing developments in the financial sector. 
Over 
financial  sector  has  witnessed  significant 
transformational developments. The  Kenya  Institute of  Bankers has  been  on  the  driver’s 
seat  to  spearhead  these  developments.  Let  me highlight a few of these developments: 
 
the  Kenyan 
five  years, 
last 
the 
The  growth  of  technologically  enabled  financial  services,  especially  through  the 
inter-linkage  of  mobile  phone 
technology  platforms  and  banking  technology 
platforms; 
Increased regional and international expansion and connectivity of financial  service 
players  as  well  as  increased  market  potential  to the region; 
Increased  market  awareness  of  customer  rights  and  the  resultant  emphasis  on 
consumer protection; and 
Strengthening of oversight mechanisms to protect the integrity of financial systems. 
The  operationalisation  of  the  National  Payment  Systems  Act  and  the  Financial 
Reporting  Centre  amongst  others  will strengthen the integrity and  stability of  the 
financial system; 
   Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  These  developments  present  not  only  opportunities  but  also 
significant  challenges.  To  be  able  to  exploit  the  resultant  opportunities  and  surmount  the 
challenges, there is need to enhance the skills and competence of our human resources. It 
is  therefore  imperative  that  the  Kenya  Institute  of  Bankers  and  other  capacity  building 
institutions continuously interact with the market for their programmes to remain relevant. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Kenyan banks have taken the lead in positioning themselves for the 
expanded  market  of  more  than  100  million  people  in  the  five  East  African  Community 
Countries. More  than  ten  Kenyan  banks  have presence in the EAC member countries and 
beyond. Following the operationalisation  of  the  Customs  Union  and  Common  Market,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
EAC member states are currently preparing for a Monetary Union. As part of this preparation, 
the  EAC  Central  Banks  are  harmonizing  their  supervisory  rules  and  practices  while 
benchmarking  to  global  standards.  This  will  not  only  facilitate  integration  but  will  also 
position  the  region  as  a  financial  hub.  To facilitate effective preparations for the monetary 
union, KIB should tailor its training programmes to satisfy the emerging needs of a dynamic 
regionally integrated financial sector. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Kenya’s  aspiration  of being an International Financial Centre is 
already receiving a boost from the increasing interest by leading global banking brands. Over 
the last two years, four foreign banking institutions  have  opened  Representative Offices  in 
Kenya,  with  four  others  in  the  pipeline.  These  Representative  Offices  allow  the  foreign 
institutions  to  study  the  market  with  the  aim  of  up-scaling  to  fully  fledged  banking 
institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is worth noting that capacity building by banks should not be a 
preserve of operational staff as has been the case traditionally,  but should  span across  all 
cadres  of staff including  board members. In this regard, KIB should review its offerings to 
ensure that they cut across all levels from the Board to operational levels. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  to  welcome  our  Chief  Guest,  Hon. 
Robinson  Njeru  Githae,  Minister  for  Finance,  to  deliver  his keynote address and officially 
open the Kenya Institute of Bankers’ National Banking and Finance Conference 2012. 
Honourable Minister, you have the floor.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
