Choongsoo Kim: Challenges and policy responses to the euro crisis 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the 
SEACEN-BIS Executive Seminar, Busan, 24 September 2012. 
 Distinguished Deputy Governors, delegates of SEACEN member central banks! Ladies and 
gentlemen! 
I  would  like  to  welcome  you  once  again  for  coming  to  Busan  to  attend  the  SEACEN-BIS 
Executive Seminar. 
In  particular,  my  special  thanks  go  to  Mr.  Francesco  Papadia  (Director  General  of  Market 
Operations  and  Adviser  to  the  Executive  Board,  ECB),  Professor  Takahashi  ITO  of  Tokyo 
University and Chief Economist Changyong Rhee of the ADB for taking time out of your busy 
schedules to attend the SEACEN-BIS Executive Seminar as Speakers. Let me also express 
my appreciation to lead discussants and session chairs. Taking this opportunity, I would also 
like to express my gratitude to Dr. Eli Remolona and his staffs from the BIS Representative 
Office  for  Asia  and  the  Pacific  and  the  SEACEN  Center  for  your  efforts  and  hard  work  to 
organize this seminar. 
We are holding the seminar today on Challenges and Policy Responses to the Euro Crisis 
under  the  theme  of  Dealing  with  Financial  Contagion  with  leading  experts  in  each  field.  I 
hope particularly that this seminar will be a good chance to further elucidate the causes and 
the  prognosis  for  the  euro  crisis  and  its  effects  on  EMEs,  and  share  our  experiences  and 
wisdom on the future policy challenges.  
The most notable characteristic of the recent global crisis is that the shocks from a certain 
sector have spread rapidly and been amplified to the global real sector through the high level 
of global financial inter-connectedness that has been built up over the past few years. That 
said, it seems to me that the cross-border adverse spillovers and excessive global liquidity 
and the resulting capital flow management difficulties, deemed to be at the root of the crisis, 
have, to a large extent, failed to be resolved when we look at the international coordination 
efforts so far to deal with the crisis and what they have involved.  
Therefore I believe there is a good case for us to conduct a critical review at this point as to 
whether the active policy implementation efforts made by major advanced nations including 
the  US  in  coping  with  the  crisis  have  been  effective  to  some  extent  but  have  so far fallen 
short  in  terms  of  the  global  spillover  effects  of  the  crisis,  and,  furthermore,  whether  the 
various policy tools used during the crisis have worked as they should. 
As various views and assessments concerning this are expected at today’s seminar, I would 
like  to  make  several  points  about  a  future  global  economic  recovery  from  slightly  different 
perspective and the practical part the EMEs can play in this.  
I would like to begin my speech by arguing that the global economy has already entered into 
a state of multiple equilibria, where bad and good equilibrium coexist. My working hypothesis 
is  that  an  equilibrium  that  eurozone  area  economies  attempts  to  achieve  is  likely  to  be  a 
local, not a global equilibrium. Furthermore, it can be a bad equilibrium in that it may incur 
negative  spillover  effects  on  the  EMEs.  Such  equilibria  tend  to  remain  unstable  and  we 
expect that knife-edge equilibrium cannot be sustainable. I believe a global equilibrium can 
only  be  attained  with  the  concerted  policy  efforts  by  advanced  and  emerging  market 
economies.  
Let me be a little more specific about my argument.  
The  eurozone  sovereign  debt  crisis  poses  a  threat  to  a  global  economic  recovery  and 
financial stability, and the upshot may be that it is hard to rule out the possibility of it affecting 
the EMEs unstable due to excessive provision of capital and thus making the capital market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of EMEs highly volatile. The chances are also slim that the sovereign debt problems of major 
economies including European countries can be resolved smoothly without achieving global 
economic growth.  
I believe therefore that it is high time for us to concern ourselves with how best to revive the 
global economy, while consolidating the achievements of the financial reforms implemented 
by the policy authorities of individual countries in the wake of the global financial crisis from a 
medium and long- term perspective. 
Of course, since the tasks and challenges that we should deal with in order to escape from 
the  current  crisis  and  get  back  to  a  sustainable  growth  track  are  multifaceted  and  highly 
interconnected, the solution should not be limited to a single country or a certain region but 
be sought at the global level.  
In  this  context, I think the  key  here  is to maximize  the  positive  knock-on  effects  of growth 
running  between  EMEs  and  advanced  nations.  And  I  am  convinced  that  EMEs  will  play  a 
bigger role in this process going forward. 
Specific  figures  also  bear  this  out  as  well.  EMEs  accounted  for  54%  of  the  growth  of  the 
global economy from 2000 to 2005 and their growth contribution rose to 72% from 2006 to 
2011. In addition, while EMEs contributed just 37% of the global GDP in 1999, their share 
went  up  to  49%  in  2011,  hard  on  the  heels  of  the  advanced  nations.  The  IMF  recently 
estimated  in  its  global  economic  outlook  that  while  the  contribution  of  EMEs  to  the  global 
economic  growth  is  expected  to  remain  about  70%  for  the  next  five  years  as  in  the  late 
2000s, their share in the global GDP is forecast to continue to increase to 54% in 2016. 
For more specific details, you may refer to the results of the study conducted by the Bank of 
Korea recently in order to examine to what extent EMEs could drive the economic growth of 
advanced  nations.  According  to  the  study,  there  are  similar  positive  growth  repercussions 
between  EMEs  and  advanced  economies,  when  controlling  conventional  macro  and 
institutional  factors.  To  put  it  another  way,  a  1%  increase  of  per  capita  GDP  of  advanced 
nations will lead to a 0.4%p per capita GDP growth in EMEs, and a 1% increase in per capita 
GDP in EMEs will be translated into 0.3%p per capita GDP growth in advanced economies.  
Given  that  the  positive  knock-on  effects  of  growth  between  emerging  and  advanced 
economies  are  higher  than  a  certain  level,  one  country’s  structural  reform  could  have  a 
positive impact on other countries’ growth through such knock-on effects. If advanced and 
emerging  economies  carry  out  the  structural  reforms  and  expand  market  openness  at  the 
same time, the world economy will grow faster and more robustly.  
As  we  can  learn  from  Asian  countries’  experience  in  overcoming  the  late  1990s  Asian 
financial crisis very fast on the back of major advanced nations’ robust economic growth, if 
EMEs can sustain their relatively high growth rates as at present, this will be greatly helpful 
to advanced nations in breaking free from the current dilemma of reducing sovereign debt or 
achieving economic growth. 
To catapult the world economy onto a sustainable growth trajectory, what would be the most 
desirable policies to be taken by major advanced and emerging economies? I cannot explain 
this in great detail, but I think that roughly five requirements should be met in order for the 
global economic recovery.1  
First,  major  advanced  economies  should  establish  a  credible  medium-term 
consolidation plan and put it into practice to put their sovereign finances on an even keel.  
fiscal 
                                                
1  Excerpt from Governor Choongsoo Kim’s speech on “Out of the Great Recession: An EME’s Perspective” as 
part  of  the  Distinguished  Lecture  held  by  IMFS  (Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability)  of  Goethe 
University. (April 16, 2012) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Second,  the  negative  spillover  effects  through  financial  channels  should  be  minimized.  To 
this end, eurozone member states should build a strong firewall ensuring financial stability, 
while  providing  sufficient  public  funds  to  banks  that  they  can  be  recpaitalized  to  fend  off 
contagion effects.  
Third, trade and financial protectionism should be completely rejected. 
Fourth, even though implementation of a new international financial regulatory framework is 
desirable  for  global  financial  stability,  we  need  more  thorough  analyses  and  studies  on 
whether  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  framework  could  undermine  the  incentives  for 
appropriate risk sharing needed for productive investment.  
Last but not least, global financial safety nets should also be strengthened. 
This poses the question, what kind of role should central banks play in seeking such global 
solutions? 
I  think  that  above  all  central  banks  need  to  remain  faithful  to  their  original  mandate.  They 
should contribute to economic growth by maintaining price stability and financial stability and 
establishing an effective macroprudential policy framework to manage systemic risks. 
In particular, major advanced nations’ central banks need to bear in mind that their monetary 
policies could have negative spillover effects on emerging market countries. I think even from 
advanced nations’ standpoint, the benefits from precluding the possibility of adverse effects 
would  far  outweigh  the  ex-post  costs  caused  by  conducting  monetary  policies  in 
consideration of their own conditions alone.  
Let me conclude. 
As I am sure you are all too well aware, it has been four years since the global financial crisis 
broke out in September 2008. There is an urgent need for policy responses commensurate 
with  the  changing  conditions  in  line  with  the  most  severe  global  financial  crisis  since  the 
Great Depression in the 1930s. 
As I mentioned earlier, to overcome the challenges facing us, we need above all to consider 
the measures at the global level. To that end, close cooperation in the global community is 
required, bearing in mind the growing role of EMEs. 
The world economy nowadays seems to be waiting for a sage like the philosopher Aristotle 
who  claimed  that  the  whole  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  its  parts.  That  is  because,  in  this 
increasingly  multipolarized  environment,  global  leadership  which  can  envision  “the  whole” 
future  of the  human  being  is  becoming more  important  than  ever  before  so  as  to  address 
transnational issues, including global policy cooperation and coordination for global financial 
regulation and global sustainable growth.  
In the face of the unprecedented Great Depression in the 1930s, our august predecessors in 
office  were  bold  enough  to  change  their  conventional  wisdom  and  recast  the  academic 
framework  of  the  macroeconomy  from  a  new  perspective.  For  our  part,  we  also  similarly 
need to further push back and advance the horizon of a new explanatory paradigm that will 
stand  for  the  next  twenty  or  thirty  years,  through  the  historic  impetus  of  the  outbreak  and 
resolution of this global financial crisis.  
Noting that “the ever-changing nature of the challenges calls for vigilance and an on-going 
willingness  to  re-examine  critically  even  well-honed  convictions”  in  his  speech,  former  BIS 
General Manager Sir Andrew Crockett, who passed away in early September, emphasized 
the  importance  of  overcoming  the  ever-increasing  challenges  through  “vigilance”  and 
“willingness”.2  
                                                
2  Sir Andrew Crockett’s speech on “Central banking under test?”: conference on “ Monetary stability, financial 
stability and business cycle”, Basel, Switzerland (2003.3.28.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
We need to exercise our wisdom to overcome such challenges through creative responses in 
the  face  of  the  historic  challenges.  To  this  end,  I  think  all  economic  players  should  stop 
looking back and start looking forward. 
Brief though this seminar is, I hope that it will be useful for us broadening our perceptions of 
the new intellectual paradigm.  
Once again I would like to extend my gratitude to all participants and hope that this seminar 
will serve as a forum for lively and productive discussions with the active participation of all of 
you who are attending this seminar on behalf of SEACEN members. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
