Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Pilot platform for cross-border investment and settlement of 
debt securities 
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, 
at the press conference for the launch of the pilot platform for cross-border investment and 
settlement of debt securities, jointly with the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and Euroclear 
Bank, Hong Kong, 13 March 2012. 
 The world as we know is changing. Many aspects of how the global financial landscape will 
change  have  been  discussed.  One  key  area  of  focus  has  been  the  uneven  growth 
momentum  across  the  world,  which  is  expected  to  persist  for  some  time,  and  this 
development will have an impact on the trends and direction of the flows of trade and capital 
across  the  world.  In  essence,  the  nature  of  trade  and  capital  flows  will  be  significantly 
different from what we have experienced in the past decades; gross capital flows from across 
the globe between the east and the west, the north and the south, will be larger in size and 
more  robust,  going  forward.  These  developments  may  pose  risk  in  particular,  to  open 
economies  like  Malaysia  and  Hong  Kong.  A  key  safeguard  to  manage  the  risks  that  may 
arise  from  this  transformation  would  be  by  strengthening  our  financial  systems,  to  further 
develop the capital markets and to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory frameworks.  
In the Asian region, accentuating this global transformation are the rapid regional economic 
and financial integration and the expansion of domestic demand. While these developments 
are likely to further reinforce the strong intra-regional trade and investment linkages that are 
already in place, a key aspect of the increased financial integration in Asia is the need for 
more  efficient  intermediation  of  funds  within  the  region.  This  includes  the  mobilizing  and 
channeling  of  some  part  of  the  sizeable  savings  in  Asia  to  productive  investments.  The 
average savings rate in Asia is 35% of GDP and Asia as a group has a total of about USD5 
trillion  in  foreign  reserves.  Even  if  we  invest  1%  of  this  amount,  the  impact  would  be 
significant.  
With further liberalisation of the financial sector and the capital account, and the increased 
linkages  of  the  national  payment  systems  in  Asia,  financial  flows  within  the  region  is 
envisaged  to  increase.  This  trend  is  reinforced  by  the  increased  presence  of  regional 
institutions  in  the  individual  countries’  domestic  financial  systems  and  Asia’  s  favourable 
economic  prospects  and  the  increasingly  more  developed  and  sophisticated  financial 
markets. This region has already experienced an increase in intra-Asian financial flows. One 
should expect that given the uneven growth paths across economies in the next few years, 
issuances out of the emerging economies, in particular Asia, will also likely assume greater 
importance as an asset class. The greater variety of asset classes would contribute to the 
stability of the international financial system. It will also provide a wider range of options for 
investors  and  borrowers  and  thus,  contribute  to  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  financial 
resources across borders. It should be emphasised that the impact of Asia’ s economic and 
financial integration, would extend beyond its own region to other parts of the world. Today, 
the  economic  and  financial  linkages  between  the  emerging  economies  have  gained 
significant traction and are likely to continue. All the issues that I had mentioned earlier would 
only be significantly realized if we have a seamless payment system that links markets as 
one.  
As  part  of  our  continuing  journey  in  deepening  and  strengthening  our  financial  markets  in 
Asia  and  Malaysia  in  particular,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  pleased  to  be  a  party  to  the 
launching  of  the  Pilot  Platform  for  Cross-Border  Investment  and  Settlement  of  Debt 
Securities, jointly with the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and Euroclear Bank. This initiative 
marks an important milestone in our vision towards deeper financial integration. The rollout of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
this  platform  will  provide  investors  and  market  intermediaries  with  more  efficient  and 
cost-effective cross-border access to the bond markets in Hong Kong and Malaysia.  
Over the years, the bond market in Asia has expanded significantly. To date, Asia’ s share of 
the global bond market has increased by almost four-fold since the pre-Asian financial crisis. 
In  tandem  with  the  growth  of  the  bond  markets,  the  sukuk  market  in  the  region  has  also 
evolved  as  an  important  avenue  for  international  fund  raising  and  investment  activities, 
generating  significant  cross-border  flows.  Malaysia  has  been  an  important  part  of  this 
development  with  well  developed  bond  and  sukuk  markets.  As  at  9  March  2012,  the 
outstanding  amount  in  the  Malaysian  bond  market  was  RM899  billion  compared  to 
RM301 billion  at  the  end  of  2001.  This  represents  a  300  per  cent  increase  over  the  last 
decade. Within the region, both Hong Kong and Malaysia  have participated actively within 
the  EMEAP  Group  in  promoting  regional  bond  market  development  initiatives  such  as  the 
Asian Bond Markets Initiative and the Asian Bond Fund. 
I am confident that this pilot platform will bring benefits, not only to Hong Kong and Malaysia, 
but the region as a whole. We envisaged that this pilot platform will increase the efficiency of 
issuance,  investment  and  settlement  of  bonds  through  the  increased  harmonisation  of 
cross-border  processes  and  standards.  We  expect  this  initiative  to  strengthen  the 
cross-border linkages and facilitate the intermediation of surplus funds within the region. This 
increase in cross-border flow of funds will further enhance the efficiency in the mobilization of 
surplus funds to meet the rising investment needs of the region. 
The implementation of this pilot platform is indeed timely and opportune and, will serve as an 
important catalyst for further development in linking financial markets within this region. This, 
I believe, is a development that we should all welcome. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
