Thomas Jordan: Challenges for Switzerland as a financial centre 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the NZZ (Neue Zürcher Zeitung) Capital Market Forum, Zurich, 3 September 2012. 
 I would like to thank Raphael A. Auer for his support in writing this speech. I would also like to thank Daniel Heller, 
Rita Kobel and Peter Kuster for their insightful comments. 
Introduction 
“If you see a Swiss banker jumping out of a window, follow him, there is sure to be a profit in 
it.” This famous saying, attributed to the French writer and philosopher Voltaire, has been in 
circulation for more than two centuries. In recent years, however, the reputation that Swiss 
bankers  have  for  turning  a  profit  under  all  circumstances  has  been  somewhat  tarnished. 
Pressure  on  the  Swiss  financial  centre  has  been  intensifying,  due  mainly  –  but  not 
exclusively – to the financial crisis. For banks domiciled in Switzerland, doing business and 
making money has become more difficult. But this is not the first time that Switzerland as a 
financial  centre  has  faced  stiff  headwinds.  Throughout  our  history,  Swiss  bankers  have 
managed  to  draw  the  appropriate  conclusions,  and  change  course  in  time.  Allow  me, 
therefore, right at the outset, to say this: I am convinced that the Swiss financial centre will be 
successful  in  overcoming the  many  challenges ahead,  and  that  it  will  remain  an  important 
pillar with regards to the wealth of our nation. 
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) has also faced a number of challenges since the onset of 
the global financial crisis in 2007. We have repeatedly been forced to counteract the adverse 
effects of enormous shocks to the Swiss economy, in line with our mandate to ensure price 
stability, while taking due account of economic developments in Switzerland. 
At the current juncture, the economic uncertainty in the euro area, in particular, is of great 
concern  to  Switzerland  and  the  SNB.  While  we  cannot  influence  the  developments  in  the 
euro area, we can act in a resolute and timely manner to dampen the negative implications 
for our country. 
The most visible measure we have taken is undoubtedly the introduction, almost exactly one 
year ago, of the minimum exchange rate. In the current situation, a further appreciation of the 
Swiss franc would constitute a very substantial threat to the Swiss economy, and would carry 
with it the risk of deflationary developments. With this in mind, we will continue to enforce the 
minimum exchange rate with the utmost determination, in line with our mandate. 
Today, however, I do not want to talk primarily about monetary policy, but about the Swiss 
financial industry. Allow me to start by explaining why the financial industry, in general, and a 
healthy and stable banking sector, in particular, are of vital interest to the SNB. 
There are two main reasons. 
First, the banking system fulfils a key financial intermediary role in the economy. Due to this 
pivotal  function,  the  banking  sector  plays  a  crucial  part  in  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. On the other hand, however, it may also be the source of financial shocks that impact 
on the real economy. 
Second,  the  industry  is  itself  a  large  part  of  the  Swiss  economy.  The  significance  of  the 
financial industry and our position as a global financial centre are important contributors to 
the wealth of our nation. This is especially apparent here in Zurich, where the financial sector 
generates much employment, wealth and tax revenue. 
In my remarks, I will first discuss the macroeconomic challenges associated with the banking 
sector’s  key  role  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  the  risk  that  it  may 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
propagate  financial  shocks  to  the  economy.  Then,  I  will  discuss  the  challenges  for  the 
industry itself. Lastly, I will address the main implications from the SNB’s point of view. 
Macroeconomic challenges 
Let me start by focusing on the macroeconomic challenges associated with the importance of 
the  Swiss  financial  industry,  and,  in  particular,  the  banking  sector,  for  the  rest  of  the 
economy. 
The main reason why the banking sector is so important for the Swiss economy and the SNB 
lies  in  its  traditional  function  as  financial  intermediary.  As  banks  collect  funds  and  provide 
financing to firms and households, they are the “life blood” of the economy. 
Related  to  this  traditional  function,  there  are  two  distinct  aspects  I  would  like  to  point  out. 
First,  banks  play  a  crucial  part  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  There  are  various 
channels  through  which  monetary  policy  is  transmitted  to  the  economy,  but  the  primary 
channel is via changes to the short-term nominal interest rate, in other words, via the cost of 
borrowing  and  the  return  on  savings.  Monetary  policy  thereby  affects  investment  and 
consumption  decisions  throughout  the  entire  economy,  thus  influencing  business  level 
activity and price dynamics. 
In its implementation of monetary policy, the SNB provides short-term liquidity to the banking 
system, and not directly to firms and households. Banks, as financial intermediaries, in turn 
transmit these monetary policy decisions to the real economy. The extent, however, to which 
the banks respond to these decisions – by changing their interest rates on deposits, loans 
and their credit supply – depends on a number of factors, such as the degree of competition, 
but also the banks’ balance sheets. The effects of monetary policy can thus be impaired if 
banks have poor balance sheets. 
Thus,  the  banks’  function  as  financial  intermediaries  is  a  welcome  and  influential  channel 
through which the SNB’s monetary policy decisions affect the economy. There is, however, a 
downside to this role. The banking sector can also propagate large financial shocks to the 
rest of the economy. In other words: the financial industry itself can have a large impact on 
the economy. 
In Switzerland, the propagation of financial shocks to the real economy is potentially large in 
magnitude. There are two reasons for this: the size and the international orientation of the 
financial industry. 
First,  the  financial  industry  makes  up  a  large  share  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  in 
Switzerland – larger than in other rich nations. For example, at its peak in 2007, the financial 
industry contributed around 13.5% to GDP in Switzerland, compared to just 8% in the US, 
7.5% in the UK, and less than 5% in Germany1. 
In  countries  with  large  financial  industries,  households  and  non-financial  companies 
generally  rely  more  on  external  capital.  Consequently,  in  these  nations,  shocks  to  the 
financial  system  have  larger  output  effects.  The  financial  industry’s  considerable  share  of 
GDP  thus  implies  that  shocks  to  the  financial  system  potentially  have  more  substantial 
effects on the real economy of Switzerland than in other countries2. 
Second,  parts  of  Switzerland’s  financial  industry  are  very  internationally  oriented.  In  the 
aggregate,  around  half  of  the  entire  value  added  by  banks  in  Switzerland  stems  from 
                                                
1  Source: OECD, Structural Analysis Database. 
2  This  has  been  documented  empirically  by  Levintal  (2009),  who  shows  that  the  effects  of  fluctuating  bank 
profits on GDP growth are related to the size of the financial industry as a share of GDP; Kroszner, Laeven 
and Klingebiel (2007) find that bank crises have more pronounced real effects in countries with a higher ratio 
of loans to GDP. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
business  conducted  with  foreign  customers. Over  half  of  all  assets  under  management  by 
Swiss banks come from foreign customers3. 
The  international  orientation  of  the  industry  has  contributed  to  Switzerland’s  success  as  a 
financial  centre.  This  orientation  also  implies  that  its  business  is  diversified  and  less 
dependent on the domestic economy. For example, during the Swiss real estate crisis of the 
1990s, profitable international business activity helped to stabilise the banking sector. 
However,  the  downside  of  the  international  focus  is  that  susceptibility  to  foreign  shocks  is 
considerable.  Because  foreign  business  is  sizeable,  shocks  abroad  can  cause  substantial 
losses  for  Swiss  banks.  An  example  of  this  are  the  huge  losses  some  Swiss  banks  have 
experienced  in  recent  years  due  to  their  US  subprime  mortgage  positions.  Where  banks 
have  to  absorb  such  losses  on  their  balance  sheet,  they  may  encounter  refinancing 
difficulties and be forced to sell assets at any price. This may in turn lead them to cut back 
their  credit  supply,  and  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  may  be  impaired4.  In  the 
worst  case,  the  financial  system  could  be  destabilised,  threatening  the  whole  economy. 
Fortunately  the  Swiss  economy  has  not  suffered  a  credit  crunch  –  not  even  in  2008  and 
2009.  A  package  of  public  sector  measures  greatly  contributed  to  the  stabilisation  of  the 
Swiss financial system. 
To sum up, our economy is especially susceptible to financial shocks due both to the size of 
the  Swiss  financial  industry  and  its  international  exposure.  As  a  consequence,  a  major 
challenge that arises for Switzerland as a financial centre is to make sure the banking sector 
is resilient so it can cushion shocks when they occur. Otherwise the financial industry will be 
unable to fulfil its role as a financial intermediary. 
A lot has been achieved in recent years to strengthen the resilience of the banking system. In 
particular,  the  two  big  banks  have  made  progress  in  this  area.  They  have  increased  their 
highest-quality capital and reduced their risk-weighted assets. This is an on-going process 
that will further increase the stability of the system. 
Challenges for the financial industry 
Ladies and Gentlemen, so far I have focused on the macroeconomic challenges arising from 
the importance of the financial industry for the economy. Let me now turn to the challenges 
the Swiss financial industry itself faces. 
Obviously,  like  its  peers  abroad,  the  Swiss  financial  industry  has  to  cope  with  several 
challenges.  Let  me 
for 
Switzerland  –  wealth  management,  residential  mortgages  and  regulatory  measures 
addressing “too big to fail” issues. 
Wealth management is challenged on several fronts. Revenues in wealth management will 
continue to be depressed. In jittery financial markets, client trading volumes are low. The flat 
yield  curve  reduces  the  margin  between  deposits  and  credits.  In  addition,  competition  in 
private banking with foreign clients will continue to intensify. And finally, wealth management 
to  be  most  relevant 
three  which 
I  consider 
focus  on 
                                                
3  Data  from  the  SNB’s  Swiss  Balance  of  Payments  2011  report  shows  that  international  receipts  from  bank 
financial services stood at CHF 15.1 billion in 2011, equivalent to 43% of the total value added in the banking 
sector in 2011 (CHF 35 billion as reported by the Swiss Bankers Association). The Swiss Bankers Association 
reports  that  in  2011,  around  51%  of  assets  under  management  at  Swiss  Banks  originated  from  foreign 
customers (cf. “Der Finanzplatz Schweiz und seine Bedeutung”, Swiss Bankers Association, 2012). 
It is important not to underestimate the economic importance of international transmission of financial shocks 
via  bank  linkages.  Goldberg  and  Cetorelli  (2010)  document  the  fact  that  global  banks  transmitted  the 
international  shock  during  the  2007–09  financial  crisis  to  emerging  market  economies,  leading  to  both 
cross-border lending contraction and contraction of domestic lending. 
4 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
will have to adapt to changing international standards and international tax agreements. In 
such an environment, it is hard to maintain profit margins and retain clients. 
The  second  challenge  for  the  Swiss  financial  sector  relates  to  signs  of  overheating  in  the 
Swiss residential real estate market. Over the past two years, the SNB has repeatedly drawn 
attention to these risks. Residential mortgages are very important in Switzerland since they 
account for around 70% of the assets of domestically oriented Swiss banks. There are signs 
that  residential  properties  are  overvalued  in  the  Geneva,  Zurich  and  Zug  regions,  for 
instance,  as  well  as  some  tourist  areas.  Even  though,  there  were  recent  indications  of  a 
possible  slowdown  of  momentum,  the  risk  remains  of  a  further  build-up  of  imbalances 
followed by a significant price correction in the residential real estate market5. Against this 
backdrop,  it  is  important  that  banks  use  prudent  credit  standards  to  limit  potential  default 
risks and are well-capitalised so they can withstand such potential losses should they arise6. 
The third challenge is specific to Switzerland’s systemically important global banks. Like their 
peers abroad, they will have to adapt to new supervisory requirements that address “too big 
to  fail”  issues  and  the  resulting  moral  hazard.  In  the  past,  systemically  important  banks 
enjoyed  an  implicit  bailout  guarantee  by  their  governments.  Not  only  did  this  lower  their 
refinancing costs, but it also led to various distortions in the areas of leverage, excessive risk 
taking  and  compensation.  A  wide  range  of  measures  will  address  problems  caused  by 
institutions that are too big to fail. These include a systemic risk capital surcharge, recovery 
plans and organisational measures. The systemically important banks will have to adjust to 
these measures. This process will take time and will not occur overnight. 
Implications for the Swiss National Bank 
I  have  discussed  the  challenges  that  arise  for  Switzerland  as  a  financial  centre  from  the 
SNB’s perspective. 
Our mandate is to maintain price stability, while taking due account of the development of the 
economy. To ensure that we can always conform to this mandate, we need a stable banking 
system. Monetary policy transmission could not work properly without such a system. At the 
same time, it is equally important that the financial system itself is not a source of excessive 
risk for the rest of the economy. 
Our  efforts  are  thus  concentrated  on  increasing  resilience  by  mitigating  systemic  risk.  To 
ensure  this,  we  work  closely  with  the  Financial  Market  Supervisory  Authority,  FINMA,  the 
Federal  Department  of  Finance  and  various  international  standard-setting  bodies.  A  great 
deal has been achieved in our country so far. 
One of these achievements is the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB)7, which has recently 
generated a number of headlines. As you know, the SNB has, for the time being, decided 
against proposing the activation of the CCB. There are two reasons for this. First, as I have 
already  mentioned,  we  have  observed  some  indications  of  a  possible  slowdown  of  price 
momentum in the market for residential real estate. Second, two other measures came into 
effect at the beginning of June – stricter capital requirements for mortgages and a revision of 
the self-regulation rules for mortgage lending. 
However, this is far from an all-clear for the real estate market – I want to underline again 
that the risk of a further build-up of imbalances followed by a significant price correction is 
                                                
5  Cf. SNB press release, 27 August 2012. 
6  Cf. SNB, Financial Stability Report, 2011 and 2012 
7  Cf.  SNB  fact  sheet  “Implementing  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  in  Switzerland:  concretising  the  Swiss 
National Bank’s role.” 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
still present. The CCB is a key element in the package of measures recently approved by the 
Federal Council. These measures should help to mitigate the risks to financial stability from 
imbalances  developing  in  the  real  estate  and  mortgage  market.  The  CCB  enables  the 
authorities to temporarily raise capital requirements in the banking system, as imbalances in 
the credit market develop. It serves two purposes, strengthening the resilience of the banking 
system by increasing its loss absorbing capacity and helping to lean against the build-up of 
excesses.  It  is  a  very  flexible  instrument  and  may  be  activated  for  specific  sectors  of  the 
credit market only. 
Let me at this point also stress two – in my view – important principles in the context of rules 
and  regulation.  First,  authorities  should  define  the  framework  for  the  financial  system,  but 
they should not propagate a specific business model for the industry. That means it is up to 
companies  and  individuals  to  take  business  decisions,  to  choose  the  most  promising 
business model and to adapt to the changing environment. 
Second, we have to acknowledge that it is very difficult for banks to do business without a 
predictable  set  of  rules  and  related  interpretations.  In  this  regard,  after  a  period  of  rapid 
changes, we should aim for a stable banking regulation framework at both the national and 
the  international  level.  Our  focus  should  now  move  to  a  consistent  and  rigorous 
implementation of the Basel III framework across the globe. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  have  discussed  the  challenges  Switzerland  faces  as  a  financial 
centre. 
While  I  consider  these  challenges  to  be  high  hurdles,  they  are  not  insurmountable.  The 
Swiss financial industry has constantly adapted throughout its history; it will continue to adapt 
to the current challenges and continue to be successful. 
What can the SNB contribute to the success of the financial industry? I am convinced that an 
independent,  stability-driven  central  bank  with  a  clear  mandate,  willing  and  able  to  act 
forcefully  if  appropriate,  is  a  necessary  condition  for  a  competitive  and  vibrant  financial 
centre. However, this condition is far from being sufficient. 
In that spirit, allow me now to throw the ball into your court. 
The future of the Swiss financial industry is in your hands. It is your integrity, your power of 
innovation and your service to the customer that is pivotal for the Swiss financial industry. It 
is up to you to shape the future of this industry. 
While I certainly do not pretend to know the business decisions you will have to take in the 
years to come, I am pretty sure that jumping out of the window is not the best option. In this 
regard, it may be worthwhile remembering that Voltaire himself made a fortune, and went on 
to  be  celebrated  as  an  old  wise  man  –  without,  to  my  knowledge,  ever  following  his  own 
advice. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
