Barry Whiteside: Brief update on Fiji’s economy 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the opening of HFC 
Lautoka Branch, Suva, 20 September 2012. 
 The Chairman of the HFC Board, Mr. Tom Ricketts  
Board of Directors  
Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Isikeli Tikoduadua  
Management and Staff of HFC  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Introductory comments  
Good evening and bula vinaka to you all.  
I am honoured to be here this evening for the opening of HFC’s new Lautoka Branch and 
offer my warm congratulations on the company achieving 50 years of service to Fiji.  
I thought to begin with a bit of history as this year marks HFC’s Golden Jubilee year.  
Just over fifty years ago the British Overseas Development Corporation, through its locally 
incorporated company, the Fiji Development Corporation, partnered with the Fijian Colonial 
Government to form Home Finance Company Limited. The institution, which was registered 
on  30  June  1962,  was  reportedly  set  up  primarily  to  provide  Government  guaranteed 
assistance for housing to civil servants.  
Coincidentally, it was also in the 1960s that I spent some of my formative years in these very 
surroundings  while  my  dad  served  as  the  Post  Master,  Lautoka.  Needless  to  say,  I  have 
many fond memories of this City and its neighborhood areas.  
HFC – Home Finance Company Limited  
With such a rich history dating back to our colonial days, Home Finance can lay claim to its 
fair  share  of  credit  for  playing  a  role  in  advancing  Fiji’s  financial  system  and  economic 
development. Three milestones are worth mentioning in the Company’s history to bridge the 
past with the present: –  
• 
33  years  ago  in  1979  the  Fiji  National  Provident  Fund  first  acquired  a  partial 
ownership,  
17  years  ago  in  1995,  the  Government  divested  its  partial  ownership  in  the 
company and  
A  decade  ago  in  2002,  Home  Finance  Company  Limited  rebranded  as  HFC, 
launching  the  vibrant  colours  we  are  familiar  with  today  and  also  diversified 
markedly from its traditional objective of home loan provider.  
  I  have  watched  the  growth  of  the  company  with  interest  over  the  years,  particularly  since 
2004 when I headed the Supervision function at the Reserve Bank.  
A  decade  ago,  primarily  as  a  consequence  of  competitive  pressures,  HFC  rebranded, 
diversified and repositioned itself. Invariably, as is so often seen in various facets of life, as 
we  adapt,  change  and  successfully  address  a  set  of  challenges,  new  ones  arise. 
Understandably therefore, HFC has faced some difficult years, but I am pleased to say that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
they  have  persevered  and  pulled  through  well.  HFC  today  has  a  well  entrenched  market 
presence and, I am happy to say, complies with all Reserve Bank requirements.  
Currently, HFC boasts an asset base of a little over $247 million; a lending book in excess of 
$196  million  and  deposits  totalling  approximately  $157  million.  These  figures  have  grown 
threefold  in  the  past  decade.  Apart  from  its  Headoffice,  there  are  four  branches:  in  Suva; 
Namaka;  Labasa;  and  this  one  in  Lautoka.  An  agency  was  recently  opened  in  Ba  and  I 
understand a fifth branch will be added soon in Nakasi. The number of employees has grown 
to 82 officers managing a total of over 1,300 deposit accounts and approximately 2,500 loan 
accounts.  HFC’s  products  have  expanded  and  now  include  Term  Deposits,  Home  Loans, 
Personal Loans, and Asset Finance Loans, Investment and Commercial Loans.  
However, I reiterate that as challenges occur and are addressed, new ones inevitably arise. 
With increased growth comes increased risks and responsibilities.  
HFC  has  experienced  strong  growth  and,  in  line  with  its  vision  to  serve  the  people  with 
innovative  financial  products,  recently  branched  out  concertedly  into  commercial  lending. 
This  alters  the  institution’s  risk  profile  and  necessitates  deviations  from  the  norm.  In  this 
regard,  we  have  seen  HFC  strengthen  its  corporate  governance  and  risk  management 
framework  significantly  over  the  past  few  years.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  continue  to  work 
closely with HFC, as we do with all licensed financial institutions, to ensure inherent risks are 
adequately mitigated with the required buffers and oversight systems and processes.  
Earlier this month, I had the opportunity to meet with the Senior Management of HFC with 
regard  to  its  business  performance,  views  on  the  general  business  environment,  products 
and services and the overall strategic intent of the Company. Let me just say that there are 
bold commitments in the offing. The relocation and refurbishment of this branch underlines 
HFC’s  commitment  and  dedication  to  its  strategic  goals  and  meeting  the  needs  of  its 
customers both current and potential.  
HFC is proud of its local management and local ownership. I am sure you will all agree with 
me that they back this up with being an exemplary corporate citizen. We often open the daily 
newspapers to read about HFC being involved in some community project:- flood supplies 
distribution;  hospital  ward  upgrades;  involvement  with  Senior  Citizens;  the WOWS  Cancer 
initiative,  just  to  name  a  few.  And  yes  the  name  HFC  cropped  up  recently  pitching  in  to 
reward Fiji’s first Olympic Champion, Iliesa Delana.  
In addition to all this, HFC has introduced products to support the Reserve Bank’s initiatives 
towards Export and Import Substitution and Flood Rehabilitation.  
I am told that there are a few more innovative products in the pipeline to be launched soon. I 
commend  the  Board  and  Management  of  HFC  for  their  empathy  and  support  of  nation 
building initiatives, not only in terms of the facilities I have mentioned, but also in our financial 
inclusion initiatives.  
The Fiji economy  
Ladies and gentlemen, please allow me say a few words about our economy. You would be 
aware that our latest forecast has growth pegged at 2.7 percent this year, the strongest for 
some  time.  The  forecast  is  currently  being  reviewed  by  the  Macroeconomic  Policy  and 
Technical Committees as we gear up for the 2013 National Budget announcement. However, 
all  indicators  are  generally  moving  in  line  with  expectations.  Real  sector  growth  has  been 
broad  based.  While  some  sectors  are  exhibiting  lower  growth  than  forecasted,  others  are 
exceeding  forecasts.  Investment  is  picking  up  and  consumption  is  strong.  There  are 
extremely positive signs that we are on the cusp of strong economic growth going forward. 
This is underpinned by the ongoing reforms by Government, including the fiscal measures 
put in place in the 2012 Budget, which are fueling the positive sentiments. Our key threats 
are any deterioration to global growth which could impact on our trading partners, hikes in 
commodity or oil prices and of course natural disasters.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  terms  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  twin  statutory  objectives,  inflation  is  trending  down;  the 
year-end  inflation  forecast  remains  unchanged  at  3.5  percent,  and  foreign  reserves  are 
comfortable at just under $1.6 billion or the equivalent of 5 months of retained imports. Given 
this scenario, our monetary policy stance remains accommodative.  
Concluding remarks  
Coming back to the business at hand, it is investment like HFC has put in place here today, 
that will fuel and drive the increasing positive sentiment in the economy. There have been a 
number of new investments noted in this city and we certainly hope the trend will continue.  
I would like to again thank Isikeli for his kind invitation. I reiterate my thanks to the Board, 
management  and  staff  of  HFC  for  their  support  and  cooperation  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
policies and guidelines. I also salute this institution on achieving its Golden Jubilee Year of 
existence and for the role that it has played in Fiji’s economic development. Congratulations 
on this new branch and all the very best in your future endeavours.  
Official Opening  
I now have much pleasure in declaring the new HFC Lautoka Branch open.  
Vinaka vaka levu.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
