Yaseen Anwar: Developments of the microfinance sector in Pakistan 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
national  roll-out  of  microfinance-exclusive  Credit  Information  Bureau  (MF-CIB),  Karachi, 
20 June 2012. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am extremely delighted to be part of this historic event of the launch of the national roll-out 
of microfinance dedicated CIB, and I congratulate all the stakeholders, Pakistan Microfinance 
Network,  Pakistan  Poverty  Alleviation  Fund,  DFID,  DataCheck,  Microfinance  Banks  and 
MFIs,  and  my  colleagues  at  SBP  on  this  great  achievement  which  will  modernize  and 
strengthen the “industry infrastructure” of microfinance in Pakistan.  
SBP  has  been  actively  supporting  microfinance  in  Pakistan  through  policy,  regulatory  and 
program-based  interventions  to  make  major  breakthroughs  in  reaching  out  to  millions  of 
underserved  people  who  require  a  wide  variety  of  financial  services.  The  efforts  to 
mainstream  Microfinance  into  the  formal  financial  system  started  in  2000-2001  when  the 
Government promulgated the Microfinance Institutions Ordinance. Presently, nine MFBs are 
operating in Pakistan. All these MFBs are privately owned and reflect diversity of ownership 
and approaches to microfinance banking. Considering that the market has potential and the 
regulatory framework is supportive, the ownership in MFBs has flowed both from local and 
international  investors  including  banks,  development  agencies,  investment  funds,  mobile 
network operators, and largest transformed MFIs. With the collective wisdom and efforts of 
all  key  stakeholders,  the  microfinance  sector  has  spawned  its  own  innovation,  and  the 
success of microfinance in Pakistan is widely acknowledged by the international community. 
Our microfinance regulatory framework has been ranked globally at the top in 2010 and 2011 
by  the  independent  “Economic  Intelligence  Unit”  of  UK’s  “The  Economist”  Magazine.  And 
Pakistan is the fastest developing market for branchless banking.  
SBP  has  played  a  sterling  role  in  the  development  of  the  microfinance  sector  as  an 
alternative to conventional banking to serve the lower end of the market. However, there is a 
global  shift  from  microfinance  to  inclusive  finance,  that  is,  from  supporting  microfinance 
initiatives  in  isolation  to  building  an  inclusive  financial  sector.  Inclusive  finance  recognizes 
that a continuum of financial services providers work within their comparative advantages to 
serve  the  poor  and  low-income  people,  as  well  as  micro  and  small  enterprises.  Financial 
inclusion is a core component of SBP’s financial sector development strategy. It envisages 
transforming  the  financial  market  into  an  equitable  system  with  efficient  market-based 
financial  services  to  the  otherwise  excluded  poor  and  marginalized  population  including 
women and young people.  
SBP’s  financial  inclusion  agenda  is  supported  by  a  multi-pronged  strategy.  First,  the 
regulatory framework to enable commercial microfinance in Pakistan is well-developed. The 
most  recent  regulatory  innovation  includes  the  introduction  of  the  bank-led  model  for 
branchless banking. Second, SBP’s commitment is reflected by the in-house Development 
Finance  Group,  dedicated  to  increasing  access  to  financial  services.  The  Development 
Finance  Group  consists  of  departments  that  focus  on  key  areas  of  financial  inclusion 
including  microfinance,  agricultural  credit,  SMEs  finance,  and  housing  finance.  Third,  SBP 
has partnered with DFID to launch a GBP 50 million “Financial Inclusion Program” (FIP) to 
tackle financial exclusion among poor and marginalized groups head-on through a variety of 
supply-side  funds  and  facilities.  FIP  focuses  on  market-based,  sustainable  financial 
services  for  low  income  people  and  small  enterprises  and  to  move  away  from  a  donor 
dependent model. In addition, FIP aims to enhance delivery of financial services through 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
technology  based  branchless  banking  solutions,  financial  innovation,  and  remittances. 
Fourth,  in  line  with  the  evidence  (Access  to  Finance  (A2F)  Survey  of  2008)  that  lack  of 
financial  literacy  is  a  major  constraint  in  advancing  financial  inclusion,  SBP  launched  the 
first-ever Nationwide Financial Literacy Program (NLFP) in January 2012 to tackle this issue. 
The  program  focuses  on  different  themes  such  as  savings,  budgeting,  debt  management, 
investment,  consumer  protection  and  branchless  banking  to  impart  awareness  and 
understanding  of  basic  financial  concepts  to  the  low-income  and  unbanked  population. 
Lastly, a number of initiatives have been taken to promote access to finance in the SMEs, 
agriculture,  housing  and  microfinance  sectors  that  largely  focus  on  creating  an  enabling 
environment by addressing regulatory barriers, market failures and industry bottlenecks, and 
ensuring consumer protection. 
Despite having in place  internationally acclaimed regulations, innovative  delivery channels, 
credit  enhancement  mechanisms  and  industry-wide  initiatives  for  institutional  and  capacity 
development, and consumer protection, the growth in microfinance has remained stagnant at 
around  2  million  borrowers  in  Pakistan  in  recent  years,  indicating  that  our  success  in 
achieving  financial  inclusion  leaves  much  to  be  desired. This  partly  explains  why  Pakistan 
has  one  of  the  lowest  financial  penetration  levels  in  the  world  with  56%  adult  population 
totally  excluded,  and  another  32%  informally  served. Therefore,  it  is  imperative  that  we  all 
endeavor to bring these segments into the formal banking channels to achieve our collective 
vision of “access for all”.  
The stagnancy in microfinance growth is attributable to various factors; most notably among 
them is the risk of multiple borrowings by clients. In a period of high growth during 2007–08, 
the  staff  of  some  MFIs  followed  unhealthy  practices  of  clients  vying  and  poaching  that 
caused  negative  repercussions  on  loan  portfolios  of  such  MFIs.  As  the  competition 
increased,  the  MFBs  and  MFIs  became  increasingly  sensitive  to  the  fact  that  without  an 
information  sharing  mechanism,  aggressive  credit  growth  would  lead  to  worsening  of 
repayment performance, thereby creating systemic risk for the sector. The lack of a complete 
information sharing mechanism was due to the fact that only MFBs (regulated by the State 
Bank)  had  access  to  SBP’s  e-CIB;  and  non-regulated  MFIs  were  neither  posting  nor 
retrieving credit history of their borrowers through SBP or a private CIB. Clearly, the lack of 
an exclusive credit bureau was contributing to the “imperfection” of the credit market. At the 
same  time,  the  experiences  of  borrowers’  revolts  and  government  interventions  in 
neighboring  countries,  such  as  Andhra  Pardesh  in  India,  were  also  forcing  the  lenders  to 
pursue a risk-averse approach in Pakistan.  
Taking a proactive approach in Pakistan and recognizing the potential risks in absence of a 
sound  risk  management  framework  nor  a  credit  information  sharing  mechanism,  policy 
makers and other key stakeholders explored different options to develop a long-term solution 
of credit information sharing. Finally, in May 2010, PMN and DataCheck in collaboration with 
SBP and PPAF, launched a pilot of MF-exclusive CIB at Lahore. The idea was to test and 
develop the reporting structures, MIS, and data storage/processing capabilities of lenders in 
the pilot and then prepare for a national roll-out at the appropriate time. Here, I would like to 
congratulate  the  leadership  and  team  of  DataCheck/PMN  for  their  commitment  and 
hard-work in making the pilot a successful project, and paving the way for the development 
of a dedicated national CIB for microfinance.  
Currently, four CIBs are operational in Pakistan, three private and one public, all with varying 
stages of development. The largest and oldest is e-CIB, which is housed in the State Bank of 
Pakistan and requires all regulated financial institutions to report data on all loans and debt 
instruments,  both  disbursements  and  repayments.  According  to  an  IFC’s  paper  on  credit 
bureaus  released  in  2007  “Private  credit  bureaus  are  found  in  approximately  60  countries 
and in nearly every developed country. Public credit bureaus, usually set up by central banks 
and found mostly in developing countries, exist in approximately 70 countries.” It is a matter 
of great satisfaction that Pakistan has credit bureaus both in the public and private sector. 
Having a private sector credit bureau exclusively for microfinance in particular is a source of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
both encouragement and pride for all of us. Let me assure you that SBP is fully supportive of 
private sector credit bureaus. However, presently private bureaus are non regulated entities. 
SBP  believes  that  a  policy  framework  for  credit  bureaus  is  essential  for  their  smooth  and 
long-term growth. In fact, the Government and SBP are already working on the development 
of  a  legal  framework  that  will  strengthen  private  CIBs  by  establishing  criteria for  licensing, 
issuing  regulations,  and  creating  an  oversight  mechanism.  All  this  will  result  into 
stakeholders’ satisfaction, and, most importantly, it will boost public confidence. 
A  nation-wide  MF-CIB  will  be  a  major  step  with  positive  impact  for  both  lenders  and 
borrowers. As the CIB expands its operations across the country, the quality and efficiency of 
the  loan  appraisal  process  will  improve  significantly.  The  CIB  will  help  microfinance  banks 
and institutions in developing robust risk management system and practices, thus reducing 
the risk of multiple borrowing and loan defaults. On the clients’ side, the CIB will open access 
to credit for millions of potential poor borrowers. Availability of the CIB will also reduce the 
credit risk cost of the lender, thus also lowering the loan price for the borrowers. At present, 
the successful borrowers of microfinance institutions also face difficulty in accessing larger 
loans from MFBs or commercial banks due to non-availability of their long history of loans 
and  timely  repayments  with  a  microfinance  institution.  The  MF-CIB  will  facilitate  the 
“graduation” of such livelihood-based workers into small entrepreneurs. 
Although there are numerous benefits of a fully functional credit bureau to all stakeholders, 
successfully  operating  a  national  CIB  will  not  be  without  challenges.  Ensuring  timely  and 
accurate reporting by all members will be crucial for maintaining the impartiality and integrity 
of the CIB. I believe PPAF will make it mandatory for its partner MFIs to report accurate and 
timely data on their clients. At the policy level, it will be a priority to ensure that consumer 
rights remain protected. They should not become victims of inaccurate reporting of their data, 
and/or  breach  of  data  confidentiality  by  the  CIB.  As  customers,  it  is  their  right  to  have  an 
accessible redressal mechanism. I am sure the leadership of MF-CIB will take into account 
all these concerns, and build the CIB on strong fundamentals. 
I will now highlight few recent developments in the microfinance sector that, we hope, can 
turn the existing stagnant curve into a steeper growth curve. First and foremost, many of our 
MFBs  have  undergone  recapitalization  and  restructuring  in  the  last  two  years.  Resultantly, 
strong and strategic investors have now entered and are entering in the microfinance sector. 
Secondly,  adoption  of  new  technologies  and  alternative  delivery  channels  such  as  mobile 
phone  and  agent-based  banking  have  radically  transformed  the  distribution  channels  and 
retail capacity of the sector. Finally, SBP continues to invest in various large-scale initiatives 
in  areas  of  funding,  financial  literacy,  capacity  building,  institutional  strengthening  and 
innovation. In the interest of time, I will not go into the details of these initiatives. However, I 
will emphasize that all these initiatives, including MF-CIB, have now set a platform for MFBs 
and  MFIs  to  attain  high  growth  momentum.  SBP  encourages  that  credit  growth  should  be 
fairly distributed across all economic, social, and geographic segments of the target market. 
The  MFBs  and  MFIs  should  develop  innovative  credit  methodologies  and  appropriate  risk 
management  policies  to  maintain  growth  and  quality  of  loan  portfolios.  In  particular,  SBP 
encourages  financing  micro  enterprises  that  so  far  have  been  neglected  by  both  the 
microfinance  sector  and  commercial  banks.  In  this  regard,  SBP  has  already  issued 
necessary  regulations  to  allow  MFBs  to  extend  loans  of  up  to  Rs.  500,000/–  to 
microenterprises.  
Now I wish to address the CEOs/Presidents of MFBs and MFIs specifically? In my view, the 
ball  is  now  in  your  court.  What  has  so  far  been  achieved  in  the  arena  of  microfinance  in 
Pakistan  may  best  be  described  as  an  “enabling  environment  for  attaining  scale  and 
sustainability”. However, achieving scale and sustainability is a huge task. I would urge you 
to 
institutional  and 
HR development  in  your  respective  organizations.  Your  organizations  should  also  have  in 
place adequate systems and policies for ensuring the protection of consumer rights. SBP is 
already in the process of revising regulations to ensure that MFBs follow best standards in 
improve  corporate  governance,  management  structures,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
these critical areas. We count on your wisdom and commitment to reach out to millions of 
financially excluded people. On our part, SBP will continue to support your efforts to advance 
financial inclusion.  
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate PMN, DataCheck and all key stakeholders on the 
national roll-out of MF-CIB, and we look forward to its success and expected outcomes of 
this mega initiative. I believe after global recognition of Pakistan’s MF regulations, it is now 
the turn of our MF-CIB to earn appreciation worldwide.  
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
