Masaaki Shirakawa: The era of linkages among Asia and across the 
Pacific Ocean 
Remarks (via videoconference) by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Conference, San Francisco, 11 June 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I am privileged to have the opportunity to speak at this invaluable conference being held by 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco.  Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the 
strengthened linkages among Asia and across the Pacific Ocean, as well as the challenges 
in finance to be tackled to achieve sustainable growth in Asia. Unfortunately, our Monetary 
Policy Meeting scheduled for the day after tomorrow does not allow me to join you in San 
Francisco. Nonetheless I am grateful for being given the opportunity to speak in this way. I 
now realize that a new linkage across the Pacific, which relates to the topic I want to discuss 
today, is being formed through such innovative information technology like this. 
Since the voyage of Christopher Columbus in 1492, there have been economic, cultural and 
political exchanges between the two sides of the Atlantic Ocean for more than five centuries. 
Since the nineteenth century, the two sides of the Atlantic Ocean have been regarded as the 
center  of  the  civilized  world.  Compared  to  this  long  history  of  trans-Atlantic  linkages,  the 
history of trans-Pacific linkages is quite brief. Thirty years after Columbus made his voyage, 
the  fleet  led  by  Ferdinand  Magellan  discovered  and  crossed  the  Pacific  Ocean  during  the 
years  1520  and  1521.  However,  more  substantive  trans-Pacific  economic  exchanges  only 
began after the Forty-niners came to join the California Gold Rush and the population of the 
U.S.  Pacific  Coast  increased  substantially.  The  only  exception  was  the  Manila-Acapulco 
galleon trade, in which Spanish trading ships sailed between Acapulco and Manila once or 
twice a year when the Spanish viceroy of Mexico ruled the Philippines. 
The biggest obstacle to linkages across the Pacific was the gigantic scale of the Ocean. In 
order to sail between Acapulco and Manila, Spanish people of the 16th century had to build 
the largest galleons they could, whose size was as much as 2,000 tons (Chart 1). Compared 
with the famous Mayflower whose size was estimated to be 180 tons, we can easily imagine 
how  exceptionally  big  the  Spanish  galleons  were.  Even  in  the  modern  era,  the  first 
trans-Pacific undersea telegraph cable was built in 1903, 45 years after the construction of 
the trans-Atlantic cable. Non-stop trans-Pacific flights became widespread only 40 years ago, 
in the 1970s, after Boeing 747 “Jumbo Jets” were fully introduced (Chart 2). Thus, it was not 
long ago that people began to see the Asia-Pacific region as an economic bloc. Indeed, the 
Asia-Pacific  Economic  Cooperation,  or  APEC,  was  established  as  a  forum  for  the 
governments of Asia-Pacific countries only in 1989. 
Although there remains the geographical distance between Asia-Pacific economies, owing to 
technological innovation it is far less an obstacle to economic exchanges than before, and 
the Asia-Pacific countries have become able to enjoy the benefits of sitting around the same 
sea together. 
Apart from the historical context, last year there were a couple of big events that reminded 
me of the strong linkages that exist within Asia and across the Pacific. The first one was the 
tragic  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake.  This  massive  earthquake  severely  damaged  supply 
chains  of  manufacturing  of  Japan  (Chart  3).  When  factories  of  micro-controllers,  integral 
parts  of  automobiles,  came  to  halt,  the  resultant  shortage  substantially  affected  not  only 
automobile  production  lines  in  Japan  but  also  those  in  overseas  in  Asia  and  the  United 
States (Chart 4). In terms of negative impacts on supply chains, the floods in Thailand since 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
last  summer  also  struck  production  lines  of  hard  disk  drives,  disrupting  computer 
manufacturing in other Asian economies including Japan. These natural disasters revealed 
the strength of linkages among Asia-Pacific economies. 
Another  event  that  reminded  me  of  strong  linkages  across  the  Asian-Pacific  region  was 
extremely quick popularization of tablet PCs and smart phones. Indeed, we now see people 
looking at smart phones almost everywhere. Today’s industrial linkages do not necessarily 
take the traditional form of division of labor depicted in textbooks on international trade. With 
new  “concepts,”  firms  have  become  increasingly  capable  of  attracting  wide-ranging 
resources from all over the world to bring these new concepts to reality. As is shown in the 
case  of  tablet  PCs,  the  Asia-Pacific  region  has  become  more  and  more  important  as  an 
“incubator”  of  innovation.  An  estimated  break-down  of  the  costs  of  Apple’s  iPhone,  whose 
retail  price  is  649  dollars,  consists  of  manufacturing  cost  of  8  dollars,  component  costs  of 
188 dollars  and  a  gross  profit  margin  of  453  dollars  (Chart  5).  The  concepts  of  iPad  and 
iPhone were generated in Silicon Valley. During the process of turning these concepts into 
real  merchandise,  there  were  trans-Pacific  flows  of  goods,  human  resources  and  financial 
services  in  all  directions,  such  as  in  the  development  of  component  technologies, 
manufacturing  processes  and  distribution  channels.  In  such  processes,  not  only  Silicon 
Valley  companies  but  also  many  Asian  firms  in  China,  Korea,  Taiwan  and  Japan  are 
involved. 
2. 
Asia in the global economy 
Asia acting as growth pole to enhance resilience of global economy 
Now,  let  me  briefly  illustrate  the  economic  growth  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region  and  the 
strengthened linkages among the countries of that region, as the basis for further discussion. 
The  economic  growth  of  Asia  has  continuously  exceeded  that  of  the  global  economy  in 
recent years. Indeed, the relative strength of the Asian economy has been more pronounced 
since the global financial crisis. According to the IMF World Economic Outlook, Asian growth, 
which stood at 5.9 percent in 2011, is expected to continue growing at a relatively high rate 
of  6  percent  in  2012.  Meanwhile,  the  growth  of  advanced  economies,  which  stood  at 
1.6 percent in 2011, is expected to remain as low as 1.4 percent in 2012 (Chart 6). According 
to  the  IMF,  Asian  economies  are  expected  to  increase  their  share  of  the  global  economy 
from  30%  to  40%  or  more  by  the  year  of  2030  if  the  current  trend  of  Asian  growth  is 
maintained (Chart 7). 
The Asian share of the global economy is also increasing in terms of trade (Chart 8). In this 
regard,  Japan’s  “White Paper  on  the  International  Economy  and  Trade”  published  in  2011 
provides an insightful analysis on the global trade structure. This Paper divides the world into 
six  areas,  that  is,  NAFTA,  the  EU,  ASEAN,  MERCOSUR,  China  and  Japan  (Chart  9). 
According  to  this  analysis,  the  share  of  the  trade  between  advanced  economies  such  as 
NAFTA, EU and Japan to the total was as much as around 60 percent in 1990, but this figure 
declined  to  a  little  more  than  30  percent  in  2008.  On  the  other  hand,  the  share  of 
trans-Pacific  trade  among  NAFTA,  ASEAN,  MERCOSUR,  China  and  Japan  excluding  that 
between NAFTA and Japan increased from around 25 percent in 1990 to around 45 percent 
in 2008 (Chart 10). This fact illustrates the dramatic development of trade network among the 
Asian-Pacific region. 
The growth of Asia is leading global economy even after the global financial crisis. Despite 
the  bursting  of  the  housing  bubble  in  the  U.S.  and  the  financial  turmoil  after  the  failure  of 
Lehman Brothers, the global economy has not fallen into a deep and prolonged slump such 
as that experienced in the Great Depression in 1930s (Chart 11). As to the background of 
such resilience in the global economy, let me point out the contribution made by emerging 
economies,  especially  by  emerging  Asia,  as  well  as  various  policy  responses  taken  by 
governments and central banks worldwide. With the strong growth of emerging economies, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the global economy now has multiple growth “pillars”, which fortify its resilience. Needless to 
say,  it  may  not  be  appropriate  to  overemphasize  so-called  “de-coupling”  in  this  globalized 
economy. Nonetheless, further endogenous economic development associated with the rise 
in living standards in Asian and other emerging economies will surely continue enhancing the 
robustness of global economy. 
Asia as a new frontier for global economic growth 
I would also like to emphasize that the high growth of Asia, which enhances the resilience of 
global economy, also expands new growth frontiers for non-Asian economies. 
As  many  advanced  countries  are  now  facing  common  issues  of  an  aging  population  and 
fiscal  imbalances,  enhancing  the  growth  potential  has  become  an  imminent  challenge  for 
these countries.1 In addition, the solution to the European debt problem ultimately rests with 
the  ability  and  efforts  of  peripheral  countries  to  boost  their  productivity  and  growth 
sufficiently. In this regard, Asian economies could offer great potential, as they have a vast 
pool  of  human  resources  and  are  now  becoming  major  high-tech  suppliers.  Moreover, 
emerging Asia is expected to substantially grow as consumption markets. According to an 
industry  survey  conducted  early  this  year,  China  has  surpassed  the  U.S.  to  become  the 
world’s largest smart phone market by shipments. 
To  exploit  Asia’s  potential,  advanced  economies  should  build  systematic  and  productive 
linkages with Asian economies, instead of viewing Asia simply as labor-intensive production 
base. Case in point is Japanese retailers, medicare service industries and private education 
industries  which  used  to  focus  on  the  domestic  markets.  They  are  now  formulating  global 
business  strategies 
their 
environmental  and  energy-saving  engineering  technologies,  advanced  economies  could 
contribute to alleviating growth constraints associated with the rapid rise in living standards in 
Asia. It would also be fruitful for advanced economies to consider how they could make use 
of Asia’s human resources and supply capacity to overcome the problems associated with 
their  aging  population.  Establishing  such  strategic  and  coordinated  linkages  with  Asian 
economies would expand growth frontiers and thus bring about “win-win” relationships, which 
would be beneficial to both Asia and the rest of the world. 
the  broader  Asian  market.  Moreover, 
targeting 
through 
3. 
Economic development and financial stability in Asia 
Asia’s strength and challenges in terms of finance 
Next, I would like to talk about the relationship between the economic development of Asia, 
new linkages and the role of finance, which is indeed the main topic of this conference. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  Asian  economies  recovered  relatively  smoothly  and  swiftly  after  the 
global financial crisis and remain a driving force of the world economy. As one of the major 
factors  behind  the  resilience  of  Asia,  I  would  like  to  point  out  the  overall  stability  of  Asian 
financial systems. 
In my view, there are three major factors behind such financial stability in Asia. 
First,  Asia’s  economic  fundamentals  are  relatively  strong.  Most  emerging  Asian  countries 
have  excess  domestic  savings  and  their  fiscal  conditions  are  also  better  than  those  of 
advanced economies. The external balances of these countries generally remain in surplus. 
                                                 
1  Regarding  the  issues  associate  with  demographic  changes,  see  Shirakawa,  “Demographic  Changes  and 
Macroeconomic  Performance:  Japanese  Experiences”  (Opening  Remark  at  2012  BOJ-IMES  Conference) 
[2012] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Against  this  background,  capital  inflows  to  Asia  quickly  rebounded  after  the  sudden 
contraction during the initial stage of the crisis.  
Second,  the  business  models  of  Asian  financial  institutions  are  different  from  those  of 
European and U.S. institutions. In Asia, traditional banking businesses play a major role in 
financial intermediation, and the “originate to distribute” business model, which was one of 
the  major  causes  of  the  financial  crisis,  has  never  been  popular.  Moreover,  Asian  banks’ 
exposures to structured products were limited. 
Third, based on the Asian experiences of financial crises in the 1990s, many Asian countries 
including Japan have already made various efforts to enhance the stability and resilience of 
their  financial  systems,  such  as  strengthening  banks’  capital  and  building  financial  safety 
nets. Now advanced economies are focusing on “macro-prudential” policies. In this regard, 
some Asian economies, based on the experiences of financial crises in 1990, have already 
made use of various macro-prudential tools such as loan-to-value ratio to curb excessive real 
estate loans. As such, some Asian economies have moved ahead of advanced economies in 
terms of implementing macro-prudential policies.  
In  spite  of  their  relative  stability,  Asian  financial  systems  also  face  challenges.  One  of  the 
policy  challenges  is  to  foster  the  development  of  capital  markets,  especially  the  corporate 
bond  markets.  In  emerging  Asia,  there  would  be  huge  financing  needs  for  building  social 
infrastructure such as public transportation, energy supply and communication networks. In 
view of the length of financing needs for building infrastructure as well as the risks associated 
with  possible  maturity  mismatches,  a  well-functioning  capital  market,  as  well  as  credit 
intermediation  through  banks,  should  play  an  important  role  in  such  long-term  domestic 
financing. Moreover, the co-existence of different financing tools such as bank borrowing and 
corporate bonds could enhance the resilience of the financial systems. In this regard, Asia 
has already taken various steps including the introduction of Asian Bond Fund. 
Japan’s possible contribution toward financial developments in Asia 
On this front, I firmly believe that Japan is able to contribute to Asian financial stability as well 
as to the development of financial infrastructure in Asia, for two reasons. 
First, Japan’s financial system, on the whole, is being stable and resilient. 
Given  that  Japan  experienced  a  financial  crisis  in  1990s,  various  measures  have  already 
been  taken  to  strengthen  its  financial  system.  Partly  due  to  such  efforts,  Japan’s  financial 
system  have  remained  mostly  stable,  surviving  successive  events  such  as  the  failures  of 
Lehman Brothers and other financial institutions, the Great East Japan Earthquake and the 
European debt problem. To date, internationally active Japanese banks have generally set 
aside  sufficient  capital,  and  are  in  a  position  to  contribute,  as  financial  intermediaries,  to 
satisfying Asian needs for various financial services. 
Second,  not  only  for  internationally  active  Japanese  banks  but  also  for  Japanese 
non-financial firms, establishing linkages with other Asian economies is now at the core of 
their overseas business strategies. 
Internationally  active  Japanese  financial  institutions  are  now  allocating  their  resources  to 
Asian  businesses  as  a  part  of  their  global  strategies  and  increasing  their  lending  in  Asia. 
They  are  also  exploring  various  businesses  such  as  M&A  financing  in  Asia.  For  example, 
Japanese  “mega”  banks’  loans  to  Asia  as  a  share  of  their  total  overseas  loans  is 
continuously increasing, and has now reached around 30 percent (Chart 12). Recently, some 
European  banks  are  streamlining  their  exposures  to  emerging  economies,  and  Japanese 
banks  are  filling  a  part  of  the  void  created  by  such  “deleveraging”  of  European  banks 
(Chart 13).  Such  Japanese  banks’  activities  would  certainly  contribute  to  stable  financial 
intermediation in Asia. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Also for Japanese non-financial firms, economic  developments in Asia also provide a new 
growth  frontier.  In  view  of  the  widening  gap  between  savings  and  investment  in  Japan’s 
corporate sector due to the sluggish growth in domestic investment opportunities, Japanese 
non-financial  firms  are  now  expanding  their  direct  investments  and  M&A  activities  in 
emerging Asia so as to explore their business frontiers and to seek for higher rate of return. 
Such  activities  are  not  confined  to  large  companies,  but  medium-sized  manufacturers  and 
service providers are also involved. In 2009, the aggregate amount of Japanese firm’s direct 
investments in Asia exceeded the amount invested in the European Union (Chart 14). 
Such  activities  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  and  firms  would  contribute  to  sustainable 
growth in Asia by facilitating a steady flow of risk capital into productive investment in Asia, 
including Japan itself. On the other hand, in order for the Japanese economy to enhance its 
growth potential, it is critical that financial institutions and firms improve their productivity and 
profitability by taking advantage of the growth potential of Asia in terms of both supply and 
demand. 
Toward a new “win-win” relationship 
4. 
In  view  of  the  strengthened  linkages  among  Asia  and  across  the  Pacific,  I  would  like  to 
highlight  three  tasks  for  policymakers  in  order  that  both  Asia  and  the  rest  of  the  world 
achieve  sustainable  growth  through  establishing  a  win-win  relationship  from  a  broader 
perspective. 
First of all, I would like to reiterate the importance of each Asian country continuing its effort 
to maintain economic stability by strengthening fundamentals and the policy framework. As 
Asia’s  share  of  the  global  economy  increases,  possible  impacts  on  the  global  economy 
stemming from fluctuations in the Asian economy and policies adopted by each country in 
Asia could become more pronounced. 
In  terms  of  economic  fundamentals,  emerging  Asia,  lagging  a  bit  behind  advanced 
economies, will also be required to tackle the issue of ageing population in the near future. 
For example, the working age population in China is expected to start decreasing in around 
2020  (Chart  15).  How  effectively  and  promptly  each  country  responds  to  this  issue,  after 
enjoying  the  “population  bonus”,  could  have  significant  implications  for  their  economic 
fundamentals. 
Regarding  growth  constraints  on  Spaceship  Earth,  policy  efforts  aimed  at  protecting  the 
environment  and  saving  energies  would  also  become  more  important.  As  emerging 
economies’  share  of  the  global  economy  increases,  growth  expectations  for  the  global 
economy  often  lead  to  rise  in  commodity  prices,  which  constrains  policy  conducts  of 
emerging  economies  by  intensifying  inflationary  pressures.  In  this  regard,  policy  efforts  in 
environmental  protection  and  energy  savings  will  alleviate  such  growth  constraints  and 
enhance emerging countries’ resilience against fluctuation of commodity prices. I believe that 
Japanese  firms,  which  have  strength  in  environment-related  technology,  could  and  should 
make a valuable contribution on this front. 
From  the  policy  framework  perspective,  it  is  also  imperative  that  each  influential  economy 
maintain  sufficient  exchange  rate  flexibility.  Under  economic  and  financial  globalization, 
inflexibility of exchange rates may trigger abrupt changes in international capital flows and 
increase  the  burden  of  monetary  and  prudential  policies.  In  this  regard,  I  truly  welcome 
recent efforts Asian countries have made to enhance exchange rate flexibility. 
Second,  with  regard  to  financial  stability  policy,  we  are  still  struggling  with  the  question  of 
reconciling the borderless nature of globalized financial services and the national nature of 
financial intermediaries located within the border of a home-country sovereign state. 
If we look at the first half of the decade since 2000, or at western nations since the end of 
19th century before the World War I, we can see that the periods of economic prosperity have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
almost always coincided with big waves of globalization. Looking back at such history, we 
cannot avoid further progress in globalization, for it would be the surest way to raise growth 
potential  for  advanced  economies which  are  faced  with  unfavorable  demographics  and  for 
emerging Asia which is trying to raise living standards further. As a financial aspect of larger 
economic  globalization,  we  cannot  escape  from  financial  globalization  either.  Moreover, 
since  money  is  scalable  and  can  now  move  beyond  borders  instantly  at  an  extremely  low 
cost, it is little wonder if financial globalization goes further in future. 
On  the  other  hand,  financial  service  providers  cannot  be  free  from  their  home  country’s 
“nationality” no matter how far financial services themselves are globalized, as long as the 
current system of national borders is maintained. There have been debates on whether these 
providers could or should be saved in an emergency at the cost of taxpayers in a specific 
jurisdiction. Ultimately, the perceived quality of debt issued by financial institutions cannot be 
separated  entirely  from  the  credibility  of  their  home  country  and  the  resilience  of  its 
regulatory and supervisory framework. At the very least, in order to perform their functions 
sufficiently,  financial  service  providers  must  be  backed  up  by  public  confidence  under 
institutional frameworks such as home country’s effective supervision. In fact, we see some 
signs  of  “re-nationalization”  of  funds  under  the  current  financial  environments.  At  present, 
under the initiative of G20 and Financial Stability Board, policymakers are discussing various 
issues stemming from tensions between financial globalization and sovereign states, such as 
cross-border resolution of globally active financial institutions. Indeed, this issue is a quite big 
challenge for policymakers now. 
Third,  it  is  also  important  to  further  promote  mutual  understanding  of  different  national 
economies and financial structures. 
As  I  already  mentioned,  the  resilience  of  Asian  economy  played  a  key  role  in  preventing 
global economy from falling into a deep and prolonged slump. As this fact illustrates, global 
economy would be more vulnerable to shock when it consists of homogeneous countries in 
terms of economic structure and policy framework than when it is a hybrid system embracing 
diversity.  
In  spite  of  the  development  of  information  technology  and  strengthened  linkages  among 
global  economy,  various  “differences”  among  countries  and  regions  are  likely  to  continue 
existing at least for a foreseeable but substantially-long period of time. Nonetheless, creative 
concepts, innovations and sources of growth will emerge from new linkages between such 
economic diversity. 
Since we are living in a world of diversified economies, there should also be various forms of 
linkages,  ranging  from  an  ultimate  form  of  currency  union  to  much  looser  ties.  Thus,  it  is 
important for policymakers to seek the most appropriate form and combination of linkages, 
taking differences in economic structures and nations’ development stage fully into account. 
In addition, at the occasion of international discussions, constructive dialogue is needed to 
foster  a  mutual  understanding  of  such  differences  and  to  learn  from  one  another.  The 
economies of advanced countries tend to be affected by common economic cycles, and thus, 
their  policy  discussions  inevitably  tend  to  focus  on  similar  themes  such  as  the  “Great 
Moderation”.  In  this  regard,  the  developments  in  Asian  and  other  emerging  countries  are 
adding diversity to the world economy, and their fresh viewpoints will enable policymakers to 
explore new frontiers of policy debates. 
Conclusion 
5. 
In  my  speech  today,  I  have  sought  to  explain  my  current  thinking  given  the  deepening 
linkage  among  Asia  and  across  the  Pacific.  Before  concluding  my  speech,  I  would  like  to 
refer to one issue to which we might need to pay attention as financial linkages within this 
economic area continue to deepen. That is, the issue of time zone differences. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
You are now watching me live, with only a slight time lag as video signals are transmitted 
from Tokyo to San Francisco. That said, it is the 12th of June for me, which is tomorrow for 
you, and I am actually talking to you from “the island of the day after” over the International 
Date Line. For you, my speech is being delivered on the 11th of June, but my diary shows this 
important speech is scheduled for the 12th of June. We are communicating across the Pacific 
in real time, but the dates in our minds are different. 
As  for  the  dates  of  a  speech,  I  can  rely  on  my  secretary  to  ensure  that  there  is  no 
misunderstanding. However, when it comes to finance, dates mean a lot more. Suppose I am 
committed to sending money to some of you two days from now. Should the money reach 
the  recipient  on  the  13th,  or  on  the  14th?  Moreover,  if  both  sides  take  account  of  mutual 
weekends,  there  are  only  4  days  in  a  week  when  transactions  can  be  processed.  These 
problems  could  probably  be  solved  by  laying  down  rules  beforehand.  Still,  complicated 
issues could arise in terms of risk management, including when bankruptcy procedures are 
set in motion. 
The  foreign  exchange  settlement  risks  associated  with  time  zone  differences  have  been 
substantially reduced by CLS settlement. Nonetheless, many of the currencies of emerging 
economies  are  not  yet  available  for  CLS  settlement  (Chart  16).  The  example  I  have  used 
today is seemingly a small problem. Nonetheless, through solving these practical problems 
one by one the world will become closer to a seamless economy and the global economy 
including  Asia-Pacific  region  will  become  able  to  realize  its  full  potential.  In  this  regard,  I 
sincerely hope that the discussions held in this conference will constitute another step in the 
right direction. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
 12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
 16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17
 18 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19
 20 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
