Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
8 March 2012. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. The information that has become available since the beginning of 
February  has  confirmed  our  previous  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity. 
Available  survey  indicators  confirm  signs  of  a  stabilisation  in  the  euro  area  economy. 
However,  the  economic  outlook  is still  subject  to  downside  risks.  Owing  to  rises  in  energy 
prices and indirect taxes, inflation rates are now likely to stay above 2% in 2012, with upside 
risks  prevailing.  Nevertheless,  we  expect  price  developments  to  remain  in  line  with  price 
stability  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  The  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion 
remains subdued, consistent with contained inflationary pressures over the medium term.  
Looking ahead, we are firmly committed to maintaining price stability in the euro area, in line 
with our mandate. To this end, the continued firm anchoring of inflation expectations – in line 
with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term – is 
of the essence.  
Over recent months, a wide range of additional non-standard monetary policy measures has 
been  implemented  by  the  Eurosystem.  These  measures,  including  in  particular  two 
three-year longer-term refinancing operations, were decided upon against the background of 
exceptional circumstances in the last quarter of 2011. The first impact of these measures has 
been positive. Together with fiscal consolidation and stepped-up structural reforms in several 
euro area countries, as well as progress towards a stronger euro area economic governance 
framework, they have contributed to a significant improvement in the financial environment 
over  recent  months.  We  expect  that  the  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations  will 
provide further support for the ongoing stabilisation in financial markets and, in particular, for 
lending  activity  in  the  euro  area.  All  our  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  are 
temporary in nature. Furthermore, all the necessary tools to address potential upside risks to 
medium-term price stability are fully available. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP contracted by 0.3% in the euro area in the fourth quarter of 2011. According to 
recent survey data, there are signs of a stabilisation in economic activity, albeit still at a low 
level. Looking ahead, we expect the euro area economy to recover gradually in the course of 
this year. The outlook for economic activity should be supported by foreign demand, the very 
low short-term interest rates in the euro area, and all the measures taken to foster the proper 
functioning of the euro area financial sector. However, the remaining tensions in euro area 
sovereign  debt  markets  and  their  impact  on  credit  conditions,  as  well  as  the  process  of 
balance sheet adjustment in the financial and non-financial sectors, are expected to continue 
to dampen the underlying growth momentum.  
This assessment is also reflected in the March 2012 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for  the  euro  area,  which  foresee  annual  real  GDP  growth  in  a  range  between  –0.5%  and 
0.3%  in  2012  and  between  0.0%  and  2.2%  in  2013.  Compared  with  the  December  2011 
Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the  ranges  have  been  shifted  slightly 
downwards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  outlook  remains  subject  to  downside  risks.  They  notably  relate  to  a  renewed 
intensification of tensions in euro area debt markets and their potential spillover to the euro 
area real economy. Downside risks also relate to further increases in commodity prices.  
Euro area annual HICP inflation was 2.7% in February 2012, according to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate,  slightly  up  from  2.6%  in  January.  Looking  ahead,  inflation  is  now  likely  to  stay 
above  2%  in  2012,  mainly  owing  to  recent  increases  in  energy  prices,  as  well  as  recently 
announced  increases  in  indirect  taxes.  On  the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for 
commodities,  annual  inflation  rates  should  fall  again  to  below  2%  in  early  2013.  Looking 
further  ahead,  in  an  environment  of  modest  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  well-anchored 
long-term inflation expectations, underlying price pressures should remain limited.  
The  March  2012  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area  foresee  annual 
HICP inflation in a range between 2.1% and 2.7% in 2012 and between 0.9% and 2.3% in 
2013. In comparison with the December 2011 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, 
the ranges for HICP inflation have been shifted upwards, notably the range for 2012. 
Risks  to  projected  HICP  inflation  rates  in  the  coming  years  are  seen  to  be  still  broadly 
balanced, with upside risks in the near term mainly stemming from higher than expected oil 
prices and indirect tax increases. However, downside risks continue to exist owing to weaker 
than expected developments in economic activity. 
The monetary analysis indicates that the underlying pace of monetary expansion remains 
subdued.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  was  2.5%  in  January  2012,  up  from  1.5%  in 
December  2011.  Loan  growth  to  the  private  sector  also  remains  subdued.  However,  its 
annual rate (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) picked up slightly in January to 1.5% 
year on year from 1.2% in December. 
The  annual  growth  rates  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  and  loans  to  households 
(adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) stood at 0.8% and 2.1% respectively in January. 
The  volume  of  MFI  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  declined  only  slightly  in  January, 
following the pronounced decline in December. By contrast, the flow of loans to households 
in January was positive.  
Following the signs of improvement in the financial environment, it is essential for banks to 
strengthen their resilience further, including by retaining earnings. The soundness of banks’ 
balance  sheets  will  be  a  key  factor  in  facilitating  an  appropriate  provision  of  credit  to  the 
economy. 
To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that price developments should remain in line 
with price stability over the medium term. A cross-check with the signals from the monetary 
analysis confirms this picture. 
Looking ahead, in order to deliver a favourable environment for sustainable growth and to 
support confidence and competitiveness, the Governing Council stresses the urgent need for 
governments  to  make  further  progress  towards  restoring  sound  fiscal  positions  and 
the  structural  reform  agenda.  Regarding  fiscal  consolidation,  many 
implementing 
governments  in  the  euro  area  are  making  progress.  Continuing  with  comprehensive  fiscal 
consolidation  and  complying  with  all  commitments  remains  essential.  In  this  respect,  the 
2012  European  Semester  should  be  used  to  enforce  rigorously  the  reinforced  fiscal 
surveillance  mechanism.  Equally  important  are  structural  reforms  to  increase  the 
adjustment  capacity  and  competitiveness  of  euro  area  countries  and  to  strengthen  growth 
prospects and job creation. In this area, more progress is desirable. The Governing Council 
strongly welcomes the European Commission’s Alert Mechanism Report on macroeconomic 
imbalances and expects the proposed in-depth country reviews to actively support the reform 
processes under way in euro area countries. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
