Arnór Sighvatsson: The logic behind the capital account liberalisation 
strategy 
Speech  by  Mr  Arnór  Sighvatsson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  a 
meeting of the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavík, 15 December 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen  
On  25  March  2011,  the  Central  Bank  published  a  capital  account  liberalisation  strategy 
allowing  for  removal  of  the  capital  controls  in  two  phases.  Phase  I  would  focus  on 
channelling unstable króna assets, particularly those held by non-residents, into the hands of 
investors willing to take a long-term exposure on the króna. In Phase II, other controls would 
be lifted. The strategy is relatively terse as regards Phase II, as a number of things could 
change  before  it  can  be  launched.  As  a  consequence,  Phase  II  will  be  drafted  in  greater 
detail  at  a  later  stage.  Therefore,  in  my  presentation  today,  I  will  focus  on  Phase  I  and 
attempt to explain why the individual steps within it are being taken in the order specified in 
the strategy.  
The main problem the strategy is attempting to solve is lack of confidence: in the domestic 
economy,  the  currency,  and  the  Government’s  capacity  to  service  its  debt.  Confidence 
between individuals and between firms, domestic and foreign alike, is a precious commodity 
whose true value is only realised when lost.  
The reason confidence plays such a vital role in the mechanics of the economy is that each 
party’s confidence depends on the confidence of all the others. Recent runs on short-term 
bank liabilities and the fiscal crisis in the euro area are a clear example of this. No one wants 
to  be  the  last  one  to  withdraw  his  deposits  from  a  tottering  bank,  sell  bonds  issued  by  a 
country heading for insolvency, or rid himself of the currency of a country facing an imminent 
balance  of  payments  crisis  and  potentially  unsustainable  debt  burden,  even  though  it  may 
only be unsustainable provided that other investors think it is. The capital controls stopped a 
run  on  Iceland’s  currency.  In  a  sense,  they  also  undermined  confidence  for  the  long  
term – that is, investors’ confidence that Iceland’s economy and public sector finances could 
achieve  balance  and  sustainability  in  the  absence  of  controls,  knowing  that  the  fragile 
balance created by the controls is based on coercing many investors to hold króna assets. 
Ultimately,  confidence  can  be  established  only  under  conditions  of  free  trade,  not  through 
coerced transactions.  
Fortunately, however, investors’ view on the Icelandic economy is diverse. Some understand 
quite well that behind the cloud of dust swirling in the wake of Iceland’s financial collapse is a 
country  fraught  with  opportunity.  When  the  dust  has  settled,  Iceland’s  net  international 
investment  position  may  turn  out  to  be  lower  than  it  has  been  in  decades,  and  in  spite  of 
sizeable  gross  debt,  the  Treasury’s  net  debt  position  indicates  that  it  will  be  possible  to 
reduce  gross  debt  rapidly,  if  the  programme  of  fiscal  consolidation  set  forth  is  followed 
strictly. The country’s natural resources are untouched by the financial crisis, and its human 
resources are relatively unscathed.  
The problem we face is not primarily a debt problem; it is a payment flows problem, which 
can be attributed in part to the fact that owners of frozen ISK assets either do not want to 
own them because they lack confidence in the Icelandic economy or are barred from owning 
them by regulatory provisions or investment strategies.  
If this, and not an underlying debt problem, is at the core of the issue, there are two main 
ways  to  restore  balance  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  lift  the  capital  controls:  the 
Central Bank could use its limited foreign exchange reserves to buy up unstable assets, or it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
could render unstable assets more stable by creating a forum for long-term investors to buy 
them with foreign currency.  
The  problem  with  the  former  of  these  options  is  that  it  transfers  private  sector  debt  to  the 
public  sector,  at  least  temporarily.  The  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  leveraged,  and  this 
option requires reducing reserve assets although the debts remain. The Treasury’s net debt 
position deteriorates as a result.  
The problem with the latter option is that, for the short term, the supply of krónur is too large 
in  comparison  with  long-term  investors’  capacity  to  invest.  If  it  is  executed  too  rapidly,  the 
exchange rate of the króna could fall sharply, at least temporarily, or the foreign exchange 
reserves  could  be  depleted  excessively.  In  addition,  a  number  of  investment  projects  are 
extremely foreign exchange-intensive because of imports. The króna could depreciate as a 
result,  with  heavy  outflows  of  foreign  currency,  even  if  there  were  ample  opportunities  for 
investment.  
This is the problem the liberalisation strategy is attempting to solve. Emphasis is placed on 
protecting the foreign exchange reserves by converting short-term claims against domestic 
entities  to  long-term  investments  to  the  extent  possible.  The  Central  Bank  acts  as  an 
intermediary,  and  the  auction  format  ensures  that  only  a  small  portion  of  the  foreign 
exchange  reserves  are  in  play  at  any  given  time.  The  auction  format  also  ensures  that 
transfers  of  banking  system  liquidity  will  not  be  large  enough  to  jeopardise  the  system’s 
stability.  The  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  protected  as  well  by  the  requirement  that 
investors bring foreign currency into the country and exchange it for krónur in the domestic 
market. This will offset the foreign exchange outflows that often accompany new investment.  
Another  important  aim  of  the  strategy  is  to  ensure  short-term  Treasury  financing.  Even 
though significant progress has been made in controlling the fiscal deficit after the crash and 
halting  the  accumulation  of  unsustainable  debt,  it  is  important  not  to  underestimate  the 
current dependency of Treasury financing on the capital controls. More than half – and, in 
some instances, as much as ¾ – of the stock of short-term Treasury bonds is held by non-
residents.  The  yield  on  Icelandic  Treasury  debt  is  now  a  bit  lower  than  in  the  euro  area 
countries  that  are  facing  severe  sovereign  debt  crises,  and  real  yields  are  considerably 
lower. It is not a given that this would be so without the capital controls. If the controls were 
lifted today, interest rates would probably rise sharply, even though a large proportion of the 
investors  that  own  these  bonds  are  relatively  at  ease  within  the  capital  controls  regime. 
Without the controls, the authorities would have to take further action in order to achieve the 
objectives set for the coming year.  
It  is  therefore  of  pivotal  importance  to  lengthen  the  maturity  profile  of  Treasury  financing 
before  the  controls  are  lifted.  Marked  progress  has  already  been  made  in  this  area.  The 
average duration of domestic Treasury bonds has increased from 3 to 7 years. Last spring, 
domestic  pension  funds  and  other  investors  purchased  a  sizeable  supply  of  indexed  long-
term  Treasury  bonds  by  participating  in  the  first  auctions  under  the  liberalisation  strategy, 
which were dedicated solely to investment in long Treasury bonds. The aim was to lengthen 
the maturity profile of Treasury financing and thereby reduce risk.  
Although there has been a hiatus in the auctions and the pension funds lost interest in them 
after foreign stock markets fell this past summer, non-residents are growing interested in this 
investment option, which will continue to be available alongside the Investment Programme. 
The  Programme  gives  investors  the  option  of  buying  Icelandic  krónur  at  the  auction 
exchange rate (near the offshore rate) in order to invest in the domestic economy, provided 
they  sell  a  corresponding  amount  of  foreign  currency  in  the  domestic  foreign  exchange 
market.  
The  Investment  Programme,  which  was  introduced  in  detail  on  18  November,  has  been 
described  elsewhere;  therefore,  I  will  not  go  into  the  fine  print  here.  It  is  designed  to  be 
neutral vis-à-vis the foreign exchange reserves in the short term and positive in the long run. 
This is achieved by requiring that half of the currency used for the investment be converted in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  domestic  FX  market  and  by  stipulating  a  minimum  holding  period  of  five  years  for  the 
investment.  
It is hoped that this will tie up a sizeable share of the most volatile offshore krónur. How large 
a share that is will depend primarily on the scope of the investment projects on offer and the 
actual  amount  of  volatile  krónur,  both  of  which  are  quite  uncertain.  It  is  hoped  that  the 
Investment Programme will attract significant foreign investment.  
It is a misunderstanding, however, to assume that the Programme aims at releasing almost 
the  entire  stock  of  offshore  krónur  through  foreign  investment.  This  would  require  an 
investment  that  it  is  unrealistic  to  plan  on  in  the  next  two  years.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
realistic to expect to release the most volatile krónur in this way. This is extremely important, 
although no one knows exactly how large a share of these assets are volatile. It is clear that 
a small group of non-residents are ready to sell their assets at the current offshore exchange 
rate.  This  spring’s  auctions  did  not  tempt  owners  of  short-term  Treasury  bonds.  Many  will 
turn out to be long-term investors in the sense that they will not unwind their positions at an 
auction price approaching the official exchange rate, but will continue to reinvest as long as 
the interest rate differential exceeds the assessed risk. The auctions will reveal whether this 
is the case.  
Because it is unrealistic to expect more than a limited portion of the offshore krónur to be 
released  through  auctions,  the  Investment  Programme  does  not  stop  there.  When  the 
incentive  to  participate  in  the  investments  diminishes  –  for  example,  because  investors 
consider the auction exchange rate not favourable enough to justify a five-year commitment, 
or  because the  investment  projects  are  not  sufficiently  large  in  scope –  an  exit  tax  will  be 
levied  on  short-term  capital  movements.  This  step  will  not  be  taken,  however,  unless  the 
offshore exchange rate moves close to the onshore rate, which would be a clear indication of 
enhanced stability of these assets.  
A number of critics have found fault with this sequence of events and suggested that the exit 
tax  be  levied  immediately.  In  their  opinion,  this  would  generate  significant  income  for  the 
Treasury and facilitate the full removal of the capital controls much sooner than is currently 
projected.  But 
foreign  exchange  reserves  would  be  depleted 
commensurate with the rise in Government revenue. It is not as easy to control the scope of 
transactions in this way so as to prevent undue strain on the reserves, the banks’ liquidity, 
and the Treasury’s short-term financing.  
The main problem, however, is that the incentive for long-term investors to purchase krónur 
from distressed investors will disappear as soon as the exit tax is imposed. The difference 
between the onshore and offshore exchange rates, which is the incentive for the transaction, 
would  revert  to  the  Treasury.  This  reduces  the  likelihood  that  the  problem  can  be  solved 
within the private sector, without tapping the nation’s foreign exchange reserves. Those most 
concerned  about  the  harmfulness  of  the  capital  controls  must  also  realise  that  substantial 
revenues  from  the  exit  tax  could  provide  an  incentive  for  the  authorities  to  maintain  the 
controls for as long as possible.  
I  mentioned  just  now  that  non-resident  owners  of  Treasury  bonds  did  not  participate 
significantly in the auctions held earlier in the year, and that some of them may continue to 
invest in Treasury bonds for the long term. This does not mean that they will not want to sell 
when  the  capital  controls  are  removed,  given  the  foreign  exchange  risk  that  may  be 
perceived at that time.  
In order to reduce such selling pressure and build confidence in the process, it is planned to 
offer  owners  of  short-term  Treasury  bonds  the  opportunity  to  exchange  them  for  foreign-
denominated bonds. This will allow investors to avoid the foreign exchange risk temporarily, 
although creditor risk vis-à-vis the Treasury will still exist. It is too early to speculate on the 
duration  of  the  bonds  that  would  be  offered.  That  would  be  determined  by  the  conditions 
prevailing at the time. The more successful the authorities are in reversing the trend in public 
sector debt, the more likely investors will be to buy long-term bonds and the better protected 
the  danger 
that 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  Treasury  will  be  against  the  short-term  exchange  rate  volatility  that  could  accompany 
capital account liberalisation. Implementation of precautionary rules is also an important part 
of the preparation for ultimate removal of the controls.  
Ladies and gentlemen  
The  capital  controls  are  harmful.  No  one  knows  that  better  than  those  who  must  enforce 
them.  They  are  even  more  harmful  if  they  are  not  enforced.  There  are  those  who  want 
precisely  dated  schedules  for  more  rapid  liberalisation  than  is  currently  planned,  and  their 
impatience is understandable. But a precisely dated schedule would not necessarily speed 
up the removal of the controls – not without correspondingly greater willingness to take on 
risk. I welcome the constructive criticism and exchange of opinions that come to the fore at 
meetings such as this one, however, and I urge others to air their views. In my opinion, the 
capital  account  liberalisation  strategy  is  based  on  sensible  arguments,  which  I  have 
described briefly in my presentation today. On the other hand, it is not etched in stone, and in 
the  final  analysis,  experience  will  reveal  the  truth.  The  liberalisation  strategy  can  be 
implemented  in  various  ways  and  adapted  to  actual  developments.  Sound  ideas  on  this 
subject  are  most  welcome.  But  at  this  juncture,  I  believe  it  is  best  that  we  follow  the  path 
already mapped out, with strong emphasis on safeguarding the foreign exchange reserves, 
financial stability, and Treasury financing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
