Erdem Başçi: Financial and macroeconomic stability 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at a 
conference on “Financial and macroeconomic stability”, organised by the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey jointly with the Central Bank of Brazil, the Bank of Finland and the Journal 
of Financial Stability, Istanbul, 4 June 2012. 
 to 
the  real  sector.  Therefore, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome  to  the  conference  on  Financial  and  Macroeconomic  Stability,  organized  by  the 
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey jointly with the Central Bank of Brazil, the Bank of 
Finland and Journal of Financial Stability. In November last year, we organized yet another 
conference on Financial Stability and Inflation Targeting, with a focus on financial stability. 
Country experiences since then have shown once more how costly it would be economically 
and  socially  if  and  when  financial  stability  is  neglected.  Therefore,  financial  stability  is  of 
utmost importance for policymakers in attaining macroeconomic stability. As a matter of fact, 
this conviction, which is also supported by international platforms such as G20, IMF and BIS, 
has  not  only  raised  several  new  questions  regarding  the  design  and  implementation  of 
monetary policy, but also proposed a new research agenda in the academic literature. 
Esteemed Participants, 
Sustainable  growth,  low  inflation,  steady  employment  growth,  low  levels  of  unemployment 
and  a  balanced  public  finance  can  be  listed  as  the  main  indicators  of  macroeconomic 
stability. Although economists were aware of the significance of the above listed for social 
welfare,  financial  stability  had  been  in  the  back  burner  before  the  global  financial  crisis  of 
2008–2009.  With  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  importance  of  financial  sector  came  to  the 
forefront and it was understood that the costs will be immense if the instability in the financial 
sector  spreads 
the  period  ahead,  maintaining 
macroeconomic  stability  and  financial  stability  concurrently  remains  a  major  challenge  for 
policymakers. New policy tools and new policies might be needed to achieve both stability 
targets.  In  this  context,  I  believe  that  the  conference  on  “Financial  and  Macroeconomic 
Stability” will provide a significant contribution to policymakers. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Excessive volatility in macroeconomic aggregates, namely production, employment, budget, 
foreign trade and inflation, might impair the distribution of income and assets, and reduce the 
welfare  of  that  society.  It  is  therefore  of  utmost  importance  to  achieve  macroeconomic 
stability and to sustain the welfare of the society. 
Financial  stability  is  crucial  in  providing  an  effective  mechanism  for  the  transfer  of  the 
economy’s  resources  from  savers  to  producers.  An  effectively-functioning  financial  system 
will ensure balanced distribution of risks and decrease the susceptibility of the economy to 
shocks. Otherwise, financial crises will disrupt real sector production and the economy will 
suffer  sizeable  loss  of  welfare.  Thus,  instability  in  the  financial  sector  will  jeopardize 
macroeconomic  stability.  As  a  striking  example  to  this  argument,  we  can  mention  the 
2008–2009  global  crisis  that  was  triggered  by  the  financial  sector  and  paved  the  way  to 
deteriorating macroeconomic indicators such as production, employment, unemployment and 
budget balance in many countries. We need to underline the fact that financial stability is also 
crucial for the economies of developing countries as well. During the convergence process, 
these  countries  experience  rapid  financial  deepening  and  integration  with  global  financial 
markets,  as  a  result  of  which  financial  transactions  become  an  indispensable  part  of 
economic  activity.  It  is  essential  for  a  sound  economic  outlook  in  these  countries  that  this 
process is managed effectively and risks likely to arise from the financial sector are predicted 
so as to contain their potential effects on the economy. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Another  potential  threat  to  financial  stability  is  the  international  capital  flows.  Free  flow  of 
capital  enables  it  to  contribute  to  the  growth  prospects  by  moving  where  it  is  the  most 
efficient. Yet, when capital flows are not stable, economies are likely to face severe damage. 
While  on  the  one  hand,  the  surge  especially  in  short-term  capital  inflows  ensure  easier 
access to credit and boost consumption; on the other hand, they lead to over-appreciation of 
local currencies and thereby widen the imbalance between domestic and external demand. 
Overall, this leads to deterioration in external balance and increases the domestic economy’s 
susceptibility  to  sudden  changes  in  global  risk  appetite,  and  in  turn,  poses  risk  to 
macroeconomic and financial stability. In economic literature, capital outflows following the 
developments  of  this  kind  are  called  “sudden  stops”.  Turkey  and  many  other  developing 
countries  have  occasionally  experienced  such  sudden  stops.  Keeping  excessive  volatility 
and  international  capital  flows  under  control  is crucial  for financial  stability.  In  this respect, 
macroprudential measures stand out as an important tool. 
The  monetary,  fiscal  and  financial  sector  policies  adopted  by  advanced  economies  in  the 
wake  of  the  global  economic  crisis  exposed  even  open  developing  countries  with  sound 
economic  fundamentals  to  financial  instability  risk.  The  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey,  in  view  of  this  risk,  safeguarded  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability 
simultaneously  by  adopting  a  flexible  monetary  policy,  and  thus  contributed  to  the 
sustainable  development  path.  In  addition  to  the  flexible  monetary  policy  strategy 
implemented by the Central Bank as of the end of 2010, the prudent measures adopted by 
the BRSA accompanied by the safeguarded fiscal discipline strengthened the Central Bank’s 
hand. We firmly believe that we will attain very positive results with respect to price stability 
and financial stability by the end of 2012. 
Along  with  national  macroprudential  measures  introduced  by  countries,  some  international 
criteria  have  also  been  developed  for  the  sake  of  safeguarding  financial  stability.  For 
example,  the  Basel  III  accords  bring  about  new  arrangements  reinforcing  the  capital 
structures of financial institutions. These arrangements will ensure a more resilient financial 
sector  against  unforeseen  risks  and  will  contribute  to  financial  stability.  The  recent  efforts 
clearly  point  to  a  consensus  among  countries  on  the  critical  importance  of  safeguarding 
financial stability. 
Despite  the  consensus  among  policy-makers  on  the  importance  of  financial  stability,  the 
economic  literature  lacks  adequate  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  on  the  details  of  the 
transmission  mechanism  from  financial  stability  to  macroeconomic  stability.  At  this  point, 
academia is expected to do their share in this respect. 
The two-day conference will  stage parallel sessions, panel  discussions  and  presentations on 
these  issues.  Banking  sector  dynamics,  macroprudential  measures  and  their  impact  on 
macroeconomic stability, systemic risk issue and sovereign debt dynamics are among the topics 
that  will  be  addressed  at  the  conference.  Two  of  our  distinguished  guests,  Mr.  Ricardo 
Caballero and Mr. Franklin Allen, will be delivering speeches. Mr. Caballero will be presenting a 
speech  on  the  first  day  of  the  conference  and  Mr.  Allen’s  presentation  is  scheduled  for  the 
second day. On the second day of the conference, the panel discussion titled “How did the crisis 
challenge the Central Banking as we knew it? What should (not) change?” will be held, at which 
senior central bankers will be sharing their country experiences. I think this panel discussion will 
be very interesting and beneficial for all the participants. 
The  studies  that  will  be  presented  throughout  the  conference  will  contribute  to  better 
understanding  of  the  factors  threatening  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability  and 
developing  policies  to  achieve  these  two  objectives  simultaneously.  I  believe  that  the 
conference  will  also  serve  as  a  forum  for  the  participants  for  exchanging  views.  In  this 
respect,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organization  committee  for  their  efforts  in  bringing  these 
very  interesting  and  enlightening  studies  under  this  conference.  I  wish  the  conference  a 
complete success and I would like to thank all our guests for their participation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
