Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Financial stability and financial inclusion – two 
facets of the same policy objective 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  to  the  Financial  Sector  Forum  at  the  Asian  Development  Bank, 
Manila, 7 February 2012. 
 Officials  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  resource  persons,  forum  participants,  my 
colleagues in government and in the financial market, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.  
I am happy to join you this afternoon and have this opportunity to discuss two policy issues 
which command prime attention today. For this reason, this session is a timely intervention, 
providing  us  a  venue  to  further  our  appreciation  of  the  dynamics  between  inclusion  and 
stability. 
Let me start with financial inclusion. 
Our  foray  into  this  policy  objective  has  been  driven  by  our  socio-economic  profile.  Spread 
over 17administrative regions, the Philippine archipelago is prone to physical fragmentation. 
With the population typically drawn along ethnocentric lines, we have as much diversity as 
distinction. 
The  economics  of  this  divide  is  evident  in  our  income  distribution.  Data  from  our  Family 
Income and Expenditure Surveys (FIES) will show that on average only 20 percent of family 
saving is generated by 80 percent of families. This disparity was the case in the 1997 FIES 
and it still is the case in the latest (2009) FIES. 
In  the  banking  market,  limited  family  saving  is  validated  by  the  metric  of  having  3  deposit 
accounts  per  5  Filipinos  nationwide.  This  is  quite  low  in  absolute  terms  specially  when 
compared with the rest of the region. 
What  is  worse  though  is  that  only  26%  of  the  adult  population  use  banking  services.  This 
suggests that the 3 deposit accounts likely belong to repeat customers. 
To compound matters, about 37% of municipalities still do not have banking offices. Quite 
expectedly,  the  majority  of  banking  offices  are  in  the  cities  and  first  and  second  class 
municipalities.  These  information  are  significant  because  they  reflect  the  basic  gap  in  the 
footprint strategy of the banking community vis-à-vis the population. 
Left as they are, the numbers do give us strong reasons to intervene with a formal policy on 
financial inclusion.  
This  call  for  intervention  is  premised  on  socio-economic  diversity.  This  is  again  another 
important consideration because it is a reminder that it is diversity which financial inclusion 
must precisely address. 
From  this  perspective,  financial  inclusion  is  about  tailor-fitting  a  response  for  a  defined 
problem. It is about advancing the financial, social and economic well-being of those who are 
otherwise  “excluded”.  The  same  supervisory  principles  as  those  in  the mainstream  market 
continue  to  apply  but  the  execution  allows  for  the  proportionate  application  of  regulatory 
requirements. In this way, we provide for flexibilities in policy aspects where rigidities would 
deter the creation of markets. 
This  is  precisely  what  we  have  done  in  the  Philippines.  To-date,  we  have  crafted 
20 regulatory  issuances  specific  to  the  financial  inclusion  framework.  These  20  fall  under 
5 key aspects: 
1. 
Wider range of products; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Expanded physical network; 
Extended virtual reach; 
Enhanced transparency and disclosure; 
Lower barriers to customer acquisition1 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
We believe these ensure effective implementation of financial inclusion. 
In  providing  for  a  wider  range  of  products,  for  example,  we  recognize  that  the  financial 
service needs are quite varied. Toward this end, the BSP has recognized credit facilities of 
up  to  Php300,000  for  such  instruments  as  micro-enterprise  loans,  micro-agri  loans  and, 
housing  microfinance  loans.  To  make  this  micro  ecosystem  thriving,  we  complement  the 
credit  facilities  with  needed  auxiliary  products  such  as  micro-deposits and  micro-insurance 
product lines. The combination of all these product lines allows for a free flow of funds within 
an environment that is specifically structured for small-ticket item transactions. 
We  recognize  that  access  is  a  major  concern,  particularly  with  37%  of  municipalities  not 
having a banking office. To address this, we introduced the concept of microfinance banking 
office  (MBO).  MBOs  are  operationally  attached  to  a  full-service  branch  but  can  be 
established in hard-to-reach areas. On their own, they serve as a launch pad for a range of 
product lines from loans, to savings, remittances, to e-money conversion, bills payment, pay 
out services and even foreign exchange purchases on a limited basis.  
MBOs are separate from the electronic money ecosystem which we introduced a couple of 
years ago. Using technology that is readily accessible by the retail market, we are able to 
bridge the physical gaps in banking with a technology-driven network. This covers several 
facets  including  fund  transfer  facilities,  retail  payments  and  even  partnerships  with 
merchants. 
Pricing  is  certainly  another  key  element.  Contrary  to  some  perception,  financial  inclusion 
operates on market terms and does not require any special pricing concession.  
To make this effective, we believe it to be important that the financial consumer is provided 
with accurate information on pricing. By expanding the provisions of the Truth in Lending Act, 
the  pricing  approach  has  been  standardized  to  avoid  possible  misrepresentation.  Beyond 
pricing,  we  are  also  of  the  belief  that  the  consumer  would  be  better  protected  if  he  is 
informed  of  the  different  investment  options  available  to  him  as  well  the  macro  and 
microeconomic factors that are likely to impact on the value of his chosen investments2. 
None  of  the  above  would  be  possible,  however,  if  specific  regulatory  barriers  are  not 
addressed.  Through  the  recent  issuance  of  updated  Anti  Money  Laundering  rules  and 
regulations, we are able to strike a balance between prudential requirements and realistically 
not having direct knowledge of those in under-served areas. To address this difficulty, our 
new rules rely on 3rd parties already embedded in the communities to fulfil the face to face 
requirements of the Know-Your-Customer threshold3. 
                                                 
1  A specific example would be allowing banks to rely on customer identification by agents that are located in 
underbanked communities. There is decreased transaction cost in customer retention and record keeping.  
2  To  date,  the  BSP  has  conducted  under  its  BSP  Economic  and  Financial  Learning  Program  90  Public 
Information  Campaigns,  48  local  and  11  international  Financial  Learning  Campaigns  for  OFWs  and  their 
families, 9 Financial Expos, 11 Financial Learning conferences for Microfinance Clients and the Unbanked. 
3  An example of authorized third parties under the new rules are covered institutions such as money changers, 
pawnshops  and  remittance  agents  which  have  been  accredited  by  specific  banks  in  the  head  offices  to 
perform KYC functions for them in the underbanked communities.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The net effect is an enabled environment. Today,188 banks provide microfinance services. 
We estimate that one million households are serviced with an outstanding portfolio of about 
Php 7 billion as of September 2011. 
When  compared  with  the  Php  7.17  trillion  total  resources  of  the  banking  system  as  of 
November 2011, the portfolio for financial inclusion is modest. However, this same portfolio 
was not formally in existence only a decade ago and it is in that context that we measure the 
strides taken, which then reflect greater significance. 
With all of the above initiatives and changes, a natural question to ask is whether financial 
inclusion impinges upon financial stability. After all, inclusion requires specialized rules for a 
specialized market constituency. 
However, the link between inclusion and stability – or more appropriately, between reducing 
exclusion and increasing instability – may not be unique. This makes it difficult to be precise. 
Nonetheless, two possibilities may be considered.  
First, financial market failures are often premised on information asymmetries. Incorporating 
new agents into the formal market will likely increase information asymmetries. This is more 
so the case with stakeholders whose access to and use of information is not the same as 
those in the mainstream market. 
Second,  there  is  regulatory  arbitrage.  The  “tailor  fitting”  of  guidelines  that  is  inherent  to 
financial inclusion may create an unintended imbalance in incentives. This becomes a point 
of arbitrage, if not market pressure.  
These  two  scenarios  are  certainly  possible.  As  we  evaluate  these  possibilities,  it  bears 
repeating  that  the  tailor-fitting  of  regulations  observed  for  the  inclusion  framework  is  not 
meant to compromise governance standards.  
What it simply does is introduce flexibilities so that we can impose proportionate oversight 
where and in the manner that this is needed. 
Beyond this, it does become an empirical issue. At the most basic level, the risks in financial 
inclusion are transactional, of smaller value and often specific to a target constituent. 
For  the  Philippines,  the  concern  is  the  extent  to  which  the  financial  inclusion  portfolio  can 
affect the banking system which is currently 100x its own size. 
The answer lies in the concept of contagion. This is largely idiosyncratic to a jurisdiction and 
empirical  in  nature  more  than  anything  else.  Different  jurisdictions  will  face  different 
parameters and different pressures due to contagion. 
Where then do all of these take us? Should we not pursue inclusion when the numbers say 
so? Should stability be the primordial concern around which all other policy objectives must 
subsist?  
If we go back to first principles, markets are made when two parties with opposing views and 
different needs come together to agree to transact with each other. It is for this fundamental 
reason that markets thrive on servicing the needs of savers versus borrowers and those of 
depositors  versus  investors.  However,  when  the  markets  are  too  fragmented  and  their 
constituents  are  effectively  segmented,  instead  of  offering  a  venue  for  disinterested 
counterparties to come together, market failures could arise. 
Moving forward then, it would stand to reason that financial stability would thrive when the 
market framework allows for the different stakeholders to participate. Financial stability can 
thrive  when  different  needs  are  recognized,  but  addressed  as  appropriate  and  governed 
under the same overarching core principles of market governance and prudential oversight. 
This is nothing more than financial inclusion. Stripped to its core, inclusion is a participatory 
framework to work toward a holistic market and break down barriers between bankable and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
inclusion,  we  are  proud  of  our  humble  achievements  and 
unbanked,  serviced  and  under-served.  Once  such  a  holistic  market  is  upon  us,  we  would 
have created the environment where stability can more likely be sustained.  
More than nice words, the Philippines stands by this framework. 
the  recent 
First,  on 
pronouncements from external institutions give us reason to move further and forward. For 
three  years  in  a  row  (2009–2011),  the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit’s  global  survey  on 
microfinance has ranked the Philippines as number one in the world in terms of policy and 
regulatory framework for microfinance. The World Economic Forum and other international 
bodies have also recognized our strides in using innovation to increase access to financial 
services.  
Second, on stability, we believe that our financial system has performed well under the most 
difficult  global  conditions  in  recent  memory.  Beyond  the  positive  review  from  our  recent 
FSAP and the analyses from various other external agencies, including credit rating bodies, 
the fact remains that the Philippine financial system has been consistently expanding through 
the past decade. 
It is our view that the strength and stability of the financial system and the expansion and 
development  of  our  financial  inclusion  program  are  not  merely  co-incidental  but  rather 
complementary. They do not just run in silent parallel, but they run as a shared purpose.  
From only Php 2.6 billion in December 2002 serving around 390,000 borrowers, the financial 
inclusion portfolio as of September 2011 is over Php 7 billion with nearly a million borrowers.  
What makes this impressive is not its nominal amount. Rather, it is the fact that the portfolio 
growth  translates  to  an  annualized  expansion  of  12%  per  annum.  In  contrast,  banking 
system  resources  over  the  same  exact  period  have  grown  by  8.4%  per  annum  [from  Php 
3.48 trillion in December 2002 to Php 7.04 trillion in September 2011].  
Though much remains to be done, we have moved forward to make economic activity much 
more participatory through inclusion. In the process, we have broadened the coverage of the 
financial net by not limiting it to those who are already naturally bankable. 
The  process  does  not  end  here.  Financial  inclusion  and  financial  stability  can  and  do 
complement each other and we will continue to stand by this framework.  
Well beyond the numbers, we believe that the Filipino public is definitely better for it. 
Thank you very much and good day.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
