Mario Draghi: A route for Europe 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the day in memory 
of  Mr  Federico  Caffè,  organised  by  the  Faculty  of  Economics  and  the  Department  of 
Economics and Law at the Sapienza University, Rome, 24 May 2012. 
 A  teacher,  says  Eco,  “teaches  that  everyone  must  become  individual  and  different”.1 
Professor Federico Caffè, albeit with a coherent vision and deeply held convictions, was a 
teacher. He taught his students to think for themselves and did not pass on a binding creed. 
He helped his students – economists, thinkers, servants of the state and of the institutions, 
alert citizens – to discover themselves. 
I’ll  start  with  the  subject  which,  without  a  doubt,  was  the  most  precious  to  Caffè,  namely 
welfare. Probably nothing in his intellectual heritage is more topical than this painful protest 
of his: one cannot, he would say, “accept the idea that an entire generation of young people 
should consider themselves as having being born at the wrong time and having to suffer job 
insecurity as an inevitable fact”.2 
Work: a European matter 
“Full employment is not only a means of increasing production..., it is an end in itself, since it 
leads to overcoming the servile attitude of those who find it hard to obtain a job opportunity or 
live in constant fear of being deprived of one. In other words, the benefits of full employment 
are considered as well, and above all, in terms of human dignity. ”These words of Caffè do 
not  surprise  those  who  knew  him  and  those  who  have  read  his  works.  They  express  the 
fundamental inspiration of his professional and public life: it is a duty of economic policy to 
act so that the economy can get as close as possible to full employment. 
In 1975, he formulated it more precisely: “The goal of dignified work for all, however, is not 
compatible either with situations of privilege, which have now become destabilising, nor with 
excessive  labour  and  social  security  rights,  which  results  in  job  opportunities  evaporating 
away”.  The  issue  that  Caffè  raises  here  is  one  of  fairness.  We  find  it  again  today:  the 
international crisis has affected everyone, and young people especially. 
In  the  European  Union,  between  2007  and  2011  the  unemployment  rate  rose  by 
5.8 percentage points among the 15–24 year olds, by 3.5 points among the 25–34 year olds 
and  by  1.8  points  in  the  35–64  age  range.  Qualitatively,  the  profile  is  similar  almost 
everywhere;  the  clear  exception  is  Germany,  where  the  unemployment  rate  among  15  to 
24 year olds in the first quarter of 2012 was 8%; in Italy it was 34.2%, in Spain 50.7% and the 
euro area average was 21.9%. These trends reflect a fundamental question: they confirm the 
particular vulnerability of this essential part of our workforce. The unequal sharing of the “cost 
of flexibility”, only affecting young people, an eternal flexibility with no hope of stabilisation, 
leads  among  other  things  to  companies  not  investing  in  young  people,  whose  skills  and 
talents often decline in jobs with low added value. The underuse of their resources reduces 
growth  in  various  ways:  it  makes  the  creation  of  start-ups  less  likely  –  and  they  are  on 
average more innovative than others – it causes a decline in skills in the long run, slowing 
down  the  assimilation  of  new  technology  and  acting  as  a  brake  on  efficient  production 
                                                 
1  Tiberi, M., “Ricordo di Federico Caffè”, in Rivista italiana degli economisti, April 1997, p. 132. 
2  Caffè, F., La solitudine del riformista, edited by Acocella, N. and Franzini, M., Bollati Boringhieri, Turin, 1990, 
p. 258. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
the  crisis, 
the  eve  of 
processes. In addition to undermining society’s sense of fairness, it is a waste that we cannot 
afford. 
I  think  it’s  essential  to  ask  how  economic  policy  conducted  in  various  Member  States  has 
done its duty in the way desired by Caffè. 
Social progress is one of the key objectives of the European integration process: “The Union 
shall work for the sustainable development of Europe based on balanced economic growth 
and  price  stability,  a  highly  competitive  social  market  economy,  aiming  at  full  employment 
and social progress … It shall combat social exclusion and discrimination, and shall promote 
social  justice  and  protection,  equality  between  women  and  men,  solidarity  between 
generations and protection of the rights of the child”. 
(Article I–3 of the draft European Constitution). Welfare is not only a remedy for the failure of 
insurance markets, but also a tool to promote inclusion, solidarity and a sense of fairness. 
In the three post-war decades (the so-called “Golden Age”), which especially in Europe were 
marked by high growth rates, use of advanced technologies, high growth employment, stable 
lifetime  employment,  welfare  started  to  emerge,  at  different  times  and  on  different  scales 
depending on the country, as an integrated system that protects its citizens from significant 
risks.  
The European model redistributes many more resources for social purposes than the US and 
Japanese  systems:  on 
total  expenditure  on  pensions, 
unemployment benefit, for children and families was, in relation to GDP, more than twice that 
of  the  US  and  Japan.  This  can  take  different  forms  as  regards  the  composition  of  social 
policies and the degree of labour protection. In Italy, with an overall welfare spending ratio of 
GDP  in  line  with  that  of  the  rest  of  Europe,  spending  on  support  for  the  unemployed,  for 
households, particularly those at risk of falling into poverty, is at a level less than half that of 
elsewhere  in  Europe,  while  spending  on  pensions  is  significantly  higher.  The  weakness  of 
the “social shock absorbers” is that relatively high job protection for those in employment is 
accompanied  by  weaker  protection  for  those  out  of  work,  contrary  to  what  happens  in  the 
Nordic  models,  where  the  so-called  “flexisecurity”  combines  an  extensive  social  safety  net 
with less job protection. 
In  some  countries,  even  if,  40  years  on,  the  assumptions  of  that  model  are  still  valid, 
reflections on it began some time ago. 
Structural  factors  have  changed  the  context  within  which  the  European  social  model 
operates: the growing competition from emerging countries, the reorganisation of production 
processes on a global basis, the speed of innovation, the increasing fragmentation of career 
paths  with  ever  looser  ties  to  a  “permanent  position”,  the  greater  instability  of  families, 
declining fertility, the prospective decrease in the workforce, an ageing population. The set of 
risks faced by individuals throughout their life has changed significantly. 
The social protection systems are therefore constantly evolving; substantial corrections have 
taken  place  in  recent  years  in  many  countries,  including  France,  the  United  Kingdom  and 
Germany,  the  country  where  the  reform  process  began  a  decade  ago.  In  Italy,  the  recent 
pension  reform  which  approves  the  full  transition  to  a  contribution  system  completes  the 
necessary  correction  of  the  pension  spending  dynamics  which  was  started  years  ago.  As 
Germany shows very well, large and effective welfare systems can be made more efficient 
without compromising social goals. 
We are living at a critical juncture in the history of the Union. The sovereign debt crisis has 
exposed serious weaknesses in the institutional framework; in this context, the difficulties in 
finding  common  solutions  are  having  a  negative  impact  on  market  valuations.  The 
extraordinary  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  have  gained  us  time;  they  have  preserved  the 
functioning of monetary policy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But we have now reached a point where European integration, in order to survive, needs a 
bold  leap  of  political  imagination.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  I  have  referred  to  the  need  for  a 
“growth compact” alongside the well-known “fiscal compact”. 
A  growth  compact  rests  on  three  pillars  and  the  most  important  one,  from  a  structural 
viewpoint, is political: the economic and financial crisis has challenged the myopic belief that 
monetary union could remain just that, and not evolve into something closer, more binding, 
into  an  arrangement  whereby  national  sovereignty  on  economic  policy  is  replaced  by  the 
Community  ruling.  If  the  governments  of  the  Member  States  of  the  euro  define  jointly  and 
irrevocably their vision of what the political and economic construct that supports the single 
currency will be and what the conditions to reach that goal together should be. This is the 
most  effective  answer  to  the  question  everyone  is  asking:  “Where  will  the  euro  be  in  ten 
years’ time?”. 
The  second  pillar  is  that  of  structural  reforms,  especially,  but  not  only,  in  the  product  and 
labour markets. The completion of the single market and the strengthening of competition are 
crucial  for  growth  and  employment.  Labour  market  reforms  that  combine  flexibility  and 
mobility with a sense of fairness and social inclusion are essential. 
Growth and fairness are closely connected: without growth, and the events of recent months 
also reflect this, the temptation to “circle our wagons ”gains strength, and solidarity weakens. 
Without  fairness,  the  economy  breaks  up  into  multiple  interest  groups,  no  common  good 
emerges as a result of social and economic interaction, and there are negative effects on the 
capacity to grow. Recent Italian history has no shortage of examples. 
These reforms have long been indispensable in a global economy very different to the one 
which witnessed the creation of the institutions still operating today. In the political structure 
that will emerge from the crisis it is likely and desirable that for these reforms a system of 
European rules will be introduced similar to that for the fiscal compact, a discipline leading 
over time to the European harmonisation of objectives and tools. 
The third pillar is the revival of public investment: the use of public resources to push forward 
investment  in  infrastructure  and  human  capital,  research  and  innovation  at  national  and 
European levels. (The proposed strengthening of the EIB and the reprogramming of Union 
structural funds in favour of less-developed areas go in this direction). 
Thus,  a  growth  compact  complements  the  fiscal  compact,  because  there  can  be  no 
sustainable  growth  without  orderly  public  finances.  In  this  regard  I  have  noted  on  other 
occasions the extraordinary progress made by all governments of the euro area in terms of 
fiscal consolidation, but, once the emergency is overcome, they need to make improvements 
by cutting current spending and taxation. 
Let me now consider some issues more directly related to the ECB’s monetary policy and 
action. 
Objectives and instruments 
The  first  issue  involves  the  relationship  between  objectives  and  instruments  of  economic 
policy in a macroeconomic reference model that changes over time. For Caffè, one of the 
first scholars of Frisch and Tinbergen, the optimal allocation of tools and objectives occurred 
in the reference model prevalent in the 1970s, in which the goal of economic policy was to 
make  best  use  of  the  available  resources,  in  particular  full  employment.  In  pursuit  of  this 
goal, monetary policy was subordinated to fiscal policy, with an ancillary role for the central 
bank vis-à-vis the Treasury. The reference macro-model was based on a static mechanism 
of  elaborating  expectations,  which were  formed  by  extrapolating  from  past  observations  to 
the future. This mechanism amplified the immediate effect of public spending on aggregate 
demand. Monetary policy – in charge of credit conditions – was entrusted with the task of 
alleviating, through a careful policy of accommodation, the impact that government borrowing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
would have exerted on the cost of private debt. The central bank was financing the Treasury 
by  creating  money.  Under  these  conditions,  an  increase  in  public  spending  could  “add 
demand”– where this would be lacking for the goal of full employment – without taking away 
resources from other uses. 
Since then, the theory of economic policy has followed two paths that have led it to invert the 
ranking of relative potential of tools and to enhance the definition and measurement of the 
objective. 
As  for  the  instruments,  a  different  theory  of  the  formation  of  expectations  –  no  longer 
extrapolative – has highlighted the strong impact of monetary policy and has weakened the 
expected effects of fiscal policy. In the models that we use today, agents, when formulating 
their  expectations,  are  attentive  to  the  sustainability  conditions  of  the  choices  in  the  long 
term. Economic policies deemed unsustainable in the long run are ineffective. For example, 
an  active  deficit-financed  fiscal  policy  is  limited  by  fears  about  the  government’s  ability  to 
refinance the debt from which that policy originates. These fears may lead to behaviours that 
weaken  the  private  sector  –  or,  at  worst,  completely  neutralise  –  the  impact  of  public 
spending as a means of controlling demand. Monetary policy, by contrast, is strengthened by 
this. Acting through the expectations channel, it can have a lasting effect on the expected 
flows  of  financial  revenue.  Affecting  the  real  rate  of  intertemporal  discount,  it  can  deeply 
affect decisions on savings and consumption. 
The  definition  of  the  objective  is  now  wider.  Price  stability  has  become  an  essential 
parameter in defining and measuring prosperity. From taking a relaxed approach to inflation 
and  considering  it  secondary,  nowadays  low  and  predictable  inflation  is  a  pre-eminent 
criterion  of  economic  performance.  Why?  High  inflation  hits  savings  –  and  therefore 
investment  and  future  consumption  –  with  a  tax  on  real  returns  that  rewards  the  risk  of 
uncertain  inflation.  Low  inflation,  however,  frees  up  resources  that  individual  choices  can 
allocate to increasing the fixed capital. A policy that neglects inflation gradually destabilises 
the  economy.  The  costs  of  uncertainty  about  the  value  of  the  money,  initially  unimportant, 
then  overlooked,  subsequently  become  evident,  and  then  are  judged  intolerable.  At  that 
point, voters express a strong preference for policies that promise rapid disinflation. But such 
policies impose high costs in terms of job losses, which have to be included in the dynamic 
calculation of the costs of inflation. Also, it should not be forgotten that inflation affects the 
poor more than the rich, and is therefore a tax on the weaker members of society. 
Under the influence of the neo-classical synthesis of Samuelson and Solow, the long-term 
correlation  between  inflation  and  growth  was  perceived  as  positive  in  the  early  1970s:  a 
slight increase in inflation would have led – within limits – to an increase in employment and 
growth.3 But by the end of that decade, studies by Bob Lucas and Tom Sargent were to show 
that long-term inflation and growth are not correlated.4 Monetary policy, while very effective in 
the  short  term,  only  affects  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  It  is,  in  other  words, 
neutral. 
Today, new models and advanced computational techniques allow us to simulate the effects 
of  inflation  on  incentives  to  save  and  to  work,  on  the  formation  of  physical  capital,  and 
therefore on the prospects for growth. The correlation has become negative: higher inflation 
reduces  growth  and  employment.  For  example,  vector  autoregressive  models  with 
                                                 
3  Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow published their article entitled “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy” in 
the May 1960 edition of the American Economic Review. The article discussed the causes of inflation and the 
Phillips curve. 
4  Bob Lucas then assembled the empirical evidence which motivated his study on the theory of neutrality in his 
Nobel lecture entitled “Monetary Neutrality”, 7 December 1995. The absence of a correlation between inflation 
and growth is documented in McCandless, G.T. and Weber, W., “Some Monetary Facts”, Federal Reserve of 
Minneapolis Quarterly Review, No 1931, 1995. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
non-constant parameters allow the identification of a range of values that quantify the cost in 
terms of growth failure for every two percentage point increase in steady-state inflation. This 
cost implies lower growth of between 3 and 5 percentage points over a period of ten years. 
Finally, monetary policy is a powerful tool. When used improperly, it may cause permanent 
damage.  But  it  can  become  an  effective,  stabilising  factor  and  contribute  to  collective 
prosperity in an independent and active way. The sine qua non for this is to build monetary 
policy  decisions  into  a  systematic  and  predictable  strategy,  based  on  price  stability,  which 
drives expectations and guides the economy but doesn’t shock it. This is perhaps the most 
important practical difference to what was studied in the early 1970s. 
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy 
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy is based on the new theory of the instruments I have 
tried  to  outline,  and  takes  into  account  the  enrichment  of  the  theory  of  objectives,  which 
emphasises  the  contributions  of  price  stability  to  the  “general  prosperity”.  It  also  provides 
continuity  for  a  monetary  tradition  in  continental  Europe  that  has  ensured  inflation-free 
growth for more than 60 years. 
The  strategy  is  based  on  the  objective  of  “maintaining  price  stability”  that  the  Treaty  has 
entrusted  to  the  central  bank  and  the  quantitative  definition  that  the  Governing  Council 
subsequently  gave  the  objective.  The  studies  I  have  mentioned  helped  to  define  a  range 
within which inflation is no longer a factor that distorts economic choices. The ECB pursues, 
as an objective of monetary stability in the medium term, an inflation rate below, but close to, 
2%, which is the upper limit of this range. 
The macroeconomic model on which the ECB’s monetary policy strategy rests is imbued with 
contemporary  macroeconomics,  based  on  dynamic  optimisation  and  on  the  centrality  of 
forward-looking  expectations.5  At  the  same  time,  the  model  is  broader  and  well  structured 
and corrects the simplifications of the pre-crisis neo-Keynesian paradigm with its prescriptive 
approach to optimal monetary policy. 
The  weakness  of  this  paradigm  was,  and  is,  its  inability  to  recognise  the  importance  of 
financial  frictions  and  the  role  of  credit  and  money.  This  has  to  do  with  the  fragility  of  the 
theoretical  foundations  that  formalise  the  links  between  the  real  economy,  financial 
imbalances  and  the  level  of  confidence.  Ignoring  money  is  tantamount  to  assuming  an 
absence of risk and uncertainty. Without risk, Keynes would have said, there would be no 
money. The preference for liquidity is not justified in an economy without uncertainty. But the 
neo-Keynesian model excludes the possibility of default. In it, risks in the financial sector can 
be isolated and therefore have no effect on the real economy. 
The financial crisis has clearly highlighted the weaknesses of this system. Macroeconomic 
theory has begun to reflect on the neo-Keynesian system and these studies are now one of 
the  liveliest  areas  of  analysis.  These  studies  –  at  least  their  early  results  –  confirm  the 
farsightedness of some of strategic choices of the ECB. Liquidity, money, credit have always 
been – since 1998, when the Bank received its mandate from the founders of the monetary 
union  –  qualifying  variables  of  the  ECB’s  reference  model  and  its  strategy.  The  monetary 
analysis  requires  a  constant  monitoring  of  banks’  assets  and  liabilities  as  sources  of 
information  on  the  assessment  of  risk  in  the  markets  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  This 
analysis commits the Governing Council to adjust the tenor of monetary policy to ensure the 
                                                 
5  The pre-crisis new-Keynesian paradigm and the monetary policy strategy of inflation targeting derived from it 
are  outlined  in  Clarida,  R.,  Galì,  J.  and  Gertler,  M.,  “The  Science  of  Monetary  Policy:  A  New  Keynesian 
Perspective”,  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  Vol.  XXXVII,  1999,  pp.  1661–1707.  These  were  superbly 
expounded  in  Woodford,  M.,  Interest  and  Prices,  Princeton:  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy, 
Princeton University Press, 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that  helps 
to  prepare  correction  mechanisms 
long-term  growth  of  monetary  aggregates  and  credit  consistent  with  the  potential  for 
economic expansion. 
In  this  sense,  the  monetary  pillar  of  the  strategy  can  be  interpreted  as  a  strategic 
reinforcement 
in  situations  where 
macroeconomic  imbalances  are  having  difficulty  in  manifesting  themselves  in  inflationary 
pressures. 
The  monetary  analysis  gave  important  warning  signals  in  the  years  preceding  the  crisis 
regarding the existence of deep macroeconomic and financial imbalances. In the autumn of 
2005, in conditions of inflation observed and projected to be “normal”, the ECB’s monetary 
analysis began to record a change in the composition of M3 growth: from a model of growth 
explained by money demand factors – that we would define as irrelevant to the evolution of 
spending  and  prices  – to  a  dynamic  associated  with  increased  credit creation  –  that  is,  to 
banks’ money supply factors. These changes were accepted as indications that the tenor of 
monetary  policy,  despite  the  moderation  of  inflationary  pressures  observed  and  projected, 
had become too lax. A new cycle of monetary policy tightening was initiated in December of 
that  year,  based  on  considerations  inspired  by  the  monetary  pillar,  where  monetary  and 
financial stability is an intermediate objective for attaining a more balanced development of 
macroeconomic variables and hence price stability over the long term. 
In a globalised world, the international financial crisis has not spared the euro area. But today 
we know that preventive action by  the ECB, implemented mainly by  considering monetary 
indicators, has mitigated the impact on incomes and inflation.6 
The two operations of three-year refinancing (LTROs) 
The monetary analysis has also been an essential strategic tool in diagnosing and managing 
the  crisis.  In  this  regard,  the  analysis  that  led  to  the  more  recent  non-standard  monetary 
policy measures can illustrate how the systematic monitoring of banks’ liabilities – money in 
its broadest sense – can provide guidance on the risks faced by the economy as a whole. 
Towards the end of 2011, with a decision unprecedented in the history of the euro, the ECB’s 
Governing Council decided to conduct two three-year refinancing operations. At the end of 
February, or when the second three-year operation was completed, the net increase in loans 
granted to counterparties was around €520 billion. 
The motivation for the two operations can be summarised by the following strategic view. A 
central bank is mandated with the crucial task of ensuring the sufficient supply of liquidity to 
sound  bank  counterparties  in  return  for  adequate  collateral.  In  normal  times,  “sufficient 
liquidity” means a volume of refinancing in line with the need for banks to meet the obligatory 
reserve  requirements  and  the  financing  of  other  independent  factors  which  explain  the 
growth  over  time  in  the  demand  for  money.  In  times  of  increased  financial  instability, 
“sufficient liquidity” indicates a volume of available central bank money which avoids the risk 
that – under such market conditions – the temporary inability of banks to provide refinancing 
leads to insolvency and thus to a situation of widespread default. 
In  neither  of  the  two  cases  –  normal  times  or  crisis  periods  –  can  the  central  bank  be 
considered responsible for the survival of bank counterparties that are close to bankruptcy. 
                                                 
6 
]In  a  recent  paper  entitled  “A  monetary  policy  strategy  in  good  and  bad  times:  lessons  from  the  recent 
past”(ECB Working Paper, No 1336, May 2011), S. Fahr, R. Motto, M. Rostagno, F. Smets and O. Tristani 
simulated  a  “counterfactual”  monetary  policy  strategy  which  did  not  include  credit  and  money  among  its 
variables of observation and reaction. The authors found that as a consequence of the shock caused by the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers, the euro area would have entered into a protracted period of deflation and the 
level of GDP at the end of 2010 would have been 2 percentage points below that which was observed. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  two  long-term  refinancing  operations  achieved  the  purpose  for  which  they  were 
intended. In an environment of a near-shutdown of private credit markets, banks were not 
able  to  refinance  their  assets  and  were  unable  to  maintain  their  level  of  exposure  to 
households and businesses. The extensive long-term refinancing allowed for the partial and 
temporary  substitution  of  private  credit  with  central  bank  money  and  thus  avoided  a 
disorderly process of credit to the economy running dry. 
Nevertheless, these operations were not without their criticism. These can be summarised in 
three points: 
1. 
2. 
The growth in liquidity following the two operations will ultimately lead to inflation; 
The  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  is  exposed  to  unprecedented  and  uncontrollable 
risks; 
Such  operations  have  reinforced  the  perverse  link  between  banks  and  sovereign 
debtors and may be considered a violation of the prohibition of financing public debt 
with central bank money, laid down in Article 123 of the Treaty. And, the opposite  
–  but  conceptually  equivalent  –  criticism  that  these  operations  did  not  provide  the 
economy with finance. 
3. 
As regards the first point, it is again pertinent to refer to strategy: in the medium to long term, 
the inflation dynamic reflects developments in broader monetary aggregates. Conditions that 
encourage  the  creation  of  inflation  or  speculative  bubbles  are  generated  by  strong  and 
sustained growth in money and credit, not necessarily as a result of an increase in liquidity 
granted by the central bank to the banking sector. This liquidity constitutes a precautionary 
supply for sight liabilities that the banks have towards households, non-financial corporations 
and  other  banks.  The  sight  liabilities,  i.e.  deposits,  and  not  the  supply  of  liquidity, 
demonstrate a high statistical correlation to the price dynamics of goods and assets. 
Today,  monetary  developments  do  not  allow  for  the  identification  of  risks  of  inflation  or 
pressure on asset prices in the medium term. 
As  regards  the  second  point,  the  main  criticism  related  principally  to  the  expansion  of 
collateral accepted by the national central banks of the Eurosystem as a guarantee in return 
for liquidity extended to credit institutions. In particular, doubts were raised regarding credit 
claims that became eligible with the decisions taken in December 2011. 
These  doubts  are  founded  on  an  incorrect  understanding  of  the  guarantees  that  are 
requested by the national central banks to protect against the risk that central bank liquidity is 
not repaid. In particular, the discount applied to the nominal value of credit claims provided 
as security in refinancing operations is very high. This means that, for credit claims deposited 
as  collateral  with  a  nominal  value  of  €100,  the  national  central  banks  accepting  the  new 
collateral  provide,  on  average,  the  equivalent  of  around  €47  in  liquidity.  This  discounting 
represents a powerful method for absorbing the credit risk involved in such operations. It is 
also worth highlighting the fact that the main elements of risk control continue to be shared 
by  the  Eurosystem:  the  criteria  for  acceptance  and  measures  for  controlling  risk  are 
approved by the Governing Council, which is also responsible for the continuous monitoring 
of the effectiveness of all of the measures for mitigating risk. 
With regard to the third point, it is undeniable that, in some countries in particular (especially 
Spain  and  Italy),  banks  used  some  of  the  liquidity  acquired  via  the  three-year  long-term 
refinancing operations for temporary investments in government bonds. 
Today,  central  banks  do  not  have  an  instrument  for  the  precise  and  targeted  allocation  of 
credit to a sector or in favour of a specific financial use. Those who accuse the ECB of an 
indirect  violation  of  the  prohibition  on  financing  public  debt  with  central  bank  money  are 
making the same conceptual mistake as those who accuse the ECB of not having forced the 
banks to the use the funds acquired via the LTROs to supply credit to the private sector. In 
the  first  case,  banks  would  have  had  to  have  been  forced  not  to  purchase  government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
securities,  and  in  the  second  case,  to  give  credit  to  the  private  sector.  Both  groups  of 
accusers forget that the policy of precise allocation of credit was a norm in various countries 
until  the  end  of  the  1970s.  In  the  1980s  the  operational  system  for  monetary  policy  was 
radically  redefined,  principally  on  account  of  the  heavily  distorting  effects  of  such  an 
operational framework on economic activity. Moreover, legal arguments relating to the Treaty 
and to the current contractual form of repos underlying the LTROs, as well as considerations 
relating  to  feasibility,  would  make  it  difficult  to  reinstate  such  a  framework.  Finally,  the 
behaviour  of  credit  institutions  with  respect  to  households  and  businesses  is  not  uniform 
across countries: while some countries saw negative credit developments, others saw growth 
in credit, in some cases even significant growth. 
In  Italy,  but  also  in  the  vast  majority  of  euro  area  countries,  the  fall  in  loans  recorded  in 
December has come to a halt, avoiding a much more severe risk of credit restriction which 
would have had far more serious consequences for growth and monetary stability than the 
ones we are seeing currently. The Bank Lending Survey registered a gradual normalisation 
of  interest  rates  set  by  banks  and  of  the  criteria  for  granting  loans  to  companies.  The 
continued  anaemic  developments  in  lending  reflect  the  weakness  in  demand  and  the 
worsening of creditworthiness resulting from an adverse economic cycle. Furthermore, in the 
countries  most  adversely  affected  by  the  crisis,  banks  are  rationing  credit  on  account  of 
certain prevalent contractual structures. 
The large-scale participation in the February operation, in which around 800 banks obtained 
funding, and the composition of counterparties in terms of their size and type implies that the 
distribution of liquidity has been widespread and could be even more so in the near future. 
Furthermore,  this  widespread  distribution  of  liquidity  is  also  of  advantage  to  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  with  which  smaller  banks  have  closer  relationships.  We  would 
wish for the liquidity provided to end up as credit to the private sector. This is the motivation 
behind the new non-standard monetary policy instrument. 
Central  bank  credit  to  banks  has  been  a  complement  to  –  rather  than  a  substitute  
for – private credit: in the first quarter of this year, the amount of bonds issued was equal to 
the total issued in 2011 as a whole, which shows that the operations, at least in the first few 
months  of  the  year,  provided  the  markets  with  liquidity,  reactivating  a  number  of  credit 
channels. The two LTROs removed one of the obstacles – the only one over which the ECB 
has any influence – to credit, namely a lack of liquidity. The ECB cannot do anything to make 
up  for  a  lack  of  capital,  to  change  intermediaries’  risk  perceptions,  or  to  remove  other 
structural obstacles present at national level. More generally, the size and complexity of the 
two  LTROs  is  such  that  it  will  take  time  for  all  of  their  positive  effects  on  the  euro  area 
economy  to  be  fully  felt.  However,  it  is  essential  for  growth  and  employment  that  credit 
institutions regain their ability to provide refinancing to the economy. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
