Don Abel: The economy, uncertainty and institutional response 
Speech by Mr Don Abel, Assistant Governor and Head of Operations of the Reserve Bank of 
New  Zealand,  and  Mr  Steve  Gordon,  Head  of  Risk  Assessment  and  Assurance  of  the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, at the Oceania CACS 2012, Wellington, 10 September 2012. 
 The  assistance  of  Bernard  Hodgetts,  Tim  Ng  and  Mike  Hannah  in  drafting  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
The events of the past decade have been extraordinary.  
Prior  to  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  a  western-based  consensus,  built  around 
unfettered markets, in particular financial markets, allied with a commercial emphasis on the 
maximisation  of  shareholder  value,  dominated  the  evolution  of  developed  economies.  For 
many years this prescription seemed to work but some inherent flaws were revealed by the 
sudden  collapse  of  financial  markets  in  2007–08  and  the  subsequent  fall-out  that  we  are 
continuing to experience today. 
To remind ourselves of what happened is to provide a basis on which lessons can be drawn 
to improve our collective futures. As risk managers you need to be aware of these lessons 
that  may  directly  affect  your  institutions  and  which  you  can  reference  to  calibrate  your 
responses in these uncertain times. 
From the early 2000s there was a build-up in a number of troubling factors.  
First,  from  the  early  part  of  the  decade  onwards  credit  began  expanding  in  numerous 
countries  at  double-digit  annual  rates.  Much  of  the  credit  growth  was  to  households  and 
coincided  with  a  rapid  increase  in  house  prices  along  with  a  significant  increase  in  debt 
burdens within the household sector. At the same time, there was a significant deterioration 
in  lending  standards  in  many  countries  as  financial  institutions  attempted  to  sustain  the 
growth in credit. 
Second, financial risk management practices were adopted which, in hindsight, proved to be 
quite ill founded and based on a naive understanding of the underlying risks. The packaging 
of  sub-prime  loans  into  highly-rated  residential  mortgage  backed  securities  in  the  United 
States, in an attempt to reduce risk through diversification, is the best example. When the 
United  States  housing  market  later  weakened,  investors  holding  these  securities  were 
exposed to risks they (and the agencies that had rated them) never thought existed. 
Third,  underlying  fiscal  imbalances  in  many  countries  continued  to  worsen.  Many 
governments  ignored  the  reality  of  longer  term  fiscal  pressures  associated  with  ageing 
populations and growing income inequalities leading to increased health and social security 
spending.  Later  decisions  to  support  economies  and  financial  systems  in  the  wake  of  the 
GFC would further stretch fiscal positions.  
Fourth,  global  imbalances  were  also  continuing  to  worsen.  While  the  causes  of  these 
imbalances are complex, the lack of fully flexible exchange rate regimes in some countries 
was undoubtedly an aggravating factor. Large and growing current account deficit countries 
in many western economies were mirrored by large and growing current account surpluses in 
other  countries  such  as  China.  These  surpluses  then  formed  the  basis  for  much  of  the 
financing of the debt-fuelled imbalances occurring in the western economies.  
Surprisingly many of these phenomena were largely ignored by policy  makers, until it was 
too late to intervene. The financial institutions and rating agencies that were meant to monitor 
and  price  for  risk  proved  to  be  more  interested  in  short  term  profits  and  management 
bonuses.  Governments  were  reluctant  or  unable  to  take  the  longer  view  in  terms  of  their 
fiscal  positions.  The  regulators  in  western  developed  economies  displayed  a  notable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reluctance to take action at an early point when it might have made a difference. In the end 
the inevitable financial crash occurred and governments around the World were left to pick 
up the pieces and the taxpayers the tab. 
What the financial collapse revealed was a world economy that was “seriously imbalanced”. 
On  the  one  side  stood  the  western  developed  economies  whose  societies  had  expanded 
debt, both private and public, to maintain and lift living standards. While, on the other, the 
newly  emerging  economies,  benefiting  from  globalisation  and  the  low  cost  production  of 
manufactures, had recycled their earnings as savings to the western economies. For most of 
the 2000s this apparently mutual beneficial relationship persisted, but eventually it unravelled 
as  a  substantial  part  of the  debt  accumulated  in  the  developed  countries  turned  out  to  be 
unserviceable. 
The pressures of rapid growth in the developing countries were also becoming apparent. Oil 
prices started to rise rapidly from a low of around $20 a barrel in 2001 to a peak of $140 just 
prior  to  the  GFC.  Currently  the  price  of  oil  is  around  $100  a  barrel.  This  represents  an 
ongoing weight on economic activity that did not exist at the opening of the 2000s, despite 
the fact that the World is in a period of low growth. 
There was also strong growth in non-oil commodity demand and prices. Hard commodities, 
like  iron  ore,  coal  and  industrial  metals  were  sucked  into  China  and  other  East  Asian 
economies to fuel industrial development and urbanisation. While soft commodities, like dairy 
products  and  meat,  experienced  substantial  volume  and  price  increases  as  the  rapidly 
growing  middle  classes  in  the  emerging  countries,  with  rising  incomes,  shifted  their  eating 
preferences  towards  protein-based  diets.  The  currencies  of  commodity  producing  nations 
became in-demand, appreciating in value as capital flowed into them, creating problems for 
import competing industries and, in some cases, exporters as well as the control of domestic 
monetary conditions. 
When the financial collapse occurred it was sudden, and sharp, and unprecedented in the 
post-Second World War era. Global financial institutions, big names, were wounded, some 
fatally, others less so. Some required bail-outs from governments. Financial markets were in 
turmoil, unable to distinguish between potentially “good” names and potentially “bad” names 
and, for a short period, the flow of money in the  world economy practically stopped. Even 
small financial markets like in New Zealand were caught in this maelstrom. In concert with 
other  governments  around  the  World,  we  were  forced  to  take  action  to  safeguard  our 
domestic-based financial institutions. 
The difference for New Zealand, though, was that the vast majority of the growth in financial 
assets was held on the balance sheets of the four large Australian owned banks. Rather than 
on-selling  mortgages  or  transforming  their  risk  through  complex  financial  derivatives,  New 
Zealand’s  domestic  banks  had  supplied  plain-vanilla  financial  products  and  avoided  an 
excessive leveraging of their capital.  
Furthermore,  lending  standards  in  New  Zealand,  at  least  within  our  banking  system,  had 
generally  remained  sound.  But  within  parts  of  our  non-bank  deposit  taking  sector  –  most 
notably the finance companies – New Zealand experienced its own homegrown example of 
poor  risk  management,  leading  to  considerable  financial  loss  for  many  people.  High  risk 
loans made in areas like property development, financed from household deposits, proved to 
be  an  unsustainable  combination  when  property  markets  turned  down  from  around  2007 
onwards. 
A  lesson  from  the  GFC  for  risk  managers  is  that  “innovative  financial  products”  should  be 
treated with a great deal of scepticism. Understanding where the true risks lie and how they 
could play out when economic fortunes change is paramount. 
Another lesson is that poorly managed risks may take years to be realised. The build up of 
risk on financial institutions’ balance sheets, which was uncovered by the GFC, was created 
over a number of preceding years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The current situation 
The New Zealand economy was not immune to the collapse in World financial markets. As 
credit growth and commodity prices tumbled, our GDP shrunk through 2008 and in the first 
half  of  2009.  But,  by  the  second  half  of  2009, with  commodity  prices  lifting  again,  modest 
growth resumed in the order of 2% per annum. Banks, which had relied heavily on short-term 
wholesale funding from offshore during the boom, found funding harder and more expensive 
to obtain. The situation was gradually alleviated following the introduction of a government 
guarantee for wholesale debt and as funding markets reopened in early 2010. 
The downturn associated with the GFC, nevertheless, had more long-lasting effects for our 
businesses  and  households  as  inflated  property  prices  were  punctured.  As  noted  earlier, 
many non-bank financial institutions failed with depositors suffering great loss. And, with a 
high  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  future,  businesses  and  households  preferred  to  be 
conservative, reducing debt and spending and avoiding future commitments.  
The  government  sector,  on  the  other  hand,  faced  a  prospect  of  accumulating  debt  as  tax 
revenues  fell  and  spending  demands  increased.  In  the  space  of  five  years  from  2008  the 
fiscal deficit as a percent of GDP moved from a positive 3% to a negative 4%. 
In comparison, the shift to increasing household saving can be traced in Figure 1 with the 
ratio of saving to disposable income changing from a substantially negative position in 2003 
to a slightly positive one today. 
Figure 1 
Household saving to disposable income ratio 
Source: Statistics NZ 
 Into  this  mix  another  completely  unanticipated  event  fell.  The  Canterbury  earthquakes, 
centred on the second largest city in New Zealand – Christchurch – caused a catastrophic 
loss of life, property and infrastructure.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
To  rebuild  Christchurch  will  cost  at  the  very  least  $20  billion.  While  the  impetus  to  the 
regional economy of Canterbury will be very large, this spending represents a replacement of 
damaged buildings and infrastructure, not a net gain to national wealth. And, the extent to 
which the cost is not covered by insurance, it results in a further need for fiscal consolidation 
at the central government level and increased property rates at the local, Canterbury, body 
level.  In  addition,  overseas  reinsurers  are  now  acutely  aware  of  natural  disasters  and  the 
cost  of  property  insurance  for  all  New  Zealanders  has  risen  across  the  country  with 
Christchurch and Wellington being especially impacted. 
Medium term influences 
As the governments of developed countries in the western hemisphere struggled to deal with 
the consequences of the GFC, their spending and borrowing ballooned causing fiscal deficits 
to  rise  at  pace.  The  central  banks  in  these  countries  also  had  a  role  to  play  by  reducing 
policy interest rates close to zero – “the lower bound” – and embarking on programmes that 
substantially expanded their monetary bases (quantitative easing) in an attempt to push up 
domestic demand while depreciating their currencies.  
Despite  these  unprecedented  interventions  economic  recovery  in  Europe,  the  United 
Kingdom  and  the  United  States  has  remained  stubbornly  subdued.  This  can  best  be 
illustrated by comparing the current path of the recovery in the United States with previous 
recoveries in the post-war period (Figure 2). 
Figure 2 
Path of real GDP since end of recession 
GDP Index  
GDP Index 
Unemployment in many of these countries has lifted sharply and, of particular concern is the 
high level being recorded amongst young people. In Greece and Spain, for example, the rate 
of unemployment for those under 25 years of age has risen to around 50%. To put this in 
perspective, the comparable number in New Zealand is 12% (Figure 3). 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 3 
Unemployment rate: Under 25 (SA, %) 
 The social and political ramifications of these levels of unemployment in the Eurozone are 
considerable  and  weigh  heavily  on  the  economic  policies  that  governments  are  able  to 
pursue. 
CPI inflation in the western economies, on the other hand, is largely stable at around 2% and 
the  far  more  pressing  financial  issue  facing  these  countries  has  been  the  build-up  in 
sovereign  debt.  As  can  be  seen  from  Figure  4  a  number  of  European  nations,  the  United 
Kingdom and the United States all have levels of debt in excess of 50% of GDP. 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  become  critical  in  the  Eurozone  as  the  southern,  peripheral 
states of Greece, Portugal, Italy and Spain have struggled to implement domestic economic 
austerity and structural reform policies aimed to placate financial markets and reduce their 
debt and borrowing costs. Their individual ability to trade their way to stability and growth has 
been circumscribed by membership of the Eurozone and consequent adoption of the Euro 
currency. For at least the past year, the World has watched, in a combination of concern and 
fascination, as Eurozone governments and the IMF have moved from one crisis meeting to 
another in the hope of finding a solution that will maintain the integrity of the European bloc 
but also the economies of the constituent sovereign states. At this point it is not at all clear 
how  the  crisis  will  resolve.  What  is  evident  is  that  the  Eurozone  as  a  whole  is  falling  into 
recession with the weaker southern states pulling the stronger northern states down. While 
countries  within  the  European  bloc  undertake  much  of  their  trade  with  each  other,  lower 
growth overall is having a dampening effect on World output more generally. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Figure 4 
Sovereign debt 
  Austerity  measures  are  also  being  pursued  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States. 
Tightened government spending in combination with restrained business sector investment 
and  household  consumption  and  investment  –  housing  –  has  meant  these  economies 
respectively  are  not  growing  or  growing  only  slowly.  In  the  case  of  the  United  States  the 
situation  is  complicated  by  the  November  presidential  election  which  has  the  effect  of 
postponing  difficult  decisions,  in  particular  how  to  deal  with  the  impending  “fiscal  cliff”  of 
expiring tax cuts and increased spending cuts. Together these two policy measures if fully 
engaged would be likely to push the United States back into recession.  
New Zealand’s future, however, now resides firmly in the economies of Australia, China and 
East Asia. This grouping (excluding Japan) today accounts for 49% of our trade compared 
with 39% a decade ago. And it is this grouping that is experiencing growth rates of 5–6% per 
annum. Our problem is that Australia is dependent on China while China and East Asia have 
ties to the fortunes of the rest of the World. The question is to what extent will growth in the 
Asian economies be affected by developments in the West? 
China’s high rate of growth, averaging close to 10% per annum over the past decade, has 
been  driven  by  exports  and  high  levels  of  investment  in  infrastructure  and  housing. 
Neighbouring  East  Asian  economies  have  benefited  by  supplying  intermediate  goods  to 
Chinese manufacturers. There is no doubt that the low activity now being experienced by the 
western  developed  economies  will  slow  expansion  in  China  and  East  Asia  but  this  seems 
more likely, perhaps optimistically, to be a relative deceleration rather than a plunge towards 
outright  recession.  There  is  still  a  lot  of  scope  for  China  to  increase  efficiency  and 
productivity as well as investment and its levels of urbanisation and consumption have the 
potential to expand considerably. What can be assumed reasonably is that the prospects for 
China  over  the  next  4–5  years  will  be  considerably  better  than  for  the  Eurozone,  United 
Kingdom and United States. 
Within  New  Zealand  the  path  of  recovery  from  the  Canterbury  earthquakes  has  been  a 
matter fraught with great difficulties and much heartache. Nobody anticipated the frequency 
and severity of the aftershocks that accompanied the February 2011 event. The scale of the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
disaster  has  been  enormous  and  only  now  as  the  aftershocks  seemed  to  have  dissipated 
does it appear that rebuilding can begin in earnest. The earlier forecasts of a relatively quick 
recovery  can  be  seen  to  have  been  quite  unrealistic  as  the  detail  of  land  use  planning, 
sorting  through  insurance  disputes,  coordinating  competing  interests,  providing  logistical 
support  and  resources  has  taken  over.  The  path  for  rebuilding,  based  on  the  most  recent 
information available, suggests that activity  will  start to ramp up from the end of this year, 
accelerating through 2013 and 2014 before reaching a peak in 2015. 
Degrees of uncertainty 
Right now the uncertainties faced by decision-makers are unusually diverse and numerous. 
The World is in the process of transiting to a new order of economic reality, the dimensions 
of which are difficult to map with any certainty. What is clear, nevertheless, is that choices for 
policy  makers,  business  leaders  and  householders  can  no  longer  be  based  on  a  simple 
assumption  of  brisk  growth  resuming  as  before  and  that  the  economies  of  the  western 
hemisphere will be in a position to direct economic policy and growth ad infinitum. 
With the rapid development of the Asian bloc and India, combined with a lack of access to 
easily recoverable energy supplies as well as political instability in the Arab states, the World 
is  having  to  adjust  to  an  environment  of  high  and  on-going  energy  costs.  A  new  easily 
exploitable  resource  might  be  discovered,  with  a  consequent  reduction  in  prices,  but  this 
remains an uncertain prospect and definitely not one on which to base business decisions. 
The western developed economies, in particular, face multiple challenges and the degree to 
which these will be overcome in the next five years is far from clear. The volatility seen in 
financial and equity markets is a symptom of this uncertainty currently most obvious in the 
responses to the Eurozone crisis. Structures, previously thought inviolable, such as the Euro 
currency, are now recognised to be vulnerable.  
In the banking and finance sectors regulators are tightening standards, imposing new capital 
requirements and introducing new macro-prudential tools to assist in maintaining the stability 
of financial systems and the control of credit creation.  
Fiscal policy is dominated by a desire to reduce sovereign debt by increasing government 
savings. On the one side financial markets need to be reassured that governments are able 
to act responsibly and implement sound, long term, economic policies to promote economic 
growth, while, on the other, the voting public have to be convinced that the lengthy period of 
restrained growth that typically accompanies structural reform and fiscal austerity is in their 
best long term interest. In these highly uncertain times households themselves act to restrain 
growth by increasing savings and reducing spending. Obtaining the right balance between 
these  factors  will  largely  determine  the  direction  of  the  western  economies  with  a  positive 
outcome  being  sustained  ultimately  by  the  return  of  business  and  consumer  confidence 
leading to investment and productivity growth. 
Similar forces can be seen at play in the New Zealand economy. The difference being that 
the imbalances and structural issues here are not nearly as deep-seated as in many of the 
western  economies.  Furthermore,  New  Zealand  has  been 
to  be  placed 
geographically  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Pacific  primarily  selling  soft  commodities  that  are 
now  experiencing  increasing  demand  from  Asian  trading  partners  who  continue  to 
experience relatively good growth.  
The Canterbury earthquakes have proved to be an additional test of resilience for the country 
and  although  insurance  will  cover  the  majority  of  the  cost  of  recovery,  the  process  of 
rebuilding will take much longer than originally thought and may well cost more than currently 
forecast. The impact of these events on the provision and cost of insurance is now becoming 
apparent  and  is  reflective  of  a  general  review  of  the  insurance  cover  for  natural  disasters 
world-wide.  The  frequency  and  intensity  of  these  types  of  events  seems  to  be  on  a  rising 
trend creating further management challenges for private and public enterprises. 
fortunate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Institutional response 
Institutional language is now coloured by words such as austerity, crisis, collapse, disaster 
response, instability, volatility, vulnerability and, above all, uncertainty. The GFC exposed the 
weaknesses of risk management to the World and especially the inadequacy of institutions 
that  allowed  their  risk  management  practices  to  be  subverted  by  the  drive  for  short  term 
profitability. Many of these institutions no longer exist and if they do, not in a form they would 
have recognised prior to the GFC. 
The irony is that despite its lack of strength in the decades building up to the GFC and its 
ultimate  failure,  risk  management  remains  absolutely  critical  to  the  success  of  institutions. 
Furthermore, the incidence of risk means that the enterprise needs to take a long run view of 
its business not a myopic, short run, approach. Which is a good thing if it helps to make the 
business operating environment more stable. 
The  issues  outlined  earlier  in  this  paper  reveal  the  complexities  that  private  and  public 
enterprises will need to navigate in the future. Possession of a metaphorical radar, capable of 
identifying obstacles both near and far, should be second-nature to those leading and managing 
the enterprise. In the current climate effective risk management aligns very closely to the theme 
of your conference: “Embracing uncertainty and delivering value in turbulent times”. 
As risk professionals you must systematically identify the key areas of risk for your institution 
and develop a built-in resilience and ability to respond to whatever happens. Anticipation and 
not the “ambulance at the bottom of the cliff” is required. In Table 1 some key risks are set 
out. Your challenge is to interpret these macro developments and translate them into tangible 
business meaning. 
Table 1 
Areas of Focus 
Risk Themes 
Key Points and Area of Focus 
Global economic 
and political 
Domestic 
landscape 
Environmental 
Information 
technology 
Operational risk 
•  High and volatile energy costs 
•  Sovereign debt and austerity issues 
•  Fragility and interconnectedness of the financial system 
•  Eurozone developments 
•  Credit, funding and liquidity conditions 
•  Rising influence of Asia 
•  Growth 
•  Household and business spending 
•  Exchange rate developments 
•  Property prices 
•  Agriculture sector 
•  Natural disaster preparedness 
•  Business continuity planning 
•  Significant dependency on technology 
•  High impact risk area 
•  Change and uncertainty increase operational risk 
•  Operational  risk  is  pervasive  and  relates  to  many  other  risks  that 
materialise 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The first group relate to global economic growth and relevant questions for decision-makers, 
who have the ultimate responsibility to mitigate risks, are what does this mean for product 
demand and prices, cost of production, transport and supply of goods and services? Actually 
these questions are fundamental to how institutions are run. What is being suggested here is 
that a bit more thought is given to how events might deviate from what is perceived to be 
“normal”; what steps should be taken in settled times to ensure the future of the enterprise 
and through doing so the wider role it plays in society.  
In our globalised and wired environment the speed at which information is transmitted would 
suggest that no one should be surprised at the consequences of a collapse of steel prices in 
China or a deep liquidity crisis in european funding markets. The point in question is to what 
extent have these types of events been imagined and planned for, sorting the “sheep from 
the  goats”. Tools  such  as  stress testing  and  scenario  analysis,  if  rigorously  deployed,  can 
provide valuable insight into the uncertain future and assist in preparing the institution to deal 
with an existential crisis that may arise. 
In terms of the Bank, as you would expect, considerable effort is placed on monitoring and 
assessing all financial risks as these are of high relevance to monetary policy, our prudential 
and supervisory responsibilities as well as the management of our $27 billion balance sheet. 
The second  area  noted in  Table  1,  which  is  inextricably  linked  to the first,  is  the  domestic 
landscape. Growth has been modest and confidence somewhat repressed and there are no 
imminent signs of a sudden or material positive change to this pattern. In this setting, where 
there are limitations as well as opportunities, businesses will need to be astute in reading the 
emerging trends and, in doing so, identifying the risks associated with fulfilling their particular 
business objectives. 
The  next  area  of  focus  shown  in  Table  1  is  described  as  environmental.  The  Canterbury 
earthquakes served as an unwanted illustration of the power to literally shift the ground on 
which institutions stood and planned their activities. The consequences are now playing out 
across many levels, including the fact that the insurance industry was poorly prepared to deal 
with such a cataclysmic event. Business continuity planning should be well within the frame 
for risk professionals. Possessing a clear understanding of critical business processes and 
having made the capital and human investment required to be able to continue operations in 
the event of a disaster is simply good management. 
In February 2011 the Bank established a small satellite office in Auckland so that the time 
critical aspects of our business, such as the support of financial market liquidity and payment 
systems, could continue if Wellington was shutdown in a regional disaster. Recently a small 
internal flood on the Wellington site meant the building had to be evacuated and operations 
were carried out successfully in Auckland for the best part of a day. 
Information technology risk is an area that, no doubt, many of you will be very familiar with. 
Reliance  on  technology  is  immense  and  consequently  the  risks  inherent  in  the  loss  of 
integrity or availability of systems is severe for most enterprises. Consumers and businesses 
depend on these systems to operate effectively on a minute by minute, day by day, basis. 
The potential business loss and reputational risks in not being able to deliver services are 
considerable and it is surprising that some businesses continue to be parsimonious when it 
comes to providing sound back-up systems. Of course when it all falls apart they come to 
central  government  for  help  –  which  in  my  eyes  is  as  good  a  measure  of  managerial 
recklessness as any other. 
The Bank acts as banker to the commercial banks, providing inter-bank settlement facilities 
and  related  payment  services,  so  we  are  acutely  aware  of  our  responsibilities  in  the 
operation  of  the  New  Zealand  financial  system.  Over  the  past  decade  we  have  invested 
$13m in upgrading and improving our payments infrastructure. As you would expect, across 
both the audit and corporate risk functions at the Bank, payment system assurance is given 
considerable focus and is subject to close monitoring. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Operational risk is the final area over which a close watch should be maintained. This risk 
relates  to  failures  by  staff  and  break-downs  in  processes,  facilities  and  equipment  in  daily 
activities. Operational risk is pervasive across all business processes and, in fact, can be the 
root cause of a wide range of incidents that disrupt or impede the meeting of objectives. With 
increasing change and complexity as well as uncertainty, operational risk inherently grows. 
Mistakes and errors are more likely and institutions need sound policies to reduce both the 
underlying likelihood and impact. 
Operational  risk  management  is  quite  process  oriented  and  is  therefore  one  area  within 
which businesses can focus on continuous improvement. Incident capture, causal analysis 
and  applying  lessons  learned  from  an  operational  risk  event  can  serve  to  strengthen  the 
wider  business  environment.  At  the  Bank  we  have  a  system  called  Proactive  Problem 
Management to serve this purpose. It has been in place for over a decade and it is not about 
attributing blame but about improving how we do things. It entails line management reporting 
of incidents and, with the assistance of the central risk management function, finding ways to 
remediate the situation and, in some circumstances, identifying any wider systemic patterns 
that may be of relevance.  
Although the Bank’s Head of Risk reports directly to me, he has an indirect reporting line to 
the  Governor  and,  with  his  team  and  me  in  attendance,  meets  with  the  Governor formally 
once a month. He also has an independent meeting with the Chairman of the Board Audit 
Committee at least once a year. He has ample opportunity to talk directly with the Governor 
or the Chairman of the Board Audit Committee if he feels that is required. Currently we are 
refreshing  our  risk  model  and  have  developed  an  embedded  enterprise  risk  management 
lead  community  through  all  of  our  business  units.  These  people  work  with  the  Heads  of 
Departments  to  identify,  assess  and  manage  the  business  risks.  The  model  is  enterprise 
driven  in  that  it  aligns  risks  to  departmental  objectives  in  a  context  of  the  over-riding 
governing  mandate  for  the  Bank:  the  Reserve  Bank  Act.  The  model  also  includes  major 
projects and smaller initiatives and actions that relate to specific risks. By doing so it provides 
an  insight  into  active  risk  management  mitigations  that  are  underway  giving  a  level  of 
validation as to how resource is being directed towards certain risk areas. 
Conclusions 
The  first  half  of  this  paper  outlined  the  extraordinary  events  that  have  buffeted  the  World 
since  the  onset  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  As  noted  earlier  there  was  an  inevitability 
about the financial crash. From a debt perspective western economies had become seriously 
bloated, and in the absence of any countering force, there was always going to be a day of 
reckoning as banks in many developed countries fed an insatiable appetite for credit in the 
pursuit of short term gain. 
Better  regulation  and  policy  interventions  in  the  future  may  help  to  stabilise  markets  by 
aiming to reduce excessive and risk-laden decisions. But ultimately it is the people involved 
in  the  key  roles  of  institutions  that  largely  determine  the  future  of  their  enterprises. 
Accountability, honesty, responsibility; these sorts of well founded values must be present in 
the  culture  of  institutions  if  they  are  to  survive  in  a  rapidly  evolving  and  highly  uncertain 
environment. 
Risk experts are integral to this process and need to hold true to professional and personal 
values that instinctively drive judgement and consequent actions in the workplace. As skilled 
practitioners you should know the points at which proposed courses of action are misaligned 
to business goals in the broadest sense which include the enterprises’ responsibilities to the 
wider community. 
In  good  institutions  there  will  be  sound  frameworks  and  governance  protocols  to  address 
misalignments and the risk function has the important job of influencing and leading others to 
make the right decisions.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Uncertainty is a part of life and, indeed, can make life exciting, if not overdone. But Reserve 
Bank governors generally prefer “boring” and our Governor has been no exception, saying so 
on  a  number  of  occasions.  Unfortunately  the  past five  years  and  the  immediate future  will 
certainly not meet that preference.  
By accepting uncertainty and looking for explanations of what is happening, you should be 
able to assist your institutions towards strategies that respond to the unusual pressures that 
we currently face. 
Delivering value in these turbulent times should be second-nature to risk managers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
