Anand Sinha: Striking a balance – credit penetration and NPA 
management – role of information sharing 
Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the fourth 
Annual Credit Information Conference, Mumbai, 7 March 2012. 
 Inputs provided by Mr Manoj Sharma, Smt Rachna Dikshit and Smt Jayanthi N are gratefully acknowledged.  
Mr. Nair, Chairman, Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL) and CMD, Union Bank 
of  India;  Mr.  Mallya,  CMD,  Bank  of  Baroda;  Mr.  Siddharth  Mehta,  President  and  CEO, 
TransUnion; Mr. Thukral, MD, CIBIL and other distinguished guests. It is indeed an honour 
for me to address you all here during the fourth annual Credit Information Conference. 
Banking is a risky business. Banks, or more generally the credit institutions, in their role as 
intermediaries  take  upon  themselves  significant  credit  risks,  while  interposing  between 
lenders (depositors) and borrowers. Credit risk is, by far, the largest risk faced by banks. The 
risk transformation, where they become borrowers to lenders and lenders to borrowers, leads 
to warehousing of risks in credit institutions. In fact, this risk transformation offered by credit 
intermediaries is the cornerstone of credit intermediation which facilitates pooling of savings 
for being lent for various economic activities. 
In credit markets, the lenders’ knowledge of a borrower’s likelihood to repay (risk profile) is 
imprecise  and  has  to  be  estimated  based  on  available  information.  Borrowers,  obviously, 
would  have  superior  information  than  lenders  about  their  own  past  actions  and  future 
intentions  although  it  is  the  lender  who  bears  the  negative  consequences  of  the  risk. 
Moreover,  borrowers  have  incentive  to misrepresent their risk profile. In any case, lenders 
cannot rely solely on the information provided by the applicant but must evaluate borrowers’ 
claims  even  when  borrowers  are  truthful.  This  entails  significant  cost  and  time.  Such 
information asymmetry has consequences for lending as it results in misallocation of credit. 
Let me explain. 
Before the advent of credit information models, traditional neoclassical economics assumed 
that  markets  were  “informationally  efficient”.  This  implied  that  one  cannot  consistently 
achieve returns in excess of the average market returns on a risk adjusted basis, given the 
information  available.  More  recent  work  by  Stiglitz  and  others  has  shown  that  only  under 
exceptional  conditions  are  markets  perfect  and  even  under  competitive  equilibrium,  credit 
markets  may  ultimately  witness  credit  rationing  owing  to  insufficient  information  i.e. 
information  asymmetry.  When  lenders  cannot  assess  the  risk  profile  of  borrowers 
adequately, they mistake good risks as bad ones and vice versa. Lenders typically respond 
to insufficient information about borrowers by increasing interest rates. Since credit is now 
expensive  for  low  risk  borrowers,  they  are  driven  out  from  the  market  whereas  high  risk 
borrowers  finding  credit  cheap  are brought  in. This  makes  the  portfolio  riskier  and  interest 
rates rise to reflect this. Higher interest rates create incentive even for good risks to take up 
riskier  projects  so  as  to  have  higher  returns  to  compensate  for  higher  cost  of  loan. 
Furthermore, some borrowers may have incentive not to repay, because without information 
sharing  they  can  still  obtain  loans  from  other  lenders.  Thus,  with  the  problems  of  moral 
hazard  (lack  of  penalty  for  non-payment)  and  adverse  selection  (i.e.  higher  interest  rates 
attract riskier borrowers or make borrowers take more risks), lenders ration credit i.e. given 
two entities with identical risk profiles, one will get a loan and the other will not. 
Credit  bureaux/  Credit  Information  Companies  (CICs)  which  enable  sharing  of  credit 
information  among  lenders  are  an  institutional  arrangement  to  deal  with  moral  hazard  and 
adverse selection problems on account of information asymmetry. Shared information allows 
better  assessment  of  risk  profiles of  potential  borrowers  (i.e.  deals  with  adverse  selection) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and  creates  incentive  for  borrowers  to  pay  on  time  by  limiting  borrowers’  ability  to  access 
credit from other lenders (i.e. deals with moral hazard). 
Credit  information  bureaux  have  thus  come  into  existence  to  deal  with  the  information 
asymmetry issues and have come a long way since the first credit registry started functioning 
in USA in the mid-19th century. 
CICs deal with the problems associated with asymmetric information in the following ways, 
by:  
i. 
Mitigating adverse selection by allowing loans to be extended to safe borrowers who 
had previously been priced out of the market, resulting in higher aggregate credit. 
Studies analysing the effect of CICs on credit markets found a positive effect on the 
volume of bank credit as a percentage of GDP and a decrease in credit risk. It was 
also  found  that  firms  in  countries  with  better  credit  information  systems  were  less 
credit constrained. 
Mitigating moral hazard by either incentivising borrowers to repay or increasing the 
borrowers’  cost  of  defaulting  as  non  payment  with  one  institution  would  result  in 
sanctions  from  all  others.  This  would  encourage  debt  repayments  and  a  more 
efficient recycling of credit. 
A study showed that without a CIC, borrowers had a tendency to repay loans only 
when they intended to maintain their current relationship with the lender. However, 
in  economies  with  CIC,  borrowers  had  a  higher  chance  of  repaying  their  loans 
regardless of whether or not they intended to continue the relationship. Thus, it can 
be surmised that credit sharing institutions, by documenting borrower behaviour, can 
positively impact borrower repayment. 
Reducing information monopoly which would result in lowering of interest costs for 
the borrower. 
Lenders  with  long  standing  relationship  with  borrowers  know  their  credit  histories 
while other lenders do not. This allows the lenders to charge higher interest rates 
and  extract  other  rents  from  high  quality  borrowers.  Sharing  of  credit  related 
information reduces the monopoly that a lender has on its borrowers. This reduces 
the extra rents that lenders can charge their borrowers. Moreover with CICs, credit 
institutions can screen away more risky borrowers and charge interest more aligned 
to their risk profile. They thus extend lower rates to less risky borrowers who would 
not have borrowed otherwise. Thus the average interest cost to the borrower gets 
lowered. Additionally, credit reporting can play a key role in improving the efficiency 
of lenders by reducing loan processing costs as well as time taken to process loan 
applications all of which, like interest rates, have a positive impact on pricing. 
Reducing over-indebtedness as overly extended borrowers would now receive less 
credit. 
Information sharing among lenders reveals borrowers’ debt level to all lenders. This 
results  in  highly  indebted  borrowers  receiving  less  credit  and  in  turn,  results  in 
lowering the aggregate indebtedness. 
A recent study demonstrated that after establishment of a CIC, lenders were more 
likely to issue smaller and shorter term loans and to require more guarantees. This 
could indirectly provide evidence that sharing information allowed lenders to see and 
factor in the indebtedness of their borrowers. 
Lowering poverty and improving distribution of income. 
Constraints in allocation of credit in situations of poor credit information are likely to 
hurt the poor relatively more and increase inequality. By reducing credit constraints, 
 ii. 
 iii. 
 iv. 
  v. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
credit  reporting  may  be  expected  to  facilitate  credit  to  the  poor  and  thereby  help 
reduce poverty. 
Evidence demonstrates how credit sharing increased the quantity of small business 
loans  in  the  US  and,  more  importantly,  served  to  increase  credit  to  the  marginal 
borrowers, i.e. firms which in the absence of credit information sharing mechanism 
would  probably  not  have  received  any  credit.  It  would  stand  to  reason  that  such 
marginal  borrowers  would  have  been  unable  to  fulfill  the  normal  collateral 
requirements imposed on them by lenders. 
This evidence is very relevant for our financial inclusion drive which is a major policy 
plank. 
  All in all, international evidence suggests that information sharing increases access to credit. 
Studies have also shown that sharing of only negative information results in higher default 
rates while systems that include both positive and negative information result in lower default 
rates.  A  CIC  serves  the  purpose  of  storing  and  sharing  more  comprehensive  borrower 
information both negative and positive. This would enable lenders to achieve lower default 
rates. Regimes which have tough data protection norms, implying restricted access to credit 
information,  have  a  detrimental  effect  on credit  allocation.  It  would  be  a  useful  exercise  to 
employ some of the models to carry out simulations based on country data on the impact of 
information  sharing,  say,  on  such  variables  as  access  to  credit,  especially  to  the  MSME 
sector and default rates in lending. 
Lack of credit information among lenders and financial market participants can have negative 
and sometimes serious consequences for the smooth functioning of the financial and credit 
markets and the general economy. Several instances bear this out.  
In our country we have recently seen indebtedness levels which made families in rural India 
very  vulnerable  like  in  Andhra  Pradesh,  due  to  multiple  borrowing.  This  would  not  have 
reached the proportions that it did if there was information sharing. According to the Report 
of the sub-committee of the Board of the RBI to study the issues and concerns in the Micro 
Finance  sector  (Chairman:  Shri  Y.H.Malegam),  an  essential  element  in  the  prevention  of 
multiple  lending  and  over  borrowing  is  the  availability  of  information  to  the  Micro  Finance 
Institutions (MFIs) of the existing outstanding loan of a potential borrower. According to the 
sub-committee,  a  Credit  Information  Bureau  needs  to  be  established  expeditiously  and 
where  more  than  one  bureau  discharges  the  role,  adequate  co-ordination  among  bureaux 
will need to be established. With the establishment of 3 more CICs in addition to CIBIL, it is 
hoped  that  the  gap  in  credit  information  in  Microfinance  would  soon  be  filled  up  and 
Microfinance  can  operate  on  a  sounder  and  more  sustainable  basis  than  hitherto.  Already 
some  CICs  are  working  on  these  lines.  It  may  also  be  mentioned  that  state  governments 
have  an  important  role  to  play  in  financial  education,  particularly  on  the  issue  of  debt 
sustainability of households.  
Similarly,  lack  of  effective  credit  information  sharing  has  increased  the  risk  in  multiple 
banking,  to  which  we  had  moved  sometime  back  from  consortium  lending  with  a  view  to 
introducing flexibility in the credit delivery system by providing more choice to the borrowers. 
Taking  advantage  of 
information  asymmetry,  several  unscrupulous  borrowers  had 
manipulated  the  multiple  banking  arrangement  and  defrauded  banks  of  substantial  funds. 
More  recently,  inadequate  sharing  of  information  among  lending  banks,  had  led  to  some 
borrowers  acquiring  multiple  exposures  in  exotic  derivatives  which  amplified  the  downside 
risk when they were seriously impacted due to adverse rate movements. This led to several 
defaults as well as disputes. An elaborate system for exchange of credit information among 
lending banks was devised to deal with these deficiencies while three new Credit Information 
Companies (CICs) were licenced and were in the process of being set up. 
The subprime crisis is an example of the extremely serious consequences of lending based 
on  inadequate  credit  information  (risk  profiling).  These  high  risk  subprime  assets  were 
securitised through a complex and long chain of intermediaries. The investors relied largely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
on  ratings,  though  it  should  have  been  obvious  to  them  that  ratings  are  no  substitute  for 
careful due diligence before investing. However, it is doubtful whether given a long chain of 
intermediaries  with  likely  progressive  loss  of  information  along  the  chain,  willing  investors 
would  have  been  able  to  carry  out  meaningful  due  diligence.  The  subsequent  freezing  of 
interbank markets and hoarding of liquidity by banks was also caused by lack of information, 
leading to mistrust about banks’ holding of toxic subprime assets and its probable impact on 
the financials of counterparty banks.  
II. 
Indian context: steps taken by RBI to build a “credit information” environment 
in India 
to 
the 
then  Finance  Minister’s  Budget  Speech  made 
Arrangements  for  sharing  credit  information  prior  to  the  Credit  Information  Companies 
(Regulation) Act 
Pursuant 
in  Parliament  on 
28th February  1994,  RBI  had  put  in  place  a  scheme  to  collect  details  about  borrowers  of 
banks and FIs with outstanding aggregating Rs.1 crore (Rs.10 million) and above which were 
classified  as  “Doubtful”  or  “Loss”  or  where  suits  had  been  filed,  as  on  31st  March  and 
30th September each year. This was done with the objective of alerting the banks and FIs 
and  putting  them  on  guard  against  the  defaulters  to  other  lending  institutions.  In 
February 1999,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  had  also  introduced  a  scheme  for  collection  and 
dissemination  of  information  on  cases  of  willful  default,  of  borrowers  with  outstanding 
balance of Rs.25 lakh and above.1 It is to be noted that these lists are negative in nature. 
While this information would, no doubt, be of use for aiding banks and FIs in taking decisions 
in  regard  to  sanctioning  of  loans,  the  requirement  of  an  adequate,  comprehensive  and 
reliable  information  system  on  borrowers  through  an  efficient  database  was  felt  by  the 
Reserve Bank, Central Government, credit institutions and other players in the banking and 
financial sector. The Reserve Bank constituted a Working Group2 under the chairmanship of 
N H Siddiqui to explore the possibilities of setting up a credit information bureau in India. The 
Working  Group  observed  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  set  up  a  world  class  credit 
information company within the existing legal framework. The legal prohibition on disclosure 
of information contained in various laws relating to banking did not permit banks and financial 
institutions  to  share  credit  information  with  the  credit  information  companies.  Besides  the 
power  vested  with  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  under  Chapter  III-A  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India Act, 1934, to collect and furnish credit information from banks or financial institutions 
cannot be delegated by it to another institution. 
The  Working  Group,  therefore,  observed  that  amendments  would  be  required  in  various 
enactments.  The  Working  Group  in  its  report,  submitted  in  October  1999,  recommended 
(a) enactment  of  a  legislation  for  facilitating  collection  and  sharing  of  information  by  the 
proposed  bureau  and  (b)  to  amend  certain  Acts  relating  to  banking  to  permit  sharing  of 
information with the said bureau. On the recommendation of the Working Group in January 
2001, a company by the name of CIBIL was promoted by SBI in collaboration with HDFC and 
two 
technology  partners.  The  company  commenced  operations  by  pooling 
information  on  suit-filed  accounts  as  also  transactions  on  which  the  borrower  had  given 
consent for sharing amongst the user group. The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) 
Act,  2005  was  thus  enacted3  with  a  view  to  providing  necessary  legislative  support  to  the 
business of credit information and for the regulation of credit information companies and to 
foreign 
                                                 
1  At present, the data relating to non-suit filed accounts for the above lists are being disseminated by RBI to 
banks and FIs for their confidential use whereas the lists pertaining to suit-filed cases are in the public domain 
as published by the Credit Information Companies. 
2  Report of the Working Group to explore the possibilities of setting up a Credit Information Bureau, Oct 1999 
3  Statement of Objects and Reasons – Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act 2005 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
facilitate  efficient  distribution  of  credit.  Further,  the  Credit  Information  Companies  Rules, 
2006 and the Credit Information Companies Regulations, 2006 framed under the Act were 
notified on December 14, 2006 and the Act was brought into force.  
Credit information companies (regulation) Act, 2005 
In this regard, the Act provides that credit information companies are companies formed and 
registered  under  the  Companies  Act,  1956  and  which  have  been  granted  a  Certificate  of 
Registration by the Reserve Bank. The Act also provides that the Reserve Bank may, having 
regard to the potential and scope for expansion of the existing credit information companies 
and other relevant factors, determine the total number of credit information companies which 
may be granted the certificates of registration for carrying on such business. Section 14 of 
the  Act  enumerates  the  forms  of  business  which  a  credit  information  company  may 
undertake  and  stipulates  that  a  credit  information  company  shall  not  engage  in  any  other 
form  of  business.  Section  17  of  the  Act,  by  and  large,  stipulates  that  credit  information 
collected by a credit information company under that section shall be provided to its specified 
users and that the credit information company and its specified users shall not disclose the 
credit information received by them to any other person or for any other purpose other than 
as permitted or required by any other law for the time being in force.  
These  statutory  restrictions  on  disclosure  answer  the  question  which  is  often  asked  as  to 
whether the Act violates the privacy principles laid down in Tournier v. National Provincial 
and Union Bank of England [1923] All ER 550: [1924] 1 KB 461 and followed in India. The 
exceptions to the rule of confidentiality laid down in the Tournier’s case include disclosure, 
where there is a duty to the public to disclose and where the interests of the bank require 
disclosure.  Since  disclosure  of  information  relating  to  borrowers  will  enable  other  credit 
institutions  to  take  an  informed  decision  regarding  lending  to  such  borrowers  and  the 
disclosing  bank  itself  benefits  by  such  disclosure  as  the  borrowing  of  the  borrowers 
concerned may not be expected to increase beyond limits once the other credit institutions 
also come to know of the existing debt of the borrower, disclosure to credit institutions may 
be  regarded  as  a  duty  to  the  public  or  a  disclosure  in  the  interests  of  the  bank  under  the 
Tournier principles. 
Thus  the  provisions  of  the  Act  may  be  regarded  as  striking  a  balance  between  the  dual 
objective of putting in place an efficient system of sharing of credit information in the larger 
interest of financial system on one hand, and maintaining the privacy of such information, on 
the  other.  In  other  words,  the  Act  serves  as  a  means  to  provide  an  effective  and  reliable 
information  system  on  borrowers  (through  the  database  maintained  by  credit  information 
companies) and, at the same, time strives to maintain customer confidentiality, to the extent 
permissible, and privacy as envisaged in Tournier’s case mentioned earlier.  
Challenges and the road ahead 
III. 
Based on stakeholders’ feedback it is observed that CICs in India face issues relating to data 
accuracy,  timeliness  and  completeness.  Credit  Institutions  in  India  need  to  substantially 
improve  the  quality  and  completeness  of  data  as  well  as  timeliness  while  furnishing  credit 
information  to  the  CICs.  They  also  need  to  use  the  credit  information  data  in  a  more 
wholesome manner. Our impression is that the data on corporates is not being used as much 
as for retail exposures. This needs improvement. 
Let me now provide some direction that this sector would need to take in the future. First, 
credit  institutions  will  need  to  be  more  proactive  in  cases  of  credit  denials  and  unfailingly 
ensure  that  their  proposed  borrowers  are  supplied  with  a  copy  of  their  credit  reports  as 
provided  under  the  Act.  In  fact,  one  of  the  most  effective  mechanisms  for  maintaining  the 
quality and accuracy of information is to notify borrowers when their credit applications are 
refused.  This  notice  of  refusal  of  credit  serves  as  an  important  tool  to  cross  check  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
accuracy of the credit information and also informs proposed borrowers of the need to build 
and maintain a good credit history.  
The quality and scope of credit data collected and disseminated is the basic building block of 
an effective credit reporting environment. Accuracy of data implies that such data is free of 
error, truthful, complete and up to date. In this regard, the Act provides that credit institutions 
shall ensure updation of credit information on monthly basis or more frequent intervals, as 
mutually  agreed  upon  with  the  CIC.  Inaccurate  data  may  lead  to  numerous  problems, 
including unjustified loan denials or higher borrowing costs. Quality also means that data is 
sufficient and adequate, implying that: i) relevant detailed information is captured, including 
negative as well as positive data; ii) information from as many relevant sources is gathered, 
within the limits established by law and iii) information is sufficient in terms of the period over 
which  observations  are  available.  The  World  Bank  in  its  General  Principles  for  Credit 
Reporting, has inter-alia, set out that credit reporting systems should have relevant, accurate, 
updated and sufficient data – including positive data – collected on a systematic basis from 
all  reliable,  appropriate  and  available  sources,  and  should  retain  this  information  for  a 
sufficient amount of time.  
Incorrect  data  may  result  from  human  error  or  other  causes.  For  example,  incorrect  data 
provided  by  the  data  subject  (i.e.,  individuals  and  businesses  whose  credit  histories  and 
identification  data  are  stored  in  these  systems)  or  human  error  from  creditors  or  other 
sources  when  inputting  data,  will  result  in  incorrect  data  being  transmitted  to  the  credit 
reporting system, affecting the quality of reports. In addition, data pertaining to a certain data 
subject  may  erroneously  be  associated  to  another  data  subject  due  to  inadequate 
identification  mechanisms  (e.g.  improper  matching  of  names,  lack  of  identification keys  for 
individuals and/or businesses, the inability of such keys to provide a unique identifier or the 
absence of robust matching mechanisms). If no proper definitions, tools and controls are in 
place,  execution  of  such  processes  may  result  in  distortions  which  would  then  lead  to 
incorrect  inferences  about  the  data  subject  due  to,  for  example,  underestimation  or 
overestimation of the data subject’s outstanding liabilities. 
Unique  Customer  Identification  (UCI)  across  the  banking  system  becomes  of  paramount 
importance.  While  some  of  the  Indian  banks  have  established  a  unique  customer 
identification process, there is no unique identification across the banking system based on a 
shared database. This could enable borrowers to circumvent the risk profiling guidelines and 
obtain  multiple  facilities  across  banks.  UCI  should  eventually  graduate  to  a  Legal  Entity 
Identifier (LEI). LEI are a unique ID associated with a single corporate entity which assists in 
easy identification of the entity across multiple financial market utilities and aids in tracking 
settlement activity and exposures. Financial Stability Board has been supporting the work by 
financial  regulators  and  industry  to  establish  a  global  system  for  identifying  parties  to 
financial  transactions.  G-20  has  also  expressed  support  for  this  initiative.  The  LEI  solution 
would be used by both firms and regulators to facilitate better counterparty and systemic risk 
management  as  well  as  regulatory  reporting.  As  regards  individuals,  the  Aadhaar  system 
devised  by  the  Unique  Identification  Authority  of  India  (UIDAI)  will  seek  to  minimise  or 
eliminate  duplicate  identity  using  the  biometrics  feature  to  do  so.  This  will  ensure  that  no 
person can get more than one identity and at the same time no one can assume the identity 
of another person as is possible with paper based documents. The effect of the new systems 
through unique identification will enhance the quality of data with CICs. This will also ease 
the number of complaints received from concerned consumers. All this would ultimately have 
a beneficial effect on the efficient allocation of credit, especially among the poor.  
Second, it is incumbent on CICs to address customer grievances in a transparent and timely 
manner and also put in place a responsive public grievance redressal mechanism. In case, a 
CIC  or  the  lender  discover  of  their  own  or  are  informed  about  any  inaccuracy,  error  or 
discrepancy  in  respect  of  the  data,  the  CIC  or  the  lender  has  to  take  immediate  steps  to 
correct  the  error  as  provided  under  the  Act.  Further,  in  case  of  any  dispute  raised  by  the 
borrower on the content of information in his credit report or on any matter pending before a 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
court of law which is likely to take further time, the CIC, before furnishing data to anyone, 
would need to include an appropriate remark to reflect the nature of the inaccuracy. 
Third,  as  with  all  technology-intensive  organizations  dealing  with  multiple  parties,  the 
potential  for  operational  risk  and  associated  reputational  risk  on  account  of  errors  and 
unauthorized  access  to  the  information,  either  from  inside  the  CIC  or  from  outside,  is 
significant. CICs have to manage these risks. 
Fourth, CICs must carry out campaigns to educate the public on the advantages accruing to 
them  through  enhanced  access  to  finance  through  information  sharing  through  CICs. 
Consumers  of  CICs  would  need  to  be  educated  about  the  benefits  of  credit  sharing,  what 
role credit reports have in facilitating their access to credit or how they could contribute to a 
more competitive credit market.  
Campaigns targeted to the general public should, therefore: 
i. 
Explain  the  role  and  nature  of  credit  information  sharing  to  mitigate  general 
concerns about sharing of personal information. 
Inform about the function of a CIC and its obligations for respecting the privacy of 
consumer data. 
Discuss  the  measures  that  a  CIC  would  take  to  ensure  the  security  of  consumer 
data and the way mistakes can be corrected.  
ii. 
iii. 
Fifth,  as  the  principle  of  a  successful  credit  sharing  regime  is  based  on  reciprocity,  it  is 
important for credit institutions who are the primary providers of data to the CICs to use the 
data,  in  turn,  for  taking  decisions  on  loan  applications.  Besides  banks,  the  Act,  which 
includes financial institutions, NBFCs, housing finance companies and companies engaged 
in  the  business  of  credit  cards  or  dealing  with  the  distribution  of  credit  in  any  manner, 
provides that such lenders or credit institutions are required to be members of at least one 
CIC. It is possible that the credit information in respect of the borrowers of a particular lender, 
who  contributes  data  to  only  one  CIC,  is  available  only  with  that  CIC  leading  to  an 
“information silo”. In India, in order to reduce the gap in the generation of credit information 
on  a  specific  borrower  and  to  enhance  the  quality  of  the  credit  information  report,  the  Act 
allows one CIC to become a member of another. However, this mechanism has not taken off 
as much as one would have wanted, probably for reasons of competition among CICs. 
Last,  the  coming  of  age  of  a  credit  information  system  in  a  country  is  a  bellwether  of  its 
financial  maturity.  The  quality  of  financial  infrastructure  determines  the  efficiency  of 
intermediation,  the  ability  of  lenders  to  evaluate  risk  and  of  consumers  to  obtain  credit, 
insurance and other financial products at competitive terms. Credit reporting expands access 
to  finance,  especially  for  lower  income  consumers  and  MSMEs  and  plays  a  key  role  in 
improving the competitiveness and efficiency of banks by reducing loan processing costs as 
well  as  the  time  required  to  process  loan  applications.  Intuitively,  the  availability  of  credit 
information  would  imply  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  credit  at  lower  interest  rates 
accompanied  by  higher  economic  growth  and  a  less  lop  sided  income  distribution.  With 
increasing coverage, which would ultimately subsume the entire population of loans data, the 
information from CICs may, in future, support both on and offsite supervision. 
To conclude, information is very critical in financial transactions and is a lubricant that keeps 
the  wheels  of  the  financial  machinery  rolling.  Any  gap  in  information  is  bound  to  result  in 
these  wheels  coming  to  a  grinding  halt,  as  was  witnessed  during  the  global  crisis  where 
heightened concerns about counterparties’ creditworthiness resulted in freezing of markets. 
The importance of information in credit intermediation cannot be overemphasised. With our 
plans of economic recovery post crisis and also in the light of the financial inclusion initiative, 
envisaging  bringing  a  vast  majority  of  the  excluded  into  the  financial  fold,  the  role  of 
information sharing is very critical to keep credit flowing to various segments of the economy 
in  adequate  measures  and  ensuring  against  over-indebtedness.  Over-indebtedness  would 
result in heightened credit risk perception leading to drying up of credit flow and jeopardise 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the  welfare  of  the  poor.  A  robust  credit  information  sharing  framework  is  thus  a  very 
important constituent of financial system and all of us must strive to strengthen it further.  
I thank you all once again for your attention and I wish the Conference all success. 
Thank you. 
Bibliography: 
Barron John M & Michael Staten, “The value of comprehensive credit reports: Lessons from 
the US experience” 
Bernardo  Alberto,  Marco  Pagano  and  Salvatore  Piccolo,  “Multiple  bank  lending,  creditor 
rights and information sharing” 
Borwn,  Martin  &  Christian  Zehnder,  “Credit  registries,  relationship  banking  and  loan 
repayment” 
Doblas-Madrid  Antonio  &  Raoul  Minetti,  “Sharing  information  in  the  credit  market: 
Contract-level evidence from US firms” 
Jappelli, Tullio, and Pagano, Marco, “Information Sharing in Credit Markets” 
---, “Information Sharing, lending and defaults: Cross-Country evidence” 
Joseph E Stiglitz, “Information and the change in the paradigm in economics” 
Joseph E Stiglitz & Andrew Weiss, “Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information” 
Michael  A  Turner  &  Robin  Varghese,  “The  economic  consequences  of  consumer  credit 
information sharing: Efficiency, Inclusion & Privacy” 
OECD, Facilitating access to finance – Discussion Paper on Credit Information Sharing 
Padilla  A  Jorge  &  Marco  Pagano,  “Sharing  default  information  as  a  borrower  discipline 
device” 
Robert M Hunt, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, “The development and regulation of 
consumer credit reporting in America” 
World Bank-IMF, “Financial sector assessment: A handbook (2005)” 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
