Andres Lipstok: Overview of Bank of Estonia’s first year of the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Andres  Lipstok,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia  (Eesti  Pank),  at  the 
presentation of Eesti Pank’s 2011 Annual Report to the Riigikogu (the Parliament of Estonia), 
Tallinn, 29 May 2012. 
 Honourable President of the Riigikogu, honourable members of the Riigikogu, 
My mission today is to present you with an overview of Eesti Pank’s first year of the euro. I 
will first run through the activities of Eesti Pank in 2011. Then, I am going to focus on the 
euro area economic and monetary policy, as well as on economic developments in Estonia 
and the activities of the central bank against the backdrop of the euro area financial crisis. 
[EESTI PANK IN THE YEAR 2011] 
1. 
2011 was an action-packed year for Eesti Pank. First of all, the central bank had to 
carry out the work required for the changeover to the single currency. Second of all, 
the  transition  to  the  euro  bestowed  Eesti  Pank  with  new  duties  and  a  greater 
responsibility  –  the  central  bank  became  an  equal  partner  in  monetary  policy 
decision-making in the euro area. Our main task is to contribute to price stability in 
the  euro  area  along  with  other  Eurosystem  central  banks.  From  the  beginning  of 
2011, the Governor of Eesti Pank partakes in decisions affecting not only the people 
of Estonia, but also the 300 million residents of the euro area. Third of all, we had to 
continue  fulfilling  the  traditional  central  bank’s  functions  –  ensuring  currency 
circulation, maintaining payment systems, contributing to ensuring financial stability, 
collecting statistical data and analysing the Estonian economy and financial system.  
For  a  small  nation,  the  transition  to  the  euro  can  be  considered  high  recognition. 
However, it was also a challenge. The smooth changeover required the joint effort of 
the  entire  nation.  Residents  and  retail  traders,  entrepreneurs  and  banks  –  we  all 
managed very well. 
[EURO AREA ECONOMY AND MONETARY POLICY IN 2011] 
1. 
Monetary  policy-making  proved  quite  a  challenge  in  the  euro  area  in  2011.  The 
second half of the year bore no resemblance to the first. The beginning of the year 
witnessed a continued, albeit slower, economic recovery, both on the global scale 
and  in  the  euro  area.  Liquidity  was  plentiful  and  oil  and  other  commodity  prices 
soared,  exerting  price  pressures  in  the  euro  area.  To  maintain  price  stability,  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  decided  to  raise  the  monetary 
policy rates. This was done in April and in July. 
The tide turned in the second half of the year, when waning confidence and growing 
uncertainties  in  the  financial  markets  started  curbing  global  growth.  This  was 
brought  about  by  market  participants’  concerns  about 
finances 
development in several euro area countries. Changes in the economic environment 
were  accompanied  by  a  sharp  decline  in  consumer  and  corporate  confidence  in 
August.  Companies  were  cautiously  optimistic  in  the  first  half  of  the  year,  but 
summer saw a postponement of investment and recruitment decisions. Confidence 
loss  slowed  economic  growth,  easing  inflationary  pressures.  In  November  and 
December, we thus lowered the interest rates to an all-time low. 
Under normal circumstances, changing interest rates alone would have sufficed to 
influence  prices  and  economic  activity.  Unfortunately,  the  crisis  proved  extensive 
the  public 
2. 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
enough to disrupt the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
The ability of commercial banks to issue loans to companies and households was 
thus  significantly  reduced.  This  compelled  us  to  take  various  non-standard 
measures,  starting  from  August.  We  supported  the  securities  market  in  order  to 
prevent paralysation of the activities of banks; we continued the unlimited provision 
of liquidity loans to banks; we offered banks three-year loans on highly favourable 
conditions; we expanded the list of eligible collaterals for liquidity loans, and lowered 
the minimum reserve requirement from 2% to 1% at the end of the year. 
Looking back, it has to be admitted that the annual growth in consumer prices was 
faster than expected, amounting to 2.7%. Inflation picked up mostly due to the price 
growth  of  commodities.  This  is  confirmed  by  core  inflation  remaining  below  1.5%. 
Inflation expectations are also in line with our long-term goal. 
4. 
[THE PRICE OF CRISIS-TIME MONETARY POLICY FOR CENTRAL BANKS] 
1. 
These bold and crucial steps came with a price – the risks inherent in the central 
banks’ balance sheets have increased. Risk analysis and buffer-raising will also be 
a challenge for Eesti Pank in the forthcoming periods. The central bank just finished 
its first year as a member of the euro area, with one of the lowest equity to monetary 
policy assets ratios among euro area central banks. We must bear in mind that the 
revenues  and  expenditures  of  monetary  policy  operations  are  shared  within  the 
Eurosystem in proportion to the central bank’s participation in the total capital. The 
Supervisory  Board  of  Eesti  Pank  thus  resolved  to  raise  the  central  bank’s  capital 
adequacy ratio to the average level of euro area central banks in the long term. In 
order to bring the ratio into line with Eesti Pank’s participation in the Eurosystem, the 
capital  adequacy  ratio  must  be  raised.  This  means  that  the  central  bank’s  equity 
must  be  raised  from  0.37  billion  euros  to  approximately  1.3  billion  euros.  Eesti 
Pank’s equity currently stands at 0.07% of the Eurosystem’s total equity, while Eesti 
Pank’s participation in the Eurosystem stands at 0.26%. 
[QUO VADIS, EURO AREA?] 
1. 
It is not only the central banks that can contribute to a successful exit from the crisis – 
the  governments  of  member  states  must,  as  soon  as  possible,  implement  the 
measures taken and agreements made by the European Council and the euro area 
heads  of  state  and  government.  Closer  cooperation  in  the  field  of  economic  policy, 
along with clear-cut, functional rules, serve the interests of all members. 
Even  though  budget  adjustments  may  curb  economic  growth  in  the  immediate 
future, they will help ensure the sustainability of public finances and lower the risk 
premia  of  sovereign  bonds.  We  must  reverse  the  growth  in  debt  burden  and 
establish a framework which would support market confidence in the sustainability of 
public finance management in euro area countries. This is the common interest of all 
euro area Member States. 
Alongside crisis management measures, we must lay emphasis on ensuring stability 
in  the  long  perspective.  To  ensure  an  outlook  for  growth,  we  must  implement 
structural reforms to enhance economic flexibility, competitiveness and employment. 
The  key  task  of  the  Eurosystem  central  banks,  including  Eesti  Pank,  is  to  ensure 
general price stability in the euro area. This should be the principle goal of monetary 
policy and the main mission of the central bank in its efforts to facilitate economic 
growth and create jobs. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
[CONCERNING ESTONIA] 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Unlike  several  other  euro  area  countries,  Estonia  had  no  need  to  engage  in  local 
crisis management in 2011. 
The Estonian economy showed notable adjustment ability against the backdrop of 
the uncertain environment. Our annual economic growth (7.6%) was the fastest in 
the euro area. Moreover, the economic developments were far more balanced than 
before the crisis: the current account was in a moderate surplus and domestic price 
pressures  remained  subdued.  Unfortunately,  it  has  to  be  admitted  that  food  and 
energy prices affect the cost of the consumer basket more than in older euro area 
Member States. Thus, consumer prices accelerated to 5% in Estonia. 
Estonia  stands  strong,  compared  to  the  EU  average.  In  the  midst  of  a  crisis,  we 
demonstrated our ability to quickly fix the balance in times of trouble. We now need 
to make plans for regulating our behaviour at times of joy. 
Our State Budget Strategy has set out a budget policy framework for the medium 
perspective. Unfortunately, we have yet to see the binding nature of the document in 
the  decision-making  process.  For  example,  the  budget  strategy  prepared  in  the 
spring  of  2011  set  its  sights  on  restoring  the  consolidated  budget  surplus.  As  at 
2012, the attainment of the objective has been postponed. This is worrying. It shows 
that  the  current  framework  enables  to  change  long-term  goals  too  easily.  The 
current framework also provides no solutions to managing the cost increase at times 
of growth. It would thus be reasonable to establish rules for restricting expenditure 
alongside  the  established  rules for ensuring  a  balance. These rules  would  reduce 
the volatility of the cost increase, prevent unjustified expectations and alleviate the 
pains of cost-cutting. 
At the beginning of 2012, the euro area heads of state and government resolved to 
launch the European Stability Mechanism sooner than initially planned. 
In  public  relations,  Eesti  Pank  has  repeatedly  emphasised  that  central  banks  are 
being forced to take on a role that does not suit them. Functions that are alien to the 
Eurosystem  are  best  left  to  the  European  Stability  Mechanism.  There  are  two 
advantages  to  such  a  solution.  Firstly,  establishing  conditions  for  the  award  of 
financial  support  allows  guiding  the  recipient  country’s  economic  policy  in  the 
desired  direction.  As  we  all  know,  monetary  policy  measures  cannot  be  used  for 
eliminating  the  causes  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Secondly,  this  will  tighten  the 
control  of  the  member  states’  governments  and  parliaments  over  crisis  measures 
and ensure a better overview of the costs of the crisis measures. 
[TO SUM UP] 
1. 
The right decisions can only be made when we understand the economy. It does not 
serve our interests to monitor just our own activities – we also need to monitor the 
development plans and objectives of other euro area countries (and not only Greece 
or Portugal). 
The European Economic and Monetary Union already has all the good characteristics for the 
achievement of which the union was established to begin with. We now need to enhance the 
union’s efficiency, potency and security in the service of our best interests. 
Honourable President of the Riigikogu, honourable members of the Riigikogu. I would like to 
finish the speech by expressing my gratitude for the seven years of cooperation. Thank you for 
taking notice and account of the messages of Eesti Pank! On its behalf, Eesti Pank has always 
provided  you  with  the  best  knowledge  at  its  disposal.  I  sincerely  hope  that  the  constructive 
cooperation between the Riigikogu and Eesti Pank will continue in the years to come. 
Thank you for your attention!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
