H R Khan: Food inflation and agricultural supply chain management 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  H  R  Khan,  Deputy  Governor  of the  Reserve  Bank  of India,  at  the 
16th Conference of Globoil India, Mumbai, 22 September 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri Ajay Prakash and Shri G V Nadhanael of the Reserve Bank 
of India and the inputs from NABARD. 
Shri Kailash Singh, Managing Director, Tefla’s, Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Chairman, Forward 
Market  Commission,  Dr.  D.  Bhalla,  Joint  Secretary,  Department  of  Food  and  Public 
Distribution,  Government  of  India,  Shri.  Sushil  Goenka  and  Vijay  Datta  of  the  Solvent 
Extractors’  Association  of  India,  Shri.  Sandeep  Bajoria,  Chairman,  Globoil  Organising 
Committee, Shri. Dinesh Shahra, Dr. B. V. Mehta and other leaders from the edible oil and 
agri-commodity trade industries, and distinguished delegates, both from India and abroad. It 
is indeed a pleasure to interact with people from the agribusiness world, especially at a time 
when  the  demand for food  items  are  rising  and is  expected  to  continue to  rise for  several 
years  from  now.  I  am  sure  people  here  who  have  greater  exposure  and  expertise  can 
elucidate  in  much  better  way  the  ground  level  facts  about  the  current  rise  in  food  prices, 
particularly that of edible oil and challenges that lie ahead in countries like India which are 
net  importers  of  edible  oil.  I  thank  both  Globoil  India  and  Tefla’s  for  inviting  me.  I  wish  to 
congratulate Globoil India on its 16th Anniversary – a long enough period for an organisation 
to  grow  out  from  infancy  and  reach  adulthood.  Around  50  per  cent  of  India’s  domestic 
consumption of edible oil is met through imports and India has an import share of more than 
15 per cent in the world market. Given this, Globoil has an important role to play and I wish 
them all the best in their efforts. I hope the proceedings of this event would help in improving 
domestic productivity, availability and marketing efficiency of edible oils.  
Taking  a  broader  and  generalised  view  of  your  industry,  I  shall  be  looking  at  the  role  of 
agribusiness in growth of the economy as well as inflation management. In particular, I would 
be  discussing  the  importance  and  potential  of  supply  chain  management  in  the  evolving 
scenario.  
Growth and inflation – role of agribusiness 
Before  discussing  the  role  of  agribusiness  in  growth  and  inflation,  it  would  be  apposite  to 
define and understand the concept of agribusiness. Way back in 1957, Davis and Goldberg1 
had  defined  agribusiness  very  lucidly  as  the  sum  total  of  all  operations  involved  in  the 
manufacture  and  distribution  of  farm  supplies;  production  operations  on  the  farm;  and  the 
storage, processing and distribution of farm commodities and items made from them. Thus, 
agribusiness  essentially  encompasses  today,  the  functions  which  the  term  agriculture 
denoted  150  years  ago  and  agriculture  now  is  a  subset  of  the  larger  superset  called 
agribusiness.  
As far as growth and inflation is concerned, you may be aware that the weights attached to 
objective of growth vis-à-vis that of price stability in choice of policy measures vary according 
to  the  extant  macroeconomic  environment.  For example,  during the Great  Moderation,  the 
policies all over the world were focussed on growth enhancing measures. Presently, in view 
of the continuance of low inflation and low or negative growth in the developed economies, 
the  policy  measures,  mainly  in  the  form  of  liquidity  enhancement  and  low  interest  rates, 
continue to focus on augmentation of growth. 
                                                
1  Quoted  from  King,  Robert  P.,  Michael  Boehlje,  Michael  Cook,  and  Steven  T.  Sonka  (2010)  “Agribusiness 
Economics  and  Management”,  American  Journal  of  Agricultural  Economics,  Special  Issue  Commemorating 
the Centennial of the AAEA, Vol.92, No.2, April 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In India, however, the conditions are very different. Along with economic slowdown, inflation 
is  ruling  significantly  above  the  threshold  level,  beyond  which  inflation  turns  inimical  to 
growth. Under the current macroeconomic environment, Indian policy makers have to think of 
various measures that can simultaneously achieve the twin objectives of higher growth and 
lower  inflation.  Opinions  differ  on  the  utility  of  different  policy  measures  at  the  current 
juncture and you all may be familiar with the current debate on the timing, sequencing and 
complementarity of various measures. There is, however, near unanimity, amongst all that 
agriculture and agribusiness growth is a necessary prerequisite for moderation of inflation, 
particularly food inflation, as well as for acceleration and sustenance of inclusive growth.  
The impact of agribusiness on inflation is also both direct and indirect. The direct impact of 
agribusiness  is  visible  in  the  form  of  food  inflation.  With  demand  arising  from  increasing 
population and prosperity outstripping the growth of agricultural output, food inflation is likely 
to persist at the global level for the next several years. OECD-FAO has predicted that a grim 
global  food  inflation  outlook  could  continue  in  the  next  ten  years.  The  OECD-FAO 
Agricultural Outlook 2011–20 indicates that food prices may be higher in real terms over the 
five  years  2015–20.  For  example,  prices  of  oil  seeds  are  projected  to  be  higher  by 
36 per cent  relative  to  the  levels  prevailed  during  the  five  year  period  1998–2003.2  High 
prices at global level limit the use of imports as a tool for our domestic inflation management. 
Even when global prices are low, the import option is limited as mere news of entry of a large 
consumer like India entering the global market can spike up prices. Further, higher imports 
would only add to the pressure on our already high current account deficit. 
The indirect impact of agribusiness on inflation is reflected in the rise in cost of living arising 
from  high food  inflation leading  to  higher  wages,  which,  in  turn,  contributes  to generalised 
inflation  through  higher  cost  of  production.  This  may  trigger  a  wage-price  spiral.  Hence, 
though food inflation or at least spike in food inflation is normally a supply side phenomenon, 
it is monitored very closely and remains one of the most difficult challenges for the central 
banks. The Reserve Bank is presently grappling with this challenge of high food inflation as 
often monetary policy has to act as the first line of defence, even if it is a persistent supply 
side issue. However, managing food inflation from a medium-term perspective would include 
measures  to  increase  production,  improve  productivity  and  enhance  efficiency  of  supply 
chain management.  
On the growth front, while service sector has been driving growth for the past several years, 
acceleration of growth of the economy and its sustenance at higher level critically hinges on 
the  performance  of  agriculture  sector  in  terms  of  supply  of  food  and  food  products, 
employment of large section of population and providing a large and growing demand base 
for  the  other  segments  of  the  economy,  viz.,  industry  and  services.  Given  the  strong 
backward and forward linkages of agribusiness with both the industrial and services sector, 
this sector not only directly contributes to growth but also facilitates growth in the rest of the 
economy. Also, the growth of agribusiness has the potential to generate gainful employment 
within the farm sector, which could help in reducing the incidence of underemployment and 
disguised unemployment in agriculture. 
The role of agribusiness has become even more important in the context of the challenges 
that global economy faces in enhancing food production to cater to increasing demand for 
food,  fuel  and  feed.  OECD-FAO  estimates3  suggest  that  with  world  population  touching 
9 billion by 2050, agricultural production will need to increase by 60 per cent over the next 
40 years  to  meet  the  rising  demand  for  food.  Additional  one  billion  tonnes  of  cereals  and 
200 million tonnes of meat a year has to be produced by the year 2050 as compared with 
2005–07  levels.  The  demand for  bio-fuel  production  is  also  expected to  double.  Increased 
                                                
2  OECD-FAO Agricultural Price Outlook: http://www.oecd.org/site/oecd-faoagriculturaloutlook/ 
3  OECD FAO Food and Agricultural Outlook: 2012–2021 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
demand  for  meat  and  meat  products  also  require  additional  agricultural  feedstocks.  Given 
the  limited  scope  for  expanding  farmland  area  around  the  world  and  problems  of  soil 
degradation  and  water  scarcity,  apart  from  over  exploitation  of  fish  stocks,  augmenting 
agricultural production has become a major challenge. Global warming, climate change and 
extreme weather conditions have added further uncertainties. 
Increases in food prices across the globe have become a major issue in recent years. The 
spike  in  global  food  prices  that  was  witnessed  during  the  period  2004–08  had  significant 
welfare  consequences  in  terms  of  millions  of  people  pushed  into  poverty  and  hunger. The 
increase in prices was witnessed in almost all the major commodities and edible oils have 
been no exception. Though prices have been volatile in recent period, the forecasts suggest 
that the prices could continue a secular upward trend, which could put pressure on inflation 
(Chart 1). This is a critical issue for a country like India which is a major importer of edible 
oils. Also, it has been observed that in India, the domestic prices are significantly impacted 
by the trends in global prices of edible oils. 
 Incidentally, during the current year so far, inflation at the retail level in oils and fats has been 
higher than at the wholesale level (Chart 2). While this phenomenon can be attributed to a 
number  of  factors,  improvement  in  supply  change  management  will  certainly  help  in 
narrowing the gap. Also, the price trends at retail level indicate that the price paid by final 
consumer  for  the  edible  oil  differs  significantly  across  major  cities  within  the  country 
(Chart 3). While some part of this divergence could be attributed to factors like transportation 
cost and state specific taxes as well as quality of product, the difference of such magnitude 
also point towards issues related to supply chain which is critical in a country like India which 
has a large domestic market.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Hence, I shall now turn to the supply chain through which farm products move to reach the 
final  consumers  and  need  to  be  upgraded  in  view  of  the  growing  challenges  mentioned 
earlier.  
Supply chain management and agribusiness 
It has been observed that there is a wide divergence between the farm gate prices and retail 
prices  of  various  food  items.  The  usual  reference  to  1-2-3-4  in  supply  chain  is  quite  well 
known,  where  what  the  producer  sells  for  one  rupee,  by  the  time  it  reaches  the  final 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
consumer fetches four rupees due to the presence of intermediaries. The recently appointed 
Inter-Ministerial  Group4  on  Inflation  has  emphasised  on  the  need  to  cut  down  the  margin 
between farm gate prices and retail price. Improving supply chain is beneficial both for the 
producer and final consumer as producers would get remunerative price for his produce and 
consumer would be benefitted from the lower price. Therefore, increasing efficiency of supply 
chain  could  help  in  bringing  food  inflation  down  and  increase  the  efficiency  of  our  food 
markets and make our agriculture sector sustainable and viable.  
A well-known feature of current structure of food inflation is the sharp rise in prices of protein 
food items. These comprise perishable items such as milk, eggs, meat, fish, vegetables and 
fruits – all of which require advanced and effective supply chain management.  
Different aspects of agribusiness and the supply chain are undergoing transformation which 
is  likely  to  continue  in  future.  Emphasis  on  processing,  trading  and  marketing  is  going  to 
increase over time. Demand for protein rich and other high value food like fruits, vegetables, 
edible  oil  and  livestock  products  are  increasing.  Demand  for  high  quality,  safe  and 
convenient  (frozen,  pre-cut,  pre-cooked  and  ready-to-eat)  foods  is  rising.  Meeting  these 
demands emanating from within the country and from the growing Indian diaspora through 
more  efficient  supply  chain  management  is  expected  to  facilitate  growth  and  moderate 
inflation.  
Supply  chain  management  and  agricultural  business  are  integral  part  of  agricultural 
marketing  system.  Efficient  supply  chain  and  business  models  are  necessary  for  creating 
efficient  agricultural  market  which  delivers  agricultural  produce  from  the  farmer  to  the 
consumer  in  the  most  efficient  way. While  output  and  productivity  are  supply  side  factors, 
markets  provide  an  intermediate  link  between  producers  and  final  demand  by  consumers. 
Efficiently  functioning markets  add to  welfare  of  producers  as  well  as  consumers.  Efficient 
agricultural markets can also be a potent tool for poverty reduction.  
Agricultural  markets  in  India,  in  particular  the  supply  chain  management  and  business 
models,  are  inefficient.  In  India,  farmers’  produce  is  generally  disposed  of  in  the  village, 
rural/primary  market  or  secondary  agricultural  market.  The  challenges  facing  supply-chain 
management and agribusiness in India can be broadly classified into three, namely, 1) lack 
of accessibility to regulated markets, 2) lack of competitition under the Agricultural Produce 
Market Committee (APMC) Act, and 3) absence of a nationwide common agriculture market. 
These are challenges that run across the various channels through which the supply-chain 
and  agribusiness  models  operate.  These  channels  are 
(i)  Producer-Consumer, 
(ii) Producer-Retailer-Consumer, 
Producer-Wholesaler-Retailer-Consumer, 
(iv) Producer-Commission  agent-Wholesaler-Retailer-Consumer  and  (v)  Producer-Village 
Merchant-Wholesaler-Retailer-Consumer. 
Agriculture  markets  in  India  are  regulated  through  the  model  APMC  Acts.  The  number  of 
regulated (secondary) agricultural markets stood at 7,157 as of March 2010 as compared to 
just 286 in 1950. There are also about 22,221 rural periodical markets, about 15 per cent of 
which function under the ambit of APMC regulation.5 The model APMC Act allows States to 
collect market fees from the buyers/traders on the sale of notified agricultural produce which 
are  generally  high.  The  high  incidence  of  commission  charges  on  agricultural/horticultural 
produce renders marketing cost high. There are other charges like entry tax/octroi tax that 
vary across states as well as across commodities. These charges prevent the emergence of 
a  nationwide  common  market  for  agricultural  produce.  Moreover,  restrictions  on  the 
movement of goods under the Essential Commodities Act remain in place in various states. 
(iii) 
                                                
4   Position Paper No.1 from the IMG on Inflation http://finmin.nic.in/workingpaper/IMG%20on%20Inflation.pdf 
5  Average  area  served  by  a  market  is  115  sq.  km  while  an  average  area  served  by  a  regulated  market  is 
454 sq km. According to recommendations by National Farmers Commission, availability of Markets should be 
within 5 km radius (approx. 80 sq km). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
These had inhibited free access of agriculture markets. Most of the agricultural markets are 
also  characterised  by  dominance  of  cash  based  transactions  where  issues  of  cash 
management also become important. Also, there are issues of weights and measurements 
as well as the presence of brokers and commission agents. 
There  is  reason  to  believe  that  regulatory  barriers  have  constrained  investments  in 
development  of  storage  and  processing  facilities,  hampered  the  development  of  effective 
institutions,  and  lowered  the  capacity  of  agricultural  producers  to  be  internationally 
competitive. India, for example, is the world’s largest producer of fruit and vegetables but it 
has been estimated that inadequate post-harvest storage and transportation cause losses of 
around 30–40 per cent, only 7 per cent value addition takes place, and only about 2 per cent 
of  production  is  processed  commercially.  Road  connectivity,  development  of  horticulture, 
dairying & other animal husbandry activities and expansion of cash crops, which provide the 
necessary wherewithal for greater access of the farm sector to market oriented agriculture 
are still lacking in the country. This is particularly important for the segment of “high value” 
agriculture, where demand pressures are going to be most intense in the coming years, and 
major  investments  will  be  needed  in  the  development  of  efficient  value  chains  to  save  on 
high  wastages  and  intermediation  costs.  The  inadequate  facilities  for  storage  of  products 
also results in considerable seasonal fluctuations in the prices of products.  
The  country  needs  a  single  point  market  fee  system  for  facilitating  free  movement  of 
produce,  bringing  price  stabilization,  and  reducing  price  differences  between  the  producer 
and  consumer  market  segments.  Use  of  Information  &  Communications  Technology  (ICT) 
solutions (for example, pre-paid card based payments at octroi posts) would facilitate easy 
movement  of  agricultural  produce.  Besides  boosting  productivity  on  a  sustained  basis, 
cleaning, grading  and  packaging  of  agricultural produce,  would  have  to  be  popularized  for 
greater  market  penetration.  The  current  fragmented  marketing  system  and  lack  of 
infrastructure are the serious constraints to the efficient functioning and competitiveness of 
supply chains in India. An efficient supply chain would need to integrate the supply chain with 
the value chain wherein at each stage within the chain, significant value addition takes place. 
It  is  essential  to  link  the  farmers  with  the  markets  with  state-of-art  infrastructure.  Effective 
linkage can help remove the constraints of logistics, quality maintenance and thus, help in 
efficient  access,  delivery,  price  discovery  and  compete  with  global  products.  Linking  small 
primary producers with markets can help improve the livelihoods for millions of poor in India. 
Banking and bank finance also plays a critical role in the entire agribusiness chain. 
As a result a broad consensus has emerged about the need for reforms in agricultural market 
policies and important reform measures have been implemented in recent years, as part of 
the ongoing policy reform process in India, such as, amendments to the APMC Act as also 
the recent initiative to allow Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the retail sector. At a more 
specific  level,  introduction  of  negotiable  warehouse  receipt  system,  the  scheme  of  bank 
financing  against  such  receipts,  establishment  of  Warehouse  Development  &  Regulatory 
Authority  (WDRA)  and  guarantee  support  scheme  up  to  ten  years  for  construction  of 
warehouses/storage  facilities  would  provide  much  needed  fillip  to  efficient  marketing 
management  and  price  risk  reduction  for  the  producers.  Further,  the  disbursements  under 
the  Rural  Infrastructure  Development  Fund  (RIDF)  administered  by  the  National  Bank  for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) with a special earmarking of ₹50 billion for the 
year  2012–13  for  developing  cold  storage  and  warehousing  facilities  in  rural  areas  would 
also  provide  boost 
infrastructure  development  for  marketing  efficiency.  External 
Commercial Borrowing (ECB) for infrastructure to cover cold storages has also been allowed. 
Considering  the  need  to  boost  the  supply  and  value  chains  in  certain  critical  agricultural 
products  that  have  significant  implications  for  both  the  producers  and  the  consumers, 
NABARD  has  initiated  a  few  pilot  programmes  on  supply  chain  development  for  potato  in 
West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh, onion in Maharashtra and tomato in Punjab and Haryana. 
These  projects,  which  would  involve  the  banks,  the  State  Governments  and  the  research 
institutes,  are  comprehensive  in  nature  and  are  expected  to  help  the  farmers  in  better 
to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sorting/packaging, warehousing and marketing apart from helping at the production stage by 
adopting better agricultural practices, involving quality inputs and R&D support. 
Measures to improve supply chain 
The  suggestions  from  various  policy  documents  to  strengthen  the  supply  chain  can  be 
classified into: 1) enhancing the capabilities of farmers, 2) strengthening infrastructure, and 
3)  legislative  interventions.  By  encouraging  farmers  to  organise  themselves  into  groups 
–  growers’  groups,  co-operatives,  self-help  groups,  joint  liability  groups,  and  producer 
companies given the preponderance of small and marginal farmers in our country – supply 
chains can be streamlined as well as made more egalitarian. Recently, NABARD has set up 
Producers Organization Development Fund (PODF), which could play a catalytic role in this 
regard. Also, investments across the entire agro-value chain spectrum, such as creation of 
cold chains, rural godowns, new agricultural marketing infrastructure, and modernisation of 
existing markets could be promoted by providing them fiscal incentives. As suggested by the 
Inter-Ministerial Group on Inflation, perishables could be taken out of the ambit of the APMC 
Act to encourage arbitrage activity by small traders and farmers by allowing them to freely 
trade  perishables  through  buying  where  it  is  cheap  and  selling  where  it  is  expensive. 
Similarly  from  the  long-term  perspective  of  inflation  management,  it  is  crucial  to  improve 
mandi governance with focus on transparency and efficiency by holding regular elections of 
agricultural  produce  market  committees  as  well  as  to  bring  professionalism  into  the 
functioning of the existing regulated markets through public private partnership. 
Analysis  of  international  market  developments  reveals  that  encouraging  large  scale 
integrated players to develop the supply chains in various commodities with latest technology 
infrastructure  is  the  right  approach  suitable  for  Indian  conditions.  The  existing  system  of 
fragmented handling of various supply chains should be converted into integrated handling 
systems so as to ensure better realisation to the farmers. Contract farming and supermarket 
procurement arrangements are two supply chain arrangements that are gaining ground amid 
active  debate  in  India.  Recent  experience  in  India  indicates  that  contract  farming  and 
supermarket procurement approaches will have to involve small-scale farmers in the medium 
term, because the farm structure obliges them to do so. Initiatives like the one in Argentina 
by the company El Tejar where the small and marginal farmers are pooled together by taking 
the  land  on  rent  and  providing  them  wage  employment  could  be  experimented.  In  some 
countries, public-private partnerships have been instrumental to the success of new supply 
chain arrangements, for example, in providing extension and technical assistance to improve 
the  quality  and  safety  of  produce  and  accreditation  of  farmers.  The  country  needs  a 
convergence  platform  at  national,  state  and  district  level  where  private  players  join  hands 
with large number of farmers through various ongoing schemes and programmes of Central 
and State Governments in a PPP mode. Approaches to promote equitable participation by 
large-and  small-scale  farmers  who  constitute  more  than  80  per  cent  of  the  rural  farming 
community would include:  
• 
Facilitating  entry  and  competition  among  buyers,  for  example,  improving  the  rural 
infrastructure  or  establishing  collection  centers  to  reduce  the  transaction  costs 
involved in sourcing from small scale farmers;  
Organizing farmers into formal or informal groups to meet the volume requirements 
and strengthen farmers’ bargaining power;  
Reforms in tenancy laws and legalizing tenancy farming to facilitate establishment of 
production rights and credit flow; 
Enhancing  farmers’  capacity  to  adopt  improved  production  and  post-harvest 
techniques to meet the required higher quality standards; 
Assisting  farmers  to  obtain  the  capital,  in  addition  to  short-term  production  loans 
given by banks, to make on-farm improvements and other required investments, for 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
    example,  micro-irrigation,  greenhouse,  grading,  or  cooling  facilities  and  acquire 
essential national and international certifications;  
Efficient dissemination of market information to the producers by leveraging ICT (for 
example, mobile phone based market information propagation);  
Training  farmers  and  buyers  about  their  rights  and  obligations  under  contract 
farming arrangement and in the design of contracts; and  
Developing  institutions  that  assist  farmers  to  settle  contract  disputes,  such  as, 
commodity or market associations.  
The  Working  Group  of  the  12th  Five  Year  Plan  on  “Agriculture  Marketing 
Infrastructure, Secondary Agriculture and Policy Required for Internal and External 
Trade”6 has identified the following models of agriculture marketing that should be 
emphasized  during  the  Plan  period  viz.,  a)  greater  responsibility  to  producer 
organizations;  b)  direct 
linkage  with  retailers/processors/exporters;  c)  price 
discovery through virtual market platform; d) direct marketing; e) organized retailing 
and removing restrictions on FDI for greater competition; f) market access for small 
producers; g) reforms in APMC Act; h) integrated value chain system covering even 
areas  like  partnership,  information  and  communication  technologies,  leveraging 
networks,  value  chain  financing,  smallholder  policy,  and  contracts;  i)  promotion  of 
innovative  marketing  models  for  effective  market  participation,  and  j)  PPP  for 
efficiency and effectiveness.  
Finally,  in  the  context  of  the  role  of  public  distribution  system  in  cereals  also  needs  to 
undergo  a  transformation.  There  are  two  opposing  views  on  the  desirable  strategy  of  the 
PDS system. According to some, PDS should play a stabilising role by releasing stocks when 
food prices are high, particularly during periods characterised by supply chain manipulation. 
However, there are others who opine that the PDS dilutes competitive market forces and the 
government  instead  should  focus  on  removal  of  supply  chain  rigidities.  Given  this  rise  in 
demand  due  to  urbanisation  and  migration,  higher  per  capita  incomes,  changing  dietary 
habits, on one hand, and the huge costs and leakages associated with PDS, on the other, it 
is considered desirable and imperative for competitive market forces to play an increasingly 
greater role over time. The proposed alternatives to PDS like cash transfers/food coupons 
would also be effective only with the presence of a well integrated supply chain. Otherwise, 
the  supply  chain  manipulation  could  lead  to  exploitation  of  cash  transfer  beneficiaries  and 
could have implications for food inflation.  
Concluding remarks 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  saying  that  the  world  is  destined  to  struggle  with  shortage  of 
supply  of  agricultural  commodities  vis-à-vis  the  growing  demand  for  several  years.  The 
pressure  would  be  reflected,  among  others,  in  rising  prices.  Apart  from  raising  agricultural 
productivity, improvement in management of supply chain would be critical for sustenance of 
overall  economic  growth  and  for  prevention  of  runaway  rise  in  prices.  Diversification  into 
non-traditional  areas  like  biofuels,  polymers,  pharmaceutical/health  products  and  feed  for 
poultry and diary to meet growing demand for protein food has major implications for supply 
chain. Increase in complexity and decentralisation of agribusiness organizations would guide 
the future changes in supply chains. It would also entail the need for development of new 
concepts and techniques. I hope you all would deliberate on these issues and suggest the 
way ahead. 
                                                
6  Report  of  the  “Working  Group  On  Agricultural  Marketing  Infrastructure,  Secondary  Agriculture  and  Policy 
Required  For  Internal  And  External  Trade  For  The  Xii  Five  Year  Plan  2012–17”  http://planningcommission. 
nic.in/aboutus/committee/wrkgrp12/agri/weg_rep_market.pdf 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I thank Tefla’s  and Globoil  once  again for giving  me  this  opportunity  to share  some  of my 
thoughts with such distinguished participants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
