Manuel Sánchez: The Mexican economy in difficult times 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the JP Morgan 
7th Annual Mexico CEO Conference, Mexico City, 31 July 2012. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. It is a pleasure to participate in the annual 
JP Morgan Mexico CEO conference and share my thoughts with you on Mexico’s economic 
outlook and challenges.  
As you know, the world economy is going through difficult times, characterized by low growth 
prospects  and  financial  and  fiscal  problems  in  many  developed  countries.  I  would  like  to 
focus  my  comments  today  on  how  this  external  scenario  is  constraining  the  Mexican 
economy,  and  what  tasks  await  on  the  domestic  front.  My  main  message  will  be  twofold. 
First,  although  Mexico’s  ongoing  economic  recovery  from  the global financial  crisis  of  2008 
seems  to  be  firmly  grounded,  its  continuation  and  possible  strengthening  are  highly 
dependent  on  future  global  economic  conditions.  Second,  in  order  to  enhance  its  growth 
potential,  Mexico  should  confront  its  domestic  challenges,  including  those  related  to  the 
consolidation  of  price  stability.  As  always,  my  comments  are  entirely  my  own  responsibility 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Economic developments and outlook 
During  2012,  Mexico  has  continued  a  process  of  economic  recovery  which  began  in  the 
middle  of  2009.  In  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  GDP  increased  4.6  percent  versus  a  year 
ago, a rate that surpasses the growth observed both in the first and the last quarters of 2011. 
All  major  demand  components  expanded  significantly,  especially  exports  of  goods  and 
services and domestic investment. 
Available  data  suggest  that  this  upward  trend  continued  during  the  second  quarter.  In 
particular, during April and May, year-over-year growth as measured by the Global Economic 
Activity  Indicator  (IGAE),  a  monthly  GDP  proxy,  averaged  4.4  percent,  with  its  two  main 
components, the industrial and services sectors, showing considerable momentum. Monthly 
contraction of industrial production in May was mainly due to a slowdown in the production of 
transportation  equipment,  as  a  result  of  temporary  closures  of  some  auto  plants  for 
production  line  retooling.  Indeed,  auto  production  in  June  picked  up.  Furthermore,  the 
services sector continued to expand year over year.  
On the demand side, manufacturing exports since April continued to be a significant source 
of growth, with shipments increasing both to the United States and to the rest of the world, of 
both automotive and non-automotive products. Although preliminary figures for June suggest 
that manufacturing exports may have slowed down somewhat, it is too early to conclude that 
a change has occurred in the ongoing positive trend. 
Domestic  consumption  remained  robust,  as  reflected  by  retail  sales  during  the  first  five 
months of the year.  Sales growth exhibited by self-service and department stores suggests 
that this expansion probably continued in June.  The solid development of  consumption has 
been backed by a high rate of job creation, as measured by the increasing number of people 
affiliated with the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) across all sectors, and significant 
consumer loan growth in the banking system. 
Moreover, April figures for gross fixed investment exhibited high growth. Capital expansion is 
consistent with the favorable outlook held by business managers, according to PMI indicators 
for both the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The sustained economic rebound has been possible thanks to the country’s macroeconomic 
fundamentals, which encompass a low fiscal deficit and relatively stable public debt with long 
average  maturities,  moderate  inflation  during  recent  years,  and  a  well-provisioned,  well-
capitalized  and  liquid  banking  system  with  a  healthy  loan  portfolio.  Additionally,  up  to  now, 
imports by the United States, Mexico’s main trading partner, have provided the economy with 
significant impetus. 
The current growth momentum, the macroeconomic fundamentals, and the expectation that 
the  world  economy  will  continue  to  expand,  although  at  a  moderate  pace,  underpin  the 
consensus estimate that the Mexican economy will probably grow between 3.5 and 4 percent 
in 2012 and 2013.1 
Threats to economic recovery and financial stability 
Mexico’s  outlook  is  highly  dependent  on  global  economic  conditions.  By  far,  the  most 
significant  external  factor  is  the  pace  of  U.S.  economic  activity,  and  particularly,  that 
country’s  industrial  production.  As  you  know,  the  Mexican  economy  is  closely  intertwined 
with  that  of  its  northern  neighbor  through  industrial  integration  and  foreign  trade  and 
investment  relations.  This  interconnection  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  the  correlation 
between  the  two  countries’  industrial  productions  is  close  to  0.9,  and  that  approximately 
80 percent of Mexican manufacturing exports are sent to the United States.  
After a moderate economic expansion during the first quarter of this year, the U.S. economy 
has  recently  shown  signs  of  deceleration.  Disappointing  data  have  included  manufacturing 
production,  employment,  and  retail  sales,  as  well  as  the  recently  published  advance 
estimates  for  GDP  during  the  second  quarter.  The  softening  of  economic  activity  in  the 
United  States  has  occurred  in  spite  of  the  current  rebound  in  bank  lending  to  the  private 
sector and the seemingly incipient upturn from the bottom in the housing market. 
The recent data are discouraging, as the U.S. economy has been growing below its secular 
trend since 2008. The underlying causes of this subpar performance  are subject to debate, 
but they possibly include the time it takes for any economy to recover from a deep financial 
crisis,  the  unintended  consequences  of  an  environment  of  increased  post-crisis  regulation, 
and the uncertainty regarding measures for avoiding the “fiscal cliff” that would take place in 
2013 under current legislation and for attaining long-term sustainability for U.S. public debt. 
In any event, unless the underlying obstacles to higher economic growth  are overcome, the 
U.S. economy will likely continue to grow at unsatisfactory rates.2  
As  a  result,  consensus  forecasts  for  the  United  States  have  recently  been  lowered,  and  if 
these  adjustments  continue,  it  is  likely  they  will  affect  that  country’s  expected  industrial 
production, with a negative impact on Mexico’s manufacturing prospects. 
The second most important external factor for the Mexican economic outlook is the evolution 
of  the  eurozone.  The  European  Monetary  Union  continues  to  face  significant  challenges 
stemming  from  a  negative  feedback  loop  between  bank  fragilities  and  fiscal  weaknesses. 
These struggles are a consequence of a long period of rising indebtedness on the part of the 
private  and  public  sectors,  especially  in  the  peripheral  countries.  The  number  of  troubled 
economies has been increasing since the start of the global financial crisis through a process 
of contagion which has even threatened the foundations of the Monetary Union. 
 1   For example, Blue Chip estimates Mexico’s economic growth at 3.7 percent for both 2012 and 2013. See Blue 
Chip Economic Indicators, Vol. 37, No. 7, July 10, 2012. 
2   See  for  example,  Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  K.  Rogoff  (2011)  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial 
Folly,  Princeton  University  Press;  and  Lucas,  R.E.  (2011)  “The  U.S.  Recession  of  2007–201?,”  Milliman 
Lecture, University of Washington, May 19. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Significant  steps  have  been  taken  to  pursue  financial  and  fiscal  stability  in  the  euro  area, 
including  support  programs  for  restructuring  sovereign  debt  and  recapitalizing  banks,  more 
favorable  liquidity  provision  for  financial  institutions  from  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
recent  preliminary  plans  toward  fiscal  and  banking  unions.  Although  this  progress  is 
noteworthy,  significant  challenges  remain,  including  the  insufficiency  of  the  measures 
announced,  the  difficulties  implementing  those  measures,  and  the  short-term  tension 
between fiscal consolidation programs and economic growth.  
Consequently,  uncertainty  continues  to  prevail  in  the  eurozone,  a  situation  which  over  the 
last two years has contributed substantially to the volatility of international financial markets. 
Obviously,  instability  has  affected  Mexican  asset  prices  and,  in  particular,  the  value  of  the 
Mexican  peso  versus  the  U.S.  dollar.  The  peso  market  is  highly  liquid  and  the  floating 
exchange-rate  regime  in  place  since  1995  has  functioned  as  a  “shock  absorber”  for  the 
economy.  
The complexity of the problems in the euro area likely means that it will be some time before 
sufficient  solutions  are  finally  implemented.  Hence,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  the 
eurozone  may  continue  to  fuel  recurrent  episodes  of  heightened  risk  aversion  with  global 
financial repercussions.  
Also,  the  euro  area  will  continue  to  be  a  drag  on  the  global  economic  recovery.  As  the 
possibility  of  the  occurrence  of  a  tail-event  in  that  area  has  not  sufficiently  diminished, 
additional deterioration of global economic prospects cannot be ruled out. This in turn could 
further constrain Mexico’s economic recovery.  
Two comments on external implications for Mexico are in order. First, it is possible that some 
of  the  wider  variability  posted  by  the  Mexican  peso  relative  to  other  emerging-market 
currencies  during  recent  months  reflected  fears  of  contagion  from  Europe  through  banking 
channels, given that the two largest Spanish banks hold a significant share of assets in the 
Mexican financial system. 
Although  caution  is  always  a  good  strategy  for  economic  policy,  sound  regulation  and  the 
positive performance of foreign bank affiliates give pause to these concerns. Foreign banks 
can  only  operate  in  Mexico  as  subsidiaries,  and  hence  they  have  to  comply  with  the  same 
regulatory requirements as domestic banks, including limits for related-party lending and high 
capitalization  standards.  Additionally,  while  many 
in  advanced 
economies  are  deleveraging,  and given  the  under-banked  nature  of  the Mexican  economy, 
both foreign and domestic banks in Mexico have continued to expand their infrastructures as 
well as their lending to the private sector.  
institutions 
financial 
Second, the increasing monetary accommodation adopted by the U.S. Federal Reserve and 
other  central  banks  in  advanced  nations  since  the  global  financial  crisis  may  have 
contributed to the international search for yield that has caused substantial capital inflows to 
emerging-market  economies.  In  particular,  considerable  flows  have  been  directed  to  peso-
denominated Mexican government bonds during the last two years, allowing downward shifts 
of  the  domestic  yield  curve  in  tandem  with  that  of  the  United  States.  As  a  consequence, 
domestic interest rates have fallen to all-time lows. 
Many  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  are  obviously  navigating  unchartered  waters. 
Evidence  of  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  as  a  tool  to  stimulate  economic  activity  is 
mixed.3  Also,  the  unusually  lax  monetary  stance  may  have  unintended  consequences, 
including  lower  incentives  to  correct the  underlying  obstacles to  growth and  to finance  only 
efficient investments.  
 3   See for example, Feldstein, M. (2012) “The Impotence of the Federal Reserve,”  Project Syndicate, June; and 
Taylor, J. B. and Stroebel, J. (2012) “Estimated Impact of the Federal Reserve’s Mortgage-Backed Securities 
Purchase Program,” International Journal of Central Banking 8(2): 1–42. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Yet  growth  expectations  in  developed  economies  have  become  highly  dependent  on 
successive  announcements  of further monetary  relaxation.  Hence,  it  is  likely  that  additional 
expansionary  measures  will  be  undertaken  given  the  already  anemic  pace  of  economic 
recovery  in  those  countries.  The  implication  for  Mexico  is  that  capital  inflows  will  probably 
continue for some time.  
However,  as  history  has  taught  us  time  and  again,  any  financial  bonanza  eventually  ends. 
This  lesson  should  keep  us  prudent  and  alert  to  possible  excessive  risk-taking  in  the 
domestic financial system.  
Inflation and monetary policy 
After having declined in the previous two years, since the middle of 2011 annual inflation has 
been rising. Last June, it surpassed the upper limit of the variability interval around the Bank 
of  Mexico’s  3  percent  target,  reaching  4.3  percent.  Although  the  most  recent  reading  was 
significantly affected by a hike in agricultural prices, the upswing has been underpinned by a 
gradual increase in core inflation. In fact, on average during the second quarter, core inflation 
rose while non-core inflation fell.  
The  most  prominent  factor  pressuring  core  price  changes  seems  to  be  some  pass-through 
from the weakened Mexican peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. Although there is no evidence of 
demand  pressures  at  this  moment,  available  indicators  such  as  the  use  of  manufacturing 
capacity  and  the  output  gap,  especially  that  measured  for  non-tradable  goods  whose  price 
changes  could  better  reflect  domestic  monetary  conditions,  suggest  that slack may  already 
have disappeared.  
Furthermore,  the  outlook  for  inflation  has  deteriorated  somewhat,  as  reflected  by  several 
factors. Additional volatility in international financial markets may generate further pressures 
on  the  exchange rate,  with  a  likely  negative  impact  on  inflation.  Also,  upward  pressures  on 
key  agricultural  prices  are  probable  in  the  following  months  due  to  weather  and  a  chicken 
pandemic.  
An  additional  element  has  been  a  rise  of  short-term  inflation  expectations  as  reflected  in 
analysts’  surveys.  Moreover,  inflation  expectations  for  all  time  horizons  remain  above  the 
3 percent  target.  This  is  significant  as  inflation  expectations  have  never  been  anchored  on 
the objective, making the task of convergence challenging. 
Therefore, monetary policy should be vigilant and actions should be timely in order to prevent 
supply-price  and  exchange-rate  shocks  as  well  as  other  factors  from  contaminating  the 
behavior  of  other  prices  and  pushing  up  inflation  expectations  away  from  the  permanent 
target. Convergence to price stability is a necessary condition for financial stability and long-
term economic growth. 
Concluding remarks 
includes 
To  conclude,  sustained  higher  long-term  economic  growth  in  Mexico  requires  consolidated 
foundations for financial stability. In addition to convergence to price stability, the basic policy 
agenda 
finances,  especially  given  significant 
dependence  on  oil  revenues  and  the  fact  that  the  price  of  oil  in  recent  years  has  been 
unusually  high  but  might  not  prevail  in  the  future.  The  agenda  also  encompasses  the 
deepening of macro-prudential regulation and improved supervision of the Mexican financial 
system.  
the  strengthening  of  public 
Finally,  a  wide  set  of  possible  structural  reforms  should  be  considered,  including  the 
dismantling  of  obstacles  to  private  investment  and  further  deregulation  of  the  economy  in 
order to enhance total factor productivity and, hence, promote higher living standards. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
