Jens Weidmann: Money creation and responsibility 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of 
the 
18th colloquium of the Institute for Bank-Historical Research (IBF), Frankfurt, 18 September 
2012. 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at 
 Welcome 
1. 
Dear 
Dr Reckers 
Prof Hüttl 
Prof Binswanger 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  to  be  able  to  welcome  you  today  to  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Regional 
Office in Hessen. The high number of participants shows that the Institute for Bank-Historical 
Research has found a very attractive topic for the colloquium. 
The caption for today’s event is “Paper money – Public finances – Inflation. Did Goethe hit 
upon a core problem of monetary policy?” 
I could now answer this question posed in the title with a clear yes. Indeed, Goethe already 
analysed  the  core  problem  of  today’s  monetary  policy  based  on  paper  money  around 
180 years ago, recording it in literature in inimitable fashion. 
I would like to keep things short, but in order to do justice to the occasion and topic I do not 
want to leave it at a simple yes, but elaborate on the issues of today’s colloquium. 
Money and money creation 
2. 
I wish to begin with a question which appears trivial at first glance but which, as experience 
has  shown,  is  particularly  difficult.  What  is  money  exactly?  A  succinct  response  from  an 
economist would be: Money is what money does. 
As money is defined by its functions, various instruments are fundamentally capable of acting 
as money, as long as they can be used as a medium of exchange, medium of payment and 
store of value. 
Shells were previously used as money in some countries, for example, as were furs, salt or 
pearls. Livestock could also serve as money – the Latin word for cattle is “pecus” from which 
the word “pecunia”, meaning money, is derived. 
Concrete objects have served as money for most of human history; we may therefore speak 
of  commodity  money.  A  great  deal  of  trust  was  placed  in  particular  in  precious  and  rare 
metals – gold first and foremost – due to their assumed intrinsic value. 
In its function as a medium of exchange, medium of payment and store of value, gold is thus, 
in a sense, a timeless classic.” To gold they tend, on gold depend, all things!”, says Margaret 
in the First Part of Goethe’s Faust. 
However, the money that we carry around in the form of banknotes and coins no longer has 
anything to do with commodity money.  Money has no longer been linked to gold reserves 
since the US dollar was removed from the gold standard in 1971. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In short: today’s money is no longer backed by any real assets. Banknotes are printed paper 
– and the experts amongst you know that the euro is printed on paper made of cotton – coins 
are minted metal. 
That banknotes and coins are accepted as a medium of payment in our daily lives also has 
to do with the fact that they are the only legal tender. However, ultimately the acceptance of 
banknotes  is  based  on  public  confidence  that  it  can  use  this  paper  money  to  make 
purchases. 
In this sense, money is a social convention – it has no intrinsic value which comes before its 
use; instead, its value is created by its constant exchange and use as money. By the way, 
this recognition that trust is central, or even constitutive, for the properties of money is very 
old;  it  was  already  discussed  in  the  4th  century  BC  by  Aristotle  in  his  Politics  and 
Nicomachean Ethics. 
In recent times, in particular, many citizens are asking about the origin of money: where do 
the central banks actually acquire the huge amounts of money that they need to give billions 
in  loans  to  the  banking  system  as  part  of  monetary  policy  operations  or  to  make  other 
purchases? Why it is often repeated in this context that central banks have virtually unlimited 
firepower?  
Central  banks  create  money  by  granting  commercial  banks  credit  against  collateral  or  by 
buying assets such as bonds. The financial power of a central bank is unlimited in principle; it 
does  not  have  to  acquire  beforehand  the  money  it  lends  or  uses  for  payments,  but  can 
basically create it out of thin air. 
The  printing  of  money  is  an  appropriate  image  here;  from  an  economic  perspective,  the 
printing press is not necessary, as the creation of money primarily shows up on the central 
bank’s balance sheet, on its accounts.  
How does Johann Wolfgang von Goethe enter the equation when talking about the creation 
of money. Why have I widened the discussion further? 
Money creation, Goethe, Faust and alchemy 
3. 
Let me remind you briefly of the “money creation” scene in Act One of the Second Part of 
Faust. Mephistopheles, disguised as a fool, talks to the Emperor, who is in severe financial 
distress, and says 
“In this world, what isn’t lacking, somewhere, though? Sometimes it’s this, or that: 
here’s what’s missing’s gold”
The Emperor finally responds to Mephistopheles’ subtle attempt to persuade him,  
“I’m tired of the eternal ‘if and when’: We’re short of gold, well fine, so fetch some 
then” 
To which Mephistopheles replies 
“I’ll fetch what you wish, and I’ll fetch more” 
In  the  commotion  of  the  nocturnal  masquerade  ball,  he  persuades  the  Emperor  to  sign  a 
document  –  a  document  which  Mephistopheles  has  reproduced  over  night  and  then 
distributed as paper money. 
Those  involved  are  quite  taken  by  the  initial  success  of  this  measure.  The  Chancellor  is 
delighted to announce  
“See and hear the scroll, heavy with destiny, – (referring to the paper money that 
has been created) – that’s changed to happiness our misery”  
He reads, “To whom it concerns, may you all know, This paper’s worth a thousand crowns or 
so”  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A little later, Mephistopheles stirs up the general elation even further by saying  
“Such paper’s convenient, for rather than a lot Of gold and silver, you know what 
you’ve got. You’ve no need of bartering and exchanging, Just drown your needs 
in wine and love-making.” 
Those concerned are so overjoyed by this apparent blessing that they do not even suspect 
that things could get out of hand. 
In the Second Part of Faust, the state can get rid of its debt to begin with. At the same time, 
private consumer demand rises sharply, fuelling an upswing. In due course, however, all this 
activity  degenerates  into  inflation,  destroying  the  monetary  system  because  the  money 
rapidly loses its value. 
It is very striking that Goethe throws light in this way on the potentially hazardous connection 
between paper money creation, public finances and inflation – and thus on one core problem 
of  uncovered  monetary  systems.  This  is  all  the  more  remarkable  given  that  Faust  and 
Goethe are not generally immediately associated with economics, especially not with such 
central areas of conflicting monetary policy priorities. 
The fact that Faust can indeed be interpreted in economic terms has been demonstrated, not 
least,  by  Professor  Adolf  Hüttl,  who  used  to  be  Vice-President  of  the  former  Land  Central 
Bank in Hesse. I am delighted that he is in attendance here today. Back in 1965, he wrote a 
very insightful article in the Bundesbank’s staff magazine about “Money in the Second Part of 
Goethe’s Faust”. 
In  the  mid-1980s,  while  teaching  in  Sankt  Gallen,  Professor  Hans  Christoph  Binswanger 
– who I am pleased to say is also here today – took a similar line and brought out a book 
entitled  “Money  and  Magic:  a  Critique  of  the  Modern  Economy  in  the  Light  of  Goethe’s 
Faust”. 
Binswanger’s thesis is that Goethe was portraying the modern economy with its creation of 
paper  money  as  a  continuation  of  alchemy  by  other  means.  While  traditional  alchemists 
attempted to turn lead into gold, in the modern economy, paper was made into money. 
Indeed, the fact that central banks can create money out of thin air, so to speak, is something 
that  many  observers  are  likely  to  find  surprising  and  strange,  perhaps  mystical  and 
dreamlike, too – or even nightmarish.  
The responsibilities of an independent central bank 
4. 
If central banks can potentially create an unlimited amount of money out of thin air, how can 
we ensure that money remains sufficiently scarce to preserve its value? Does this ability to 
create  money  more  or  less  at  will  not  create  the  temptation  to  take  advantage  of  this 
instrument  to  create  additional  leeway  short  term,  even  at  the  risk  of  highly  probable 
long-term damage?  
Yes, this temptation certainly does exist, and many in monetary history have succumbed to 
it. Taking a look back in time, this was often the reason for establishing a central bank: to 
provide those in power with free access to seemingly unlimited financial resources. 
However, such government interference in central banking, combined with the government’s 
large  demand  for  funding,  often  led  to  a  strong  expansion  in  the  volume  of  money  in 
circulation, causing it to lose value through inflation. 
In  light  of  this  experience,  central  banks  were  subsequently  established  as  independent 
institutions, with the mandate to safeguard the value of money, in order to explicitly keep the 
government from co-opting monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The independence of central banks is an extraordinary privilege – it is, however, not an end 
in itself. Instead, its primary purpose is to use its credibility to ensure that monetary policy 
can focus unhindered on preserving the value of money. 
Independent  monetary  policy  combined  with  policymakers  with  a  well-functioning, 
stability-oriented compass are a necessary – but not a sufficient – condition for preserving 
the purchasing power of money as well as public confidence in it. 
Of course, it is important that central bankers, who are in charge of a public good – in this 
case,  stable  money  –  bolster  public  confidence  by  explaining  their  policies.  The  best 
protection  against  temptation  in  monetary  policy  is  an  enlightened  and  stability-oriented 
society. 
Conclusion 
5. 
I will end my overview of Goethe, Faust and paper money here. You have probably noticed 
that  the  building  we  are  in  reflects,  in  many  respects,  the  connection  between  Frankfurt, 
Goethe,  money  and  Faust,  in  particular  the  sculptures  and  paintings.  This  type  of 
architectural art was primarily the idea and initiative of Professor Hüttl. 
On that note, I would like to turn over to the other speakers, who will speak about the topic of 
today’s colloquium in more detail. I am sure that the combination of Goethe and money will 
have many additional interesting insights in store for you this afternoon. Thank you for your 
attention, and I hope you will find the event both enjoyable and stimulating. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
