Ipumbu Shiimi: Regulating competition in the Namibian banking sector 
Welcoming and special remarks by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at 
the  signing  of  the  Memorandum  of  Agreement  between  the  Bank  of  Namibia  and  the 
Namibia Competition Commission, Windhoek, 1 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
The Chairperson of Namibia Competition Commission – Mr Lucius Murorua,  
The Secretary to the Competition Commission – Mr Mihe Gaomab,  
Members of the media,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
On  this  occasion  when  the  two  Regulatory  authorities  are  going  to  sign  a  historical 
agreement,  I  am  delighted  to  welcome  first  and  foremost  the  Chairman  of  the  Namibia 
Competition Commission , the Secretary and indeed every one present here today on this 
“terrific  weatherful  day”.  It  is  indeed  a  good  omen  and  fortunate  coincidence  that  this 
important event takes place today.  
Allow me, now to briefly reflect on some of the developments over the years, with particular 
emphasis on those that brought both the Competition Commission and the Bank of Namibia 
to the point where these authorities are signing an agreement.  
As  we  all  know,  the  competition  law  has  a  short  history  in  Namibia.  The  first  attempts  in 
Namibia  on  matters  of  competition  were  made  with  the  promulgation  of  the  Namibia 
Competition Legislation in 2003, which only became effective in 2008.  
You will also agree with me that, the competition law is an essential tool that does not only 
recognise the importance of guiding the market conduct on competition matters, but, it also 
acknowledges  that  competition  provides  the  incentive  for  businesses  to  become  more 
innovative,  highly  productive,  and  efficient  in  their  operations,  thus,  contributing  to 
improvement in socio economic development of our country.  
At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  of  Namibia  as  the  regulator  of  banking  institutions  has  the 
mandate to administer agreements between banking institutions that may restrict competition 
or  that  may  be  anti-competitive.  Effectively,  this  means  that  the  Bank  of  Namibia  has  the 
power to regulate matters of competition in the banking sector.  
In the past, the mergers and acquisitions provision in section 54 of the Banking Institutions 
Act  of  1998,  as  amended  fulfilled  an  important  role  in  preserving  the  effectiveness  of  the 
competitive process by preventing mergers and acquisitions, which may substantially lessen 
competition in banking sector, while at the same time allowing mergers that do not lessen 
competition to go ahead.  
However, with the introduction of an effective regulatory framework, namely the Competition 
Act  of  2003  that  will  guard  against  anti-competitive  behaviour  and  restrain  banking 
institutions from engaging in restrictive business practices, the Bank of Namibia recognised 
the broader mandate of the Competition Commission. Therefore, it decided to enter into an 
agreement  to  transfer  the  responsibility  of  matters  relating  to  competition  to  the  rightful 
authority, which is the Competition Commission of Namibia.  
Ladies and gentlemen, during this signing ceremony of today, you will witness the signing of 
an  agreement  that  originates  from  the  provisions  of  section  67  of  the  Competitions  Act  of 
2003,  which  will  effectively  provide  the  two  authorities  with  the  appropriate  checks  and 
balances to guide its relationship, when dealing with mergers or acquisition or matters of an 
anti-competitive nature between banking institutions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Of course, in doing so the Bank of Namibia is certain that the signing of this agreement will 
remove any grey areas that may have existed in the interpretation of the banking and the 
competition laws in Namibia.  
Once again, thank you, Mr Chairman for taking time out of you hectic legal schedule to be 
with us this afternoon!  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
