Jörg Asmussen: Can we restore confidence in Europe? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  16th  Economist  Roundtable  with  the  Government  of  Greece,  “Transforming 
uncertainty into stability, wisdom and growth”, Athens, 2 July 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank you very much for inviting me today to open this roundtable with the Government of 
Greece.  The  title  of  my  intervention  is  “can  we  restore  confidence  in  Europe”.  The  simple 
answer is “yes”, because we must, to put monetary union back on a sustainable track. The 
more  complicated  part  is  how  to  do  it.  In  my  view,  it  requires  finding  the  right  balance 
between national and European responsibilities. This has two key dimensions: 
First, what can Greece itself do to restore confidence. 
Second, what can the rest of the euro area do to restore confidence. 
What Greece can do to restore confidence 
1.  
Let  me  begin  with  Greece.  Under  the  first  adjustment  programme  it  has  made  substantial 
progress in adjusting its economy. The fiscal deficit was reduced from 15.6% of GDP in 2009 
to  9.1%  in  2011.  And  very  important  reforms,  such  as  the  pension  reform,  have  been 
implemented. 
However,  many  other  necessary  reforms  have  not  been  followed  through  due  to  weak 
programme  ownership.  Moreover,  policy  implementation  has  virtually  stalled  over  the  last 
three  months.  So  the  first  priority  for  the  new  Greek  government  has  to  be  getting  the 
programme back on track. 
Some observers will ask why. They  will say that the programme has failed. They will note 
that the Greek economy is not recovering as expected. They will point out that large parts of 
the Greek population reject the conditions of the programme as a “diktat” from Brussels and 
other capitals.  
So let me make clear upfront: the programme is the best option for Greece.  
The difficulties that Greece is currently experiencing do not stem from the programme. They 
stem from many years of unsustainable economic policies and a reluctance to implement the 
necessary reforms. The programme is so comprehensive because the problems in Greece 
are so deep-rooted. With or without the programme, any Greek government would have to 
pursue a similar adjustment to bring the economy back on track and restore the confidence 
of financial markets.  
The  difference  is  that  with  the  programme,  this  adjustment  is  made  much  smoother.  The 
fiscal  measures  under  the  programme  have  been  designed  to  gradually  restore  the 
sustainability of public finances. If Greece were on its own, the adjustment would have to be 
much faster and more drastic, given that the sovereign has lost access to financial markets. 
So the programme is actually helping support the Greek people’s standard of living. 
The same is true of the reforms to improve competitiveness. Greece’s competitiveness gap 
vis-à-vis its main trading partners is still at least 15%. The programme aims at closing this 
gap through reforms to enhance the downward flexibility of prices – in the labour market and 
in  product  and  services  markets.  Implementing  these  reforms  would  create  the  basis  for 
more  export-oriented  growth  and  job  creation.  Without  them,  the  economy  would  adjust 
primarily  through  lower  production  and  employment,  with  disastrous  effects  for  social 
cohesion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Moreover,  many  of  the  reforms  in  the  programme  have  been  demanded  for  years  by  the 
Greek  people  themselves.  There  is  a  silent  majority  that  wants  to  see  a  well-functioning 
public  administration  that  serves  citizens,  enforces  tax  compliance,  and  creates  the 
conditions for private sector growth. And had the public administration reform proceeded as 
programmed, it would have offset some of the contractionary effects of fiscal consolidation, 
as has happened in other programme countries. 
Avoiding illusory alternatives 
People, and especially politicians, do not like the notion that there are no alternatives. True 
enough,  there  always  are  alternatives.  But  they  may  not  be  realistic  or  acceptable  ones. 
Some commentators would like us to believe that exit and devaluation could solve Greece’s 
problems. I do not wish to go into details of such assessments. Let me only say that much of 
what is published represents dangerously short-sighted and partial analysis. 
We must also be realistic about the prospects for a so-called “Marshall Plan for Greece”. I 
fully support a re-direction of EU funds to maximise growth and competitiveness. But it takes 
time to programme and absorb these funds. Greece has so far absorbed only around 35% of 
the  cohesion  funds  available  for  2007–2013  period,  a  level  that  in  fact  exceeds  the  EU 
average already. So any measures we take today will not be felt in the short run.  
What about relaxing the fiscal targets to support growth in the short run? Again, we need a 
full analysis of what this implies. Delaying adjustment is risky: it would increase the debt-to-
GDP ratio in 2020 above the 120% targeted under debt exchange. This is the upper bound of 
what  could  still  be  considered  sustainable.  And  it  is  also  not  free:  it  requires  additional 
funding from the creditor countries, because the country still runs a primary deficit.  
In some creditor countries this is challenging. It is difficult to ask voters in a country where 
average public sector wages are around €1000 per month, like in Estonia or Slovakia, to lend 
to  a  country  where  those  wages  are  on  average  around  €3000.  The  same  holds  true  for 
emerging  countries  outside  the  euro  area  who  participate  in  the  financial  assistance  for 
Greece via the IMF. Some of those even went through very painful but ultimately successful 
adjustment programmes themselves; take Brazil for example. 
If  those  countries  help  nonetheless,  it  is  reasonable  that,  in  return,  they  expect  Greece  to 
stick to its promises. Not because of any desire to control the Greek economy. But because 
solidarity has to go both ways, and a precondition for solidarity is solidity. 
Getting the programme back on track 
So my point is this: the new government should not lose precious time looking to avoid or 
loosen  the  programme.  It  should  instead  focus  on  how  to  maximise  the  effectiveness  of 
reforms.  And  the  key  to  this  is  much  stronger  programme  ownership.  We  know  from 
experience in Latvia, Ireland and Portugal that ownership is a crucial ingredient for success.  
The new government, with a sufficient majority in parliament, has an opportunity to do this 
from  “day  one”.  This  would  give  the  single  biggest  boost  to  growth  by  removing  the 
uncertainty that is paralysing the economy. Concretely, this means 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
identifying measures to close the large fiscal gap in 2013–14; 
making up for delays in tax administration reform; 
resuming the stalled privatisation process;  
implementing the legislated labour market reforms; and 
revitalising reforms to liberalise product and services markets, starting with the full 
liberalisation  of  the  closed  professions  and  the  complete  implementation  of  the 
Business Friendly Greece action plan. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  other  words,  restoring  confidence  in  Greece  has  to  begin  at  home.  And  to  do  this 
effectively, authorities have to make the case more strongly for reform. They have to be clear 
that it is not for the Troika, or for any European leader, but for the good of Greece and its 
future. This is a sine qua non for Greece to restore fiscal sustainability and competitiveness. 
What the rest of the euro area can do to restore confidence 
2.  
Restoring confidence for the euro area is, of course, now a bigger challenge than resolving 
the Greek crisis. Other Member States and the European institutions also have an important 
role to play.  
Measures in other Member States 
Many euro area governments have avoided dealing with problems by hiding behind overly 
optimistic forecasts or unrealistic stress tests. But this is ultimately a self-defeating strategy. 
The  problems  do  not  go  away.  Instead,  the  market  loses  trust  in  official  statements. 
Governments  then  have  to  take  ever more  drastic  policy  measures  to  win  back  credibility. 
Overall,  the  constant  stream  of  missed  targets  and  data  revisions  saps  at  euro  area 
confidence. 
For those countries receiving financial assistance, confidence can be restored by rigorously 
implementing  their  programmes.  For  Ireland  and  Portugal,  this  means  maintaining  their 
strong track record of implementation. For Spain, it means a convincing recapitalisation plan 
that removes all doubts about the solvency of its banks. The first financial review can provide 
a  basis  for  this.  For  Cyprus,  it  means  finally  addressing  its  macroeconomic  and  financial 
sector vulnerabilities. 
For other Member States – including France and Germany – it means learning the lessons of 
the crisis so far and getting ahead of the curve on fiscal and structural reforms. 
Measures at the European level 
But as I said in my introduction, a strategy to restore confidence must strike the right balance 
between  national  and  European  responsibilities,  and  there  are  also  important  steps  to  be 
taken at the European level. 
The  most  pressing  is  addressing  the  institutional  design  of  EMU.  The  euro  area  needs  to 
send a clear message that it has understood its design flaws and has a plan to correct them. 
This  would  signal  to  markets  that  the  euro  area  is  a  place  they  can  invest.  And  it  would 
underscore  Member  States’  commitment  to  the  euro  and  remove  any  doubts  about  its 
integrity. This alone would provide a major boost to confidence. 
The report by the four Presidents in principle endorsed by the European Council last week, 
sets out the four core building blocks of a genuine EMU. While it is a vision for the future, 
each  of  these  building  blocks  is  designed  to  address  the  issues that  are  currently  eroding 
confidence in the euro area. 
For instance, the financial market union would help break the link between banks and their 
sovereigns and stop deposit flight. The fiscal union would prevent countries from running up 
excessive  debt  levels.  Sound  governance  and  enforceable  rules  can  lay  a  path  towards 
common  debt  issuance,  although  here  the  sequencing  is  key.  The  economic  union  would 
ensure that countries can adjust properly without an exchange rate. And the political union 
would strengthen the democratic legitimacy of EMU. 
A  commitment to  reinforcing  EMU  in  this  way,  coupled  with  the  measures for Greece  and 
other  countries  that  I  have  described  above,  is  the  only  way  out  of  the crisis.  There  is  no 
silver bullet. Those who advocate “once and for all solutions” – be that a banking licence for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  ESM,  a  European  transfer  system,  or  the  like  –  are  contenting  themselves  with  a 
superficial analysis. 
The crisis can only be resolved through determined steps on a number of fronts that address 
its root causes. 
3.  
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
The title of this conference is “Transforming uncertainty into stability,  wisdom and growth”. 
This reminds us that, in all difficult times, there are opportunities. While the situation in the 
euro  area  today  is  certainly  challenging,  we  have  in  place  a  plan  that  is  addressing  long-
standing weaknesses. It will ultimately lead to greater long-term stability. 
But it is clear we need to improve confidence to smooth the path. This will only come through 
individual countries taking ownership for their situations, and the euro area as a whole taking 
responsibility for making EMU work. Fortunately, this is widely recognised across the union. 
And now, simply, we have to do it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
