Prasarn Trairatvorakul: The strength of the Thai economy and future 
development in Thailand’s financial system 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  British 
Chamber of Commerce, Bangkok, 4 September 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank the British Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to give a 
keynote  speech  at  this  prestigious  gathering.  The  Great  Britain  and  Thailand  have  built 
strong economic relationship and business ties over the decades. Within Europe, the Great 
Britain is by far the second biggest trading partner of Thailand, accounting for 13.9 percent of 
total  trade  volume  between  Europe  and  Thailand.  In  terms  of  foreign  direct  investment, 
Britain is also the second most important investors among European nations, particularly in 
banking, real estate, and retail sales sectors. I, therefore, hope that Thailand and Britain will 
continue this strong tie both in terms of trade and investment, and to prosper together in the 
future. 
The past few years have brought us many economic surprises and challenges. After 
severe floods took a toll last year, Thailand is currently facing much challenge from the global 
economic  downturn,  particularly  from  the  continued  Euro  debt  crisis  and  more  intensified 
global competition. Despite this backdrop of strong headwinds from abroad, I believe that the 
Thai economy will be able to sail through. I am pleased to say that during the first half of 
this year, post-flood recovery has been robust. Production constraints continue to ease, while 
private sector demand is back on track. The growth momentum in the period ahead is likely 
to  sustain,  driven  mainly  by  domestic  demand.  We  expect  that  economy  will  grow  at 
5.7 percent this year and 5.0 percent next year. 
This  episode  of  rapid  growth  recovery  is  that  it  also  witnessed  macroeconomic 
stability. Thailand has a long history of low and stable inflation, averaging around 3 percent 
over  the  decades.  The  unemployment  rate  in  recent  years  has  also  been  low  at  around 
1 percent.  Meanwhile,  external  position  remains  solid  with  moderate  short-term  external 
indebtedness.  The  banking  sector  has  been  safe  and  sound  with  sustained  profitability 
amidst the ongoing global financial crisis. Despite capital inflows into Thailand, there appears 
to  be  no  sign  of  asset  price  bubble  while  the  degree  of  leverage  in  the  corporate  and 
household  sector  is  still  low.  Such  promising  outlook  is  reflected  in  Thailand’s  sovereign 
credit rating which has been stable at investment grade despite intermittent political tension. 
At  this  juncture,  please  allow  me  to  highlight  a  number  of  Thailand’s  fundamental 
strengths  that  underpin  this  positive  outlook.  First,  our  corporate  sector  remains 
competitive  with  accumulated  robust  savings  and  profitability.  This  fact  is  well 
evidenced  by  their  healthy  balance  sheets  and  their  ability  to  explore  investment 
opportunities  overseas.  Net  profit  of  most  listed  companies  in  the  second  quarter  2012 
turned out be positive despite damages inflicted by the floods. With strong financial positions 
and  more  trade  liberalization,  an  increasing  number  of  firms  have  gone  overseas,  as 
indicated  by  a  marked  increase  in  Thai  Direct  Investment  from  $3  Billion  in  2007  to 
$.10.6 Billion in 2011. 
Second,  supportive  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  has  helped  enhance  growth  while 
continuously  strengthened  stability  in  the  Thai  economy.  This  achievement  has  been 
attributable 
together  with  market-friendly 
regulations aimed at keeping the economy operating close to its potential. The rapid recovery 
from  the  great  floods  last  year  amid  global  economic  uncertainty  has  revealed  the 
importance  of  fiscal  stimulus  and  government  efforts  in  restoring  public  confidence.  At  the 
fiscal  and  monetary  policy, 
to  responsive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
same  time,  the  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  has  helped  accommodate  business 
restoration process. 
Third,  Thailand  has  a  strategically  well  placed-  location  for  international  investors  to 
benefit from rising Asian integration. The rise of China and the ASEAN Economic Community 
(AEC)  evidently  provide  enormous  opportunities  for  businesses  operating  in  Thailand  to 
expand  and  prosper  from  enlarging  market  size  and  integrated  regional  supply  chain. 
Automotive  and  electronics  industries  are  prominent  examples  that  have  long  gained 
competitiveness  after  establishing  complex  supply  chain-hub  in  Thailand  and  obtaining  a 
critical foothold in the region. 
Finally, the Thai financial system has been resilient to the global financial crisis. And 
the  key  reason  for  the  banking  sector’s  resiliency  is  that  our  financial  system  remains 
relatively non-complex. The financial transactions are derived from real economic activities, 
and hence risks are understandable and manageable, with lending to domestic companies 
accounting for 70 percent of loan portfolio and the rest is mainly mortgage loan. 
The direct exposure of Thai banks to European countries is also very small. Investments and 
loans made by Thai banks to Europe are only 0.3 percent of total assets, while claims on 
Thai  banks  by  European  countries  are  even  smaller  at  0.03  percent  of  total  liabilities. 
Nevertheless, we will be watchful of the second round impact of the EU crisis, particularly via 
impact on exports that could impact asset quality. 
Apart  from  the  existing  solid  fundamentals  outlined  above,  Thailand  is  currently 
striving to develop a more efficient financial system to anticipate increased regional 
integration. The key driver and rationale behind this momentum is clear. ASEAN economies 
aim  to  increase  competitiveness  from  increased  economy  of  scale  and  scope,  and 
technology transfer, with link up of supply chain of ASEAN and ASEAN plus 3, in particular. 
This, in turn, will help strengthen our competitive position in the global market. 
Thus, the vision of financial sector is that it should seamlessly facilitate this process, 
whilst safeguarding financial stability. It should be emphasized that economic integration 
in ASEAN is not aimed to reach the same level of integration as EU, as the single currency 
and monetary union is not on the agenda. 
The  banking  sector  liberalization  agenda  includes  discussion  on  harmonized  standards  of 
regulations, which is key criteria for licensing, as well as financial stability arrangement. This 
will  be  finalized  this  year,  with  timeline  of  liberalisation  in  2014  to  2020,  depending  on 
country’s readiness. Capital market integration will also be important to ensure that regional 
market becomes deeper and wider, to serve growing needs of growing and large investment 
projects  to  link  up  the  region’s  production  and  infrastructure.  Moreover,  it  will  also  help  to 
intermediate capital inflows into the region in a more efficient and stable manner. Regional 
capital market will also be important for managing the growing pension funds of the region, 
where some countries are facing growing savings but aging population. It will offer a regional 
alternative to the currently fragile market in the west. 
How well prepared is Thailand for this? 
The banking system already has high degree of foreign participation. Market share of 
foreign  banks  and  hybrid  banks  is  20  percent.  The  foreign  banks  also  accounts  for  about 
50 percent  of  transactions  in  OTC  derivatives  market  here.  These  main  players  in  foreign 
and hybrid banks include banks from the UK, EU, US, Japan, and China, as well as banks 
from  Singapore  and  Malaysia.  Thus,  the  banking  system  and  Thai  banks  are  familiar  with 
international competition. Thai banks already have presence in all ASEAN countries, except 
Brunei. And for this, the AEC will help reduce barriers and enhance business operations of 
Thai banks abroad. 
The Financial Sector Master Plan phase II, for 2010–2014, has outlined to the banks the 
timeline of increased competition, and thus banks have prepared themselves. In line 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
with  this,  we  have  already  announced  that  existing foreign  bank  branches  can  open  up to 
20 branches in Thailand if they choose to become local subsidiaries with capital base in the 
country.  We  are  also  assessing  the  possibility  of  allowing  new  restricted  banking  license 
2012–2013, and possibly new commercial bank license in 2014 if such banks facilitate our 
regional economic and investment policy. 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  the  progress  in  capital  market  to  complete  a  picture  of  the financial 
sector. Collective action of both public authorities and private sector since the ASEAN 
crisis has rebalanced our financial market from a predominantly bank-based to a more 
balanced one with a growing role of capital market. Sizes of the bond and stock markets 
have noticeably increased. Number of market participants has also been rising with a more 
variety of financial products. Moreover, since March 2012 the Thai capital market has been 
upgraded to the Advanced Emerging Market status in the FTSE Global Equity Index Series 
from  Secondary  Emerging  Market  status.  More  exciting  development  is  expected  to 
continue  under  the  5-year  Capital  Market  Development  Master  Plan  which  was 
established in 2009. Apart from the internal push, ASEAN exchange linkage under the 
vision of AEC is taking place this year to allow global investors to trade ASEAN blue chip 
stocks at lower costs through a single platform. This initiative will ultimately raise the visibility 
of ASEAN capital market and continue to attract more capital flow. 
To sum up, as economic integration and upgrade of efficiency and competitiveness is key to 
our development, Thailand’s financial system is geared to facilitate this process. To do so, 
financial  liberalisation  will  play  a  key  role,  with  contribution  by  ASEAN  banks  as  well  as 
foreign banks operating in this region. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to reiterate that with solid economic strengths and a wide-ranging development in 
Thailand’s financial system, the Thai economy will continue to be resilient in the face of the 
dismal  global  outlook.  The  BOT  is  fully  committed  to  sound  monetary  policy  conduct  and 
financial-sector  development  via  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  as  well  as  play  a 
supporting role in Capital Market Development Master Plan. 
Let  me  end  my  remark  by  thanking  the  British  business  community  for  substantial 
contribution  to  our  economy.  Your  contribution  will  not  only  strengthen  our  long  history  of 
economic partnership but also bring economic prosperity to both Britain and Thailand. I very 
much hope that the mutually beneficial ties between British and Thailand will blossom into 
the future. 
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
