Stefan Gerlach: Fiscal imbalances and monetary stability 
Address  by  Mr  Stefan  Gerlach,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the 
German-Irish Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Dublin, 28 September 2012. 
I am grateful to Laura Weymes for help in preparing these remarks. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today.  Let  me  start  by  acknowledging  the  important  work  the 
Chamber has undertaken since its establishment in 1980 in promoting closer links between 
Irish  and  German  companies.  As  you  may  know,  in  terms  of  trade  with  the  EU,  Germany 
ranks jointly as the 2nd largest market for Irish exports, and is the 3rd largest source of Irish 
imports.1  Our  close  economic  links  with  Germany  are  important,  particularly  in  the  present 
environment in which the German economy continues to grow and absorb our exports. 
Today I will speak on fiscal imbalances and the problems they create for monetary policy. 
One of the most visible outcomes of the current sovereign debt crisis is that fiscal deficits and 
public debts have become very large in many countries inside and outside of the euro area. 
Given the severe economic difficulties that Ireland and a number of other economies in the 
euro area have been experiencing in the last few years, these issues have been prominent in 
the public debate. Since it is difficult to reduce fiscal imbalances quickly, it is clear that pubic 
debts will remain large for the foreseeable future. It is therefore timely to talk about why they 
matter and what concerns they raise for central banks. 
In my remarks I hope to shed light on just how large fiscal imbalances currently are in many 
countries  and  what  concerns  such  imbalances raise for  central  banks.  I  will  then  review  a 
number of institutional arrangements in force in the euro area that are intended to limit the 
need for government borrowing and that prohibit the ECB from lending to governments. I will 
also reflect on how these large debts are likely to be reduced. 
The state of public finances in Europe and in Ireland 
2. 
Let me start by reviewing how debts and deficits have evolved in Europe over time. Across 
the euro area, average general government deficits rose from less than 1% of GDP in 2007 
on the eve of the crisis to more than 6% of GDP in 2010 (Figure 1). In the same period, the 
average debt ratio rose from 66% to 87% in 2011 (Figure 2). For some euro area and EU 
countries  (and  also  for  Japan  and  the  US)  the  deterioration  has  been  even  more 
pronounced. Between 2007 and 2010 increases in debt ratios of 30% of GDP or more were 
recorded  in  Ireland,  Greece,  Latvia,  Iceland,  the  UK,  the  US  and  Japan.  Annual  deficits 
larger  than  7%  of  GDP  have  also  been  recorded  in  several  countries  including  Greece, 
Spain, Portugal, the US and the UK. 
Specifically, Irish general government debt rose from below 25% of GDP in 2007, which was 
much  below  the  60%  limit  of the  Maastricht Treaty,  to  over  106%  of GDP  in  2011,  and  is 
projected  to  rise  until  2013.  In  the  same  period,  the  headline  balance  deteriorated  from  a 
surplus of 0.7% of GDP in 2007 to a peak of a staggering 31% of GDP in 2010 (of which 
about two-thirds was related to banking support measures). In 2011 the deficit was almost 
                                                
1   Of total exports (goods and services) to the European Union, 17% go to the United Kingdom, and 9% to each 
of Belgium and Germany. On the imports side, 19% come from the United Kingdom, 9% from the Netherlands 
and 5% from Germany (based on CSO data). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
13%  of  GDP.2  Therefore,  unfortunately,  in  spite  of  nearly  16%  of  GDP  in  budgetary 
adjustment  measures  undertaken  since  2008,  a  deficit  of  8.3%  is  projected  for  this  year, 
falling slightly to 7.5% for 2013. 
Three factors  have  led  to  the rapid  increase  in public  debt  in  the  wider  European  context. 
First, the large recession triggered by the financial crisis has led tax revenues to be much 
weaker than projected. To mitigate this effect, governments have raised tax rates and relied 
on  one-off  revenues.  In  spite  of  these  efforts  total  revenues  as  a  share  of  GDP  have 
remained relatively flat (Figure 3). Second, the recession has led to higher expenditure on 
unemployment support and welfare spending. Between 2000 and 2010, social transfers as a 
share of GDP increased by 4.2% in Ireland, more than the euro area average of 1.8%. Third, 
governments  in  some  countries  have  been  faced  with  large  bills  for  rescuing  troubled 
financial institutions. In the euro area at end 2011, spending on banking support measures 
constituted 4.9% of total gross government liabilities outstanding, with impacts of more than 
6% of GDP recorded in Ireland, Germany, Netherlands and Belgium.3 In Ireland the gross 
debt-worsening impact of bank-related outlays over 2008 to 2011 amount to almost 47 billion 
euro  or  30%  of  GDP,  a  truly  staggering  number.  Of  course,  this  figure  could  have  been 
smaller  had  loss-sharing  with  bank  bondholders  been  greater.  While  burden  sharing  with 
subordinated  debt-holders  eventually  totalled  over  10%  of  GDP,  further  sharing  was 
prevented initially by the breadth of the original government guarantee and subsequently by 
the Programme agreement. 
The adverse effects of public debts 
3. 
Why are central banks so concerned about large public debts? There are several reasons. 
Debts and growth 
3.1 
First, large public debts tend to reduce economic growth, which in turn means lower future 
incomes and greater difficulties for governments to finance spending. There is a large body 
of evidence linking elevated debt levels to subsequent periods of low growth performance.4 
In  brief,  public  debt-to-GDP  ratios  exceeding  90%  of  GDP  appear  to  reduce  median  real 
economic growth by 1%.5 While seemingly small, over an extended period of time this effect 
has  a  dramatic  impact  on  income  levels,  and  therefore  on  tax  collections  and  on 
governments’ ability to finance their spending. 
Why  do  high  debts  reduce  growth?  As  debts  grow,  governments  face  increasing  interest 
burdens. To finance these, they may be forced to raise taxes to increasingly high levels that 
cause the economy to function less efficiently. 
Moreover, consumers may recognise that large debts imply higher future taxes and therefore 
cut spending in anticipation of these. Furthermore, historically, governments with large debts 
have  frequently  resorted  to  financial  repression,  that  is,  they  have  regulated  the  financial 
system in such a way as to artificially expand the demand for public debt. This reduces the 
interest rate at which debt is financed, sometimes to such an extent that real interest rates 
                                                
2   Disregarding the €5.8bn portion of the PCAR 2011 banking injection to AIB/EBS and ILP, the underlying deficit 
was –9.0% GDP. 
3   The largest amounts of general government liabilities outstanding at end 2011 relating to banking injections 
(as a percentage of GDP) were recorded in Ireland (30%), Germany (11.2%), Netherlands (7.4%), Belgium 
(6.6%). 
4  See Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), Reinhart and Rogoff (2012), Kumar and Woo (2010), Checherita and Rother 
(2010), Cecchetti et al. (2011) for a review of the evidence. 
5   See Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) and Cecchetti et al. (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
has fallen below zero.6 Of course, such regulations are a tax on the financial sector that to 
make  it  more  difficult  and  more  costly  for  other  borrowers,  in  particular  growing  firms,  to 
obtain credit. 
Furthermore, whenever debts are large, there is always a risk that if some adverse economic 
event occurred, the debts would become too large, forcing governments to restructure them. 
As  a  consequence  of  the  resulting  credit  risk,  the  interest  rate  on  public  debt  tends  to 
increase  as  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  rises.  This  is  problematic  because  yields  on  treasury 
bonds frequently serve  as a floor for the interest rates at which firms and households can 
borrow. Large and growing government debts therefore tend to raise the cost at which the 
private sector can finance itself, slowing growth. In the euro area this has led to a situation in 
which  firms  and  households  in  different  countries face sharply  divergent  lending  rates  and 
conditions, depending on the fiscal situation of the Sovereign, despite that fact that the ECB 
sets a single short-term interest rate for the entire monetary union. This is evident in Figure 4 
which shows that the increase in interest rates on new loans to households and businesses 
since  the  end  of  2009  has  been  greatest  in  the  peripheral  euro  area  countries  that  have 
experienced the greatest fiscal difficulties. 
Debts and inflation 
3.2 
A  further  reason  why  large  public  debts  are  worrying  is  their  tendency  to  end  in  high 
inflation.7 Historically, a lack of central bank independence has played a central role in that 
process. Governments with large deficits and debts in the past all too frequently managed to 
finance  them  by  borrowing  from  the  central  bank,  for  instance  by  the  central  bank 
participating directly in auctions of new government debt. While this mechanism has played a 
crucial  role  in  episodes  of  hyperinflation,  it  was  also  operative  in  the  moderate  inflation 
experienced in some European countries as late as in the 1970s and 1980s. 
But in modern economies there are a number of devices that make inflationary finance of this 
form  impossible.  Legal  independence  and  a  prohibition  on  government  borrowing  from 
central banks are of crucial importance. Furthermore, central banks operate with high levels 
of  transparency  that  make  it  difficult  for  them  to  finance  governments  without  the  public 
becoming aware of this. Any attempt to extend credit directly to governments will therefore 
stoke  inflation  expectations,  causing  long  interest  rates  to  rise.  In  turn,  this  slows  the 
economy, which offsets any benefit that would accrue to governments from such operations. 
Central  bank  independence  and  high  levels  of  transparency  thus  serve  as  safeguards 
against the inflationary booms triggered by weak government finances. 
Transparency  helps  in  another  way.  Many  central  banks  communicate  to  the  public  what 
level  of  inflation  they  are  aiming  for.  For  instance,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Bank  of 
England have adopted inflation targeting and announced what their targets for inflation are. 
Similarly, the ECB and the Swiss National Bank have announced that price stability  is the 
overriding target for monetary policy and defined it numerically.8 Since the inflation objective 
is  public  knowledge,  public  scrutiny  will  force  central  banks  to  tighten  monetary  policy  if 
inflation rises above target for a protracted period. 
                                                
6   Periods  of  negative  interest  rates  were  prevalent  between  1945  and  1980,  and  more  recently  since  2008. 
Reinhart and Sbrancia (2011) find that real interest rates were negative roughly half of the time between 1945 
and 1980. Annual liquidation of debt via negative real interest rates amounted to 3-4% of GDP per annum in 
the US and the UK. 
7   There is a very long literature that establishes the close link between public deficits and inflation, see Sargent 
and Wallace (1981), Sims (1994), Woodford (1994, 2001), and Catao and Teronnes (2003). For a discussion 
of fiscal deficits and hyperinflation, see Sargent (1982) and Dornbusch and Fischer (1986). 
8   The ECB’s objective for inflation is “below but close to two per cent.” Inflation surveys suggest that financial 
market participants believe that the ECB aims for inflation of about 1.7 to 1.9 % per annum. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
To my mind, the risk with high levels of public debt is not that average inflation rates will rise, 
but rather that central banks’ control of inflation will worsen. It is easy to see why. If inflation 
rises,  the  central  bank  must  determine  whether  the  increase  is  likely  to  be  lasting  or 
temporary.9 In the latter case, there is no need to increase interest rates since inflation will 
return to the previous level on its own. In practice, of course, it is difficult to know whether 
increases in inflation are permanent or transitory, so policy makers have to judge whether to 
raise interest rates immediately, or to wait and see how the situation evolves. If public debts 
are large, monetary policy makers may worry that higher interest rates will worsen the fiscal 
situation by increasing the cost of debt service and by slowing the economy and therefore 
dampening tax revenues. As a result, there is a risk that they may delay tightening policy in 
response to rising inflation, resulting in reduced inflation control and an amplification of the 
business  cycle.  It  is  therefore  essential  that  public  debts  are  reduced  from  the  very  high 
levels they have reached in many countries. 
3.3  Some current problems 
The current difficulties experienced in the euro area illustrate two further reasons why large 
fiscal  imbalances  are  problematic  for  monetary  policy.  The  financial  crisis  has  led  real 
economic activity to weaken severely. At the same time, the rapid increase in public debts 
and  the  attendant  difficulties  in  financing  them  have  forced  governments  in  a  number  of 
countries  to  tighten  fiscal  policy  sharply  to  improve  debt  trajectories,  further  weakening 
economic activity.10 To offset the fall in demand, interest rates have been cut to almost zero 
in  several  countries.  Nevertheless,  growth  has  not  returned  and  some  central  banks  have 
therefore adopted unconventional monetary policy measures, whose effectiveness is not yet 
fully established, to support economic activity.11 Needless to say, it would have been natural 
to use fiscal policy to expand economic activity but that is impossible for the simple reason 
that the debts are already too large. 
A further problem is when government debt becomes so large as to trigger perceptions of 
credit risk, the functioning of financial markets deteriorates. Large government debts worsen 
the  credit  worthiness  of  banks  and  other  holders  of  government  debt.  This  causes  money 
markets  to  function  poorly,  in  particular  since  government  debt  serves  as  collateral  for 
secured  lending.  Furthermore,  it  raises  interest  rates  in  the  economy  more  broadly  and 
raises  banks’ funding  costs.  Finally,  it  reduces  the  collateral  base  of  banks,  which  impairs 
banks’ access to central bank funding. These problems are evident in the euro area, where 
government debt levels and interest rates vary sharply between countries. The net effect is a 
weakening  of  the transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  the  creation  of asymmetries  across 
the monetary union. For this reason the ECB’s Governing Council adopted on September 6 a 
programme of Outright Monetary Transactions to mitigate these adverse effects.12 
Institutional limits debts and deficits 
4. 
Since large public debts have highly adverse consequences for the economy, a number of 
institutional arrangements have been adopted to limit debt accumulation in the euro area and 
the European Union more broadly. It is useful to distinguish between rules on deficits and 
                                                
9   Temporary  increases  in  inflation  can  arise  from  a  wide  variety  of  price  level  shocks  such  as  increases  in 
energy prices or exchange rate changes. 
10   While tighter fiscal policy can in theory be stimulatory, in practice it more likely that it will be contractionary. 
See  the  literature  on  “expansionary  fiscal  contractions”,  e.g.,  Alesina  and  Perotti  (1995),  and  Giavazzi  and 
Pagano (1990). 
11   Such  measures  include  an  increase  in  the  size,  frequency  and  maturity  of  liquidity  providing  operations.  A 
number of central banks have also purchased financial instruments issued by the public or private sector. 
12   http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120906_1.en.html. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
debts and rules embedded in the institutional arrangements underpinning the ECB that are 
intended to make it impossible for governments to finance themselves by way of privileged 
access to central bank funding. 
Rules on debts and deficits 
4.1 
Since the establishment of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, the EU has introduced a number of 
fiscal rules. In 1997, the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) introduced rules intended to ensure 
fiscal discipline. These rules, which essentially limited fiscal deficits to 3% of GDP and public 
debts to 60% of GDP, however, suffered from poor compliance in the EU, even before the 
crisis took hold (Figure 5). The onset of the present fiscal crisis has exposed a number of 
weaknesses in the SGP framework including the lack of a definition of a “satisfactory pace” 
of  debt  reduction,  poor  enforcement  mechanisms  and  the  fact  that  the  assessment  of 
compliance was often based on overly optimistic underlying budgetary forecasts. 
In  response  to  these  deficiencies,  a  much  strengthened  SGP,  known  as  the  Six  Pack, 
entered into force in November 2011, entailing a stronger preventative arm and with stronger 
corrective action requirements. The Six Pack ensures stricter application of the fiscal rules by 
defining  quantitatively  what  constitutes  a  “significant  deviation”  from  the  Medium  Term 
Objective (MTO). The MTO is the required structural balance which will ensure sustainability 
of the public finances, set out in the SGP. Furthermore, an Excessive Deficit Procedure can 
now be launched  when a country’s debt is in excess of 60% of GDP, and not only on the 
basis  of  a  deficit  exceeding  3%  of  GDP,  as  was  previously  the  case.  Finally,  financial 
sanctions  for  euro  area  members  can  now  be  imposed  at  an  earlier  stage  and  in  a 
proportionate and graduated manner. Furthermore, the timely imposition of such sanctions is 
now more likely since the voting rules have been changed. 
The most recent articulation of EU fiscal rules is the Fiscal Compact (or Treaty on Stability, 
Governance and Co-ordination, TSGC), which requires countries to ensure convergence with 
their  respective  MTOs.  It  introduces  a  more  explicit  Budget  Rule,  whereby  all  States  must 
strive for budgetary balance and achieve a structural deficit of no more than –0.5% of GDP.13 
In addition, Member States are henceforth required to reduce the excess of their debt over 
60% of GDP by an average of 1/20th per annum. Importantly, the Fiscal Compact requires 
that  both  budget rules must  be  implemented  in  national  law,  preferably  in  the  constitution, 
that  compliance  is  monitored  by  independent  institutions  and  that  an  automatic  correction 
mechanism is put in place to correct divergences from these rules. 
It is interesting to note in passing that many of these developments in the fiscal sphere – the 
introduction of numerical objectives for deficits and debt, written down in law, and with some 
involvement of independent monitors – that limit governments’ ability to run large deficits are 
similar to changes introduced to monetary policy frameworks in recent years. Thus, by now it 
is common for the legal acts that govern central banks to indicate that price stability is the 
overriding  objective  for  monetary  policy  and  to  define  it  in  numerical  terms.  Moreover, 
through the adoption of high levels of transparency, central banks have made it easier for 
outside observers to monitor their conduct of policy. 
Regulations concerning the ECB 
4.2 
The  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  contains  two  Articles  intended  to 
promote monetary stability. This is achieved by removing any risk of pressure from national 
governments  to  force  central  banks  to  finance  fiscal  imbalances.  Specifically,  Article  123 
prohibits  “overdraft  facilities  or  any  other  type  of  credit  facility  with  the  European  Central 
Bank or with the central banks of the Member States … in favour of … central governments, 
regional,  local  or  other  public  authorities”  and  “the  purchase  directly  from  them  by  the 
                                                
13   This ceiling excludes one-off measures and cyclical effects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
European Central Bank or national central banks of debt instruments.” Furthermore, Article 
124  prohibits  any  measure,  not  based  on  prudential  considerations,  that  grants  central 
governments,  regional,  local  or  other  public  authorities  privileged  access  to  financial 
institutions. 
However, these articles do not prohibit the ECB from operating in financial markets by buying 
or selling marketable instruments, including government debt.14 That is of course natural. In 
pursuing  their  statutory  objectives  central  banks  operate  in  a  range  of  financial  markets, 
particularly  in  government  debt  markets,  since  these  are  large  and  liquid  and  since 
government  debt  has  historically  been  seen  as  risk  free.  Such  operations  of  course  also 
augment  the  demand  for  public  debt,  thereby  reducing  the  interest  rate  on  the  debt  and 
making it easier for governments to finance themselves. But this effect is entirely incidental to 
monetary policy. 
Reducing public debts 
5. 
Public debts are currently very large in many countries and must be reduced. The European 
Union has adopted a number of measures that restrict governments’ ability to run deficits and 
require  many  of  them  to  reduce  public  debt.  But  how  will  these  debts  be  reduced?  What 
mechanism should be relied on? 
As a preliminary, it is useful to recall that there are many historical examples of episodes in 
which public debts have risen to very high levels. Both after World War I and World War II 
public debts reached levels as high or even higher than observed in some countries today. 
However, these debts were, in many cases, soon reduced sharply. 
To see how public debts can be reduced, note that the growth of the debt-to-nominal GDP 
ratio depends on three factors. 
1. 
2. 
Interest rates: the higher the interest rate, the greater the cost of debt service. 
Real GDP growth and inflation: the faster growth of real GDP and the higher the rate 
of inflation, the greater the growth in nominal GDP and thus tax revenues. 
Primary (or non-interest) budget deficit: the larger the deficit, the greater the rate of 
growth of the debt.15 
3. 
One way to reduce debts is thus to seek to reduce the interest rate on the debt below the 
market  level  through  regulation.  For  instance,  interest  rate  ceilings  or  requirements  that 
increase  banks’  and  other  financial  institutions’  demand  for  public  debt  can  be  used  to 
reduce the interest rate burden. Financial repression of this form was common after World 
War 2 and led to rapid contractions in debt/GDP ratios. 
Of course, such regulations merely amount to taxation of the holders of public debt. While it 
may facilitate debt reduction, it will lead financial markets to worry that it may happen again, 
and therefore cause them to demand higher interest rates to purchase government debt in 
the future. Thus, reducing the debt in this way may not be desirable. In any case, it presumes 
a regulatory environment that is very different from that of today. I thus don’t think that it will 
play much of a role in reducing the current high debt levels. 
A second strategy is to seek to increase the growth rate of nominal GDP. This mechanism 
also  played  an  important  role  in  debt  reduction  after  World  War  2,  as  growth  picked  up 
sharply in the 1950s and 1960s and inflation was high during the Korean war boom in the 
                                                
14   See  Article  18  of  the  Statute  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  and  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Protocol 4 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union). 
15   Debts  may  change  even  if  the  deficit  is  zero,  e.g.,  because  of  a  transfer  of  local  government  debt  to  the 
national government or a restructuring of the public debt. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
early 1950s. While I expect many governments to adopt structural reforms that increase real 
GDP  growth  in  the  coming  decade,  large  debts tend  to  reduce  growth.  It  therefore  seems 
unlikely that growth on its own can be relied on to restore fiscal stability. 
Higher inflation could in theory also reduce debts. However, the adverse consequences for 
economic  performance  of  high  and  variable  inflation  are  now  better  known  than  during 
previous periods of high debt. Moreover, inflation is a tax. While parliaments have the power 
to introduce taxes, central banks should not. Relying on inflation for debt reduction is difficult 
in a democratic society. Moreover, in the euro area and elsewhere, monetary policy  is set 
with  the  objective  of  stabilising  inflation  at  low  levels  and  it  would  be  very  undesirable  to 
change that objective. 
Overall, I therefore do not think that economies can grow or inflate away the debt with the 
ease to which they may have done so in the past. This leaves the third mechanism, primary 
surpluses,  as  the  only  way  in  which  debts  can  be  reduced.  Primary  surpluses  can  be 
achieved either by reducing spending or by raising taxes. While economic research suggests 
that fiscal stabilisation efforts that rely on expenditure cuts are more likely to be successful 
than those that rely on revenue increases16, precisely how the necessary budget surpluses 
are  achieved  is  entirely  a  matter  for  elected  parliaments  to  decide  since  fiscal  policy  has 
large  redistributional  effects.  My  point  here  is  simply  that  debts  must  be  reduced  through 
budgetary surpluses since the other avenues for debt reduction are closed. 
Of  course,  the  29  June  EU  Summit  opened  another  possible  avenue  for  debt  reduction 
through the use of the ESM to directly recapitalise banks.17 A decision to recapitalise banks 
directly, as opposed to via the sovereign as had previously been the favoured method, would 
reduce  the  burden  on  already  stressed  sovereigns  and  avoid  the  reinforcement  of  the 
sovereign-bank link that has been evident in a number of countries. 
Will  monetary  policy  hinder  or  facilitate  governments’  efforts  to  reduce  debts?  While 
monetary policy is best set independently, I believe that a monetary policy that is focussed 
on price stability will make it easier for governments to reduce debt. The reason is simple. It 
seems  unavoidable  that  tighter  fiscal  policy  will  restrict  overall  demand  for  goods  and 
services  in  the  economy.  In  turn  this  will  tend  to  reduce  inflation  pressures.  To  prevent 
inflation  from  falling  too  low,  it  seems  likely  that  many  central  banks  will  maintain  interest 
rates  at  low  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  which  will  support  growth  and  debt 
reduction. 
Conclusions 
6. 
Public debt in a number of countries has risen sharply during the financial crisis and has now 
reached very high levels. As a consequence, growth is likely to be  lower than it otherwise 
would have been, in turn making it more difficult to reduce debt. But letting debts remain at 
this high level  is not an option. While the exact path of fiscal adjustment in the immediate 
future will  vary in light of country-specific circumstances, and in the case of Ireland will be 
agreed with the Troika, not reducing debt levels will have a detrimental effect on income and 
that effect will grow over time. It may also increase the risk of a deterioration of central banks’ 
inflation control, and harm the functioning of financial markets. 
Unfortunately, it seems unlikely that the current very high levels of public debts will melt away 
through low interest rates, rapid growth or inflation. Regardless of any relief that a movement 
towards  banking  union  and  any  potential  benefits  which  direct  ESM  bank  recapitalisation 
could deliver, countries need to restore more stable fiscal balances. In place of low interest 
                                                
16   See Blochliger, Song and Sutherland (2012) and Alesina and Ardagna (2009) for further discussion. 
17   http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/131359.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
rates, high growth or inflation, debts will need to be reduced by running fiscal surpluses. It 
will no doubt be difficult to achieve to do so, but there is no other option. Thank you. 
References 
Alesina, A. and S. Ardagna (2009) “Large changes in Fiscal policy: taxes versus spending,” 
NBER working paper No 15438. 
Alesina,  A.  and  R.  Perotti  (1995),  “Fiscal  Expansions  and  Fiscal  Adjustments  in  OECD 
countries,” NBER working paper 5214. 
Abbas, S. M. A, N. Belhocine, A. El-Ganainy and M. Horton (2011), “Historical Patterns of 
Public Debt – Evidence from a New Database,” IMF Economic Review, 59(4) 717–742. 
Blochliger,  H.  D.H.  Song  and  D.  Sutherland  (2012)  “Fiscal  consolidation  Part  IV:  Case 
studies of large fiscal consolidation episodes,” OECD Economic Department Working Paper 
No. 434. 
Cecchetti,  S.  M.  Monanty  and  F.  Zampoli  (2011),  “The  real  effects  of  debt,”  BIS  Working 
Paper No. 352. 
Checherita, C. and P. Rother (2010), “The impact of high and growing government debt on 
economic  growth:  An  empirical  investigation  for  the  euro  area,”  ECB  working  paper 
No. 1237. 
Catao,  L.  and  M.  E.  Toronnes  (2003),  “Fiscal  deficits  and  inflation,”  IMF  working  paper 
WP/03/65. 
Dornbusch,  R.  and  S.  Fischer  (1986),  “Stopping  hyperinflation  past  and  present,” 
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, January, 1–47. 
Giavazzi,  F.  and  M.  Pagano  (1990),  “Can  severe  fiscal  consolidations  be  expansionary? 
Tales of two small European countries,” NBER Macro Annual, Vol 5. 
Kumar, M. S. and J. Woo (2010), “Public debt and growth,” IMF working paper 10/174. 
McKinnon,  R.  (1973),  “Money  and  Capital  in  Economic  Development,”  Washington  DC, 
Brookings Institute. 
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2010), “Debt and growth revisited,” VOX EU. 
Reinhart, C. V. Reinhart and K. Rogoff (2012), “Debt overhangs; Past and present,” NBER 
Working Paper No. 18015. 
Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  M.  B.  Sbrancia  (2011),  “The  liquidation  of  government  debt,”  NBER 
working paper 16893. 
Sargent,  T.  J.  (1982),  “The  ends  of  four  big  inflations,”  In  Inflation;  Causes  and  Effects, 
ed. R. E. Hall, University of Chicago Press. 
Sargent,  T.  and  N.  Wallace  (1981),  “Some  unpleasant  monetarist  arithmetic,”  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 5 No. 3 Fall 1981. 
Sims, C. A. (1994), “A simple model for the study of the determination of the price level and 
the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy,” Economic Theory, Vol 4, 381–99. 
Woodford, M. (1994), “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-advance 
Economy,” Economic Theory 4, 345–389. 
Woodford, M. (2001), “Fiscal Requirements of Price Stability,” Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, 33 669–728. 
 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
