John C Williams: The economic outlook and monetary policy 
Presentation  by  Mr  John  C  Williams,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  to  the  CFA  Hawaii  Seventh  Annual  Economic  Forecast 
Dinner, Honolulu, 1 March 2012. 
 I would like to thank John Fernald, Rob Valletta, and Sam Zuckerman for assistance in the preparation of these 
remarks. 
The economic outlook and monetary policy 
Thank you. It’s a pleasure to participate in this event and to enjoy the beauty and hospitality 
of the wonderful state of Hawaii. Sadly, this is my first visit here in 25 years. In fact, the last 
time I was here was back when I worked for a small business in the San Francisco Bay Area 
after I graduated from college. The business owner sent me on an all-expenses-paid, week-
long vacation as a reward for hard work. Throughout my career at the Federal Reserve, I’ve 
tried  to  convince  my  bosses  of  the  productivity-enhancing  benefits  of  such  an  enlightened 
management  practice.  Unfortunately,  I  never  succeeded.  Now,  as  President  of  the 
San Francisco Fed, it is my pleasant duty to visit all nine states in the 12th Federal Reserve 
District.  I  plan  to  be  diligent  in  fulfilling  that  duty.  So,  I  assure  you,  it  won’t  be  another 
25 years till I’m back. 
In my remarks this evening, I’m going to talk about the current state of the economy, where 
it’s headed, and what the Federal Reserve is doing to boost growth while keeping inflation 
low.  My  remarks  represent  my  own  views  and  not  those of  others  in  the  Federal  Reserve 
System. 
It’s been over two-and-a-half years since the end of the worst recession of the post-World 
War II period. The economy is growing, and the recent economic news has been increasingly 
positive.  This  is  very  welcome  progress,  but  it’s  brought  us  only  part  of  the  way  back. 
Unemployment  remains  a  huge  problem,  and  that  means  real  hardship  for  millions  of 
Americans. 
The severe recession and subdued recovery have prompted the Fed to carry out a series of 
extraordinary policy actions to restore the economy to health. Most notably, we’ve kept our 
benchmark  short-term  interest  rate  near  zero  for  over  three  years.  This  aggressive  Fed 
response is an important reason why the economy has moved to more solid ground. But, as 
I’ll  explain,  the  Fed’s  job  is  not  over  yet.  Far  from  it.  Congress  has  assigned  the  Fed  two 
goals: maximum employment and stable prices. We have lots of work to do before we can 
say we’ve met those goals. Looking at past deep recessions, you would have expected the 
economy  to  be  doing  much  better  than  it  is  by  now.  Why  has  this  recovery  been  so 
lackluster? The reason has everything to do with what took place beforehand. We’ve had a 
wild ride – first a housing boom of epic proportions, then a housing bust, a near-collapse of 
the financial system, and a terrible recession. 
Let’s  go  back  to  2006,  right  before  the  recession  hit.  That  marked  the  peak  of  an 
unprecedented run-up in U.S. home prices. But the bubble burst. Home prices plunged by 
over 30 percent nationwide, and even more in states such as Nevada, Arizona, and Florida. 
As the housing market went into a tailspin, about a quarter of borrowers found themselves 
owing more than their homes were worth. Delinquencies and foreclosures surged. 
With millions of mortgages going sour, financial institutions that had placed big bets on home 
loans  posted  massive  losses.  It  was  like  an  epidemic.  No  one  knew  which  financial 
institutions were infected with toxic assets. Everyone was suspect. Financial institutions were 
afraid to lend money to anybody, including each other. That choked off the flow of funds that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial  institutions  and  businesses  depend  on  for  their  day-to-day  operations.  The  result 
was a worldwide financial crisis. 
If left unchecked, this kind of financial panic could have ushered in an economic cataclysm 
like the Great Depression, when 25 percent of the workforce was out of work. Why didn’t we 
plunge into the abyss? A key reason was that the Federal Reserve did what it was supposed 
to  do.  The  Fed  is  the  nation’s  government-chartered  central  bank.  And  one  of  the  most 
important duties of a central bank is to safeguard the financial system. In a crisis, that means 
acting  as  lender  of  last  resort,  supplying  emergency  loans  to  financial  institutions  when 
normal  funding  isn’t  available.  The  U.S.  Treasury  Department  and  other  federal  agencies 
were also doing all they could to shore up the financial system. 
Now, I know that this financial support to big banks and Wall Street firms made many people 
irate, especially when so many Americans were losing their jobs or their homes. We should 
remember,  though,  that  ordinary  people  suffer  terribly  when  the  financial  system  breaks 
down. The ultimate goal of our programs was to avert a major depression and much higher 
unemployment. 
Because of these programs, we were able to avoid a meltdown of the financial system and 
head off a depression. But we couldn’t prevent a terrible recession. The shock waves from 
the burst housing bubble and the financial crisis were simply too great. 
As  it  happens,  it’s  normal  that  severe  recessions  and  sluggish  recoveries  follow  financial 
crises.1 Research at the San Francisco Fed and other places shows that downturns following 
financial crises are much more severe when the preceding expansions had unusually rapid 
growth of credit and leverage.2 When the credit pendulum swings, it takes many years for 
household and business spending to return to normal. And, in fact, there was extraordinary 
credit  growth  before  the  recession.  Between  1999  and  2006,  housing  debt  more  than 
doubled.3  
So  it’s  not  so  surprising  that  we  got  an  anemic  rebound.  The  financial  crisis  unleashed 
powerful forces that have damped spending and sapped the recovery of its vigor. I’ll mention 
three. First, it destroyed a huge amount of household wealth. Second, it flattened the housing 
market. Third, it made it hard for businesses and households to get credit. Let’s look at each 
of these. 
First,  when  house  prices  collapsed,  the  wealth  of  American  households  plunged  by  about 
six-and-a-half  trillion  dollars.  That  equals  more  than  40  percent  of  the  total  size  of  the 
U.S. economy. Many people went from feeling rich to feeling poor, with neither the means 
nor the will to spend. Instead, they became intent on repairing their finances by increasing 
their saving and trimming their debt. In other words, they deleveraged. During the recession, 
the household saving rate climbed to about 6 percent of income from about 1 percent. It’s still 
about 4-1/2 percent. In the long run, higher saving is healthy. But, in the near term, it puts a 
brake on spending and slows growth. 
Second, the depressed housing market has been a drag on growth. Home construction plays 
an important role in the economy, of course. When you add in items that often go with a new 
home – things such as furniture, carpets, and appliances – you’re talking about a significant 
fraction of overall economic activity.4 Today, there are still millions of homes in foreclosure, 
and  millions  more  on  the  verge.  All  those  distressed  properties  are  acting  like  a  weight 
                                                 
1  Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). 
2  Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2011). 
3  Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2010). 
4  See, for example, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) and Feroli et al. (2012) for analysis of the effects of the housing 
crash on the economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
keeping home prices from rising. The result is that new home construction and sales are still 
near the lowest levels recorded since the early 1960s. 
Tight credit is a third powerful force holding back the recovery. Lenders who were too quick 
with a loan in 2006 have turned very cautious. Consumers who lack gold-plated credit scores 
and cash for a hefty down payment find it tough to get a mortgage. That limits home sales 
and refinancing. Fortunately, there are signs that credit conditions are easing a bit. Already, 
corporations that can sell securities have great access to capital. 
These  three  forces  –  household  finances,  housing,  and  credit  –  are  likely  to  hold  down 
spending growth for some time. But let me emphasize, though – overall, things are getting 
better. You can sense greater optimism out there – albeit cautious optimism. 
Let’s look then at the positive side of the ledger. Little by little, households are repairing their 
finances.  Businesses  are  gradually  increasing  production  and  hiring.  The  housing  sector 
appears  to  have  stabilized  and  is  showing  some  signs  of  life.  Consumer  spending,  which 
represents close to 70 percent of all economic activity, hasn’t been growing fast, but it’s been 
growing steadily. More motor vehicles were sold in January than in any month in nearly four 
years. The growth in consumer spending is also evident here in Hawaii. Last year was the 
best for tourist visits since 2007. 
Exports  have  consistently  been  a  bright  spot  for  the  economy  over  the  past  few  years. 
Overseas demand for American products continues to grow. This increase has been rapid to 
our North American trading partners, and also to emerging economies of East Asia, including 
China.  Indeed,  exports  are  one  reason  U.S.  manufacturers  have  been  creating  jobs  at  a 
pace not seen since the 1990s. 
Gross domestic product, or GDP, measures the nation’s total output of goods and services. 
After adjusting for inflation, GDP grew at less than a 1 percent annual rate in the first half of 
2011,  dragged  down  by  temporary  factors,  including  the  surge  in  oil  prices,  and  the 
Japanese  tsunami.  Growth  picked  up  to  about  2¼  percent  in  the  second  half  of  2011  as 
those  temporary  factors  receded.  My  forecast  calls  for  GDP  to  rise  about  2¼  percent  this 
year and 2¾ percent in 2013. That’s not rip-roaring by any means. But it’s an improvement. 
I’m especially encouraged by the good news from the job market. In the past four months, 
the unemployment rate has fallen about three-quarters of a percentage point. It’s now at its 
lowest  level  in  nearly  three  years.  All  the  same,  the  kind  of  moderate  economic  growth  I 
forecast  won’t  keep  bringing  the  unemployment  rate  down  quickly.  That  rate  is  currently 
8.3 percent. I expect it to remain over 8 percent into next year and still be well over 7 percent 
for several years to come. If my forecast is correct, the unemployment rate will have stayed 
at or above 8 percent for more than four years. Such a long period of unemployment above 
8 percent has not happened in over 70 years. 
For its part, inflation has been relatively contained. The prices of oil and other commodities 
did surge early last year in the face of strong global demand. This caused the overall inflation 
rate  to  rise  above  our  2  percent  target.  Oil  prices  have  run  up  again  recently,  and  have 
returned  to  their  peak  levels  from  last  spring.  As  far  as  other  commodity  prices  are 
concerned,  we  haven’t  seen  a  similar  surge.  With  the  economy  still  underperforming  and 
wage  growth  modest,  inflation  should  remain  subdued.  I  expect  inflation  to  be  about 
1¾ percent this year and to be about 1½ percent next  year, down from about 2¾ percent 
in 2011. 
There’s a risk the economy could do worse than this moderate forecast. The main threat is 
the  debt  crisis  in  Europe.  The  latest  news  from  that  continent  is  somewhat  reassuring, 
although more severe turmoil is still possible. Once again, European leaders have found a 
short-term fix to Greece’s problems. Hopefully, that will prevent the situation from spinning 
out of control and igniting a wider financial crisis in Europe. 
In  addition  to  the  actions  of  European  political  leaders,  central  banks  have  been  actively 
supplying  liquidity  to  the  European  banking  system.  The  Fed  set  up  temporary  currency 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
swap lines with several foreign central banks last November. These lines allow those central 
banks to borrow dollars and, in turn, lend those dollars to banks in their countries. In addition, 
the European Central Bank has provided hundreds of billions of euros in three-year loans to 
European banks. These actions have defused concerns about the ability of European banks 
to renew credit when their debts come due. In this way, Europe has avoided what could have 
been a massive credit crunch as banks pulled back lending sharply. I don’t need to remind 
you that, in today’s interconnected world, financial turmoil in Europe would definitely hurt our 
economy as well. 
Even  if  the  European  crisis  doesn’t  flare  up  again,  growth  is  slowing  in  many  parts  of  the 
world. Many European countries already appear to be in recession, and there is a danger 
that this situation could worsen significantly as governments put in place austerity measures. 
Turning to Asia, growth in China has also slowed as that country has tightened monetary and 
credit policies to reduce inflation. Indeed, the list of countries that are still experiencing solid 
growth  is  getting  shorter  all  the  time.  If  China’s  economy  has  a  hard  landing,  there  really 
aren’t many sources of strength left in the global economy. 
Let  me  move  now  to  what  this  all  means  for  Fed  policy.  As  I  noted  earlier,  our  statutory 
mandate  is  to  achieve  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.5  We  are  far  short  of 
maximum employment. And I expect inflation to fall this year below the 2 percent level that 
we view as consistent with our mandate. This is clearly a situation in which we have to keep 
applying monetary policy stimulus vigorously. 
The Fed’s monetary policy body is called the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. As 
you  know,  the  Fed  influences  the  economy  through  its  ability  to  affect  interest  rates.  In 
December  2008,  when  the  recession  was  hitting  with  full  force,  the  FOMC  lowered  the 
federal funds rate, the rate banks pay to borrow from each other on overnight loans, close to 
zero.  It’s  been  there  ever  since.  Given  the  weakness  in  the  economy,  standard  monetary 
policy  guidelines  indicate  that  the  federal  funds  rate  should  have  gone  deep  into  negative 
territory. But, of course, it’s not possible for interest rates to go much below zero. 
So  the  Fed  has  had  to  look  for  alternative  ways  to  stimulate  the  economy.  For  example, 
we’ve purchased over one-and-three-quarters trillion dollars of longer-term securities issued 
by the U.S. government and mortgage agencies. This raises the prices on these securities, 
which lowers their yields. And lower yields on longer-term Treasury securities tend to push 
down other longer-term interest rates. That reduces the cost of borrowing across the board, 
from  mortgages,  to  business  loans,  to  corporate  debt.  Our  securities  purchases  are  an 
important reason why longer-term interest rates are at or near post-World War II lows. 
In  addition,  we’ve  publicly  announced  that  we  expect  to  keep  the  federal  funds  rate 
exceptionally  low  at  least  through  late  2014.  This  guidance  tells  investors  that  short-term 
interest rates are likely to stay low for a long time, which then gets passed through to longer-
term rates. Of course, our statements are not an absolute commitment to keep rates near 
zero. It’s simply the FOMC’s current judgment about the best future course of policy. If the 
economic outlook changes, then the guidance could change too. 
Let  me  emphasize  that  the  unusually  stimulatory  monetary  policy  now  in  place  won’t  last 
forever. Eventually we will cut back the size of our securities holdings and raise our unusually 
low interest rate target. We’ve thought hard and communicated frequently about how to exit 
from  these  special  conditions.6  The  key  point  is  that  the  economy  currently  needs  an 
                                                 
5  See Williams (2012) for a discussion of the Fed’s mandate and the implications for the conduct of monetary 
policy. 
6  See  the  discussion  of  exit  strategy  in  the  minutes  for  the  June  2011  FOMC  meeting  (Board  of  Governors 
2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
extraordinarily  supportive  policy.  But  we’ll  reverse  course when  the  time  comes  to  remove 
this support. 
We’ve  also  taken  two  steps  to  improve  our  communication  of  the  Fed’s  monetary  policy 
strategy and plans. First, we released a statement of our longer-run goals and strategies – 
essentially,  a  declaration  of  our  monetary  policy  principles.7  That  statement  noted  that  we 
view a 2 percent inflation rate as most consistent with our mandates. It also emphasized that 
we will continue to balance our goals of maximum employment and price stability in making 
policy. 
Second, we now regularly report our views about the probable course of short-term interest 
rates  over  the  next  few  years.  Under  current  economic  circumstances,  most  Fed 
policymakers judge that near-zero short-term interest rates will be appropriate well into 2014. 
In this way, our interest rate forecasts reinforce our public guidance. Releasing the views of 
policymakers  in  this  fashion  should  further  reduce  public  uncertainty  about  our  plans.  And 
that, in turn, improves the effectiveness of our policies. 
We at the Fed are broadening our commitment to openness and accountability. And we’re 
doing all we can to carry out the mission Congress gave us. The Fed’s powers are limited. 
Lower 
the  economy’s  problems.  But  monetary 
accommodation  is  indispensible.  The  economy  would  be  in  much  worse  shape  if  the  Fed 
weren’t acting so energetically. 
Looking ahead, we may need to do more if the recovery falters or if inflation stays well below 
2  percent.  If  the  economy  does  need  more  stimulus,  restarting  our  program  of  purchasing 
mortgage-backed securities would probably be the best course of action. The policy actions 
the  Fed  takes  will  depend  on  how  economic  conditions  develop.  If  circumstances  change, 
our  policies  will  adapt.  No  matter  the  circumstances,  I  assure  you  that  we  at  the  Fed  are 
doing everything we can to achieve the goals of maximum employment and stable prices. 
Thank you very much.  
interest  rates  alone  can’t 
fix  all 
References 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  2011.  “Minutes  of  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee”, June 21–22. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012. “Press Release”, January 25. 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2010. “Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit”, 
August.  
Feroli,  Michael  E.,  Ethan  S.  Harris,  Amir  Sufi,  and  Kenneth  D.  West.  2012.  “Housing, 
Monetary Policy, and the Recovery”. Presentation to the 2012 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, 
New York, February 24.  
Jordà,  Òscar  ,  Moritz  Schularick,  and  Alan  M.  Taylor.  2011.  “When  Credit  Bites  Back: 
Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises”. NBER Working Paper 17621. 
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, 
and  the  Economic  Slump”.  Presentation  at  American  Economics  Association  meetings, 
Atlanta, GA, January 8, 2012.  
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries 
of Financial Folly. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
                                                 
7  For more information, see Board of Governors (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Williams,  John  C.  2012.  “The  Federal  Reserve’s  Mandate  and  Best  Practice  Monetary 
Policy”.  Presentation  to  the  Marian  Miner  Cook  Athenaeum,  Claremont  McKenna  College, 
February 13. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
