Josef Bonnici: Reflections on the financial and economic challenges in 
the euro area and beyond 
Address  by  Professor  Josef  Bonnici,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the 
FinanceMalta’s 5th Annual Conference “Malta’s financial services industry – sustaining the 
momentum”, Mdina, 18 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  euro  area continues  to face  a  number  of  unprecedented  challenges.  Bond  and  equity 
markets  have  been  highly  volatile  and  the  degree  of  uncertainty  in  financial  markets  has 
increased.  It  can  be  said  that  Member  States  have  largely  recognised  the  gravity  of  the 
situation and have already implemented or are in the process of implementing various major 
reforms.  These  are  generally  directed  at  fiscal  consolidation  and  the  enhancement  of 
competitiveness and growth, and include significant labour market reforms, as in Spain, and 
reform  of  the  public  administration,  as  in  Italy.  Ireland  and  Portugal  are  on  track  in  the 
implementation of their EU-IMF programmes. 
But the tensions in the debt markets are clearly not over yet. Despite the efforts being made 
by  policy  makers  across  the  European  Union,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  continues  and  its 
ramifications  are  still  uncertain.  The  recent  rise  in  Spanish  yields  and  the  turbulence  in 
Greece are evidence of this. 
The main  problem  is  that fiscal  consolidation  has  to  be  effected  at  a time  of  an  economic 
slowdown.  Recessionary  conditions  slow  down  GDP  growth  and  compound  the  difficulties 
that are encountered in the reduction of the fiscal deficit and debt.  
In  this  presentation  I  will  cover  various  dimensions  of  the  sovereign  debt  problem,  and 
conclude with some observations that are of particular relevance to Malta. 
The effectiveness of monetary policy 
In the wake of risk re-pricing by the markets, financial institutions have tended to unwind their 
holdings  of  public  and  private  sector  debt.  This  can  be  seen  in  Chart  1,  which  shows  the 
resulting reduction in the leverage of Euro area financial institutions.  
It is true that deleveraging reduces financial imbalances and corrects past excesses in the 
banks’ accumulation of assets. However, the process also slows down the return to normal 
macroeconomic growth. 
The assets-to-equity ratio in the euro area (shown as the blue line in Chart 1) stood at 14.9 in 
March  2012,  almost  three  percentage  points  below  its  peak  of  18  in  2008.  (By  way  of 
comparison, the same ratio for Malta’s domestic banks has been lower and more stable, as 
can  be  seen  from  the  red  line.  It  stood  at  10.1  in  March,  almost  unchanged  from  10.2  in 
2008. I will come back to the Maltese situation later.) 
The European Central Bank (ECB) has sought to avert a credit crunch and a bank funding 
crisis  via  a  number  of  measures,  including  the  two  3-year  Longer  Term  Refinancing 
Operations (LTRO) launched last December and February. These have been provided on a 
full allotment basis and at the average Marginal Refinancing Operations (MRO) rate over the 
three year term.  
These operations have helped to stabilise bank lending to the private sector as well as the 
banks’  holdings  of  government  securities.  However,  the  effectiveness  of  these  operations 
has been reduced, as banks have preferred to place a substantial part of the additional funds 
with the ECB’s deposit facility.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    
In fact, in Chart 2, the blue line shows the sharp increases in the volume of bank liquidity 
provided by the ECB through its longer term operations over the course of the crisis. The red 
line shows the increases in the volume of funds placed by the banks with the ECB deposit 
facility. The inflow of funds into the ECB’s deposit facility has neutralised a substantial part of 
the  added  liquidity.  This  reflects  a  persisting  lack  of  activity  in  the  interbank  market  and  a 
hesitation on the part of the banks to provide more credit to households and businesses. 
This accumulation of excess liquidity comes at a cost to the banks, currently amounting to 
0.75% – the difference between the 1% MRO rate charged by the ECB on the LTRO and the 
0.25% paid by the ECB at its deposit facility.  
In a similar manner Chart 3 shows the path followed by various monetary aggregates during 
the crisis. The monetary base – shown as the blue line – includes mainly bank deposits with 
the central bank. The base consists of those central bank liabilities that form the foundation 
for expansion of the money supply – M3, represented by the red line.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
The sharp rise in the monetary base reflects the scale of the injected liquidity. On the other 
hand, the banks’ tendency to hold on to their liquidity has resulted in a growth rate in bank 
loans  (and  investments)  that  is  considerably  slower  than  that  of  the  monetary  base.  The 
result is that the growth rates in bank loans (represented by the green line in the chart) as 
well as in M3 have been substantially slower than that in the monetary base.  
A  return  to  a  fully  functioning  monetary  transmission  process  will  increase  the  volume  of 
lending  that  would  support  the  resumption  of  economic  growth.  This,  however,  remains  a 
challenging task while tensions continue in the sovereign debt markets.  
Importance of a prudent fiscal policy 
The creation of the euro reduced the cost of borrowing, as credit spreads narrowed and the 
exchange  rate  risk  on  intra-euro  area  borrowing  was  eliminated.1  The  reduced  cost  of 
financing  public  as  well  as  private  debt  led  to  higher  government  debt  and  private  sector 
leverage. With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the first seven years of the euro would 
have  been  an  ideal  time  for  governments  to  engage  in  fiscal  consolidation.  Instead 
imbalances and vulnerabilities were further aggravated. 2  
In  some  Member  States,  institutional  characteristics  also  played  a  major  role.  Seeking  to 
explain the sources of the Greek crisis, my former Greek colleague at the European Court of 
Auditors, Ioannis Sarmas, has pointed to the lack of a culture of effectiveness that holds the 
Greek government accountable for its policies.3 He also refers to the absence of an effective 
internal control system in the Greek public sector, and to the lack of adequate powers in the 
hands of the auditing authorities that would permit them to focus more on the efficient use of 
public  funds.  While  the  auditing  process  scrutinises  compatibility  with  the  laws  and 
                                                
1   Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  “Eurozone,  European  crisis  and  policy  responses”,  Goldman  Sachs  Global  Macro 
Conference – Asia 2011, 22 February 2011. 
2   Ludger Schuknecht, Philippe Moutot, PhilippRother and Jürgen Stark “The Stability and Growth Pact, Crisis 
and Reform” ECB Occasional Paper Series, No. 129, September 2011. 
Ioannis Sarmas “The Greek financial crisis from an auditor’s point of view” Cour des comptes européenne, 
Journal  July-August  2011;  “The  game  between  sovereign  states  and  financial  markets”  Cour  des  comptes 
européenne Journal, December 2011. 
3  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
legislation,  it  pays  insufficient  attention  to  other  important  criteria  like  value-for-money  and 
effectiveness.  
Fiscal  consolidation  across  most  of  the  euro  area  carries 
the  risk  of  downward 
macroeconomic  adjustment.  In  today’s  circumstances,  there  is  the  danger  of  a  negative 
macroeconomic spiral. Weak economic growth leads to reduced government revenue that in 
turn raises the deficit and debt ratios, and therefore may require further budgetary tightening 
and austerity measures.  
The  higher  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio,  the  more  difficult  it  becomes  to  take  corrective  action, 
especially during periods of slow economic growth. And the higher the debt ratio, the greater 
the  risk  of  a  situation  where  the  debt  dynamics  become  unsustainable,  such  as  when  the 
growth rate of the economy falls short of the interest rate paid on the debt. 
At the same time, structural reforms are not easy or popular to implement, especially during 
a slowdown or a recession. Structural measures include those that address the relative size 
and effectiveness of the public sector and those that promote competition in resource as well 
as in product markets.  
It  takes  time  for  these  competitiveness-enhancing  measures  to  reap  the  so-called 
macroeconomic dividends – including more rapid economic growth and faster employment 
growth. As a result, the rapid correction of the excessive debt ratio, as demanded by financial 
investors,  often  requires  a  sharp  fiscal  correction  which  leads  to  a  slowdown  in  economic 
activity.  In  other  words,  the  distress  caused  by  austerity  measures  is  relatively  immediate, 
while the benefits need a longer period of time to materialize.  
One  has  to  recognise  that  in  the  current  circumstances,  the  pursuit  of  a  lower  deficit  by 
financially  stressed  countries  is  inevitable  and  brings  about  a  short  term  slowdown  in  the 
economy.  The  issue  that  arises  is  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  alleviate  the  negative 
effects  on  incomes  and  employment.  Some  of  the  impact  may  be  alleviated  through  a 
judicious mix of government spending and revenue options so as to reduce the depth and 
duration of the slowdown. For example, an increased recourse to EU cohesion and solidarity 
funds may help alleviate the structural adjustment necessary and make the economy of the 
programme countries more competitive at the same time. Given the extent of the downturn is 
some member states, this option is likely to require a strengthening of the EU budget which 
in turn needs to be financed. However, not all member states are in a stressed environment, 
and  it  may  be  possible  to  consider  other financing  options,  especially  where  bond  interest 
rates in some member states are rather low, even below the inflation rate. EU level solidarity 
and cohesion assistance may prove a crucial catalyst to the required structural changes. 
One has to also keep in mind that governments are increasingly accountable not only to their 
parliaments and electorates, but also to investors in the financial markets, and pressure from 
the  financial  markets  becomes  more  acute  when  a  country  is  in  financial  distress.4  In 
addition,  financial  markets  take  a  very  comprehensive  view  in  their  scrutiny  of  the 
sustainability of a country’s finances. Even compliance with the Maastricht criteria may not 
be enough as there could be other imbalances that would undermine market confidence.  
For example, in the case of Ireland prior to the financial crisis, the country was doing well 
according to the Maastricht criteria. Government finances were quite healthy, with low public 
debt and a low deficit to GDP ratio. The turning point came with the collapse of the housing 
market starting in 2007. A drop in banks’ share prices led to a deposit run on the banks. The 
scale of the problem snowballed after the Irish government guaranteed all the obligations of 
the largest banks. This transformed the house price crash into a sovereign debt crisis, with 
the evaporation of the markets’ confidence in Ireland’s ability to honour its obligations. Irish 
borrowing costs rose abruptly, requiring an EU/IMF bailout. 
                                                
4  
Ioannis Sarmas, ibid. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Strengthening governance 
As I have already mentioned, the ECB played an important role in the policy response to the 
crisis. In addition to the conventional interest rate tool, the ECB introduced a number of non-
standard measures (such as the three-year LTROs that I mentioned earlier, and a reduction 
in the required reserve ratio) to facilitate the transmission of monetary policy to the economy.  
The events of the last few years have provided important lessons for the construction of a 
whole new approach to European economic governance. The aim is to go beyond the short-
term responses, such as the Greek bailouts, and tackle the problem before the situation has 
become critical.  
To  provide  better  support  where  necessary,  the  European  Financial  Stability  Fund  will  be 
replaced by the European Stability Mechanism, which will be a permanent rescue fund with 
added firepower and a stronger mandate.  
In  the  medium  term,  it  is  also  important  to  set  up  governance  changes  that  first,  limit 
government deficits and debt, and second, protect national competitiveness.  
On the subject of fiscal consolidation, there is a broad recognition across the EU that fiscal 
governance  has  to  be  strengthened  and  that  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  should  be 
reinforced.  The  current  thinking  is  that,  to  avert  the  recurrence  of  the  crisis,  fiscal 
consolidation should be enshrined in the governance structure of every country. To this end, 
the well-known Fiscal Compact obliges all euro area countries to run a structurally balanced 
budget each year. Surveillance will be enhanced and the monitoring of economic policies will 
also be comprehensive. 
In  particular,  the  problem  of  sustainable  budget  planning  was  addressed  by  introducing  a 
country-specific medium-term budgetary objective, which involves a cap on growth of public 
expenditure that is in line with the medium-term rate of growth. The Fiscal Compact will also 
accelerate the excessive deficit procedure by introducing sanctions when the debt and deficit 
to GDP ratios are excessive.  
Concerning  the  second  issue  (the  enhancement  of  competitiveness),  an  excessive 
imbalances  procedure  seeks  to  identify  and  correct  macro-imbalances  and  shortfalls  in 
competitiveness. Preventive recommendations will be made to member countries at an early 
stage in the formation of imbalances.  
On  the  financial  stability  side,  European  authorities  have  strengthened  the  financial  sector 
surveillance framework. The European System of Financial Supervisors, which also includes 
the European Systemic Risk Board (the ESRB), is a new supervisory architecture requiring 
the National Supervisory Authorities to cooperate with the European Supervisory Authorities 
in the identification and analysis of systemic risks. The objective of the ESRB is to address 
one of the most important weaknesses identified during the financial crisis, as highlighted by 
the  de  Larosière  Report  –  the  lack  of  an  adequate  pan-European  monitoring,  assessment 
and mitigation of systemic risk.  
In  line  with  the  ESRB  recommendation  to  enhance  macro-prudential  governance  in  each 
Member  State,  in  the  case  of  Malta,  it  is  the  intention  to  replace  the  current  Standing 
Committee  by  a  joint  committee  on  financial  stability.  This  committee,  which  will  include 
representatives from the Central Bank of Malta and the Malta Financial Services Authority, 
would  be  mandated  to  monitor  and  assess  risks  to  financial  stability.  Its  objective  is  to 
formulate  policy  recommendations  to  the  Boards  of  the  two  institutions,  designed  to 
safeguard  financial  stability,  strengthen  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  minimise 
systemic risk. 
The  recently  announced  changes  to  the  Depositor  Compensation  scheme  are  a  welcome 
change and help increase the resilience of the domestic banking sector. They are also in line 
with the recommendations of the latest IMF report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Given the importance of addressing the risks stemming from systemically important financial 
institutions, it is necessary for regulators to reduce and if possible eliminate the prospect that 
a  systemically  important financial  institution  would find  itself  in  difficulties  in  the first  place. 
This  consideration  also  brings  up  the  need  of  supervising  better  shadow  banking,5  which 
consists of those parts of the financial system that are not visible to regulators and hence not 
under their direct control and supervision.6  
Basle III goes a significant way in narrowing the gaps in regulation that result from recourse 
to shadow banking.7 It does so by incorporating off-balance sheet exposures in the leverage 
ratio and by including in the liquidity, regulatory and supervisory standards a range of risks 
stemming from shadow banking. Thus, stronger banking regulation and supervision will go a 
long way towards containing the risks of the shadow banking sector. 
The situation in Malta 
I  will  now  take  a  closer  look  at  some  key  issues  relating  to  the  domestic  economy  and 
financial system, particularly the fiscal situation, international competitiveness and financial 
stability. 
The  outlook  for  the  fiscal  situation  calls  for  continued  vigilance  and  caution.  Official 
projections  of  the  deficit  ratio  for  2012  and  2013  have  been  revised  downward,  remaining 
below the Maastricht threshold of 3%. However debt forecasts have been generally revised 
moderately upward, to levels projected above the 70% level in 2012 and 2013.  
During  the  last  decade,  Malta’s  fiscal  deficit  ratio  followed  a  mostly  downward  path  from 
levels that exceeded the euro area, as shown in Chart 4. The decline was interrupted during 
two particular years – 2003 and 2008. Both were the result of one-off events.  
The budget deficit ratio has fallen each year from the high of 4.6% reached in 2008. One also 
notes  that  since  2009  the  deficit  ratio  for  Malta  has  been  below  the  euro  area’s  average, 
though  one  has  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  average  for  the  euro  area  has  been  heavily 
influenced by the high deficit levels in those Member States facing difficulties (Chart 4).  
On  the  other  hand,  official  forecasts  of  the  debt  ratio  have  been  revised  upward.  With  a 
government debt ratio that is expected to exceed 70% in 2012 and 2013, it has become even 
more important to bring this ratio down at a fast pace (Chart 5). A strong case can be made 
for  continued  caution  in  Malta’s  fiscal  policy  and  for  further  measures  that  would  help  to 
ensure the achievement of the government’s targets. 
The  recent  IMF  Article  IV  Report  for  2012  acknowledges  that  “Malta  has  taken  effective 
action to correct its excessive deficit, shoring up confidence in Malta’s public finances”, but 
also recommends a return to a fiscal balance in the medium term. One has to keep in mind 
that  low  deficit  and  debt  ratios  leave  more  room  for  the  application  of  countercyclical 
measures in the event of an economic slowdown without breaching the European rules. 
The optimal way to reduce the ratio of the deficit to GDP is through economic growth. In turn, 
faster  growth  calls  for  improvements  in  productivity.  In  this  respect,  there  needs  to  be  a 
greater degree of public awareness of the importance of productivity and competitiveness, 
and a consensus on steps that can be taken with minimal social disruption to enhance the 
country’s international competitiveness.  
                                                
5   Thomas F. Huertas, Crisis Cause, Containment and Cure, 2e, Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
6   Andrew W. Lo, “Reading about the financial crisis: A twenty-one-book review” Journal of Economic Literature 
2012, 50:1, pp. 151–178.  
7   Stefan Walter, “Basel III: Stronger Banks and a More Resilient Financial System”, Financial Stability Institute, 
6 April 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As you know, competitiveness depends on the relationship between changes in productivity 
and changes in costs, including wages. I have to note that unit labour costs (ULC), which are 
based on the relationship between compensation and productivity, have generally moved in 
line with those in the euro area. However, in recent quarters, Malta’s unit labour costs have 
pulled ahead of those in the euro area, as shown in Chart 6. 
In this respect, the wage setting process and efficient labour market practices are of critical 
importance. The fact  that  collective  agreements  in  Malta  are  negotiated  at the  level  of the 
individual  firm  helps  to  ensure  that  wage  growth  is  compatible  with  the  realities  of  the 
markets  where  the  firm  sells  its  products.  Still,  further  steps  could  be  taken  to  improve 
productivity  levels  and  increase  the  employment  rate.  Also,  as  I  argued  recently,  COLA 
increases should not be superimposed on wage increases agreed in collective agreements, 
but should form part of the negotiation process, so as to ensure that firms are able to match 
all wage increases with productivity increases. Faster productivity growth depends on many 
factors,  including  investment,  the  infrastructure,  the  quality  of  the  human  resources  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
hence the quality of the educational system and its ability to meet the skills requirements of a 
growing economy. Measures that increase the employment rate could include further policies 
that  incentivise  a  higher female  participation  rate,  as  well  as  measures that facilitate  more 
flexible work conditions, including part-time employment. 
  
A further requirement for economic growth is the smooth functioning of the financial system. 
Particularly  during  these  turbulent  times,  continued  economic  growth  depends  also  on  the 
uninterrupted supply of credit by the financial sector to firms and households, and to that end 
the stability of the financial system is essential.  
It is important to note that although its rate of growth has declined, bank credit has continued 
to  increase  in  Malta,  unlike  the  situation  across  the  euro  area,  where  widespread 
deleveraging  by  financial  institutions  has  led  to  a  contraction  in  the  volume  of  credit,  as 
shown in Chart 7.  
 
The  recent  IMF  report  that  I  mentioned  earlier  noted  the  strong  performance  of  Malta’s 
financial sector but also stressed the importance of strengthening the resilience of the sector.  
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  elevated  levels  of  credit  and  concentration  risks  call  for  stronger  financial  buffers, 
through  higher  provisioning  and  retention  of  profits.  Such  measures  would  strengthen  the 
banks’ ability to absorb potential shocks and would also allow them to prepare themselves 
for compliance with stricter Basel III regulatory requirements. On the positive side, credit risk 
is being mitigated by prudent credit standards and cautious lending behaviour on the part of 
the banks.  
On the funding side, the resilience displayed by the banking system in the face of adverse 
international  conditions  is  explained  by  the  business  model  that  has  been  a  traditional 
characteristic of domestic banks, which rely strongly on retail deposits.  
Another indication of the overall prudent bias of the Maltese domestic banks is evident in the 
first  chart  presented  earlier,  which  shows  that  leverage  ratios  of  Maltese  banks  are 
considerably lower than in euro area in general. While the euro area average has declined 
on  account  of  widespread  deleveraging,  the  ratio  remains  significantly  higher  than  the 
Maltese ratio, which has been quite stable.  
A further indication of the traditional funding model is the loan to deposit ratio, as shown in 
Chart 8, which is significantly low when compared with the major economies. 
This business model has served the domestic banking sector well. The traditional sources of 
funding  have  proven  to  be  very  stable,  including  at  a  time  of  heightened  tensions  in  the 
international  financial  markets.  While  taking  on  the  changes  that  are  needed  to  remain 
competitive and improve efficiency, the domestic banking sector must also continue to build 
upon the strengths of the traditional model.  
Among  the  many  lessons  that  may  be  drawn  from  the  experience  of  the  international 
financial crisis, one that stands out is the importance for each banking institution to keep a 
prudent mix of dependable sources of funding, to limit the level of financial leverage and to 
maintain a sound balance sheet. 
            Source: Central Bank of Malta;  International  Monetary Fund 
                         Conclusion  
In  summary  I  would  like  to  conclude  by  stressing  the  need  for  further  efforts  to  maintain 
international competitiveness and continued vigilance in the banking sector, in the context of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
recurring uncertainty in international financial markets and in the world economy. With this in 
mind,  one  has  to  acknowledge  that  although  the  relative  performance  of  the  Maltese 
economy has been encouraging, the challenges ahead are to be treated seriously and with 
caution.  
A  further  lesson  from  recent  experience  is  that  fiscal  prudence  has  to  be  a  continuous 
endeavour, especially in the light of the recent upward revisions in the public debt projections 
for 2012 and 2013. Further fiscal consolidation becomes more challenging in an environment 
of  weak  external  demand.  The  choices  that  must  be  made  between  the  various  national 
priorities  have  to  be  compatible  with  the  economic  and  fiscal  limits,  and  these  limits  can 
become  less  constraining  only  through  improved  competitiveness  and  faster  economic 
growth. 
Thank you for your attention 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
