Benoît Cœuré: Unexpected events and the global safety net 
Remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the IMF-SNB High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System, Zurich, 
8 May 2012. 
 I wish to thank Isabel Vansteenkiste, Roswitha Hutter and Andreas Schönenberger for their contributions to these 
remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Madam Managing Director, Mr Chairman of the Governing Board, ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  honoured  to  speak  at  this  third  IMF-SNB  high-level  conference  on  the  International 
Monetary System. 
The recent global financial crisis, including the ongoing euro area sovereign debt crisis, has 
reemphasised the need for global and coordinated safety nets. Following a decade that was 
largely  free  of  crises,  in  the  aftermath  of  Lehman  Brothers  collapse,  liquidity  has  dried  up 
globally and the crisis has spread to, and within, the euro area. 
The view that crisis resolution mechanisms were inadequate also prevailed during the Asian 
crisis of the 1990s. This is one of the reasons why many emerging market economies have 
built up national foreign exchange reserves. 
Recent innovations to global financial safety nets 
1. 
The  recent  crisis  has  led  to  substantial  progress  in  the  global  safety  net,  including  the 
following improvements. 
 
The  strengthening  of  the  IMF’s  crisis  prevention  toolkit  through  a  combination  of 
increased firepower and more flexible and effective instruments: an increase in IMF 
resources  through  bilateral  loans  in  2009;  an  expanded  New  Arrangements  to 
Borrow  in  2011;  an  increase  in  IMF  resources  in  2012  (during  the  last  Spring 
Meetings firm commitments were made to increase the resources made available to 
the IMF by over USD 430 billion, in addition to the quota increase under the 2010 
reform);  the  introduction  of  the  Flexible  Credit  Line  and  Precautionary  Credit  Line 
(the latter has more recently been replaced by the Precautionary and Liquidity Line, 
as  recommended  by  G-20  Leaders  in  Cannes);  and  an  agreement  to  double  the 
amount  of  IMF  quotas,  thereby  in  effect  doubling  the  Fund’s  permanent  resource 
base. 
The creation and strengthening of the European financial safety nets: the European 
Financial  Stability  Facility  and,  more  recently,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism. 
The overall European firewall, including the amounts already committed under the 
Greek  Loan  Facility  and  the  European  Financial  Stability  Mechanism  amounts  to 
approximately EUR 800 billion, more than USD 1 trillion, which is being mobilised to 
ensure the financial stability of the euro area. 
Also,  at  a  regional  level  outside  Europe,  progress  is  ongoing  in  Asia  towards 
strengthening  the  Asian  financial  safety  net,  known  as  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative 
Multilateralisation (CMIM), with the doubling of the CMIM fund to USD 240 billion. 
  In parallel, important steps have been taken to mitigate the spreading of risks within a highly 
interconnected global financial system, making it more resilient to unexpected events: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Systemically  important  financial  institutions,  which  contribute  to  the  spreading  of 
risks given their high level of interconnectedness, will be subject to stricter capital 
requirements under the Basel III agreement; 
Financial infrastructures have been made more resilient. First, the Financial Stability 
Board  is  working  on  safeguards  aimed  at  promoting  global  clearing  in  order  to 
facilitate access to, and the use of, global clearing houses. Second, regulators and 
overseers have just finalised a new set of regulatory principles for financial market 
infrastructures aimed at ensuring that any such infrastructures, whether domestic or 
global,  will  be  better  able  to  withstand  shocks  and  unforeseen  events.  Moreover, 
regulators  and  overseers  are  required  to  adopt  regimes  for  effective  cooperation 
with each other. 
Further improvements to global financial stability nets 
2. 
While all these measures have undoubtedly made an important contribution to stabilising the 
global  economy,  many  observers  have  argued  that  gaps  remain  in  the  current  global 
financial safety nets. Existing mechanisms for dealing with crises have been seen as being 
deficient  in  three  respects:  (i)  insufficient  amount  of  financial  fire-power;  (ii)  insufficiently 
flexible or fast decision-making and (iii) insufficient coordination with respect to both financing 
and surveillance. 
These deficiencies have been seen as leading countries to increase their foreign exchange 
reserve  holdings.  For  the  holders,  the  great  attraction  of  reserves  is  that  they  provide 
instantaneous  and  unconditional  liquidity.  However,  the  accumulation  of  a  large  stock  of 
reserves  is  not  only  based  on  precautionary  motives.  Moreover,  even  at  the  level  of  the 
individual holder, there are downsides as reserves come with a quasi-fiscal cost.1 
How  can  we  go  forward  and  what  can  be  done  differently?  Overall,  there  is  widespread 
agreement  about  what  a  global  mechanism  should  do:  (i)  reduce  the  demand  for  self-
insurance through reserves accumulation; (ii) provide fast-disbursing financial assistance in 
large amounts to the “innocent bystanders”; and (iii) reduce global imbalances.2 
However,  it  is  clear  that  any  further  improvement  will  need  to  strike  the  right  balance 
between, on the one hand, efficiently addressing global liquidity shocks and, on the other, 
avoiding moral hazard and respecting the mandate of individual institutions. 
During  the  financial  crisis,  swap  lines  among  major  central  banks  played  a  pivotal  role  in 
easing the funding pressure of banks. Empirical evidence and anecdotal feedback suggest 
that market participants see them as a useful safety net, also in times of limited usage. 
While  swap  agreements  have  so  far  been  set  up  with  a  high  level  of  urgency,  it  is  worth 
considering a framework of permanent stand-by swap lines. There are important limitations, 
however.  Such  a  framework  should  not  constrain  the  monetary  policy  and  operational 
frameworks of participating central banks. 
Even  more  importantly,  the  establishment  of  global  financial  safety  nets  should  not  lead 
countries, or financial institutions, to engage in overly risky strategies.  
                                                 
1  See  Obstfeld,  M.  “The 
http://www.nber.org/chapters/c12596.pdf 
International  Monetary  System:  Living  with  Asymmetry”,  November  2011, 
2  See Pickford, S. “Global financial safety net”. Chatham House International Economics Brief. IE BP 2011/02. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Reaping the full benefits of international financial integration 
3. 
At a deeper level, global financial safety nets cannot be a substitute for a more resilient and 
better functioning global financial system. Let me mention a few avenues for reflection. 
First,  the  global  financial  system  should  adapt  to  an  increasingly  multi-polar  international 
monetary system. Various initiatives have been taken by Chinese authorities to promote the 
renminbi’s  international  role.  Its  use  by  market  participants  has  already  increased, 
particularly as a currency for international trade invoicing and, more recently, as a currency 
for international issuance, deposit and selected official investments. Such initiatives should 
be increasingly reflected in market infrastructures. 
Second,  global  financial  safety  nets  are  temporary  instruments  –  and  as  we  all  know, 
temporary measures often risk becoming permanent. Measures aimed at addressing liquidity 
crises  should  not  weaken  policymakers  and  market  participants’  incentives  to  address 
financial market malfunctioning in a more durable manner. Let me give an example: in the 
euro area, the ECB has extended liquidity to banks faced with temporary funding difficulties, 
provided they are financially sound and can post adequate collateral, but the ECB should not 
act  as  a  substitute  to  euro  area  capital  markets  on  a  durable  basis.  This  is  all  the  more 
important  as  shocks  to  cross-border  capital  flows,  such  as  sudden  stops  in  capital 
movements, have proven to be persistent rather than short-lived. More analytical reflection 
on  what  has  made  such  shocks  persistent,  and  how  this  can  be  addressed  at  a  deeper 
structural  level  would  therefore  be  welcome.  Today,  there  are  many  signs  that  political 
support for international financial integration has weakened in domestic constituencies, and 
we are witnessing an increased fragmentation of capital markets at a global and at a regional 
level3.  This  should  not  be  accepted,  because  we  would  then  lose  the  benefits  of  financial 
integration.  Financial  markets,  if  properly  regulated,  should  regain  a  key  role  in  allocating 
resources and sending price signals to individual players and policymakers. 
Third,  an  interconnected  financial  system  requires  a  very  high  level  of  harmonisation  of 
financial regulation and cooperation among financial markets and banking supervisors, both 
at the international and at the regional level. In the euro area, the ECB has argued in favour 
of  a  single  regime  for  bank  resolution  and,  down  the  road,  in  favour of  a  single European 
institution in charge of insuring deposits and winding down failed banks. If one wishes to reap 
the benefits of financial integration while delivering financial stability, one must be willing to 
give up at least partially national autonomy in financial regulation.  
Fourth, one should take into account what Maurice Obstfeld has named the fiscal dimension 
of international liquidity4: expanded international lending facilities, including an expanded IMF 
or a stronger European framework, cannot remain unconditionally solvent in the absence of 
an expanded level of fiscal backup. Global financial safety nets should be backed by sounder 
fiscal fundamentals in all major economic areas. 
I will now conclude. Global financial safety nets have been successfully strengthened under 
the Korean and French G-20 presidencies, and there is room for further improvement. But 
measures aimed at addressing liquidity crises should remain temporary, and they should not 
weaken the incentives to address financial market malfunctioning in a more durable manner. 
Even  more  importantly,  safety  nets  are  there  only  to  address  unexpected  events.  It  is  the 
duty of policymakers to take preventive action against expected disorderly outcomes, such 
as those resulting from current account and fiscal imbalances. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
3  See “Financial Integration in Europe”, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, April 2012. 
4  See Obstfeld, M. “International Liquidity: The Fiscal Dimension”, NBER WP No. 17379, September 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
