Tiff Macklem: Raising the house of reform 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to 
the Rotman Institute for International Business, Toronto, Ontario, 7 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here this morning. I want to thank the Rotman Institute for International 
Business, and particularly its co-directors, Wendy Dobson and Ig Horstmann, for inviting me. 
Like  many  of  us,  I  have  benefited  tremendously  from  Wendy’s  insight,  her  ruthless  truth 
telling and her sage advice on international issues. Ig Horstmann was one of my professors 
in graduate school. And I owe him a debt of gratitude for turning an enthusiastic student of 
macroeconomics  on  to  the  importance  and  utility  of  microeconomics  –  training  that  has 
proven invaluable in grappling with issues of financial regulation. My remarks today combine 
both these elements – international economics and financial regulation. 
I  want  to  talk  to  you  about  the  imperative  of  completing  the  reform  of  the  global  financial 
system. 
Some are calling for a slowdown of the reform process, arguing that a weak global recovery 
and elevated uncertainty are good reasons to ease up on implementation. 
The global economy is certainly underperforming. The euro area appears to have fallen back 
into recession, with a sovereign debt crisis that poses clear and present downside risks. In 
the United States, housing and labour markets have proven stubbornly slow to recover, and 
there is a large fiscal adjustment still to come. 
But the current challenges are not an excuse for delay. Quite the opposite – they underscore 
the  urgent  need  to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient.  In  a  risky  world,  the  need  to 
make the financial system safer and restore confidence is vital. If there is a reproach to be 
made, it is that progress has not been faster. 
The G-20 Leaders’ 2009 plan of action to strengthen the financial system was appropriately 
sweeping. It included: 
 
 
 
enhanced transparency and disclosure so markets work better; 
larger capital and liquidity buffers to make banks safer; 
broadening  the  span  of  regulation  and  oversight  so  that  all  systemically  important 
financial institutions, markets and products are included; 
stronger infrastructure so that core financial markets continue to function in periods 
of stress; and 
credible  and  effective  resolution  regimes  for  all  financial  institutions  so  that  no 
institution is too big to fail. 
  With  the  architecture  for  their  house  of  reform  sketched  out,  the  Leaders  assigned 
responsibility for the detailed design and construction to the Financial Stability Board (FSB). 
Now, almost three years later, construction is well underway. 
But it’s a big house with several wings. The foundation has been laid and the framing has 
been completed. Some wings are even ready for occupancy, while in others the walls are still 
going up. 
In my remarks today, I will focus on the key prerequisites for completing construction and the 
challenges of moving in. I will organize my remarks around the three Cs essential to get to 
completion: the need to be comprehensive, coordinated and consistent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Reform must be comprehensive, spanning institutions, markets and products, from inception 
to resolution. 
Reform  must  be  coordinated  across  its  many  elements,  across  jurisdictions  and  with 
stakeholders. 
And reform must be implemented in a consistent manner around the globe. 
Comprehensive 
To ensure the reforms are comprehensive, work began at the core of the financial system 
and is now moving outward to the periphery. Three wings that will house the reforms to the 
core are now ready to move into. 
First, the new Basel III capital rules have been finalized and are now being implemented over 
a  suitably  gradual  transition  period.  The  new  standard  substantially  increases  the  loss-
bearing capital that financial institutions must hold and establishes a new limit on leverage. 
This is a significant strengthening of the global rules, effectively raising the minimum global 
capital requirement sevenfold. 
Second, a methodology to assess systemic importance has been developed, and 29 banks 
have been identified as globally systemic. These banks are required to have additional loss-
absorption capacity tailored to their systemic importance, ranging from 1 per cent to 2.5 per 
cent of risk-weighted assets, to be held in common equity. They will also be subject to closer 
scrutiny by bank supervisors. 
Third, to be able to resolve firms – no matter how large – without disruption to the economy 
or cost to taxpayers, the FSB has developed a new international resolution standard. Work is 
now turning to the implementation of the Key Attributes for Effective Resolution. 
By the end of this year, global systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) will have 
completed: 
 
 
 
resolvability assessments; 
recovery and resolution plans; and 
institution-specific,  cross-border  co-operation  agreements  so  that  home  and  host 
authorities are better equipped to deal with crises. 
The sooner we move in, the sooner we roll back too big to fail. 
Other wings of the house are at various stages of construction. Permit me a few words about 
each. 
Liquidity standards 
The  construction  of  new  minimum  standards  to  enhance  banks’  liquidity  buffers  is  well 
advanced,  but  needs  some  remodelling  before  completion.  The  current  definition  of  high-
quality liquid assets is too narrow, focusing only on sovereign debt and cash. This may have 
the  unintended  consequence  of  increasing  segmentation  and  reducing  liquidity  in  some 
financial markets. Consideration should be given to broadening the definition to allow for a 
continuum of asset types, with suitable haircuts and limits. 
Systemically important financial institutions 
With additional protections for global SIFIs agreed, work is now under way to extend extra 
resiliency  requirements  to  banks  that  are  not  globally  systemic  but  are  systemic  at  the 
national  or  domestic  level.  This  includes  developing  an  appropriate  methodology  for 
identifying domestic SIFIs, and outlining prudential measures to mitigate the risks they pose. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Given  the  significant  differences  across  countries  in  the  structure  of  national  banking 
systems, this framework should adopt a principles-based approach so that regulators have 
the flexibility to focus on the additional requirements that will be most effective within their 
domestic context. 
The systemic risks posed by other types of financial institutions and financial infrastructures 
are  also  being  reviewed.  The  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS)  is 
developing a methodology to identify activities of insurance companies that are systemically 
important on a global scale, including both traditional insurance and ancillary activities. Once 
the nature of their systemic activities has been identified, consideration will need to be given 
to any additional buffers that may be required – a task made more difficult by the lack of an 
international prudential accord for insurance companies. 
The  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the  International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  are  currently  developing  safety  and 
soundness  principles  for  financial  market  infrastructures,  such  as  central  counterparties 
(CCPs). Work is also under way to examine the systemic activities of other types of non-bank 
financial firms or so-called shadow banks. 
Shadow banking 
Drawing  the  systemic  elements  of  shadow  banking  into  the  regulatory  net  was  a  central 
element  of  the  G-20  Leaders’  reform  vision.  They  agreed  that  regulation  and  oversight 
should  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  activity  –  not  legal  structure  –  and  that  like  activities 
should receive like treatment. 
In many countries, including Canada, market-based financing or shadow banking is at least 
as  large  as  the  traditional  banking  sector.  Shadow  banking  spans  a  range  of  activities, 
including repurchase agreements, mortgage-backed securities, other types of securitization, 
short-term  debt  instruments  and  money  market  mutual  funds.  The  sector  provides 
competition to traditional banking and is an important source of diversification and innovation. 
But it also entails many of the same risks that are inherent in traditional banking. 
Like  the  credit  intermediation  of  banks,  shadow  banking  involves  liquidity  and  maturity 
transformation, often with some degree of leverage. Moreover, as the financial crisis made 
painfully  clear,  the  systemic  risks  of  shadow-banking  activities  can  be  magnified  by  the 
interconnectedness  of  the  financial  system  –  stresses  within  shadow  banks  can  be 
transmitted to the core of the financial system in unforeseen ways. 
Foundational  elements  to  achieve  more  comparable  treatment  are  now  in  place,  including 
enhanced disclosure requirements, the new consolidation accounting standard and minimum 
risk-retention rules. But much work is needed on the full range of policy options to control 
systemic risks in the shadow-banking sector. These include: direct regulation of the activities 
of  shadow  banks;  indirect  regulation  via  links  to  the  traditional  banking  sector;  targeting 
specific products; and various macroprudential measures. 
By the end of 2012, the FSB, with the relevant standard-setting bodies, will develop policy 
recommendations on shadow banking in five priority areas: 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy reforms in all of these areas should be guided by four considerations. 
the interactions of regulated banks with shadow banking entities and activities; 
money market mutual funds; 
other shadow-banking entities; 
securitization; and 
securities lending and repos. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
First, with the capital and liquidity standards applied to banks set to increase, we can expect 
to see new incentives for activities to migrate to the shadow-banking sector, increasing the 
need for timely reform. 
Second,  the  reforms  must  strike  an  effective  balance  between  the  benefits  of  shadow 
banking,  in  terms  of  competition,  diversification  and  innovation,  and  the  risks  related  to 
regulatory arbitrage and systemic vulnerabilities. 
Third,  given  the  important  differences  in  the  structure  of  shadow-banking  activities  across 
countries, the best means of mitigating systemic risks is likely to differ across jurisdictions. 
But  given  that  shadow-banking  activity  crosses  national  borders,  there  is  a  need  for  a 
coherent global approach to these issues. 
Fourth,  the  reforms  and  the  approach  to  monitoring  the  sector  must  be  flexible  and 
adaptable,  since  changes  in  regulation  and  innovation  can  lead  to  rapid  expansion  and 
mutation of shadow-banking activities. 
Central counterparties for OTC derivatives 
The final element of the comprehensive reform plan is mitigating contagion between sectors 
and institutions in the financial system. The house needs firewalls. 
Recognizing  this  imperative,  the  G-20  Leaders  mandated  that  all  standardized  OTC 
derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, where 
appropriate,  and  cleared  through  CCPs.  In  addition,  all  OTC  derivatives  trades  should  be 
reported to trade repositories. 
The architecture for trade repositories is converging on a global platform, although important 
issues of data access are still to be worked out. 
For CCPs, the basic architecture has yet to be resolved. There are two competing designs – 
global and local – and each has its costs and benefits. 
The global design has the greatest potential to reduce fixed costs, maximize netting benefits 
and  economize  on  collateral.  At  the  same  time,  these  very  benefits  would  concentrate 
clearing  risk  in  a  small  number  of  very  large  global  CCPs.  They  could  also  create  a 
competitive  advantage  for  the  largest  global  banks,  serving  to  reinforce  their  systemic 
importance. 
The alternative is a more distributed model in which local CCPs are established to clear OTC 
derivatives transactions outside the United States and the European Union. While this design 
would reduce concentration and provide for greater competition, it could result in an overly 
fragmented architecture, with local CCPs that are not sufficiently efficient and robust. 
To inform decisions on architectural design, the FSB, working with the standard setters, is 
coordinating efforts to develop adequate safeguards for a global architecture, especially with 
regard to access, cross-border emergency liquidity arrangements, co-operative oversight and 
resolution. 
The goal is to complete the work on these safeguards by June so that each jurisdiction can 
make an informed choice about its preferred clearing architecture this year. 
Coordinated 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  C  –  coordinated.  Reform  elements  must  be  balanced, 
coherent, mutually reinforcing and well integrated. The FSB’s overarching role is to ensure 
global coordination across all the elements of reform and across countries. 
Coordination across the elements means we must consider the combined effect of the totality 
of the reforms, including both their cumulative impact and their interaction. We should avoid 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
overreliance on one instrument, and strive for balance. For example, as the experience of 
some firms in the financial crisis highlighted, even strong capital levels, by themselves, do 
not provide adequate protection. While important, capital buffers need to be buttressed with 
sound  risk  management,  a  leverage  cap,  liquidity  requirements  and  measures  to  limit 
contagion. 
Coordination across countries requires a coordinating process. Historically, responsibility for 
financial  sector  policy  has  been  spread  across  national  agencies  as  well  as  international 
standard-setting  bodies.  The  crisis  underscored 
the  FSB’s  key 
coordinating role. 
Now chaired by Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney, the FSB is acting on a clear remit 
from  the  G-20.  As  the  general  contractor  in  the  reform  process,  the  FSB  coordinates  all 
aspects of construction. Over the past four years, the FSB has undertaken much of the policy 
work itself through its standing committees, while other aspects of construction have been 
subcontracted to international standard-setting bodies, including the Basel Committee, CPSS 
and IOSCO. 
The  FSB’s  responsibilities  loop  from  conception  to  feedback.  The  FSB  takes  the  lead  in 
identifying critical financial vulnerabilities, developing new policies and then assessing their 
implementation and effectiveness (Figure 1). 
importance  of 
the 
 
These efforts are being undertaken in coordination with the private sector. Broad consultation 
is essential to effective design. To steal a line from the late Michael Mussa on the perils of 
seeking  input  from  just  one  kind  of  specialist,  if  you  only  consult  plumbers,  every  room  is 
going  to  have  a  toilet.  Reform  proposals  are  being  developed  in  consultation  with  the 
financial  community  and  released  for  public  commentary  and  input  from  industry  round 
tables. 
Consistent 
That brings me to the third C – consistent implementation. 
If  the  new  global  standards  are  to  promote  international  financial  stability,  they  must  be 
consistently implemented across the major financial jurisdictions. Consistent does not mean 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Implementation,  which 
I  chair.  Assessment  has  proceeded  along 
one size fits all. Most standards, such as the Basel capital rules, are international minimums. 
Countries  can  adopt  stronger  rules  or,  as  Canada  is  doing  with  Basel  III,  implement  more 
quickly than the generous maximum phase-in period. 
The  monitoring  of  implementation  is  coordinated  by  the  FSB’s  Standing  Committee  on 
Standards 
two 
complementary  tracks:  country  reviews  that  examine  the  implementation  of  standards  in  a 
single  FSB  member  country,  and  thematic  reviews  that  focus  on  one  element  and  assess 
implementation  across  the  24  FSB  member  countries.  Six  country  peer  reviews  have  now 
been completed, most recently for Canada and Switzerland. And five thematic peer reviews 
have  examined  implementation  across  the  full  FSB  membership  on  topics  ranging  from 
compensation practices at banks, to mortgage underwriting standards and deposit insurance 
systems. So the FSB peer review system is up and running. 
But already it is time for expansion. 
To  assess  consistency  in  the  implementation  of  major  reforms,  we  are  significantly 
enhancing the resources devoted to monitoring, and coordinating implementation-monitoring 
activities across the standard-setting bodies and the FSB. This will include annual progress 
reports to the G-20 on a country-by-country basis, as well as less-frequent but more in-depth 
peer reviews in priority areas. 
Some commentators are concerned that the FSB lacks the authority to enforce the rules, and 
have argued that it must evolve to a treaty-based organization with the power to sanction its 
members.  While  this  may  ultimately  prove  to  be  the  case,  so  far,  this  has  not  been 
demonstrated.  The  FSB  is  making  good  progress  on  the  basis  of  consensus  and  co-
operation. Peer reviews have reported that implementation is moving ahead, have identified 
remaining gaps and have increased the focus on impediments to implementation. Countries 
that are not complying have been called out. 
But  tougher  tests  lie  ahead,  and  it  is  essential  that  the  spirit  of  internationalism  and  co-
operation is sustained. Implementing Basel III is the biggest and most immediate test. 
The Basel Committee is taking primary responsibility for monitoring and reporting on national 
implementation of Basel III. The committee will first look at whether each member’s financial 
system legislation is consistent with the Basel III requirements, and then at whether the risk-
weighting rules are applied similarly across countries. It will conduct and publish country-by-
country reviews and provide the FSB with an assessment of progress and gaps. If there are 
material  deviations  from  Basel  III,  they  will  need  to  be  fixed.  Full  and  consistent 
implementation is imperative. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. The global financial system must be flexible enough to respond to the 
dynamics of the global economy. But it must also be able to retain its structural integrity in 
the  face  of  powerful  cross-currents  generated  by  multi-polar  economic  development,  rapid 
technological  innovation  and  increasing  financial  globalization.  The  reforms  we  are 
constructing  to  house  the  financial  system  will  allow  us  to  track  and  identify  emerging 
vulnerabilities and promote its stability. The goal is a dynamic and resilient financial system 
that serves the needs of households and businesses in good times and in bad. 
The  FSB  is  building  the  reforms  on  a  foundation  of  consensus  among  G-20  members. 
Despite its small size, the FSB has accomplished a great deal in just two and half years. Now 
it  needs  to  reach  out  and  network  to  foster  closer  relationships  with  international  financial 
institutions, standard-setting bodies and non-member countries. 
The FSB also needs to be placed on a more secure footing if it is to be an enduring pillar of 
the international financial architecture. To that end, the G-20 Leaders agreed at the Cannes 
Summit last November that the FSB should expand its resources, and gain legal personality 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and greater financial autonomy. This will extend the FSB’s capacity to coordinate, monitor 
and assess financial reform. 
But,  ultimately,  it  is  up to  the  FSB’s  member  countries  to ensure  that the  house  of  reform 
becomes the home to the financial system. Full implementation is the responsibility of every 
member. We should expect no less. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
