Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Increasing women’s access to finance – 
challenges and opportunities 
Paper presented by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at 
the Second African Women’s Economic Summit, Lagos, 13 July 2012. 
Prepared by the Research Department of the Central Bank of Nigeria. 
 Protocol 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  present  this  keynote  speech.  I  am  delighted  on  two  fronts.  First  our 
current quest to secure a level playing field for the girl child makes this meeting important. 
Second,  recognizing  the  role  of  women  in  national  economic  development  makes  it 
imperative to explore options for improving access to finance for women entrepreneurs. For 
this keynote speech, I shall focus on the latter with particular reference to Nigeria. 
Economic  advancement  leads  to  higher  standard  of  living.  Earlier  theories  of  economic 
growth  recognized  the  importance  of  labour  and  capital  as  key  determinants  of  growth. 
However, human capital was not given visible prominence, as it was positioned exogenous in 
earlier growth models. With significant progress in economic thought and research, human 
capital is now regarded as the most fundamental ingredient for driving economic growth. The 
development  of  human  capital  through  formal  and  informal  training  directly  increases  the 
productivity of labour. The efficiency of capital is also boosted by technological innovations 
also powered by human capital. 
The contribution of women to economic development is well documented. Yet there exists 
several  barriers  to  the  full  optimization  of  women’s  economic  potential.  These  range  from 
cultural, to religious, traditional, and legal discrimination amongst others. 
A  recent  publication  by  the  Global  Partnership  for  Financial  Inclusion  highlights  that  in 
developed  countries,  women  are  starting  businesses  at  a  faster  rate  than  men,  and  are 
making significant contributions to job creation and economic growth. The same is true for 
transition economies, although the comparable rate of growth is slower. In Indonesia, 2007 
data  showed  that  women-owned  businesses  grew  at  8  per  cent,  while  men-owned 
businesses  shrank  0.3  per  cent.  In  Thailand  (2008)  women-owned  businesses  grew  by 
2.3 per cent while the male counterparts grew only by 0.3 per cent. (GPFI, IFC, 2011). 
Access  to  Finance  is  often  cited  as  one  of  the  major  factors  impeding  the  growth  of 
women-owned  businesses  in  developing  countries.  The  key  barriers  include  lack  of 
ownership of collateral – as tradition would seldom cede property rights to women; coupled 
with  the  absence  of  credit  histories  –  owing  to  the  fact  that  most  women  businesses  are 
informally organized. 
Yet, it is a fact that improving financial support for women would increase the number of new 
businesses,  which  in  turn,  would  boost  economic  activity,  enable  the  expansion  of  old 
businesses, leading to increased productivity and growth. Financial empowerment enhances 
the  bargaining  power  of  women  at  the  family  level  and  this  allows  larger  latitude  for 
investment in child-nutrition, health and education, thereby regenerating the future workforce. 
Beyond the family, financial freedom is a precursor to gender equality and consequently, the 
assurance of social security. Women constitute not only a formidable demographic force, but 
are  also  responsible  for  the  youth  that  make  up  the  next  generation.  Therefore,  their 
well-being has implications not only for their own lives, but also for the society at large. Their 
ability to play this role effectively depends on how far the society supports their development. 
Empowering  them  is  a  crucial  challenge  which  calls  for  constant  review  of  policies, 
re-assessment  of  priorities,  commitment  of  adequate  financial  resources,  and  effective 
implementation of programmes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The experience of the Grameen Bank of Bangladesh provides evidence that women might 
be  better  fund  managers.  Of  loans  made  by  the  bank,  over  98  per  cent  were  recovered, 
implying a near 0 per cent default. Moreover, giving women access to finance has emerged 
as a lucrative business for fund providers. The Global Banking Alliance for women has seen 
a  steady  upward  trend  in  its  profits,  which  has  also  put  its  operations  on  the  path  to 
sustainability. 
The place of women in Nigeria 
Nigeria’s  female  population  is  estimated  at  80.2  million  (UNFPA,  2012),  representing 
49 per cent of the total population. About 54 million of Nigeria’s female population live in rural 
areas where they provide 60–79 per cent of the rural labour force. Recent data from the 2009 
Nigerian  Education  Data  Survey  showed  that  1.5  million  children  (8.1  per  cent  of  children 
aged  6–14)  were  not  in  school  at  the  time  of  the  survey.  Of  this,  1.5  million  people, 
53 percent  were  girls.  While  on  the  one  hand,  the  survey  shows  a  doubling  of  the  net 
attendance ratio for female students between 1990 and 2010, it also indicates that most of 
these girls do not make the transition to secondary school. There has only been a marginal 
increase  in  the  number  of  girls  enrolling  for  secondary  school  over  the  20  year  period. 
Although there is a policy of free education, the literature suggests that there are still some 
significant costs that deter parents and cause pupils to drop out (Lincove, 2009). 
Nigeria’s maternal mortality rate is amongst the highest in the world; the rate is estimated to 
be around 828 and 351 per 100,000 live births in rural areas and urban areas respectively. 
There  are  also  regional  disparities  between  the  North  and  South.  The  North  East  has  the 
highest  rates  of  maternal  mortality  at  around  1,549  per  100,000  live  births  and  the  lowest 
rates are recorded in the South-East, with 165 per 100,000 live births. 
Teenage marriage also contributes to low female attendance, retention and achievements in 
school.  About  30  per  cent  of  school  age  girls  drop  out  of  school  having  already  begun 
childbearing  at  an  early  age.  The  physical  and  psychological  implications  of  these 
phenomena cannot be overemphasized. 
Challenges to women’s access to finance 
The challenges to women’s access to finance include: 
Property rights and control over assets 
Legal  regulations  and  customary  rules  often  restrict  women’s  access  to  and  control  over 
assets that can be accepted as collateral, such as land or livestock. Women are less likely to 
have land titled under their name, even when their families own land, and are less likely than 
men to have control over land, even when they do formally own it. Biased inheritance rights 
often bestow land to male relatives, leaving both widows and daughters at a disadvantage 
(Agarwal, 2003). 
Cultural norms and family responsibilities 
Socially  accepted  norms  and  expected  family  roles  have  a  profound  effect  on  the  type  of 
economic  activities  that  women  can  engage  in,  the  technologies  available  to  them,  the 
people and agencies with whom they can interact, the places they can visit, the time they 
have available and the control they can exert over their own resources such as capital. 
Biased attitude of banks 
Women’s  access  to  financial  resources  is  also  limited  by  biased  lending  practices  that 
emerge when financial institutions consider them inexperienced and therefore less attractive 
clients,  or  when  institutions  lack  the  knowledge  to  offer  products  tailored  to  women’s 
preferences and constraints (Fletschner, 2009). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Lack of collateral and start-up capital 
Access of collateral and asset-based lending generally constrains borrowers from access to 
finance. This is much more serious women for obvious reasons. Data from the NBS (2009) 
showed that men are twice as likely to secure finance compared to women. A recent World 
Bank  report  on  the  “Investment  Climate  in  Nigeria”  showed  that  capital  rather  than 
productivity narrows the range of activities in which women engage. The report also showed 
that majority of women (76 per cent) rely mostly on internal funds and retained earnings, and 
that  only  about  1  per  cent  obtain  capital  from  the  formal  financial  sector.  The  report 
substantiates that formal financial institutions, especially banks, have not supported women 
entrepreneurs as much as they could have (Halkias et al., 2011). 
Lack of awareness of finance 
Women  generally  lack  knowledge  on  the financial  options  available  to  them.  Furthermore, 
the cost of getting this information (measured in money, time, and energy) may be high due 
to family responsibilities. 
Financial market imperfections 
Enterprise survey data shows that small firms are more likely to be negatively impacted by 
financial constraints than large firms. Women entrepreneurs are largely concentrated in small 
firms and hence are likely to face greater financial constraints. 
Formal employment 
Women  are  significantly  underrepresented  in  secure  wage  employment  in  both  public  and 
private employment. Those who have formal sector jobs are constrained by the reproductive 
roles  they  play.  As  a  result,  majority  of  women  occupy  low-level  posts  that  offer  them  the 
flexibility  they  need  to  manage  their  households  while  working  in  the  formal  sector.  They 
spend  most  of  their  time  doing  unpaid  household  work,  which  undermines  their  business 
potentials. 
Opportunities for increasing women’s access to finance 
The opportunities for increasing access to finance for women are discussed in terms of the 
various initiatives of the government and allied agencies that support access to finance in the 
economy  including  women.  I  shall  go  on  to  discuss  some  of  these  initiatives  below  while 
highlighting some of the progress that the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) and the banking 
industry have made in their to efforts to empower women. 
launched 
Government initiatives 
The  Federal  Government  recently 
the  Public  Works  and  Women/Youth 
Empowerment  Scheme (PW/WYE).  The programme  which  is  a  component  of  the  Subsidy 
Re-investment  and  Empowerment  Programme  (SURE)  is  targeted  at  generating  about 
370,000  jobs  across  the  country.  The  PW/WYE  is  intended  to  create  employment 
opportunities  for  women  and  youth  in  labour-intensive  public  works  and  is  expected  to 
generate  50,000  skilled  jobs  and  320,000  unskilled  job  opportunities.  The  implementation 
would be in partnership with the States, the Local Governments and the private sector. To 
boost  the  scheme,  the  government  has  set  aside  some  portion  of  the  partial  subsidy  on 
petroleum  prices  removal  proceeds  to  support  the  employment  generation  intervention 
nationwide. 
Policymakers need to establish an enabling environment that will facilitate access to financial 
services  for  women  entrepreneurs,  through  the  development  of  a  supportive  legal  and 
regulatory framework, and the development of education and training opportunities that are 
more aligned with the specific needs of women. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Skilled  women  are  likely  to  access  finance  more  easily.  Therefore,  a  necessary  step  in 
enhancing  finance  for  the  women  should  be  to  ensure  an  upscale  of  their  leadership, 
technical, entrepreneurial and managerial skills. An important priority for governments should 
be increasing the enrolment of girls across all levels of education complemented by efforts to 
improve the quality of education that they receive. While it is important to build the capacity 
of financial institutions to better serve women entrepreneurs, it is also imperative that women 
are  provided  with  the  opportunity  to  be  financially  literate,  so  that  they  can  speak  the 
language of finance. 
Women face peculiar exclusion as a result of cultural, religious and social biases that hinder 
their access to financial services. It will be pertinent to explore the possibility of enacting laws 
that address gender inequality, sexual harassment and discrimination as first step towards 
improving their access to financial services. 
Initiatives by the Central Bank of Nigeria 
Women  component  of  Micro,  Small  and Medium  Enterprises  Development Fund 
(MSMEDF) 
In  order  to  promote  the  development  of  the  Microfinance  sub-sector  and  provide  for  the 
wholesale  funding  requirements  of  Microfinance  Banks  and  Microfinance  institutions,  the 
Revised Microfinance Policy, Regulatory and Supervisory Framework for Nigeria provided for 
the  establishment  of  a  Microfinance  Development  Fund.  One  of  the  key  targets  of  the 
microfinance  policy  is  to  eliminate  gender  disparity  by  ensuring  that  women’s  access  to 
financial services increases by 15 per cent annually. In view of the peculiar challenges faced 
by  women  in  accessing  financial  services  in  Nigeria,  the  CBN  has  approved  the 
establishment  of  MSMEDF.  It  is  intended  that  a  minimum  of  60  per  cent  of  the  MSMEDF 
should  be  committed  to  providing  funding  to  women  in  order  to  address  their  peculiar 
financial  exclusion  challenges.  The  key  objectives  include  providing  grants  for  capacity 
building  of  staff  in  microfinance  institutions  (MFBs,  MFIs  and  similar  institutions)  and  their 
apex bodies on women based lending, promoting the development of regulatory provisions 
that  are  favourable  to  women  lending,  supporting  initiatives  that  can  improve  financial 
literacy, entrepreneurship development for women clients, supporting programmes that are 
geared  towards  the  mobilization  of  women,  research  and  development,  and  promotion  of 
women friendly financial innovations and products. 
Financial inclusion and entrepreneurship development 
The Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) appreciates the fact that financial access, inclusion and 
literacy  are  cornerstones  for  reducing  poverty.  To  his  end,  we  have  taken  the  lead  in 
developing Nigeria’s National Financial Inclusion Strategy to ensure that a clear agenda is 
set for increasing both access and usage of financial services within a defined timeline for 
excluded  groups  including  women.  Indeed,  the  financial  inclusion  strategy  provides  for 
reducing the exclusion rate of women from 54 per cent to 20 per cent by the year 2020. To 
achieve  this,  special  incentives  and  provisions  would  be  made  available  to  financial 
institutions to develop products that would meet the needs of Nigerian women. The CBN as 
part of its developmental efforts supports Entrepreneurship Development Centres (EDC) in 
the  six  geo-political  zones  of  the  country.  The  bank  would  endeavour  to  place  more  of  a 
focus on women in the implementation of these centres. 
Promoting women into leadership and decision making roles 
The  Bankers’  Committee,  which  comprises  of  the  CBN,  Nigerian  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (NDIC), Deposit Money-Banks and Discount Houses declared 2012 the year of 
“Women Economic Empowerment”. I am also pleased to report that the Bankers’ Committee 
also  now  has  a  dedicated  sub-committee  focused  on  women  economic  empowerment 
headed  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Standard  Chartered  Bank  (Nigeria)  Limited, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mrs. Bola Adesola. One of focus areas of this sub-committee is to facilitate the decision of 
the  Bankers’  Committee  to  ensure  that  women  occupy  more  leadership  positions  in  the 
industry. Presently, we have a situation where at the junior levels; we have a situation where 
about 42% of the junior roles in the industry are held by women. Unfortunately, as they move 
on  to  middle  and  senior  management  roles,  this  starts  to  diminish  to  31  and  27  per  cent 
respectively. We have collectively agreed that by 2014, 40 per cent of senior management 
and 30 per cent of board level positions should be occupied by women. 
As  we  strive  towards  the  improvement  of  the  lot  of  African  women,  we  must  continue  to 
extend  their  participation  in  leadership  positions  in  the  public  and  private  sectors.  The 
Federal  Government  of  Nigeria  has  shown  some  leadership  in  this  regard  through  the 
appointment  of  16  women  as  Ministers  in  the  cabinet.  The  CBN  in  recent  years  has  also 
provided  some  leadership  for the  banking  industry  through  its  appointment  of  up  to  seven 
female  directors  in  some  cases  to  head  departments  that  have  been  seen  as  traditionally 
male dominated environments. It is instructive to note that the CBN is coming from a position 
where it has only had four directors between 1959, the year of its establishments and 2009, 
when it celebrated 50 years of existence. 
for 
institutional  support 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  in  other  developing  nations  of  the  world,  women  in  Nigeria  are 
faced  with  numerous  socio-economic  challenges  some  of  which  were  discussed  in  this 
paper.  One  of  the  potent  solutions  to  these  menaces  is  the  empowerment  of  women  for 
active participation in economic activities. Lack of finance has been identified as one major 
limiting  factor  to  women  entrepreneurship  development.  Therefore,  I  used  this  speech  to 
highlight some of the challenges of accessing finance for women. I have also mentioned the 
available avenues for providing financial encouragement to women. It does not stop there. 
The  Central  Bank  also  encourages  advocacy 
to  women 
empowerment. 
And  as  you  are  aware,  small  and  medium-sized  Enterprises  (SMEs)  in  market  economies 
are  the  engine  of  growth  and  development.  SMEs  contribute  to  sustainable  growth  and 
employment  generation 
their  private  ownership, 
entrepreneurial spirit, flexibility and adaptability as their potential to react to challenges and 
changing environments in a competitive market frame work. Women occupy pivotal positions 
in SMEs. Increasing access to finance for women-owned or operated businesses is a sound 
strategy  for  financial  institutions  if  they  are  to  establish  a  foothold  in  the  SME  space. 
Therefore, supporting women entrepreneurship by means of training and granting financial 
support  is  a  key  step  to  take  towards  guaranteeing  the  contribution  of  women  to  national 
economic development. 
I thank New Faces New Voices and the African Development Bank (ADB) for organizing this 
forum and the opportunity to speak and I would like to end by urging a concerted effort to 
ensure that women are included as an integral part of our strategies for the development of 
various sectors of the Nigerian economy. 
Thank You. 
References 
in  a  significant  manner  due 
to 
Agarwal B, (2003) Gender and land Rights Revisited: Exploring New Prospects via the State 
Family and Market, India 
British Council, Gender in Nigeria Report 2012, Improving the Lives of Girls and Women in 
Nigeria 
Fletschner  D,  (2009),  Rural  women’s  access  to  financial  services:  credit,  savings  and 
insurance, Lisa Kenney Evan School of Public Affairs University of Washington 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
UNFPA 2012: Gender in Nigeria Report, British Council and UKaid 
GPFI,IFC (World Bank) (2011)  Strengthening Access to  Finance for Women-Owned SMEs 
in Developing Countries 
Mike  I.  O,  Productivity  and  Employment  in  Nigeria,  National  Center  for  Economic 
Management and administration (NCEMA), Ibadan, Nigeria 
Onno  Ruhl  (2010),  “Nigeria’s  youth:  Turning  challenge  into  opportunity”,  a  convocation 
lecture delivered at the Federal University for Technology in Owerri 
World  Bank  (2011),  An  Assessment  of  the  Investment  Climate  in  Nigeria,  Directions  in 
Development, edited by Giuseppe Larossi, Peter Mousley, Ismail Radwan 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
