Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Asia in the world – sustaining the region’s 
transformative momentum 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Wharton  Global  Alumni  Forum:  “Asia  in  the  world  –  sustaining  the  region’s  transformative 
momentum”, Jakarta, 22 June 2012. 
 The global economy is experiencing a period of profound change. Asia is very much at the 
centre of this global change. Asia’s changing role in the global economy has not only been in 
terms of its growing size, but also in terms of its influence in global economic and financial 
developments.  The  issue  before  us  is  whether  Asia  will  continue  its  transformative 
momentum over the medium to longer term, to become an increasingly important source of 
global growth and stability. 
It is my very great honour and pleasure to be here in Jakarta to speak at this Wharton Global 
Alumni Forum. Exactly a decade ago, I was actually invited to speak on the same subject on 
the  state  and  future  of  Asia  at  the  Wharton  School  in  Philadelphia.  Then,  having  just 
emerged from the Asian financial crisis, the region was again being challenged by a series of 
economic and financial shocks, in particular, the bursting of the dot com bubble in the United 
States in the year 2000. Observers had questioned the sustainability of the region’s medium 
and longer term growth prospects. 
Now, five years into the global financial crisis, Asia is faced with an even more challenging 
and uncertain global environment, as significant spillovers originating from Europe and the 
United  States  are  being  felt  by  the  region.  Again,  questions  on  the  sustainability  of  the 
region’s  economic  growth  prospects  are  being  raised.  My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the 
new challenges that are confronting Asia, and whether its resilience built in this decade will 
now enable Asia to rise to these greater and more complex challenges. 
Challenges arising from global spillovers 
Given the degree of openness of most of the Asian economies, Asia is highly integrated with 
the global economy. While Asia benefited from this openness, it also resulted in the region 
being  more  vulnerable  to  global  financial  and  economic  developments.  Many  previous 
episodes of economic recession and crisis were triggered by external shocks, which at times 
exacerbated  and  amplified  domestic  vulnerabilities.  These  include  the  commodity  price 
shocks in the 1970s and ‘80s, the large swings of destabilising capital flows in the 1990s, the 
bursting of the tech bubbles and the SARs epidemic in the early 2000s, and finally the global 
recession which saw an unprecedented decline in global trade.  
The ongoing global financial and economic crisis is resulting in turbulence in the international 
financial markets. In part, this is emanating from the global policy spillovers arising from the 
unprecedented monetary easing, which has resulted in surges of capital inflows in search of 
higher returns in a low interest rate environment. This is followed by reversals arising from 
the  deleveraging  efforts  to  reduce  public  and  private  indebtedness.  These  volatile  capital 
flows in the international financial markets have increased the volatility in exchange rates and 
asset  markets.  The  low  international  interest  rate  environment  has  also  been  a  factor  that 
has increased the prospect for the financialisation of commodity markets. 
Finally, there is the impact of the potential unintended consequences of the global financial 
regulatory  reforms.  The  effort  to  implement  the  new  global  regulatory  reforms  is  already 
underway  in  Asia,  with  many  jurisdictions  making  significant  progress.  These  reforms  are 
aimed  to  significantly  enhance  financial  institutional  soundness  and  safeguard  financial 
stability. Concerns have, however, been raised on the unintended consequences that may 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
arise in the emerging economies, including its potential ramifications on the real economy. 
This underscores the importance to implement these reforms cautiously, including the need 
to conduct impact and behavioural studies, and to consider how the national implementation 
of  these  global  standards  should  reflect  the  respective  domestic  experiences  and 
circumstances. 
Factors underlying the transformation of Asia 
Asia’s rapid growth trajectory over several decades has been underpinned by a number of 
fundamental characteristics. These same characteristics are still present and will continue to 
support  the  ongoing  transformation  that  is  currently  taking  place.  More  recently,  distinct 
strategies  have  been  implemented  to  strengthen  further  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals 
and financial system soundness in the region. These stronger foundations, of steady growth, 
low unemployment, relatively low inflation, and strong and more developed financial systems, 
have  strengthened  Asia’s  resilience  and  its  ability  to  manage  external  vulnerabilities.  They 
have  placed  Asia  today  in  a  stronger  position  to  secure  and  sustain  its  future  growth  and 
stability, compared to a decade ago 
Three  prominent  characteristics  that  are  common  to  most  countries  in  the  region  have 
contributed to Asia’s economic success. First and most important is the economic flexibility of 
Asia – the ability to adjust to changing conditions without being weighed down by structural 
impediments  and  policy  rigidities.  The  significant  investment  in  productivity  enhancements 
and technology is complemented by the high degree of capital and labour mobility. Financial 
reforms for deregulation and greater market orientation and liberalisation have also facilitated 
the region to continually shift resources to new areas of comparative advantage. These have 
not  only  enhanced  Asia’s  competitiveness,  but  also  yielded  a  more  diversified  economic 
structure. More recently, the policy strategy has been to strengthen domestic demand as an 
important  driver  of  growth.  This  will  serve  to  anchor  Asia’s  growth  prospects.  As  domestic 
demand  strengthens,  Asia  is  transitioning  from  being  global  producers  to  becoming  global 
consumers. This trend will also contribute towards more balanced global growth. 
Asia  is  one  of  the  most  diverse  regions  in  the  world  –  in  terms  of  market  size,  stage  of 
development,  resource  endowment,  economic  structure,  financial  sector  development,  and 
market  systems.  Asia  has  leveraged  on  the  complementarities  arising  from  this  diversity. 
This is reflected in the increased cross-border production networks in Asia, where substantial 
gains have been experienced from the region being involved in the entire supply chain for a 
wide range of products and services. Increased intra-regional trade and investment over the 
recent decade has also resulted in a more diversified export structure – in terms of markets 
and products. Going forward, this diversity will continue to present significant opportunities in 
the form of large and growing markets across a wide spectrum of goods and services. 
Accounting for 60 percent of the world’s population, Asia is by far the most populous region 
of  the  world.  This  demographic  advantage  is  a  key  economic  asset  for  the  region.  In  this 
current  decade,  a  young  middle  class  population  has  emerged,  and  it  is  growing  both  in 
number  and  in  affluence.  Asia’s  current  middle  class  of  500  million  people  is  projected  to 
increase  by  more  than  six-fold,  to  exceed  3  billion  people,  by  2030.  This  tremendous 
increase  in  scale  will  significantly  raise  Asia’s  potential  to  be  important  consumers  in  the 
global  economy.  In  parallel,  urbanisation  and  infrastructure  development  will  reinforce  this 
trend.  This  increase  in  consumption  and  the  greater  need  for  investment  will  anchor  the 
growing importance of domestic demand in Asia. 
These fundamentals have been reinforced by the implementation of distinct strategies that 
have been undertaken in this recent decade following the Asian financial crisis, to strengthen 
the region’s ability to manage external shocks. The effectiveness of these reforms was put to 
test during the recent global crisis. While affected by the crisis, the effects on the domestic 
economies  and  financial  systems  have  been  relatively  contained.  Importantly,  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
intermediation has not been disrupted, and the financial systems have continued the supply 
of credit to support the real economy. 
Following  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  wide-ranging  financial  reforms  were  undertaken  to 
strengthen the financial systems of the region. The building of sufficient capital and liquidity 
buffers during good times provided the ability to support the continued credit intermediation 
process.  Improved  regulatory  and  supervisory  approaches,  underpinned  by  enhanced 
governance and risk management practices, have enhanced financial stability in the region. 
Enhanced  surveillance  arrangements  and  a  wider  range  of  policy  tools  have  placed 
policymakers  in  better  state  of  readiness  to  deal  with  problems  in  the  financial  system 
pre-emptively.  Macroprudential  policies  have  also  been  extensively  relied  upon  to  mitigate 
the risks from excesses and imbalances in the financial system. Continued efforts were also 
made  to  further  advance  financial  sector  development  in  the  region.  In  particular,  the 
development  of  the  domestic  bond  market  has  served  to  reinforce  the  foundations  for 
financial  stability  in  Asia.  Financial  activities  have  also  remained  generally  anchored  by 
productive real economic activities. In addition to the region’s strong external position, high 
international reserves and more flexible exchange rates have also enabled Asia to absorb 
and adjust to changing external conditions.  
The increasing cohesiveness of Asia is also a core strength and source of stability for the 
region. Steps have been intensified during this recent decade for greater financial integration. 
The motivation for greater financial integration is not only to unlock the growth potential of the 
region,  but  to  achieve  more  effective  and  efficient  intermediation  of  funds  in  the  region, 
particularly by channelling the large surplus funds in the region to productive investments in 
the  region.  This  would  also  support  regional  economic  integration.  While  Asia’s  trade  with 
economies  outside  the  region  has  doubled  since  2000,  intra-Asia  trade  has  tripled.  Now, 
more than fifty five percent of Asia’s total export is within the region. Intra-regional investment 
activity has also increased significantly during this decade. 
It is important to recognise that the approach to a more integrated Asia is different from that 
adopted by Europe. In the early 2000s, a study undertaken by the ASEAN ten economies 
concluded  that  the  region  did  not  have  the  preconditions  for  a  single  currency.  A  different 
route would therefore be taken to achieve greater integration. For the ASEAN region, it would 
involve  a  sequenced  liberalisation  of  the  financial  sector  and  capital  account,  and  the 
development of regional financial markets and financial infrastructure including the regional 
payments  and  settlement  system.  This  arrangement  also  allows  for  a  gradual  pace  of 
integration to ensure domestic readiness and the flexibility to take into account the prevailing 
conditions  and  stage  of  development  of  the  participating  financial  system.  Regional 
collaborative efforts also have been significantly enhanced in the area of crisis management. 
The  region  is  now  well  ahead  in  the  areas  of  regional  surveillance  and  supervisory 
arrangement,  and  in  crisis  prevention,  management  and  resolution.  Regional  support 
mechanisms have also been established. There are also regional institutional arrangements 
in place for the active sharing of information on the emerging risks to regional stability and on 
building  domestic  capacities  and  to  coordinate  regional  responses  in  the  event  of  eminent 
risks to the region. These efforts will be further strengthened into the future.  
Islamic finance as a growth area in Asia 
The  rapid  integration  of Islamic  finance  into  the  international  financial system  is  a  growing 
feature in the financial landscape of Asia. Developments in several emerging economies in 
Asia have seen the rapid expansion of Islamic finance. Global Islamic financial assets are 
now  estimated  to  be  more  than  1  trillion  US  dollars.  While  more  than  60  percent  of  the 
world’s Muslim population is in Asia, the interest in Islamic finance transcends to beyond this 
community. The inherent principle of Islamic finance, which requires financial transactions to 
be  accompanied  by  underlying  economic  activity,  ensures  the  close  link  between  the 
expansion in financial assets with the real economy. It also increases its potential in fostering 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
fund  raising  and 
investment  activities 
sustainable growth. This has positioned Islamic finance to be well-anchored to serve the real 
economy,  and  enhances  its  potential  as  a  sustainable  and  stable  form  of  financial 
intermediation.  
With the intensification of the internationalisation of Islamic finance, it has an increasing role 
in  bridging  economies  through  the  mobilisation  and  channelling  of  funds  to  productive 
investment activities across borders. More than 600 Islamic financial institutions operate in 
more  than  75  countries.  The  sukuk  market  is  fast  becoming  an  important  platform  for 
international 
increased 
cross-border flows. From an outstanding amount of 33 billion US dollars in 2006, the sukuk 
market  has  expanded  to  180  billion  US  dollars  by  the  end  of  2011,  of  which  66  percent 
originated  from  Asia.  There  has  also  been  a  growing  trend  for  multi-currency  sukuk 
issuances in Asia, attracting global investors to participate in this market.  
In reinforcing the internationalisation of Islamic finance, global initiatives have been taken to 
strengthen its institutional and international infrastructure, with emphasis in ensuring financial 
stability.  International  prudential  standards  and  best  practices  have  been  issued  by  the 
Islamic Financial Services Board, which was established in 2002. The industry is also guided 
by international accounting standards that have been issued by the Accounting and Auditing 
Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions,  which  was  established  in  1990.  The 
International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM),  established  in  2010,  is  a 
further  global  collaborative  effort  to  enhance  liquidity  management  in  the  Islamic  financial 
system.  
that  are  generating 
Conclusion 
To fully realise the Asian potential, continuing the transformative momentum of the region will 
not  be  complete  without  ensuring  that  the  benefits  of  development  are  widely  shared. 
Experience has shown, even in the advanced economies, that when inequality is high and a 
significant  proportion  of  the  population  is  excluded  from  the  opportunity  to  participate 
meaningfully  in  income  and  wealth  generation,  instability  follows.  To  ensure  that  rapid 
economic  growth  and  transformation  does  not  further  widen  the  social  divide  and 
disenfranchise  those  who  remain  excluded  from  its  benefits,  access  to  high-quality, 
healthcare, social security and financial inclusion is now an important focus of the region.  
The contour of the global economy is fundamentally changing amidst mounting challenges 
and continued uncertainties. In this environment, Asia has become an important source of 
stability. While the region is affected by the ongoing economic and financial crisis originating 
from  Europe  and  the  United  States,  the  Asian  region  continues  to  remain  on  a  growth 
trajectory, although at a more modest level. Greater regional cohesiveness and cooperation, 
however,  has  enhanced  Asia’s  potential  to  address  these  new  challenges  that  are 
confronting  the  region.  The  success  of  the  region  is  not  only  in  the  interest  of  the  Asian 
economies, but the world. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
