Deepak Mohanty: Statistics and the Reserve Bank – some reflections 
Opening remarks by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  Annual  Statistics  Conference  2012  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Chandigarh, 
17 March 2012. 
 Deputy Governors, Dr. Subir Gokarn and Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty; distinguished statisticians 
and  economists  from  the  academia;  Regional  Director  Chandigarh;  heads  of  select 
departments;  Shri  A.  B.  Chakraborty,  Officer-in-Charge  Department  of  Statistics  and 
Information  Management  (DSIM)  and  friends.  I  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  you  all  to  the 
Annual  Conference  2012  of  the  Department  of  Statistics  and  Information  Management 
(DSIM). For the first time, this conference is organised outside Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
which  provides  an  informal  atmosphere  for  bonding  and  brain  storming  needed  for  a 
research conference like this. This conference provides a platform to the officers of DSIM to 
present their research work before the experts and receive their feedback in order to make 
analysis more meaningful for policy and research. I thank the distinguished professors who 
have consented to discuss various papers presented by my colleagues in DSIM: Prof. Manoj 
Panda  (CESS,  Hyderabad),  Prof.  N.  R.  Bhanumurthy  (NIPFP,  New  Delhi),  Prof.  Subrata 
Sarkar (IGIDR, Mumbai), Prof. Surinder Kumar (CRRID, Chandigarh), Prof. Mahajan (Punjab 
University, Chandigarh), Prof. Chetan Ghate (ISI Delhi), Prof. Shalabh (IIT Kanpur). You all 
bring  together  plenty  of  expertise  and  experience  in  the  field  of  theory  and  practice  of 
statistical research for economic policy making which is of great value to us.  
Statistics  as  a  method  of  systematic  learning  from  observation  and  experience  has  been 
practiced  for  centuries.  India  has  a  distinction  of  starting  early  in  compilation  of  economic 
statistics for analysis and policy making. Of late, however, there have been some concerns 
over  the  quality  of  economic  statistics.  This  underscores  the  need  for  renewed  focus  and 
greater organisational efforts for improving the quality of official statistics. 
Statistics is a public good as it is necessary for empowerment of citizens. Today most of the 
economic  analysis  has  statistical  foundation.  Therefore,  a  solid  statistical  grounding  and 
soiling  the  hands  with  data  are  basic  prerequisites  for  the  making  of  a  good  empirical 
economist. This is evident from the presence of many eminent economists amongst us in this 
conference.  Actually,  many  renowned  economists  started  their  career  as  statisticians.  For 
example,  Professor  Milton  Friedman,  Nobel  laureate  and  perhaps  the  most  celebrated 
monetarist  economist  of  the  past  century  began  his  career  as  a  statistician  in  Washington 
DC. Nobel laureate Simon Kuznets presented a more scientific approach to macroeconomic 
analysis by laying the foundations of national accounts statistics. 
Central  banking  today  is  more  challenging  than  ever  and  availability  of  reliable  and  timely 
information is the key to effective policy making. As a central bank, we are responsible for 
generating  various  macro-financial  statistics  collected  both  from  primary  and  secondary 
sources in the process of implementing our policies. As the Reserve Bank boasts of one of 
the largest body of statisticians in the country, let me start with the role of statisticians in our 
organisation and highlight the achievements and challenges for DSIM. 
The statistician in the Reserve Bank performs a multifarious role. DSIM provides statistical 
service by way of collection, compilation, analysis and dissemination of information relating 
to  monetary,  banking,  corporate  and  external  sectors.  Another  major  area  of  focus  is  to 
provide inputs for policy formulation, conducting surveys and to carry out research activities 
in  conformity  with  the  needs  of  the  Bank.  Over  the  years,  it  has  widened  its  scope  and 
spectrum  of  data  collection  and  dissemination.  A  key  achievement  in  this  regard  is  the 
improvement of the Bank’s web enabled Data Warehouse, popular among the researchers 
as  Database  on  Indian  Economy  (DBIE).  Today  various  flagship  data  publications  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Bank like the Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy originate from DBIE. A large amount 
of downloadable data is made available as a public good on near real time basis on the RBI 
website.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  a  more  user  friendly  version  of  DBIE  is  being  released 
today. 
Towards information management and dissemination, the system of data submission under 
the  Online  Return  Filing  System  (ORFS)  is  further  strengthened.  At  present,  40  returns  of 
various departments like DBOD, DBS, FED, FMD, DPSS and MPD are submitted using this 
platform. At the same time, the Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) project on 
the standardisation in the reporting of financial data has made considerable progress during 
the year with 42 returns taken up for implementation.  
During the last one year, the Department has made considerable progress in identifying and 
filling  data  gaps.  This  includes  implementation  of  Co-ordinated  Direct  Investment  Survey 
(CDIS), extension of Master Office File (MOF) with population census and economic census, 
development of service price and production index for banking service, construction of house 
price  index,  collation  of  time  series  data  on  rural  wages1,  system  of  Loan  Registration 
Numbers (LRNs) for ECBs under automatic route. 
The  research  activities  of  the  Department  encompass  economic  measurement,  analysis, 
modelling  and  forecasting  of  economic  growth,  inflation,  corporate  performance  and  other 
macroeconomic  indicators  and  capturing  economic  agents’  response  to  expected  macro 
developments for forward looking monetary policy formulation. Based on various univariate 
and multivariate models, growth and inflation projected path is presented in the form of fan 
charts.  With  inflation  running  higher  than  RBI’s  comfort  level  for  the  last  two  years,  the 
analysis of growth-inflation trade-off carried out by the Department was particularly useful for 
calibrating monetary policy actions.  
The surveys conducted by the Department particularly on macroeconomic changes continue 
to  provide  valuable  inputs  for  forward  looking  monetary  policy  formulation.  These  include 
Industrial  Outlook  Survey  (IOS),  Order  Books,  Inventories  and  Capacity  Utilisation  Survey 
(OBICUS),  Credit  Conditions  Survey  (CrCS),  Inflation  Expectations  Survey  of  Households 
(IESH),  Consumer  Confidence  Survey  (CCS)  and  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters 
(SPF).Key  findings  of  most  of  these  surveys  are  now  published  on  the  RBI  website 
simultaneously  with  the  Macroeconomic  and  Monetary  Developments  every  quarter.  This 
has increased visibility of our survey output and has improved considerably the timeliness in 
dissemination of survey results. I am sure availability of these surveys now in public domain 
will spur research in these areas. 
Understanding asset price developments has gained increasing importance, especially after 
the global financial crisis. In this context, the Department has made considerable progress in 
compiling House Price Index (HPI) based on registration price. The coverage has increased 
to nine cities now. Regional offices of DSIM are making important contribution towards this. 
Further,  in  order  to  complement  this,  the  Department  has  introduced  an  Asset  Price 
Monitoring  System  (APMS)  based  on  housing  loan  account  information  as  available  with 
banks. Financial stability analysis is another important focus area of RBI. I am happy to note 
that the Department is making important contribution in this area by providing inputs such as 
financial stress indicators and asset prices. 
Notwithstanding the achievements, let me share a few challenges for the Department going 
forward.  
First,  in  the  wake  of  financial  crisis,  quality  and  timely  availability  of  statistics  has  become 
essential.  The  information  and  analytical  requirements  have  become  more  diversified  with 
added  emphasis  on  financial  stability.  With  structured  monetary  policy  reviews  becoming 
                                                 
1  Based on Labour Bureau data. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
more  frequent,  the  need  for  high  quality  and  frequent  forward  looking  information  has 
increased. At the same time, application of statistics in solving operational issues has gained 
increasing  importance.  These  developments  have  contributed  to  the  demand  for  trained 
statisticians across the departments of the Bank. The Department, being the second largest 
pool  of  statisticians  after  ISI  in  the  country,  must  rise  to  the  occasion  to  serve  the 
organisation better.  
Second, as central bank of the country, we have the responsibility of providing a sizable part 
of  macro-financial  statistics.  Our  publications  have  a  standard  that  provides  confidence  to 
data  users.  Even  for  secondary  data  like  price  statistics,  users  prefer  to  consult  RBI 
publications. Therefore, the responsibility of maintaining data quality, timeliness and making 
data  meaningful  inevitably  falls  on  DSIM.  The  Department  should  make  greater  use  of 
technology to validate and improve data quality. 
Third, there are some surveys on macroeconomic changes which have not progressed to our 
desired  level  of  satisfaction.  We  have  made  a  beginning  on  collection  of  data  on  trading 
sector and employment opportunities of fresh graduates. But we need to expedite and bring 
out  these  survey  results  soon.  Another  important  indicator  which  provides  early  signs  of 
overall economic activity is retail sales. A quarterly survey on retail sales across cities may 
be initiated with the help of regional offices. 
Fourth, the Department is involved in various data gap and statistical measurement issues 
through  its  participation  in  various  committees  within  and  outside  the  RBI.  One  particular 
issue,  that  has  received  renewed  attention  across  the  globe  in  view  of  the  complexity  of 
inflation dynamics, is measurement of prices – commodity prices, consumer prices and asset 
prices.  In  recent  years,  there  is  greater  institutional  effort  for  improving  measurement  of 
prices in India. We have a new CPI (rural, urban and combined) now. The base of WPI was 
also  revised.  There  is,  however,  considerable  scope  for  improving  the  coverage  and 
reporting of prices data besides research on measurement of prices and inflation, in terms of 
commodities/asset classes, stages of production as well as various sectors and regions. Now 
that  we  have  a  more  representative  CPI  series,  institutional  efforts  need  to  be  directed 
towards compilation of a Producers Price Index (PPI) as well as a Service Price Index. 
Fifth,  regional  market  intelligence  or  statistical  intelligence  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  providing 
important  inputs  to  monetary  policy  making.  For  example,  the  Bank  of  England  (BoE)  has 
established a regional statistical data collection system covering as many as 25 indicators 
including  business  conditions,  price  variation,  labour  and  employment.  These  are  different 
from  the  qualitative  surveys.  Information  so  collected  is  analysed  and  transformed  into 
scores which forms an important input in the deliberations of the Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC)  of  the  BoE.  India  is  a  country  with  significant  regional  variations.  Hence  regional 
inputs  are  valuable  for  policy  making.  With  its  reorganised  structure  and  envisaged  wider 
presence of regional offices in major centres, the Department may put a similar system of 
gathering  relevant  statistics  and  market  intelligence,  particularly  in  the  area  of  prices  and 
agricultural conditions to aid policy formulation at the national level. 
Sixth, as a part of the on-going work with DCM on forecasting of demand for currency and 
coins, it is necessary to conduct focused regional surveys relating to (i) availability/shortages 
of coins/currency notes, (ii) regional practice and usage of currency notes, and (iii) estimation 
of counterfeit currency notes in the system. In addition, the regional offices of the Department 
could  be  directly  involved  in  conducting  surveys  on  financial  inclusion,  particularly 
assessment of financial inclusion outcomes in the villages following the outreach programme 
of the Bank.  
Seventh, the Department has noticeable presence in a number of central office departments, 
like Department of External Investment and Operations (DEIO), Monetary Policy Department 
(MPD), 
Information 
Technology (DIT), Department of Payment and Settlement Systems (DPSS), Department of 
Banking Supervision (DBS) and Financial Stability Unit (FSU). It is desirable that our officers 
Internal  Debt  Management  Department  (IDMD),  Department  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in these departments provide analytical inputs for policy and operational issues and come out 
with  research  papers.  These  papers  could  be  presented  in  conferences  and  published 
eventually  in  the  RBI  Working  Paper  Series.  This  will  make  research  more  valuable  in 
furthering our organisational objectives.  
Eighth,  focused  and  determined  approach  to  research  across  various  units,  including  the 
regional  offices,  should  be  pursued  so  that  research  agenda  being  adopted  by  the 
Department is accomplished in a timely manner. For data management and dissemination, 
technology must be harnessed to its fullest extent. There is also a need to strengthen the 
modelling  and  forecasting  capabilities  towards  developing  a  full  fledged  forecasting  suite 
including DSGE models.  
Finally,  I  congratulate  the  Department  for  its  many  achievements.  However,  there  are 
challenges  ahead,  to  some  of  which  I  have  drawn  your  attention.  As  noted  statistician 
John Tukey  once  observed,  “An  approximate  answer  to  the  right  problem  is  worth  a  good 
deal more than an exact answer to an approximate problem.” I see the demand for statistical 
skills  and  statistics  in  the  Bank  growing  as  we  grapple  with  many  questions.  I  hope  the 
deliberations of this conference will bring academics and policy makers closer and lead to 
strengthening our statistical analysis and system. I wish the conference all success. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
