Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Asian money, bonds and derivatives in the new global 
economy 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
13th Annual Conference of Fixed Income, Money Market and Derivatives Association of India 
(FIMMDA) and Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI), Kuala Lumpur, 27 January 2012. 
 It has been more than half a decade since the beginning of the global financial crisis, and its 
ramifications  continue  to  reverberate  across  the  world.  Currently,  the  global  financial  and 
economic landscape continues to be confronted with stress and uncertainty, stemming from 
the prevailing structural weaknesses, deleveraging of the private financial and non-financial 
sectors,  and  the  escalating  strains  in  public  finances  in  the  advanced  economies.  Despite 
these  significant  near-term  challenges,  the  fundamental  global  economic  and  financial 
transformation  that  commenced  prior  to  the  crisis  has  continued  unabated.  A  new  global 
economy is emerging. The rise in significance of the emerging economies is resulting in a 
fundamental realignment in the global landscape as the balance of global economic strength 
shifts  to  the  emerging  economies,  with  its  consequent  implications  on  long-term  global 
economic and financial flows. With the rapid growth in domestic demand, reinforced by the 
vast  productive  investment  opportunities  within  and  across  the  emerging  economies,  it  is 
projected that the emerging world will account for 60 percent of total world output by 2030, 
higher by 20 percent from its current level.  
It is my pleasure to welcome you to Malaysia for this 13th Annual Conference that is being 
organised by the Fixed Income, Money Market and Derivatives Association of India and the 
Primary Dealers Association of India. We are most pleased to host this conference here in 
Kuala Lumpur. The theme of this conference, “Asian Money, Bonds and Derivatives in the 
New Global Economy”, is a relevant topic to be discussed in this period of transition to an 
increasingly multipolar world, in which Asia together with other emerging regions will have an 
increasingly more important role.  
Asia’s potential and regional integration 
While this recent global financial crisis has provided us with challenges, it has also seen the 
resilience  of  Asia  in  weathering  a  number  of  major  shocks  in  the  international  financial 
markets. Asian financial systems have demonstrated the capacity to continue to function and 
to meet the demands of its significant investment requirements. Moreover, the trend towards 
greater regional financial integration will provide for a more effective and efficient channeling 
of the sizeable surplus funds to such activities within the region. This increased intra-regional 
economic  and  financial  activities  is  already  taking  place.  The  economic  integration  is 
supported by the strong demand from the growing middle class Asian population, which is 
projected to reach 3.3 billion by 2030. The intra-regional trade in Asia now represents more 
than 50 percent of total trade in the region, increasing from 32 percent in 1995. Intra-regional 
investment activities have also been on a rising trend.  
With  the  strong  economic  fundamentals  and  the  positive  growth  prospects  of  Asia, 
international  and  regional  financial  institutions  are  also  now  shifting  their  focus  into  the 
region. With the high savings rate in Asia, and of its massive requirement for infrastructure 
development,  the  region  would  benefit  significantly  from  more  effective  and  efficient 
intermediation  of  Asia’s  surplus 
intra-regional  cross-border  portfolio 
investments have already increased to 28 percent of total assets holdings in 2011 compared 
with  21  percent  in  2001.  The  gains  from  greater  regional  financial  integration  will  be  far-
reaching as it will not only bring about a more efficient allocation of resources in the region 
but it will act as a catalyst for greater regional economic growth. Over the coming years, as 
Indeed, 
funds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
growth experienced in the developed economies is expected to remain slow in the aftermath 
of  the  financial  and  debt  crisis,  the  growth  performance  of  Asia  is  expected  to  continue 
resulting in the region becoming a more important component of the global economy.  
Asian  funding  markets  have  also  remained  highly  accessible  during  this  period  with  Asian 
names enjoying strong demand and attractive funding costs at a time when the developed 
countries  funding  markets  have  tightened.  During  this  more  challenging  time,  Asian 
sovereigns  such  as  Indonesia,  Philippines,  Thailand,  Sri  Lanka,  Vietnam  and  Malaysia 
continue  to  successfully  tap  the  market  and  to  issue  bonds  with  tenure  up  to  30-years.  In 
addition,  as  financial  markets  in  Asia  become  more  developed,  the  markets  now have  the 
capacity to transact large quantities with cost effective pricing. In 2011, Malaysia issued the 
first  10  year  global  sovereign  USD  Sukuk,  with  the  issuance  size  of  2  billion,  under  an 
innovative Shariah principle of Wakala which recorded the lowest absolute yields achieved 
by an Asian sovereign for a new USD issuance. Another recent landmark issuance on the 
domestic front is by PLUS Berhad, the largest toll operator in Malaysia, with the issuance of 
a  record  size  of  RM30.6  billion  programme,  equivalent  to  USD9.7  billion,  with  maturities 
ranging from 5 years to 27 years.  
The  depth  and  breadth  of  Asian  capital  markets  have  drawn  investors  to  expand  their 
investment  activities  to  this  region.  Even  central  banks,  as  traditionally  conservative 
investors,  are  also  venturing  into  investing  part  of  their  reserves,  in  each  other’s  markets. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  has  since  2003,  gradually  embarked  on  investments  in  regional 
markets.  This  includes  investments  in  the  Indian  rupee  market.  As  an  approved  Foreign 
Institutional  Investor,  we  have  also  been  able  to  actively  participate  in  the  Indian  rupee 
market.  
Progression in the Malaysian financial markets 
Progressive  efforts  have  been  made  to  transform  Malaysia’s  financial  sector  with  a  major 
dimension of the transformation involving achieving greater regional integration. Following a 
decade,  institutional  and  financial  infrastructure  development  that  focused  on  enhancing 
domestic capacity of the financial sector while evolving a more competitive environment. We 
have the foundations to take our financial sector to a new level of development that will focus 
on new areas that will further strengthen the competitiveness and efficiency of the financial 
sector and its potential role in facilitating Malaysia’s ongoing economic transformation and in 
strengthening our linkages in the region. 
As Malaysia evolves and the new financial landscape emerges, one prominent area of focus 
is  the  development  of  deep,  liquid  and  efficient  financial  markets  in  particular,  the 
development  of  our  domestic  bond  market.  Malaysia’s  bond  market  has  already  grown  to 
MYR867  billion  or  105  percent  of  GDP  in  2011,  and  has  become  one  of  the  largest  debt 
securities  market  in  South  East  Asia  which  has  now  been  liberalized to  allow  issuance  by 
foreign corporation and in multiple currency. Our Islamic capital markets have also thrived, 
with a growing presence of international issuers and investors operating in both the ringgit 
and foreign currency sukuk markets in Malaysia. We have seen new innovative structures for 
sukuk  issuances  including  a  world’s  first  issuance  in  Renminbi  from  Malaysia’s  own 
sovereign wealth fund, Khazanah Holdings. The money and foreign exchange markets also 
continue  to  grow  in  depth  and  liquidity.  The  volumes  transacted  in  the  domestic  money 
market  and 
trillion  and 
RM9.21 trillion  trades  respectively.  Participation  in  these  markets  have  also  broadened 
significantly  with  the  growing  presence  of  new  issuers,  banks,  institutions  and  investors  in 
general, including a growing presence of regional players.  
In  moving  forward,  measures  will  continue  to  be  introduced  to  broaden  further  the 
participation of regional players in the domestic market through progressive liberalization of 
the  foreign  exchange  administration  rules  and  also  the  development  of  cross-border 
foreign  exchange  market  have  now  reached  RM23.5 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
settlement infrastructures to enable more efficient and cost effective foreign currency trading 
and settlements.  
Arrangements supporting the regional integration process 
The  region  has  more  recently  worked  collectively  towards  establishing  arrangements  to 
support the economic and financial integration process. In particular, the ASEAN region has 
already benefited from the implementation of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (FTA), which was 
established to increase ASEAN’s competitive edge as a production base in the world market 
through the elimination of trade barriers within ASEAN. This is now further strengthened with 
the implementation of the ASEAN Investment Area which was adopted to promote greater 
flows  of  capital,  skilled  labour  and  technology  within  the  region.  In  the  area  of  financial 
markets,  the  ASEAN  Capital  Markets  Forum  Blueprint  is  also  working  towards  achieving 
significant progress in building a regionally integrated market. This vision encapsulates free 
movements of capital, freedom for issuers to raise capital anywhere and for investors to have 
access to investment avenues anywhere within the region. In such a market, investors would 
be  able  to  trade  in  ASEAN  capital  market  products  freely  in  any  ASEAN  market  at  a 
competitive fee from a single access point, with capital market intermediaries being able to 
provide  services  throughout  ASEAN.  The  strong  cross-border  linkages  of  an  integrated 
ASEAN capital market provide vast business opportunities for countries to capitalize on the 
diverse comparative advantages in this region.  
As an access point, Malaysia is  well positioned to be one of the gateways for non-ASEAN 
countries, institutions and investors to participate in these markets. Malaysia has a facilitative 
environment  with  a  strong  regulatory  and  supervision  to  support  business  activities  while 
safeguarding financial stability. In addition, there has also been the strengthening of bilateral 
economic  and 
theme  across  Asia. 
Supplementary to these affiliations, is also a strong trend to increase participation in Asia’s 
enormous growth potential through affiliations in regional bodies. Within the ASEAN grouping, 
among  the  areas  of  priority  is  the  deepening  of  cooperation  to  accelerate  the  role  of  the 
financial sector in supporting the realization of the ASEAN Economic Community by 2015.  
ties,  which  has  become  a  prevalent 
financial 
Risk mitigation as Asia strives for regional integration 
The  events  surrounding  the  recent  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  provide  us  with  many 
important lessons. While exposures to numerous financial markets bring about tremendous 
economical  and  financial  benefits,  it  is  not  without  risks.  Financial  integration  between 
markets,  if  not  well  designed,  can  lead  to  costly  financial  implications.  Hence,  the  path  to 
integration  can  expect  its  associated  challenges  that  will  need  to  be  addressed.  In 
implementing institutional arrangements across the region, it can be expected that individual 
countries will have to balance national priorities while seeking to strengthen their place in the 
global market. 
Asia has therefore adopted a different approach to regional integration. The effort towards 
integration 
ties, 
complemented by strengthening the resilience and stability of the financial sector. Towards 
this, regional surveillance mechanisms are being put in place reinforced by financial support 
facilities and an integrated framework for crisis resolution. Various forums among regulators 
and  central  banks  are  already  in  place  across  most  of  Asia  to  collectively  enhance  crisis 
management. Such fora also serves as financial safety nets across the region to ensure that 
the  financial  institutions  operating  in  this  region  will  be  able  to  withstand  the  destabilizing 
spill-over  effects  of  a  global  financial  crisis  in  an  orderly  manner.  Malaysia  is  already 
implementing  such  arrangements,  with  swap  agreements  and  cross  border  collateral 
arrangements that will serve as an alternative avenue for banks operating in Malaysia and 
the region to obtain liquidity for their efficient functioning including during challenging times. 
the  perspective  of  strengthening  economic  and  business 
from 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Bilateral arrangements that are now being entered into will allow for the acceptance of each 
others’ currency and securities as collateral.  
Strengthening economic and financial ties with India 
The  potential  for  collaboration  between  India  and  Malaysia  is  tremendous.  Historic  and 
cultural ties originate many years back and form a strong foundation for the relations to be 
strengthened  going  forward.  Currently,  Malaysia’s  exports  to  India  has  amounted  close  to 
USD9  billion  in  2011,  equivalent  to  4.1  percent  of  Malaysia’s  total  exports,  while  the 
outstanding  direct  investments  from  India  is  now  close  to  half  a  billion  USD.  The  financial 
sector has an important role to be a catalyst to facilitate growth in such trade and investment 
activities  between  India  and  Malaysia.  The  establishment  of  our  relationship  has  already 
begun with the issuance of a full commercial banking license to an Indian bank to operate 
here in Malaysia in 2010. A licence has also been granted to an Indian fund manager.  
Rise of islamic finance in the new global economy 
Another development in several emerging economies in Asia and the Middle East is the rapid 
growth of Islamic finance. An important development in this decade has been the growing 
significance  of  the  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  increased  role  in 
mobilising  and  channeling  funds  to  productive  investment  activities  across  borders. 
Expanding steadily at a double digit pace of growth, total Islamic financial assets currently is 
estimated to be more than US$1 trillion. With more than 600 Islamic financial institutions now 
operating  in  more  than  75  countries,  countries  from  Asia,  Middle  East  and  Africa  are 
increasingly participating in cross-border financial markets. In financing trade and investment 
activities, Islamic finance has influenced a new global pattern of trade and financial flows.  
Islamic finance serves as an important channel for more efficient allocation of funds across 
borders  and  diversification  of  risks.  It  has  facilitated  stronger  financial  and  economic  ties 
between  Asia  and  Middle  East.  The  sukuk  market  in  particular,  has  become  an  important 
avenue for international fund raising and investment activities that generate significant cross-
border flows. The sukuk market has experienced tremendous growth in the recent few years 
from  an  outstanding  amount  of  USD33  billion  in  2006  to  USD180  billion  as  at  end  2011. 
Malaysia is now evolving to become a major multi-currency bond and sukuk market.  
Important  in  this  development  are  the  initiatives  that  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the 
institutional and international infrastructure of Islamic finance. Most important is the emphasis 
being given to the development of the international financial infrastructure relating to financial 
stability. The Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) 
was  established  in  1990  and  in  2002,  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  was 
established  as  the  international  prudential  standard  setting  body  for  the  Islamic  finance 
industry  in  the  areas  of  risk  management,  capital  adequacy,  governance,  conduct  of 
business  and  supervisory  process.  From  ten  members  at  its  inception,  the  IFSB  is  now  a 
189 strong member institution comprising mainly regulatory and supervisory authorities.  
A more recent initiative is the establishment of the Islamic Financial Stability Forum (IFSF) as 
a platform for greater engagement between the regulatory authorities in the Islamic financial 
system and promoting more effective cross-border cooperation.  
Efforts now is focused on putting in place arrangements for enhancing liquidity management 
in the Islamic financial system. The International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation 
(IILM) was therefore established in 2010 as a collaborative effort between 12 central banks 
and  two  multilateral  organizations  to  facilitate  effective  liquidity  management  solutions 
through the periodic issuance of short-term Shariah-compliant financial instruments.  
Let  me  now  conclude  my  remarks.  This  decade  has  been  a  defining  moment  for  Asia, 
characterized  by  rapid  global  expansion  and  increased  internationalisation.  Among  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
important  trends  are  the  significant  actions  taken  by  many  emerging  economies  in  Asia 
towards  increased  liberalisation  as  well  initiatives  toward  strengthening  of  cross-border 
linkages. Moving forward, it is essential for us to continue to establish strong collaboration 
given the dynamic nature of the economies and financial markets today. As the new decade 
beckons the prospects for new opportunities, our ability to capitalize on these opportunities 
and  realize  its  potential  will  be  increasingly  determined  by  our  capability  and  capacity  in 
building such strong and lasting regional and global linkages.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
