Glenn Stevens: Innovation, stability and the role of the Payments System 
Board 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Payments Clearing Association (APCA) 20th Anniversary Symposium, Sydney, 28 May 2012. 
 I have not spoken publicly on payments system matters for some time, but it would be hard 
to find a better moment and a more appropriate event to take up the issue once more. This 
symposium  of  course  marks  20  years  of  the  Australian  Payments  Clearing  Association, 
which  was  set  up  as  a  vehicle  to  coordinate  decision-making  in  relation  to  clearing  and 
settlement following the recommendations of the Brady and Martin Reports in the years prior. 
It effectively replaced the Australian Clearing House Association, which was largely focused 
on cheques – the dominant payment system of the time.  
Sharing the stage with APCA in the early days was the Australian Payments System Council, 
which had been established in the 1980s as an advisory body to the Government aimed at 
promoting and influencing the development of payment systems. The Council was wound up 
when the Payments System Board was established in 1998, following the recommendations 
of the Wallis Inquiry.  
APCA itself has evolved over the years. New clearing streams have been added and it has 
moved more into an industry representation role. Its make-up has also evolved; for instance I 
note that it was originally chaired by a representative of the Reserve Bank, an arrangement 
that ended in 1998.  
All this change over an extended period is a sure sign that there has long been recognition of 
how  critical  governance  arrangements  are  to  payments  systems.  The  same  debates  that 
have occurred in Australia on these issues are repeated around the world. In fact, while the 
institutional arrangements for payments vary enormously from one country to another, it is 
remarkable  how  similar  the  debates  are  in  each  of  those  countries.  I  will  be  dealing  with 
some of those issues today.  
The other reason that it is a good time to be speaking about payments is that, as I am sure 
many  of  you  are  aware,  the  conclusions  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Strategic  Review  of 
Innovation are due to be released very soon. In fact they will be out within the next couple of 
weeks. I cannot pre-empt the detailed findings, but I will share with you some of the major 
themes. Naturally, most people will focus on the implications for the payments industry. But 
the conclusions will also have implications for the way that the Payments System Board goes 
about its business in relation to retail payments issues. That is as it should be. The Board is 
not a static entity either and its role evolves over time.  
My focus today, then, will be both innovation and the role of the Payments System Board. 
But with regard to the latter, I will talk not just about challenges in the retail payments sphere, 
but also about the other role of the Board that is probably less known to most of the people in 
this  room  –  that  is,  the  regulation  of  financial  market  infrastructure  in  order  to  preserve 
financial stability. This takes up a sizeable and increasing part of the Board’s time.  
Payments innovation: why is it important? 
Why  all  the  focus  on  payments  innovation?  It  might,  on  its  face,  seem  strange  for  the 
Reserve  Bank  to  have  devoted  a  considerable  amount  of  time  and  effort  to  reviewing 
innovation in the payments system.  
For  one  thing,  Australia  has  received  great  dividends  from  allowing,  in  most  cases, 
commercial imperatives to drive the process of delivering new products, including payment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
products. We of course take a more cautious approach when it comes to matters of risk in 
the financial sector and we have seen how important those considerations are over the past 
few  years.  But  in  general,  the  notion  that  a  regulator  should  be  involved  in  matters  of 
innovation  might  be  seen  as  inconsistent  with  the  regulatory  philosophy  in  Australia. 
Certainly the Payments System Board has been reluctant to “pick winners”.  
The  other  reason  that  it  may  seem  slightly  anomalous  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to  be 
preoccupied with payments innovation is that we see a great deal of it around us and every 
sign  that  there  is  significantly  more  around  the  corner.  If  we  think  about  the  rapid  rise  of 
PayPal, the spread of chip and now contactless card payments, and the enormous amount of 
energy that is being focused on mobile payments at the moment, there is clearly no shortage 
of innovation in payments.  
There  is,  however,  a  problem,  and  one  about  which  the  various  players  in  the  payments 
space  themselves  have  become  increasingly  concerned.  It  is  that  the  innovation  in  the 
customer-facing  technology  is  moving  at  a  pace  much  greater  than  the  underlying 
infrastructure.  This  is  a  problem  because  innovation  in  a  network  industry  is  not  like 
innovation  in  other  industries.  No  matter  how  much  time,  effort  and  money  a  financial 
institution puts into its own systems and the ways in  which customers interface with those 
systems, the payments service it can provide is only as good as the arrangements that allow 
payments to pass between institutions. These arrangements are in the cooperative space; 
not even the most innovative payments provider has the capacity to control these on its own.  
It  is  easy  to  see  how  this  could  act  as  a  constraint  on  innovation.  Cooperative 
decision-making  between  competitors  is  notoriously  difficult.  The  implications  of  different 
business  mixes,  strategies  and  investment  cycles  can  easily  derail  cooperation,  not  to 
mention the constraints of committee-based decision-making. These are classic coordination 
issues, where some external impetus may be required to initiate change.  
Even  if  coordination  problems  could  be  overcome  for  an  innovation  that  is  in  the  public 
interest, institutions collectively might find it difficult to make a business case to invest. Once 
again,  this  largely  seems  to  be  a  quirk  of  the  payments  industry.  Payment  systems  are 
“two-sided markets”. In other words, the market must satisfy two distinct sets of customers; 
for instance, a point of sale payment system can be successful only if it is adopted by both 
consumers and merchants. In two-sided markets the price faced by each set of end-users 
may be altered so that the party with the greatest decision-making power faces a low price. 
This  is  most  evident  in  the  credit  card  market,  where  consumers  typically  face  a  low  or 
negative  price  while  merchants  face  a  relatively  high  price.  The  flow  of  interbank  fees  to 
support this has traditionally made issuing cards profitable for financial institutions. Because 
payment systems often do not simply operate on a user-pays model, establishing a business 
case can be more difficult than in other industries, even where there is a clear demand from 
end-users.  
This means there is a case for some kind of mechanism to overcome coordination problems 
and  to  ensure  that  any  disconnect  between  the  public  interest  and  the  business  case  is 
properly managed. But any intervention by a regulator like the Payments System Board of 
the Reserve Bank must of course be carefully considered.  
The Payments System Board will be addressing the issue from two different perspectives. 
First,  it  will  be  expressing  some  views  about  the  governance  arrangements  within  the 
industry,  with  the  aim  of  giving  those  the  best  possible  prospects  of  successful  collective 
decision-making and appropriate consideration of the public interest. More details on that will 
be included in the conclusions of the Review.  
Second, the Board believes that in order to overcome coordination problems, it will need to 
take a stronger role in setting some general goals for the payments system, so as to help 
provide an appropriate focus for the innovation efforts of the various players. There will need, 
in the Board’s view, to be greater interaction between the Board and the industry to establish 
and  work  towards  shared  goals.  Our  assessment  of  experience  both  in  Australia  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
overseas  is  that  superior  industry  outcomes  have  been  achieved  when  there  has  been  a 
policy  influence  promoting  public  interest  goals.  Examples  range  from  reform  of  the  ATM 
system in Australia to the establishment of the Faster Payments Service – for real-time retail 
payments – in the United Kingdom. Therefore, you can expect the conclusions of the Review 
to  have  more  to  say  about  a  more  constructive  engagement  between  the  Board  and  the 
industry in relation to payments innovation.  
The  Board  will  not  be  picking  winners,  nor  generally  will  it  dictate  the  technical  details  of 
systems. The Payments System Board is a policy-making body. It would not seek to impose 
the technical details of solutions, unless it was aware of a very clear public policy basis for 
preferring one approach over another. In most cases, it is for the Board to provide guidance 
as to what outcomes it believes are required in the public interest, but not specific solutions. 
The latter are clearly the domain of industry experts, with their knowledge of the technical 
and  business  constraints.  But  it  is  important  that  they  be  informed  by  the  Board’s  broader 
policy goals.  
The Board’s thinking about those goals has been informed by two considerations.  
First, early in the Strategic Review of Innovation, the Board identified a number of attributes 
that  were  valued  by  end-users,  as  well  as  some  that  are  important  in  payments  system 
design.  These  included  such  things  as:  the  timeliness  of  payments;  accessibility;  ease  of 
use;  ease  of  integration  into  other  processes  (such  as  business  systems);  and  safety  and 
reliability.  Examining  the  services  the  payments  system  offers  in  terms  of  these  attributes 
strongly suggests the areas where greater innovation in the payments system is needed, and 
where the underlying infrastructure might be imposing constraints on innovation.  
Second,  the  Board  has  considered  developments  in  retail  payment  systems  around  the 
world. An understanding of what is available elsewhere and whether those things are valued 
and adopted by the users of payment systems is a very important common-sense test when 
considering  what  our own  system  ought  to  look  like. This  effort  has  in  part  been  aided  by 
interactions with many parties over the course of the Strategic Review, along with the work of 
the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, which has conducted an examination of innovation in retail payment systems.  
On  the  basis  of  this  information,  the  Board  sees  the  need  to  focus  on  the  infrastructure 
capabilities  of  retail  payment  systems,  rather  than  the  specific  products  that  are  offered. 
Appropriate  infrastructure  can  only  be  delivered  cooperatively,  but  success  in  that  delivery 
will  allow  payments  providers  to  compete  vigorously  over  the  products  and  services  they 
offer to customers. That should be true, not just for deposit-taking institutions, but for other 
innovative players that have something to offer in the provision of retail payments. I talked 
before  about  customer-facing  innovation  outpacing  innovation  in  core  infrastructure.  What 
the Board is interested in is lifting the constraints imposed by that infrastructure.  
As  to  the  specific  areas  on  which  the  Board  is  focused,  to  those  who  have  followed  this 
process, and the documents that have been produced along the way, it will be no secret that 
one area on which the Board has focused is the timing of payments. It is very clear that both 
individuals and businesses are demanding greater immediacy and greater accessibility in all 
facets  of  their  day-to-day  activities.  This  includes  payments.  People  expect  to  be  able  to 
book an airline ticket and choose their seat at any time of the day or night. They expect to be 
able to download music or a book while they are sitting on the bus. Our payments system 
supports these transactions by allowing the payment to be initiated, and goods or services 
exchanged, even though the funds will not be available to the merchant until some time later. 
This delivers the immediacy to the transaction itself, as people have come to expect.  
On the other hand, if a business or an individual wishes to receive funds into an account at a 
financial institution, that same immediacy is not available. For instance, if a business wishes 
to  make  timely  use  of  the  proceeds  from  a  large  shipment,  or  an  individual  is  in  need  of 
emergency assistance from a government agency, options are very limited. This is because 
the  infrastructure  that  underpins  retail  payments  assumes  that  making  funds  available  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
next business day is sufficient. This has served acceptably well to date, but, with systems for 
real-time  transfers  available  in  countries  ranging  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  Mexico, 
Australia’s approach is starting to look a bit dated. It is our belief that availability of real-time 
transfers would fill some important existing gaps, but would also open up enormous potential 
for innovation on top of that system. This would contrast with the current situation, where a 
significant amount of effort is being put into finding work-arounds for the current constraints 
of our systems.  
Another element of the timeliness of payments is the availability of the payments system out 
of  standard  banking  hours.  Some  systems,  such  as  card  payment  systems,  give  the 
impression of operating 24/7, but in reality no funds move between financial institutions out of 
hours, constraining the services that can be offered to end-users of the payments system. 
Some would argue that anything more is unnecessary and that consumers and businesses 
are  not  unduly  inconvenienced  by  this.  But  we  receive  enough  complaints  about  this  to 
suggest that expectations are changing. It is not that long ago that it was accepted that if a 
person wanted to ensure that they had enough cash to see them through the weekend, they 
had to make sure that they visited their bank branch by closing time on Friday. But we would 
all see that as completely unacceptable these days and I think we have reason to hold the 
rest of our payments system to the same standards.  
One  question  that  we  have  come  back  to  during  the  Strategic  Review  is  what  sort  of 
payments system architecture would best allow us to deliver the features that we think are 
going to be demanded by payments system users in the years to come, including improved 
timeliness. Australia has had a long-running practice of operating payment systems that are 
based  on  both  bilateral  business  agreements  between  participants  and  the  bilateral 
exchange  of  payments  between  those  participants.  This  model  presents  a  number  of 
problems, not least the complexity and cost of adding a new entrant, which must establish 
similar arrangements with each existing participant.  
Some of the significant changes we have seen  in the payments system over the past few 
years have represented partial moves away from those bilateral arrangements. This includes 
the  move  to  the  industry  community  of  interest  network  for  clearing  payments  and  the 
creation of eftpos Payments Australia Limited to centralise governance of the eftpos system. 
These changes denote recognition of the constraints of bilateral payment systems. While the 
Reserve  Bank  does  not  advocate  walking  away  from  some  of  the  well-established  and 
low-cost bilateral systems we have, we can see a strong case for any new architecture that is 
established to meet emerging needs to be based on centralised architecture; that is, a hub 
and spokes, rather than bilateral, model.  
So these are some of the things that will gain  attention in the conclusions of the Strategic 
Review of Innovation when they are released in the next couple of weeks. I do not mean to 
suggest that the issues identified by the Review will be solved quickly, but I think we – the 
industry and the regulator – owe it to the users we serve to embark now on the process that 
will  get  us  on  to  the  right  path.  As  a  first  step,  in  the  months  following  the  release  of  the 
conclusions of the Review, I expect there to be a healthy dialogue with the industry on the 
sorts of goals that the Payments System Board has in mind for the payments system, along 
with more focused discussions on some specific solutions.  
Other work of the payments system board 
I have been talking about the innovation review and the way it will alter, in some respects, 
the role played by the Payments System Board in the future. But it is also worthwhile to talk 
briefly about other developments that also have an impact on the direction of the Board more 
generally.  
The  reality  is  that  the  Board’s  mandate  of  promoting  stability,  efficiency  and  competition 
requires it to play quite different roles in respect of two quite different sets of players in the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial system. Most people in this room would think of the Payments System Board as the 
body  that  capped  credit  card  interchange  fees  and  worked  with  the  industry  to  achieve 
reforms  in  the  ATM  system.  There  is  another  set  of  players  out  there  who  think  of  the 
Payments  System  Board  as  the  body  that  seeks  to  ensure  the  stability  of  key  financial 
market  infrastructure,  or  “FMIs”,  such  as  securities  settlement  systems  and,  increasingly 
importantly,  central  counterparties  –  which  stand  between  financial  market  participants  in 
order  to  better  manage  risk.  Much  of  this  role  came  to  the  Board  later  than  its  initial 
payments mandate, when the Corporations Act 2001 adopted licensing arrangements for all 
clearing  and  settlement  facilities  in  2001.  As  important  as  the  Board’s  work  on  payments 
system  efficiency  is,  the  stable  operation  of  FMIs  has  a  direct  bearing  on  financial  market 
and financial system stability. Oversight of FMIs therefore demands a significant proportion 
of the Board’s time. It is also this work that is expanding most rapidly.  
In fulfilling its responsibility for the stability of financial market infrastructure, the Board has 
historically focused on the high-value payments system, RITS, with which people in this room 
are more than familiar, along with the debt and equities settlement systems operated by the 
ASX  and  the  equities  and  derivatives  central  counterparties  also  operated  by  the  ASX.  In 
addition,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  for  some  years  been  part  of  an  international  cooperative 
oversight arrangement for the global foreign exchange settlement system, Continuous Linked 
Settlement (CLS).  
Two developments mean that the Bank’s and the Board’s workload in this area is increasing. 
First,  while  most  financial  market  infrastructures  serving  Australian  markets  are  currently 
operated  by  one  entity,  cross-border  competition  is  increasing,  particularly  for  central 
counterparty  clearing  services.  It  is  likely  that  the  Bank’s  oversight  responsibilities  will 
increase and become more complex as it has to deal with new entities offering services in 
the Australian market.  
The other development affecting the Board’s role is the global push to strengthen financial 
regulation  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  That  includes  the  push  for  OTC 
derivatives to be cleared through central counterparties and reported to trade repositories, as 
embodied in the G-20 commitments from Pittsburgh in 2009. All this means financial market 
activity that is important to Australia will be increasingly reliant on centralised financial market 
infrastructure.  
The  logic  of  this  reform  is  that  it  will  reduce  and  simplify  bilateral  exposures  between 
counterparties. But it will also increase the systemic importance of the financial infrastructure, 
because we will in effect be creating a small number of “single points of failure”. Hence the 
resilience  of  that  infrastructure  will  be  critical,  and  the  obligation  of  the  official  sector  to 
provide proper oversight to ensure that resilience will correspondingly increase.  
These  trends  have  been  recognised  in  a  number  of  areas  that  will  affect  the  Payments 
System Board’s work in the period ahead.  
• 
The international standards used by central banks and securities regulators around 
the  world  as  the  cornerstone  for  oversight  of  FMIs  have  been  comprehensively 
rewritten to reflect the lessons of the crisis and the increased importance of central 
counterparties and trade repositories. The revised standards were released just last 
month and it will be a substantial task for the Bank to reflect those changes in its 
own regulatory framework.  
The  Council  of  Financial  Regulators  has  made  a  number  of  recommendations 
regarding  the  framework  for  regulation  of  FMIs  in  Australia,  including  that  the 
Reserve Bank – along with ASIC – be given the power to, in extremis, “step in” and 
operate  an  FMI  in  the  event  that  it  suffers  financial  or  persistent  operational 
problems. The Bank has long had this capacity in regard to Austraclear, because of 
the  systemically  important  nature  of that  system for the  operation  of the  domestic 
money market. Domestic work in this area is occurring in parallel with international 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
efforts  to  develop  principles  for  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  FMIs.  Over  the 
coming year, the Board will need to devote increasing attention to establishing how 
step-in and other recovery and resolution tools for FMIs would operate in Australia.  
Following  further  work  by  the  Council  of  Financial  Regulators,  the  Treasury  is 
consulting  on  a  legislative  framework  to  support  mandating  of  central  clearing, 
exchange  trading  or  reporting  of  OTC  derivatives  transactions,  should  this  be 
warranted.  Initially,  however,  the  Council  intends  to  rely  on  existing  market  and 
regulatory  incentives  to  promote  central  clearing.  The  Payments  System  Board  is 
likely  to  have  a  central  role  in  the  new  regime,  such  as  overseeing  new  central 
counterparties  entering  the  market  to  clear  these  products,  as  well  as  input  into 
decisions about when mandates for central clearing might be appropriate.  
It  is  inevitable  that  the  Bank  will  become  increasingly  involved  with  cooperative 
oversight arrangements for financial market infrastructure that operates on a global 
basis.  
  The upshot of all this is that the financial stability element of the Payments System Board’s 
role is only going to increase. This is a continuation of a trend that has been under way for 
some time, and to which we have already responded with a significant boost in the resources 
we devote to these issues within the Bank. The work of the Payments System Board on the 
regulatory framework complements the Bank’s broader focus on financial stability, which is of 
course overseen by the Reserve Bank Board.  
Conclusion 
There is a clear sense within the Payments System Board that our work over the next few 
years  will  in  some  respects  take  us  into  some  different  activities.  The  work  for  which  the 
Board  has  mostly  been  known  has  focused  on  addressing  problems  or  distortions  in 
individual  systems,  albeit  with  knowledge  that  these  distortions  had  significant  effects  on 
other  parts  of  the  system.  The  solutions  have  tended  to  be  focused  on  the  rules  of  those 
systems. Payments innovation requires something quite different because it is more clearly 
about solving coordination problems, which by their nature are likely to be ongoing and do 
not  necessarily  occur  within  the  confines  of  an  existing  system.  Addressing  this  issue  will 
require a change in the nature of the conversation between the Board and the industry. That 
conversation began with the innovation roundtable earlier this year, and will continue in the 
period  ahead,  stimulated,  hopefully,  by  the  release  of  the  conclusions  from  the  innovation 
review. At the same time, the Board’s mandate in relation to financial stability remains a key 
focus, and the global response to the financial crisis dictates that we take on a greater, and 
probably  more  complex,  role  as  the  global  focus  shifts  to  centralised  financial  market 
infrastructure.  
This  doesn’t  mean  that  the  Board  will  be  paying  less  attention  to  the  payments  system 
efficiency  matters for  which  it  is  perhaps  best  known.  Much  as  we  might  want  to  live  in  a 
world where that type of regulation is not necessary, unfortunately the issues do not become 
any  fewer  or  any  less  complex,  and  the  Board  is  committed  to  continuing  to  meet  its 
legislated  responsibilities  in  this  area.  In  fact,  one  challenge  from  innovation  is  that  old 
tensions about competition might emerge in new ways. The Board will need to remain just as 
vigilant in these areas in the years to come.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
