Lawrence Williams: An evolving financial services landscape in the 
Caribbean 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Lawrence  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Guyana,  at  the 
30th Annual Conference of the Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors, hosted by the Bank 
of Guyana, Georgetown, 24 May 2012. 
 Chairman, Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors, Mr. Ramnarine Lal 
Hon. Minister of Finance, Dr. Ashni Singh, M.P. 
Hon. Minister within the Ministry of Finance, Bishop Juan Edghill, M.P. 
Deputy Governor Bank of Guyana, Dr. Gobind Ganga 
Banking Manager, Mr. Leslie Glen 
Conference Delegates 
Special Invitees 
Members of the Media 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  for  the  Bank  of  Guyana  to  host  the  30th  annual  conference  of  the 
Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors under the theme “Regional supervisory imperatives 
in an evolving financial services landscape”. 
I wish to welcome all of the visiting delegates to our shores. I acknowledge the presence of 
the delegates from thirteen of the sixteen CGBS membership. Though our region is small, we 
are geographically dispersed and travelling to some territories can be a bit of a challenge. I 
am therefore pleased at the representation and sincerely hope that your stay will be pleasant 
and memorable. 
I am also delighted to welcome to our shores and the conference the Secretary General of 
ASBA,  Mr.  Rudy  Araujo,  the  Chief  Representative  of  the  BIS  Office  of  the  Americas, 
Mr. Gregor  Heinrick,  the  Senior  International  Adviser  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency, 
Mr. Lester  Miller  and  Advisor  on  Economic  Crimes  in  the  US  Treasury  Department, 
Mr. Thomas Noller. I have no doubt that your considerable experiences will add value to this 
conference. 
It is also fitting that I welcome the Hon. Minister of Finance, Dr. Ashni Singh and the Hon. 
Minister  within  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Bishop  Juan  Edghill.  The  importance  of  this 
Conference is underscored by the fact that both Ministers enthusiastically agreed to adjust 
their work schedules to be present at this opening ceremony with Dr. Singh consenting to 
deliver the feature address. Delegates and invitees can expect a very insightful presentation 
by the Minister. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  theme  of  the  Conference  refers  to  the  evolving  financial 
landscape  which  is  quite  evident  in  many  tangible  forms  though  not  always  easily 
manageable. As a matter of fact, the changing financial landscape has brought challenges 
almost  every  step  of  the  way.  It  is  a  testimony  to  the  quality  of  our  regional  banking 
supervisors  and  the  support  and  nurturing  provided  by  the  Caribbean  Group  of  Banking 
Supervisors  over  the  years  that  our  region  met  the  challenges  posed  by  the  changing 
landscape and has remained safe and sound.  
A lot has changed in terms of the regulatory environment and the range of financial services 
demanded and offered as well as the organizational structure and management practices of 
financial institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Thirty years ago commercial banks were primarily and basically anchored in intermediation  
–  garnering  deposits  and  making  loans.  Gradually  product  innovations,  new  distribution 
channels,  advances  in  technology,  deregulation  on  the  one  hand  and  tightening  of 
regulations on the other hand and emerging new competitors have dramatically changed the 
way banks now do business. 
Banks have now not only grown larger but have become much more complex and now span 
across  the  globe.  The  advancements  in  information  technology  in  particular  have  allowed 
banks  to  handle  a  phenomenal  amount  of  data  at  alarming  speed  thus  propelling  the 
introduction of new products and services. 
Three decades ago, bank failure was not a frequently mentioned financial jargon unlike today 
where bank failure is discussed at almost every financial fora and where the collapse of one 
bank could trigger a domino effect across many countries simultaneously. The rapid demise 
of banks which were thought of being too big to fail given the unquestionable caliber of those 
at helm are now tumbling, and with every failure, regulators are forced to revisit regulations 
that were thought to provide adequate safeguards. 
The burgeoning of the non-banking financial institutions which have now become full fledged, 
brought  with  it  increasing  competition  to  the  banking  sector  and  unique  products  some  of 
which cannot be clearly defined or very often understood by only a few. 
It  also  allowed  for  the  exploitation  of  arbitrage  and  has  contributed  to  the  erosion  of  the 
orthodox predictability of the financial services industry. Regulators have had to realign their 
mindset to regulate and supervise these non-traditional institutions. 
As the financial services landscape continues to evolve, it is imperative that regulators adapt 
an anticipatory and proactive demeanour to address the inevitable challenges. The current 
world financial crises and the continuing economic uncertainties have shown us how fragile 
and interconnected is the global financial system. Careful attention needs to be paid to what 
is  taking  place  in  the  major  financial  centres  because  of  the  contagion  effect.  Additionally, 
careful attention needs to be given to the new standards being promulgated by rule setting 
bodies which have profound effects on the way financial institutions are required to operate. 
Today every supervisory action has to be risk skewed. We have long moved away from the 
traditional  transaction-oriented  approach  to  supervision  and  as  we  move  further  away, 
cooperation  among  the  regulatory  bodies  will  become  even  more  important  given  the 
home/host relationship and the magnitude of the risk that is inherent in such relationships. 
I  have  noted  that  over  the  last  thirty  years,  the  CGBS  has  endeavoured  to  strengthen  its 
supervisory and regulatory framework of the regional central banks and monetary authorities. 
It  has  established  technical  working  groups  to  address  inter  alia  consolidated  supervision, 
crisis management and Basle requirements and has put in place the requisite instrument to 
facilitate information sharing and cooperation with foreign regulatory bodies. Your members 
are also active participants in supervisory colleges where banks span several countries and I 
am aware that yesterday three supervisory colleges were held.  
Much  emphasis  has  been  placed  on  ensuring  that  the  banking  sector  remains  safe  and 
sound, however, there are non-bank institutions that could severely threaten such safety and 
soundness and consequently the same level of attention/emphasis should also be directed to 
those  institutions.  Perhaps,  CGBS  could  consider  expanding  its  conference  scope  in  the 
future  to  include  regional  non-bank  regulators  with  whom  your  constituents  interface.  Both 
banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  are  integral  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
financial system.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by saying that our approaches to supervision and the 
depth  of  our  regulation  would  continue  to  require  proactivity  and  enhancement  as  the 
financial  landscape  continues  to  change.  The  Central  Bank  Governors  of  the  region  will 
continue to rely on the CGBS to provide the advice and guidance needed to keep our region 
safe. Success in this regards depend on the thoroughness and robustness of your work and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the reliability and efficacy of the methods you employ. You must continue to organize and 
support the necessary training and mentoring of supervisors so that a pool of capable and 
technically sound personnel is always available and that greater reliability may be placed on 
their output. 
During today and tomorrow several papers will be presented on a variety of sub themes and I 
anticipate  that  at  the  end  of  this  conference  some  critical  imperatives  would  have  been 
identified to steer us through the current challenges and others looming on the horizon. Our 
confidence in the role of the CGBS has never been misplaced. 
I  wish  you  all  successful  deliberations  and  trust  that  your  stay  here  will  afford  you  the 
opportunity  to  discover  for  yourself  the  beauty  of  our  country  and  the  warmth  of  the 
Guyanese people. 
Welcome once again to all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
