Rundheersing Bheenick: Main developments in 2011 and Mauritius’s 
economic outlook for 2012 
Letter  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  to  stakeholders, 
Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 14 February 2012. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius’ website (http://bom.intnet.mu). 
 With the crisis in its fifth year since “sub-prime” became part of the international jargon, one 
could have been excused for thinking along the lines of Murphy that everything that could 
conceivably have gone wrong had already gone wrong and that 2011 was, at worst, going to 
be more of the same as we’d seen it all before or, quite possibly, turn out to be somewhat 
better since all manner of weaponry had already been deployed to take on the hydra-headed 
beast  as  it  successively  morphed  from  a  US  sub-prime  crisis  to  a  US  banking  crisis  to  a 
full-blown  global  financial  crisis  before  emerging  in  its  latest  and  most  pernicious  and 
destructive  avatar  as  the  worst  global  economic  crisis  in  eight  decades  and,  surely,  this 
impressive arsenal – much of it never tried before on this scale – would at last begin to get 
the better of the beast. But, it was not to be. 
2011  turned  out  to  be  the  stuff  of  nightmares.  A  Hollywood  mogul  contemplating  an 
economic disaster movie would have fired any script-writer who would have dared to come 
up with such improbable plots and sub-plots as these, in no particular order, as part of the 
global economic crisis storyline: a nuclear disaster in the third largest economy; a tsunami 
engulfing South-East Asia; large universal banks tumbling like the proverbial house of cards, 
scrambling  for  capital,  losing  their  CEO’s  and  their  prime  rating;  an  acute  sovereign  debt 
crisis in the European periphery,, threatening contagion to the rest of the eurozone; a credit 
crunch in the midst of unprecedented Quantitative Easing; de facto nationalisation of banks 
in  hard-core  capitalist  economies;  a  sex-scandal  forcing  the  exit  of  the  head  of  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF);  democratically-elected  leaders  being  replaced  by 
appointed technocrats in Greece and Italy, under the pressure of markets; the US caught in 
fiscal  gridlock  and  losing  its  triple-A  rating;  an  uprising  in  the  Arab  world,,  toppling 
long-established dictators with a key role in the politics of oil; the death of a tinpot dictator in 
North  Korea;  the  spectre  of  an  unpredictable  Iran  joining  the  nuclear  club;  currency  and 
capital markets in the doldrums but with nervous twitches as they see-saw between risk-on 
and risk-off modes; gold bugs having a field day – Goldfinger’s dream of world domination at 
last coming true? – as even the respected World Bank President re-discovers the merit of a 
gold-exchange standard to combat exhorbitant currency volatility; the euro doing very poorly 
with  the  prospect  of  its  implosion  leading  to  an  explosion  of  summitry,  but  with  sophistry 
more in evidence than solutions – all this, and more, against a back-drop, at the global level, 
of the world trade system still pursuing the elusive closure of the Doha round and, at the local 
level in many countries, an amorphous “occupy” movement gathering momentum to vent its 
frustration against all manner of crisis-related ills, real or imagined. Fact was indeed stranger 
than fiction. 
Our  unfortunate  script-writer  would,  in  all  likelihood,  have  been  black-listed  forever  for 
bringing Hollywood and the guild of screenwriters in disrepute if he had also had the temerity 
to  include  in  his  screenplay  of  global  financial  and  economic  mayhem  affecting  the  major 
countries  and  their  systemically-important  institutions  a  tableau  with  a  starkly  contrasting 
narrative: a tiny ultra-peripheral economy with a population of just 1.3 million; a fruit-salad of 
a nation with a rich diversity of languages, religions and ethnicities, and democratic to a fault; 
a success story sans pareil of: structural adjustment, demographic transition, diversification 
away from mono-crop dependence on sugar, export-driven industrialisation, off-shoring from 
banking and finance to business processes, and of economic transformation generally as it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
weaned itself away from trade-preferences to the post-WTO world; an economy that has kept 
growing throughout the crisis when bigger economies contracted; an unemployment rate that 
has stayed below 8 per cent; an inflation rate that has tumbled from 10.9 per cent in April 
2007 – the date of the establishment of the Monetary Policy Committee – to a historical low 
of 0.1 per cent in October 2009, to reach 4.8 per cent in December 2011; a total public debt 
of  less  than  60  per  cent  of  GDP,  much  of  it  owed  domestically  with  the  balance  held  by 
multinational  or  national  financial  institutions,  not  commercial  banks;  a  rising  level  of  net 
international  reserves  from  Rs85.8  bn  in  2007  to  Rs109.6  bn  in  2011;  a  fiscal  deficit  of 
3.2 per cent in 2011; gross FDI inflows of Rs10 bn in 2011, not far below the record level of 
2010; a record profitability posted by the largest bank in the country, a domestic one that has 
been in business since 1838; and a free floating currency that has adjusted flexibly without 
the benefit of any controls to appreciate during the crisis with the exchange rate index, MERI 
1, standing at 91.6 in December 2011 from its base of 100 in calendar year 2007. 
Such  a  tableau,  invraisemblable  as  it  seems,  is  not  the  fruit  of  the  imagination  of  our 
hypothetical script-writer. The country depicted does exist. And the experience highlighted is 
the result of the patient and combined efforts of policy-makers, real sector operators and its 
people generally, as they strived to adapt and re-adapt to the continuously-changing external 
environment  confronting  them.  The  picture  that  is  painted  is  that  of  Mauritius:  vibrant, 
resilient,  and  resolutely  moving  forward.  And  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  that  I  have  had  the 
privilege of leading, has contributed to the rich palette that comprises the policy landscape, 
especially the financial and monetary aspects, adding our own touches and flourishes as we 
proceeded. 
In keeping with past practice, I next highlight the main developments of the past year before 
concluding  with  my  perspective  on  the  current  year.  Links  are  provided  at  the  end  of  the 
relevant paragraphs for those readers who may be interested in delving in greater detail into 
some of the issues discussed.  
Economy  The  Mauritian  economy  continued  to  display  a  creditable  degree  of  resilience 
despite  difficult  external  conditions.  Growth  momentum  was  maintained  in  2011  at  4.1  per 
cent,  not  far  below  trend,  and  projected  to  be  slightly  below  4  per  cent  in  2012.  The 
unemployment rate was fairly stable at 7.9 per cent, a far cry from the rising joblessness in 
our  main  export  markets.  The  fallout  from  the  euro  crisis  will  continue  to  affect  our 
euro-centric economy. The call that we launched two years ago to diversify production and 
find  alternative  markets,  which  then  fell  on  deaf  ears,  is  increasingly  finding  a  favourable 
echo among real-sector operators and decision-makers. (More on this issue) 
Monetary  Policy  Our  monetary  policy,  continuously  decried  by  business  lobbies  and 
regularly denounced by the press with an eye, no doubt, on their advertisers, confounded its 
critics by measuring up to its primary task of bridling inflation. At the beginning of the year, 
we  had  anticipated  that  higher  commodity  prices  would  drive  up  headline  inflation  but  it 
would  decline  by  end-2011.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  raised  the  Key  Repo 
Rate  (KRR)  at  two  successive  quarterly  meetings  in  March  and  June  by  50  and  25  basis 
points,  respectively.  These  hikes  contributed  to  contain  inflationary  pressures.  At  the 
September meeting, although inflation expectations were still high, the MPC maintained its 
stance  as  the  global  economy  recovery  was  showing  signs  of  losing  momentum.  In 
December, as the euro sovereign debt crisis had intensified causing the domestic economic 
outlook to be clouded by still greater uncertainty, the MPC proceeded to a very small cut of 
10  basis  points,  the  first  time  that  the  KRR  was  moved  by  less  than  25  basis  points,  to 
5.40 per  cent  per  annum  to  manifest  its  concern  about  the  low  level  of  business  and 
consumer confidence while avoiding undue risks on the inflation front. Headline inflation rose 
from 3.3 per cent in January to 6.6 per cent in November before declining to 6.5 per cent in 
December. Barring unforeseen shocks, we expect both year-on-year and headline inflation to 
moderate this year and gradually move within a narrowing range around our comfort level of 
4–6 per cent. (More on this issue) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(PLIBOR)  as 
the  Port  Louis 
Interbank  Offered  Rate 
Review of the MPC I had explained on several occasions the rationale for a thorough review 
of the functioning of the MPC in the light of its operating experience of four years. This was 
entrusted  to  Sir  Alan  Budd,  a  former  Member  of  the  Bank  of  England  MPC.  He  made  a 
number of recommendations in his Report which, I am glad to note, supported my own line of 
thinking.  We  have  taken  some  decisive  steps  to  enhance  the  independence  and 
transparency of the MPC: beginning with the 4Q 2011 MPC meeting, the minutes of MPC 
meetings and the pattern of individual votes are being published; and there were legislative 
changes in December 2011 to sever the remaining formal links with the Board of Directors of 
the Bank. (More on this issue) 
Financial  and  Money  Market  Developments  We  addressed  the  issue  of  excess  liquidity 
which could have fuelled inflationary pressures by a judicious combination of two measures. 
First,  we  raised  the  Cash  Reserve  Ratio  from  6.0  to  7.0  per  cent  in  February  2011  and 
increased  the  minimum  daily  cash  ratio  from  4.5  per  cent  to  5.0  per  cent.  Second,  we 
stepped  up  the  issuance  of  BoM  paper  to  nearly  Rs10  billion.  To  cope  with  persistent 
problems of liquidity overhang in different parts of the maturity spectrum, we extended the 
tenor of our paper well beyond the usual maturity of Central Bank paper of up to one year, 
and  continued  with  the  practice  of  issuing  BoM  Notes  with  maturities  of  2,  3  and  4  years, 
which  we  started  in  August  2010.  The  operation  was  successful  and  was  favourably 
commented by the January 2012 Article IV Consultation Mission of the IMF. (More on this 
issue) 
Another  interesting  development  in  the  money  market  that  occurred  during  the  year  is  the 
daily  publication  of 
from 
26  August  2011  on  the  Reuters  page  at  12  00  hours.  The  PLIBOR,  which  is  an  average 
interbank rate, is computed and published for four tenors, namely Overnight, One Week, One 
Month and Three Months. These rates will be also available on the Bank’s website in early 
2012. (More on this issue) 
Domestic Foreign Exchange Market The tumultuous conditions prevailing in international 
currency  markets  prompted  us  to  take  steps  to  prevent  contagion  from  seeping  into  our 
small, but completely open, domestic foreign exchange market. The Bank intervened actively 
to smooth out excessive rupee volatility – while taking extra care to remain broadly neutral 
and avoid any unnecessary and dangerous balance-sheet risks – with total foreign currency 
purchases equivalent to US$533 million nearly matched by foreign currency sales equivalent 
to US$512 million. We continued to provide the State Trading Corporation, at their request, 
with their foreign exchange requirements to pay for food and fuel imports. We maintained the 
foreign currency swap facility, introduced at the beginning of the crisis in December 2009. 
We, however, decided to withdraw the Special Foreign Currency Line of Credit that had been 
made available to banks for trade financing since December 2008. I am pleased to note that, 
as  a  result  of  our  vigilance,  liquidity  conditions  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  stayed 
comfortable  throughout  2011,  with  a  roughly  similar  total  turnover  of  foreign  exchange 
transactions  as  the  previous  year,  and  the  rupee  behaved  fairly  well  during  the  year, 
contributing enormously to maintain price stability and real incomes in our import-dependent 
island. (More on this issue) 
Reserves Management Given “negative carry,” we did not seek to accumulate reserves. We 
managed to keep them at a comfortable level throughout the year. In December 2011, the 
gross external reserves of the Bank exceeded Rs80 billion while net international reserves 
amounted  to  almost  Rs110  billion,  representing  around  37  weeks  of  imports.  Our  gold 
holdings amounted to around Rs5.7 billion as at end-December 2011, or around 7 per cent of 
gross external reserves. Our reserves are at a comfortable level when measured against the 
two traditional metrics of import cover and short-term debt cover. 
We  actively  pursued  our  diversification  strategy  into  higher-yielding  instruments  and 
comparatively  stable  currencies.  We  thus  invested  in  currencies  such  as  the  Norwegian 
Krone  and  the  Swedish  Krone.  We  intend  to  increase  the  share  of  our  investment  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the 
improved 
fixed-income  securities.  Amendments  have  been  brought  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  to 
support these moves. The Bank has negotiated with the Reserve Bank of India to invest in 
Indian  government  bonds  and  is  currently  negotiating  with  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  to 
invest  in  Chinese  government  bonds.  The  diversification  strategy  adopted  by  the  Bank, 
together  with  enhanced  operational  efficiency,  were  behind 
financial 
performance  of  the  Bank  which  realized  a  net  profit  of  Rs258  million  for  the  FY2010/11, 
compared to Rs72 million for the corresponding period last year, in spite of the continuation 
of the low-yield environment for currency placements.  
 We have made some progress with the idea of setting up the Sovereign Wealth Fund which 
I had discussed quite lengthily in my previous Letter to Stakeholders. I have had follow-up 
discussions with the IMF and other central banks which have gone down this road. Together 
with  my  Head  of  Financial  Markets  Operations,  I  participated  in  the  first  Africa  Sovereign 
Funds Roundtable in Morocco, which brought together central banks, pension/social security 
funds,  sovereign  wealth  funds  and  finance  ministries  across  the  African  continent.  The 
Roundtable  provided  participants  with  guidance  on  ways  to  address  strategic,  governance 
and investment management challenges. 
Debt Management We scored some success in our attempt to improve the domestic debt 
profile of central government which we lengthened. In October 2011, we introduced 273-day 
Treasury Bills to widen the maturity spectrum of available instruments and smoothe the yield 
curve – I will take up the issue of the yield curve in the next paragraph. We built benchmark 
bonds by re-opening the issues of longer-term Government instruments several times during 
the  year  to  stimulate  the  secondary  market  and  establish  a  reference  yield.  In  November 
2011,  we  revamped  the  auctioning  process  by  conducting  single-maturity  auctions  of 
Treasury Bills and holding more frequent auctions during the week. This was facilitated by 
the implementation of a web-based on-line auctioning system now in its final stage. We are 
planning to extend the system, which now handles only Treasury Bills, to other Government 
debt instruments. (More on this issue) 
Yield  Curve  The  year  also  brought  a  major  development  in  the  capital  market  with  the 
correction of the yield curve. This curve – which shows the yields of Government securities of 
different tenors – had been relatively distorted at its shorter end since 2007 and was stressed 
downwards  by  factors  such  as  the  excess  liquidity  plaguing  the  banking  system  and  the 
decrease in the KRR. I have detailed earlier the measures which we took to bring liquidity to 
reasonable  levels.  These  helped  to  reduce  the  pressure  on  yields  which  started  to  move 
upwards,  thereby  removing  the  distortions  at  the  shorter  end  of  the  curve.  By  the  end  of 
2011,  we  had  achieved  a  smooth  upward-sloping  yield  curve.  This  smooth  yield  curve  is 
expected,  among  other  things,  to  benefit  the  development  of  a  corporate  bond  market  by 
enabling market participants to price their financial products.  
Development of a Secondary Market One of the obstacles to the proper development of a 
secondary market is the tendency for banks to hold their portfolio of Government securities to 
maturity. The marked preference of banks for official paper, even at the cost of driving down 
yields in the preferred part of the spectrum, and a growing risk-aversion which impeded the 
growth of credit prompted us to introduce a new tool in the form of a cap on banks’ holdings 
of  Treasury  Bills  in  their  banking  books.  This  cap  was  initially  set  at  20  per  cent  of  daily 
average rupee deposits and tightened further to 18 per cent as from July 2011. There is no 
limit on banks’ holdings of Treasury Bills in their trading book. This is expected to encourage 
banks  to  direct  loanable  funds  towards  extending  more  credit  and  also  promote  the 
long-awaited development of the secondary market. (More on this issue) 
Banking Sector Performance Our banking sector continued to show remarkable resilience 
–  in  some  cases,  insolently  so  –  in  the  midst  of  the  global  financial  meltdown.  As  at 
30 September  2011,  unaudited  figures  show  that  banks  realised  profit  after  tax  of 
Rs15.9 billion against Rs10.1 billion a year earlier. The banking sector continued to expand 
driven  by  the  Segment  A,  i.e.  domestic,  business,  while  Segment  B  business  contracted 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
slightly. The ratio of non-performing loans to total loans hovered around 2 per cent. (More on 
this issue) 
Fee income is now a non-negligible component of banks’ total income and there have been 
complaints from various quarters that bank charges are on the high side. We decided to set 
up a Working Group on fees, charges and commissions to study the reasonableness of bank 
charges relative to the services offered. The Working Group’s main task will be to analyse 
banks’ pricing for their services, particularly with regard to basic banking services offered to 
the public. I reminded bankers at the last Banking Committee meeting of the year that the 
Bank is fully empowered to regulate fees and charges in the banking sector. Moves in this 
direction can be envisaged to ensure that customers get a fair deal.  
Regulation and Supervision We amended several of our guidelines and issued new ones 
in response to the changing financial environment. We adopted the risk-based approach to 
supervision  by  an  optimum  allocation  of  our  supervisory  resources  to  institutions  that  we 
believe  pose  greater  risks  to  the  financial  and  economic  system.  We  fine-tuned  the 
implementation of the Basel II framework by requiring banks to submit their Internal Capital 
Adequacy Assessment Process and prepared ourselves to move to the Basel III framework. 
(More on this issue) 
We firmly believe that transparency builds confidence in the integrity of the banking system. 
In April this year, after preliminary work spanning over two years, we took the bold step of 
publishing our CAMEL ratings of banks. At first, this initiative did not appeal to our bankers, 
but it favourably impressed the IMF Article IV Consultation Mission of January 2012, which 
did not hesitate to qualify it as a première in Africa. Today, the half-yearly publication of the 
CAMEL  ratings  seems to  have  been  widely  accepted  in  the  country  and  forms  an  integral 
part of our framework for the public disclosure of information on the banking sector.  
We  pursued  our  efforts  to  enhance  supervisory  cooperation  and  information-sharing  with 
other  countries.  The  Bank  entered  into  Memoranda  of  Understanding  (MoUs)  with  the 
Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  the  Maldives  Monetary  Authority,  which  brings  the  number  of 
MoUs signed with foreign regulatory bodies and agencies to ten. The Bank and the Central 
Bank  of  Kenya  are  setting  up  a  protocol  for  joint  co-ordination  and  conduct  of  on-site 
examination  of  financial  institutions  –  which  will  come  in  handy  as  Mauritian  and  Kenyan 
entities have interests in the banking sector in one another’s country. We have established a 
framework  for  regular  exchange  of  information  at  mutually  agreed  intervals  with  foreign 
“home”  regulators  for  an  effective  supervisory  oversight  of  international  banking  groups 
operating in Mauritius, and participated in the work of the related supervisory colleges. 
Islamic  Finance  March  31,  2011,  marked  another  milestone  in  the  development  of  our 
banking  sector  with  our  very  first  full-fledged  Islamic  bank,  Century  Banking  Corporation, 
launching its operations.  
We  are  actively  pursuing  discussions  with  the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management 
Corporation,  of  which  we  are  a  founder-member,  for  the  issuance  of  Islamic  liquidity 
instruments  that  would  mark  our  entry  in  Islamic  capital  markets,  facilitate  liquidity 
management  by  domestic  banks  conducting  Islamic  banking  business,  and  enhance  our 
attractiveness  for  Islamic  finance.  A  Joint  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development has been set up to study all issues relating 
to Islamic capital markets and, in particular, assess prospects for the issuance of Sovereign 
Sukuks. 
Small and Medium Enterprises Financing Scheme Less than a month after the Minister of 
Finance announced the creation of a Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) Development 
Fund in the Budget presented in November 2011, we acted promptly to set up the “Small and 
Medium Enterprises Financing Scheme” to facilitate access of SMEs to finance. Under the 
Scheme, the 14 participant banks – i.e. all the banks involved in Segment A activity – will 
provide  credit  facilities  to  SMEs  at  3  percentage  points  above  the  prevailing  KRR  in  an 
amount of up to Rs3 billion over the next three years. Over the period December  2011 to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
November 2012, funds of Rs1 billion will be disbursed to SMEs. Loans under the scheme are 
free of the processing costs and charges normally applied to such lending. They also carry a 
partial  guarantee  extended  by  a  participating  state-owned  enterprise.  The  Bank  is  closely 
monitoring all funding provided under the scheme to ensure its smooth operation. (More on 
this issue) 
Deposit Insurance Scheme We made some progress on the Deposit Insurance Scheme in 
consultation  with  selected  member  banks  of  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association.  We  have 
approached  the  Swiss-based  International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers,  of  which 
Mauritius  is  an  Associate-member,  for  their  expert  views  and  comments  on  the  proposed 
Scheme. It is our fervent hope that we will be able to plug in an additional safety-net in our 
banking  regulatory/supervisory  infrastructure  and  minimise  the  risks  now  being  implicitly 
underwritten by the monetary and fiscal authorities. 
Single  Financial  Regulator  The  twin-peaks  regulation  model  has  been  listed  among  the 
possible suspects responsible for the financial and banking crisis in some jurisdictions. An 
important policy development was the announcement in the November 2010 Budget Speech 
of the possible move to a single regulator for all financial services in our jurisdiction. This will 
most  certainly  impact  on  the  way  the  Bank  currently  functions.  A  team  of  experts  of 
international repute has been identified to undertake a study on the way forward.  
Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  Since  its  launch  in  2005,  the  Mauritius  Credit 
Information  Bureau  (MCIB)  has  rapidly  emerged  as  an  essential  decision-making  tool  for 
system  participants  to  assess  any  prospective  borrower’s  credit  profile.  The  credit 
information  system  also  provides  reputational  collateral  to  borrowers  such  as  SMEs  and 
small  borrowers  who  often  face  difficulties  in  accessing  finance  due  to  lack  of  tangible 
collateral.  An  important  amendment  was  brought  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  in  
uly 2011 empowering the Bank to impose sanctions on credit providers who refuse to join the 
MCIB. Another amendment enabled the Bank to become a participant of the system which 
the  Bank  formally  joined  in  January  2012.  Lenders  are  encouraged  to  share  the  benefits 
derived  from  the  MCIB  with  borrowers  by  reducing  processing  fees,  charges  and  lending 
rates. (More on this issue) 
Cheque Truncation System In my last letter, I had regretted my inability to deliver on the 
Cheque  Truncation  System  (CTS)  which  had  got  entangled  in  procedural  difficulties.  This 
year,  we  took  bold  steps  to  steer  this  long-delayed  project  in  the  right  direction.  Amidst 
unfounded criticisms and baseless allegations of fraud and malpractice, the new system was 
set  up  in  collaboration  with  commercial  banks.  On  6  September  2011,  Dr  the  Honourable 
Navinchandra Ramgoolam, GCSK, FRCP, Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs 
and  External  Communications,  came  to  the  Bank  to  launch  the  CTS  in  the  presence, 
amongst  others,  of  the  Honourable  CG  Xavier-Luc  Duval  GCSK,  Vice  Prime  Minister  and 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  and  the  CEO’s  of  all  banks  operating  in 
Mauritius. We chose to mark the occasion by donating a cheque of Rs1 million to the Prime 
Minister’s Relief Fund, with this Bank of Mauritius cheque being the first to be cleared by the 
CTS. 
The  deployment  of  this  new  system  which  provides  for  the  Bulk  Clearing  System  for 
low-value  electronic  transactions  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  era  for  the  payment  and 
settlement system of the country. Cheque clearing is now faster and more secure. During the 
course  of  2012,  we  will  interface  the  system  with  the  national  switch,  which  we  are  now 
working  on,  to  cater  for  the  effective  clearing  of  card-based  transactions  from  ATMs  and 
points-of-sales.  
With  the  CTS  having  been  the  object  of  so  much  unwarranted  attack,  I  feel  it  my  duty  to 
provide assurance to all stakeholders that the Bank has acted in all fairness and legality as 
well as in the best interests of the entire community of cheque-users, and bank customers 
generally, in this matter. Technology never stands still and it is in the nature of competitive 
bids that many of them fail to win the contract. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Dialogue with Stakeholders I have made regular dialogue with our stakeholders an integral 
feature of my governorship. It is my strong belief that there cannot be effective policymaking 
in central banks without effective communication and outreach. During the year, I continued 
with my open-door policy of meeting people from different walks of life and different areas of 
activity, from academia to private sector operators, and consumer associations. This allowed 
me to feel the pulse of the economy and fill gaps in the Bank’s staff reports, while also being 
sensitive to all shades of opinion, including those that rarely make the headlines in the local 
press. 
In addition to our regular schedule of quarterly meetings with the banking sector through the 
Banking Committee, I also held meetings with the MBA Bureau, an offshoot of the Banking 
Committee,  to  address  the  most  pressing  issues.  We  held  a  grand  total  of  49  trilateral 
meetings with CEO’s and Board Directors of banks and other deposit-taking institutions as 
well  as  with  their  external  auditors  to  review  their  financial  performance  and  to  discuss 
regulatory issues. I personally chaired the meetings with the larger, systemically-important, 
institutions. My First Deputy Governor handled the rest but briefed me on the issues to be 
addressed prior to the meetings, and on the outcomes and any concerns thereafter. 
The Bank’s traditional Annual Dinner in honour of Economic Operators was marked this year 
by  the  presence  of  HE  Mallam  Sanusi  Lamido  Sanusi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Nigeria, as our Guest of Honour. This annual event gave me the opportunity to express my 
appreciation to our stakeholders for the cordial working relations that we have had during the 
year. It allowed me to comment on the past year and to highlight future areas of concern for 
the regulator. The function, which was the first black-tie event ever organised by the Bank, 
turned out to be a runaway success.  
As part of our open and transparent communication strategy, I accepted invitations to speak 
from various institutions, at home and abroad. I began the year with a keynote address at the 
Future of Financial Markets Forum in Mumbai in January. I continued with an address at the 
SAID Business School at the University of Oxford in February. I delivered a dozen addresses 
to  share  my  views  on  a  wide  range  of  topics,  from  economic  analysis  and  supervisory 
matters  to  payment  system  infrastructure  and  corporate  governance,  on  Mauritius  and  on 
Africa. There were two common threads in my addresses: overseas, the main thrust was to 
present  Mauritius  as  an  avant-garde  banking  and  financial  centre  at  the  cutting  edge  of 
monetary  policy-making  and  banking/financial  regulation;  locally,  I  highlighted  the  need  to 
deliver on our core mandate. I did not elude the burning issue of exchange rate management 
when invited to speak at a Round  Table on the exchange rate organised by the  Mauritius 
Exports  Association.  It  was  the  opportunity  for  me  to  underline  the  essential  fact  that  our 
much-maligned  monetary  policy/exchange  rate  strategy  has  delivered  the  goods  for  the 
nation as a whole and done it in a more sustainable manner than the previous infernal spiral 
which  banked  on  continued  depreciation…which  fuelled  inflation…which  sparked  wage 
demands…which  stoked  up  inflationary  pressure…which  necessitated  further  depreciation 
etc. (More on this issue) 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility  Since  I  joined  the  Bank,  I  have  integrated  Corporate 
Social  Responsibility  as  a  key  element  of  the  Bank’s  outreach  to  the  wider  Mauritian 
community  to  project  a  less  technocratic  and  austere  image.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius 
Inter-Club  Youth  Championships  –  now  a  regular  feature  in  the  Bank’s  calendar  of 
activities  –  were  held  for  the  fifth  consecutive  year  on  24–25  September  2011.  This  fifth 
edition  was  co-sponsored  by  14  commercial  banks  −  namely  ABC  Banking  Corporation, 
Bank of Baroda, Bank One, Bank International Indonesia, Barclays Bank, Bramer Banking 
Corporation, Deutsche Bank, Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, Investec Bank, 
Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank, SBI (Mauritius), Standard Bank, Standard Chartered 
Bank and State Bank of Mauritius. Around 725 athletes from 25 clubs participated, including 
the 15 best athletes selected from 400 Rodriguans who participated in the Inter-Club/School 
Youth  Championships 
national 
records – 14 of them – were established this year. 
in  Rodrigues.  A 
number 
record 
held 
of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
We were proud to note that two athletes who first came to national attention at the Inter-Club 
Youth Championships won bronze medals in the “Indian Ocean Island Games 2011” held in 
Seychelles. The Bank rewarded the record-setters as well as the two bronze medallists at a 
prize-giving  ceremony  held  at  the  Bank  in  December  2011,  in  the  presence  of  their 
parents/families, trainers, and national sport officials. 
Financial  Literacy  Programme  The  Bank  continues  to  play  its  role  in  the  promotion  of 
financial literacy. This year, the Bank launched a Financial Literacy–Essay Competition on 
the theme ‘The Importance of Saving for Youngsters’, which was open to students of Forms 
IV  and  V.  We  also  organised  the  fifth  edition  of  the  “Monetary  Policy  Challenge”  in  June 
2011. At the prize-giving ceremony held at the Bank in December 2011, the winners of both 
competitions were rewarded, in the presence of parents, teachers and college rectors of the 
winners. (More on this issue) 
Internship  Programme  As  part  of  our  outreach  initiatives,  we  planned  an  internship 
programme  but  it  took  us  some  time  to  deliver  on  it.  We  first  had  to  address  very  real 
concerns  about  data  confidentiality  and  secrecy  before  we  tentatively  introduced  an 
internship programme, limited to students of the University of Mauritius and the University of 
Technology. Five interns were selected after an interview and posted in different divisions of 
the  Bank  to  acquire  practical  experience  in  Central  Banking.  The  internship  programme 
covered the period July to September 2011. In 2012, we intend to broaden the programme to 
accommodate interns from anywhere throughout the year. 
Training  We  continued  to  provide  up-to-date  training  to  staff  to  better  equip  them  for  the 
challenges ahead. IMF technical assistance in the areas of macroeconomic modelling and 
supervision  was  on-going.  Training  in  these  areas  is  expected  to  enhance  skills  and  the 
analytical capacity of Bank staff.  
Capital of the Bank With the approval of the  Minister of Finance, we doubled the Bank’s 
capital  from  Rs1  billion  to  Rs2  billion  in  November  2011.  This  injection  of  capital  was 
rendered  necessary  on  account  of  the  significant  increase  in  the  volume  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius Instruments which we had to issue to cope with excess liquidity to maintain orderly 
conditions in the banking and financial sector.  
Issue  of  New  Notes  In  October  2011,  we  issued  banknotes  of  Rs200,  Rs500  and 
Rs1,000 denominations  with  enhanced  security  features  to  extend  the  life  of  our  ageing 
family of banknotes. These features have the advantage of facilitating authenticity verification 
by  consumers  and  cash-handlers,  thus  enhancing  protection  against  counterfeiting.  The 
upgraded  banknotes  are  legal  tender  concurrently  with  other  notes  of  existing  family  of 
banknotes. (More on this issue) 
Launching of Third Platinum Coin During this year we launched the third platinum coin of 
the “Father of the Nation” Series, thus completing the collection, designed to pay homage to 
Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam who left his indelible imprint on the destiny of our country. The 
obverse of the third coin displays Le Morne Brabant, a rocky outcrop on the south-west coast 
of the island which served as a shelter for marooned slaves during the slavery period and 
which is inscribed on the World Heritage list of UNESCO since July 2008. We expect to issue 
a special collectors’ edition of all three coins in 2012.  
Central  Bank  Statistics  A  regular  and  timely  flow  of  quality  data  is  an  essential 
characteristic of a modern economy. The Bank shoulders part of this obligation on behalf of 
the  nation,  and  has  specific  responsibility  for  data  relating  to  money,  finance,  and  the 
balance of payments. The Bank is strongly committed to improve the quality of its data and to 
ensure that they meet international standards. A recent IMF Technical Assistance mission to 
the  Bank  validated  the  quality  of  our  surveys  of  Global  Business  Corporations  with  a 
Category 1 licence and confirmed that we now qualified to join the top league of nations that 
subscribe to the Special Data Dissemination Standards – a project that I espoused since my 
early days at the Bank as I was alarmed by the rising Errors & Omissions component of our 
balance of payments. We were among the few central banks worldwide to participate in the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
jusrisdiction 
listed  Mauritius  as  a 
very first Coordinated Direct Investment Survey initiative launched by the IMF in 2010. We 
have  also  initiated  the  process  of  compiling  Balance  of  Payments  (BoP)  statistics  in 
accordance with the sixth edition of the IMF’s BoP Manual – an exercise that we expect to 
complete by 2014. (More on this issue) 
Financial Stability Developments The year witnessed growing international recognition of 
the  stellar  role  played  by  the  Bank  in  our  very  small  jurisdiction  in  addressing  financial 
system vulnerabilities and financial stability issues against a background of strong regulation 
and supervision. We started the year by being invited – the second in sub-Saharan Africa 
after South Africa – to join the Financial Soundness Indicators Reference Group (FSIRG), set 
up  under  the  auspices  of  the  IMF.  The  FSIRG  will  assess  the  experience  of  countries  in 
compiling  and  disseminating  Financial  Soundness  Indicators  and  improve  their  usefulness 
for financial stability analysis. In November, in a public statement released on its website, the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB) 
taking  actions 
recommended by the FSB after conducting an evaluation of our jurisdiction. The FSB, which 
is hosted by the BIS in Basel, was launched by the G-20 in April 2009 to build and expand on 
the work of the Financial Stability Forum, itself initiated in 1997 by G-7 Ministers of Finance 
and Central Bank Governors. It has a broad mandate relating to all aspects of the financial 
system  from  standard-setting  to  contingency  planning  for  cross-border  crisis  management. 
We ended the year on an even stronger note by being invited by the FSB to join its Regional 
Consultative Group (RCG) for sub-Saharan Africa. The RCG for sub-Saharan Africa forms 
part  of  a  network  of  six  RCG’s  established  in  2011  following  FSB’s  decision  in  November 
2010. The Bank is privileged to form part of such a group, together with eight other African 
countries, and contribute to the debate on global financial stability. (More on this issue) 
A  major  lesson  learnt  from  the  current  global  banking  crisis  is  the  need  to  reduce  the 
complexity of banking and financial structures. Simpler structures facilitate risk assessment, 
effective  supervision,  and  efficient  resolution  if  financial  institutions  run  into  difficulties.  We 
have 
financial 
institutions  −  D-SIFI’s  –  and  concluded  that  some  simplification  is  called  for.  A  prime 
candidate for reform is the bank-subsidiary model where a bank is the parent of subsidiaries 
in  the  group.  We  shall  separate  banking  from  non-banking  activities  to  ensure  that 
depositors’  money  is  not  at  risk.  This  will  strengthen  our  financial  system  and  reduce 
vulnerabilities, thus contributing to financial stability. 
Regional Cooperation We played an active part in regional cooperation initiatives within our 
area  of  responsibility.  My  Deputy  Governors  and  I  attended  several  meetings  during  the 
course of the year. The charters of both COMESA and SADC, the two major African regional 
economic organisations to which Mauritius belongs, provide in their governance mechanism, 
for  a  joint  meeting  of  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Ministers  of  Finance  co-chaired  by  a 
Minister and a Governor. Both bodies met for the first time since their creation in 2011. I was 
privileged, on behalf of fellow-Governors, to co-chair both inaugural meetings − the COMESA 
meeting  in  Lusaka  in  July,  and  the  SADC  forum  in  October  in  Mauritius.  We  hosted  the 
Macroeconomic  Sub-Committee  of  the  SADC  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors.  We 
also had the privilege of welcoming the Ministers of Finance and Central Bank Governors of 
SADC  for  the  inaugural  meeting  of  the  Peer  Review  Panel  in  October  2011,  held 
back-to-back with the joint forum mentioned earlier. (More on this issue) 
The  Bank  continued  its  prominent  role  in  the  area  of  Payment  and  Settlement  System  in 
COMESA and is now hosting the software for the Regional Payment and Settlement System 
(REPSS) and the SWIFT Bank Identification Code for the COMESA Clearing House (CCH). 
In September 2011, we hosted a Workshop on the Live Operations of REPSS, attended by 
delegates  from  15  countries  and  the  CCH.  Major  technical  issues  were  cleared  and  the 
REPSS software was ready to be rolled out with the first group of central banks which had 
signed the relevant agreements and prefunded their account at the Bank of Mauritius.  
structure  of  our  domestic 
systemically-important 
studied 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The  way  we  conduct  our  business  at  the  Bank  seems  to  be  of  increasing  interest  to  our 
peers  from  the  region  and  beyond.  We  welcomed  a  delegation  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Seychelles  headed  by  my  fellow-Governor  in  April  2011.  The  Personal  Assistant  to  the 
Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Rwanda  came  for  a  short  attachment  in  the  Governor’s 
office to see how we ran the office. We also welcomed delegations from central banks from 
beyond the region, e.g Papua New Guinea, for training attachments at the Bank. 
AFRITAC  South  In  my  letter  of  last  year,  I  had  briefly  mentioned  the  impending 
establishment of one of the African Technical Assistance Centres (AFRITAC) of the IMF in 
Mauritius.  AFRITAC  South  –  as  the  centre  set  up  in  Mauritius  is  called  –  was  officially 
launched in October 2011 by the Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development at the Bank where it is presently housed. We welcomed, for the occasion, an 
important  delegation  of  the  IMF  which  comprised,  among  others,  Dr  Min  Zhu,  Deputy 
Managing  Director,  and  Ms  Antoinette  Sayeh,  Director  of  the  African  Department.  Dr  Zhu 
delivered the 7th lecture in the Bank of Mauritius Lecture Series on Global Challenges and 
Policies in Sub-Saharan Africa. (More on this issue) 
Overseas Engagements of the Governor, the First Deputy Governor and the Second 
Deputy Governor in 2011 My two Deputy Governors and myself had a very busy schedule 
of  meetings  in  2011,  as  part  of  our  commitment  to  various  regional  and  international 
organisations  and  bodies.  Given  the  critical  importance  for  us  central  bankers  to  keep 
abreast with international developments, these meetings provided a platform for exchanging 
views and establishing and maintaining contacts with our peers. (More on this issue) 
Forthcoming events As I look ahead, I note with satisfaction that our efforts to heighten the 
Bank’s  visibility  on  the  regional  and  international  front  are  beginning  to  bear  fruit.  In  the 
course  of  the  year,  we  will  have  the  privilege  to  host  several  regional  and  international 
meetings, which I give below in chronological order: 
 
In  April,  we  will  host  the  meeting  of  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors 
(CCBG).  CCBG  meetings  are  normally  held  twice  every  year  –  hosted  by  a 
SADC-member central bank in April on a rotation basis, and by the South African 
Reserve Bank every September. 
In May, we will host, for the first time in Mauritius, the 19th Summit of the Central 
Bank Governors of the Francophone countries. We expect the participation of over 
34 Francophone countries.  
In August, the Reserves Advisory and Management Program (RAMP), an arm of the 
Treasury Department of the World Bank, will hold a workshop in Mauritius. RAMP 
manages a part of our reserves. 
In September, we will host a seminar of the Islamic Financial Services Board on the 
role of Islamic Finance in the development of Africa.  
In  November,  as  Chair  of  the  SADC  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors,  we  will  be 
organising  a  regional  seminar  for  banking  supervisors  jointly  with  the  Financial 
Stability Institute. This will be open to other countries in the region and will help to 
promote cooperation among regional banking supervisors. 
Again in November, we will host the second meeting of the Official Monetary and 
Financial Institutions Forum to be held in Africa, after Cape Town last year.  
We have only just been approached by The  Banker magazine, an offshoot of the 
prestigious  Financial  Times,  and  FT  Global  Conferences  to  hold  their  inaugural 
Global International Financial Centres Congress in Mauritius, possibly in November. 
We are yet to finalise the matter. 
      These events will be the high points of the year as we celebrate the Bank’s 45th Anniversary. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Closing Remarks Each year that goes by brings its share of good things that we would like 
to remember and celebrate, and less good ones that we wish never happened and that we 
would like to forget. 2011 has been no exception. The work of a Central Banker only gets 
more and more complicated as the environment in which central banks operate continues to 
be clouded with uncertainty and becomes increasingly challenging and demanding.  
On the global front, knowledgeable observers seem to converge on the view that the crisis 
will  be  even  more  prolonged  than  is  now  expected.  Some  believe  that  prospects  in  the 
eurozone are quite bleak as hard-core Europe will be unable to do what it takes to save the 
euro from the repercussions of fiscal profligacy in its periphery. The “decoupling” theory has 
been exploded as a myth and the prospect of a hard landing in China dashes any hope of 
global salvation from the East. Small open economies like Mauritius will be buffeted by the 
raging  turbulence.  I  cannot  help  reflecting  that  the  smallness  of  our  economy  can  actually 
prove to be an asset rather than a liability, the more common view, because small size gives 
us an added adaptive advantage: a quick response capacity and the flexibility to continually 
adjust  to  the  volatile  external  environment  –  to  trim  our  sails  to  the  prevailing  wind,  like  a 
small craft, rather than blithely sailing on with the inertia of an ultra-large crude carrier. Such 
flexibility  in  some  of  our  policies  and  strategies  has  so  far  played  in  our  favour.  We  have 
been  able  to  achieve  a  growth  rate  of  4  per  cent  on  average  in  the  last  two  years.  We 
continue  to  remain  cautiously  optimistic  for  this  year.  Pessimism  is  unwarranted,  and 
unhelpful in any case. There is now a greater need for policy-makers to align and coordinate 
their  policies  to  maintain  the  growth  momentum  and  shore  up  confidence  and  business 
sentiment in the country.  
The Mauritian economy was buffeted by an unceasing succession of challenges throughout 
the year as the world continued its fruitless struggle to engineer a sustainable recovery, with 
the oft-sighted “green shoots” turning out to be a mirage. Major economies were shaken to 
their  very  foundation  and  drew  generously  on  the  medicine  chest  to  try  expansionary 
remedies,  for  some,  or  a  dose  of  austerity  for  others,  as  they  coped  with  mounting 
unemployment,  social  instability,  political  turbulence,  fiscal  gridlock,  currency  volatility, 
nervous  markets  and  the  spectre  of  recession  hanging  over  vast  swathes  of  the  global 
economic  landscape.  We  at  the  Bank  rose  to  the  challenge  and  continued  our  successful 
record  of  delivering  on  our  core  mandate  of  price  stability  and  orderly  and  balanced 
economic  development.  We  had  recourse  to  unusual  tools  to  achieve  our  objective.  In 
December, we even had a welcome relief from our usual regimen of being regularly pelted 
with brickbats by the local commentariat when The Banker, a professional magazine of the 
British  Financial  Times  Group,  awarded  yours  truly  the  title  of  Central  Banker  of  the  Year 
2012, Africa – a trophy to add to the tableau vivant of the hypothetical scenario with which I 
began this missive. 
This recognition gives me and my team considerable satisfaction as it is the first time in the 
Bank’s  history  of  nearly  45  years  that  we  are  garnering  such  an  award.  It  rewards  the 
determination  and  the  consistency  with  which we  have  been  conducting  our  policies  in  an 
extremely  difficult  and  very  uncertain  global  environment,  without  giving  in  to  the  strident 
siren calls for quick monetary fixes to give a temporary, but ultimately self-defeating, boost to 
our exports. Real gains for all Mauritians can only come from productivity increases. 
And the future? The IMF Managing Director has recently opined that the world economy is 
entering  a  new  extremely  dangerous  phase.  We  must  be  on  our  guard.  We  need  to 
coordinate  our  efforts,  align  our  policies,  and  take  concerted  measures  with  other 
policy-makers  to  navigate  the  treacherous  waters  ahead.  Above  all,  we  must  look  in  the 
same direction. And we must be always ready to deploy new policy tools, if we are to steer a 
safe  and  steady  course  while  awaiting  calmer  weather.  Let  me  end  by  quoting  Micheal 
Mussa, a former Chief Economist of the IMF, on the merits of economic policy tools: 
“My favourite economic policy tool is prayer. It is not demonstrably less 
 effective than the others and it carries none of the bad side effects.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Prayers, anybody?  
As I sign off this letter, five years to the day since I first donned the hat of Governor, I invoke 
Mussa’s twist on the Pascal wager and fervently hope and pray that 2012 will surprise us on 
the upside, with a much better outturn than current prognoses for the global economy and for 
our key partner-countries, and that – however pummelled, hammered and buffeted we may 
be – we shall be able to keep our economy on course to deliver respectable growth, more 
jobs and greater prosperity for all our stakeholders.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
