Charles I Plosser: Fiscal policy and monetary policy – restoring the 
boundaries 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the US Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by The Initiative 
on  Global  Markets,  University  of  Chicago  Booth  School  of  Business,  New  York  City, 
24 February 2012. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Introduction 
I am pleased to participate in this important forum once again. I am particularly delighted to 
be  a  part  of  such  a  distinguished  panel.  This  conference  has  rapidly  become  one  of  the 
premier venues for serious discussions of monetary policy and I am honored to be a part of 
it. 
Fiscal imbalances  
During the past year, we have witnessed the ongoing saga of governments, both in Europe 
and  in  the  U.S.,  struggling  with  large  deficits  and  soaring  public  debt.  For  the  most  part, 
these  challenges  are  self-inflicted.  They  are  the  result  of  governments  choosing  fiscal 
policies that they knew would be unsustainable in the long run. Financial market participants 
remain skeptical about whether the political process can come to grips with the problems. So 
far,  this  skepticism  appears  to  be  wholly  justified.  Neither  the  European  nor  the  American 
political  process  has  developed  credible  and sustainable plans  to  finance  public  spending. 
Instead, politicians continue to engage in protracted debates over who will bear the burden of 
the substantial adjustments needed to put fiscal policies back on a sustainable path. In my 
view, these prolonged debates impede economic growth, in part, due to the uncertainty they 
impose on consumers and businesses. Moreover, the longer the delay in developing credible 
plans, the more costly it becomes for the respective economies. 
Given the magnitude of the fiscal shortfalls, the way in which the political process restores 
fiscal discipline will have profound implications for years to come. Will there be higher taxes 
on investments by the private sector that risk reducing productive capacity and output in the 
future? Will there be higher taxes on labor that discourage work effort or hiring? Will there be 
cutbacks  in  government  expenditures  on  defense  or  basic  research  that  might  force 
significant resource reallocations and affect a wide array of industry sectors? Will there be 
cutbacks on entitlements that could affect health care, social insurance, and other aspects of 
our  safety  net?  Or  will  a  viable  fiscal  plan  combine  various  types  of  tax  increases  and 
spending cuts? 
These  are  important  questions  that  involve  hard  choices  and  trade-offs  between efficiency 
and equity. Yet, until fiscal authorities choose a path, uncertainty encourages firms to defer 
hiring  and  investment  decisions  and  complicates  the  financial  planning  of  individuals  and 
businesses.  The  longer  it  takes  to  reach  a  resolution  on  a  credible,  sustainable  plan  to 
reduce future deficits and limit the ratio of public debt to gross domestic product, or GDP, the 
more damage is done to the economy in the near term. 
Some  observers  say  cyclical  factors  and  the  magnitude  of  the  recent  global  recession 
caused  the  current  fiscal  crisis.  It  is  certainly  true  that  the  policy  choices  made  by 
governments to deal with the financial crisis and ensuing recession have caused a significant 
deterioration in fiscal balances and debt levels in many countries. However, the underlying 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
trends  that  are  at  the  root  of  unsustainable  fiscal  deficits  in  many  countries,  including  the 
U.S.,  have  been  in  place  and  known  for  some  time.  In  the  U.S.,  for  example,  the  major 
long-run drivers of the structural deficit at the federal level are entitlements such as health 
care and Social Security.1  
Thus,  even  after  cyclical  effects  play  out,  many  countries  will  continue  to  have  large 
structural  budget  deficits.  In  this  sense,  the  financial  crisis  and  recession  have  simply 
exacerbated the underlying problems and perhaps moved up the day of reckoning. In some 
cases,  such  as  Greece,  that  day  has  come.  In  light  of  these  realities,  market  participants 
have begun to question the solvency of governments and their ability to honor their sovereign 
debt  obligations  in  the  absence  of  deep  structural  reforms.  In  Europe,  the  doubts  have 
greatly complicated the political problems as various countries debate the question of “who 
pays” for the anticipated bad debts of individual countries. Here, too, the protracted nature of 
the political debate creates uncertainty, which undermines economic growth and exacerbates 
the crisis. While some have argued that preventing Greek default would keep the crisis from 
spreading, that argument has proven false. 
The interaction of monetary policy and fiscal policy 
The fiscal challenges alone are daunting. Yet, they can also have profound implications for 
monetary  policy  and  the  role  of central  banks.  Today,  I  want  to  focus  my  remarks  on  that 
interaction between monetary policy and fiscal policy. Of course, the appropriate relationship 
between the two is not a new topic. Yet, it has taken on new relevance and importance as a 
result of the recent crisis and the actions undertaken by policymakers. Let me elaborate. 
It is widely understood that governments can finance expenditures through taxation, debt, or 
printing  money.  In  this  sense,  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  are  intertwined  through  the 
government  budget  constraint.  Nevertheless,  there  are  good  reasons  to  prefer  an 
arrangement  that  provides  a  fair  degree  of  separation  between  the  functions  and 
responsibilities of central banks and those of the fiscal authorities. For example, in a world of 
fiat  currency,  central  banks  are  generally  assigned  the  responsibility  for  establishing  and 
maintaining the value or purchasing power of the nation’s monetary unit of account. Yet, that 
task can be undermined or completely subverted if fiscal authorities independently set their 
budgets  in  a  manner  that  ultimately  requires  the  central  bank  to  finance  government 
expenditures  with  significant  amounts  of  seigniorage  in  lieu  of  tax  revenues  or  debt.2  The 
ability of the central bank to maintain price stability can also be undermined when the central 
bank itself ventures into the realm of fiscal policy. 
Imagine a situation in which public debt levels are high and rising. Now stretch your mind 
even more and imagine that fiscal policymakers are reluctant to make the hard choices of 
cutting  expenditures  or  increasing  taxes.  Of  course,  neither  of  these  assumptions requires 
much  imagination.  Indeed,  history  and  our  daily  newspapers  provide  numerous  examples. 
Unless governments are constrained institutionally or constitutionally, they often resort to the 
printing press to try to escape their budget problems. Yet, we all understand that this option 
is  a  recipe  for  creating  substantial  inflation.3  Indeed,  history  shows  that  it  is  often  a  path 
toward hyperinflation.4  
                                                 
1 
In other countries and jurisdictions, such as the state and local level, pension and entitlement commitments 
also account for a significant source of the growth in commitments and thus are central to the fiscal problems. 
2  See Sargent and Wallace (1981). 
3 
Inflation, of course, is also a tax. It is a hidden tax on holding nominal assets, and when it is unanticipated, it 
can have significant consequences that redistribute wealth from creditors to debtors. The near-term effects of 
money creation often appear to be positive, while the undesirable consequences only become apparent over 
time. While money creation results in lower nominal interest rates and perhaps a modest boost to real activity 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Awareness of these long-term consequences of excessive money creation is the reason that 
over  the  past  60  years,  country  after  country  has  moved  to  establish  and  maintain 
independent  central  banks.  Without  the  protections  afforded  by  independence,  the 
temptation of governments to exploit the printing press in the absence of fiscal discipline is 
just too great. Thus, it is simply good governance and wise economic policy to maintain a 
healthy  separation  between  those  responsible  for  tax  and  spending  policy  and  those 
responsible for money creation. 
But  it  is  equally  important  that  independent  central  banks  be  constrained  from  using  their 
own  authority  to  engage  in  activities  that  enter  the  realm  of  fiscal  policy  or  distort  private 
markets.5  
There  are  several  ways  to  place  limits  on  central  banks  so  that  the  boundaries  between 
monetary and fiscal policy remain clear:6  
First, the central bank can be given a narrow mandate, such as price stability. In fact, this 
has been a prominent trend during the last 25 years. Many major central banks now have 
price stability as their sole or primary mandate. 
Second, the central bank can be restricted as to the type of assets it can hold on its balance 
sheet. This limits its ability to engage in credit policies or resource allocations that rightfully 
belong under the purview of the fiscal authorities or the private marketplace. 
Third,  the  central  bank  can  conduct  its  monetary  policy  in  a  more  systematic  or  rule-like 
manner,  which  limits  the  scope  for  discretionary  actions  that  might  violate  the  boundaries 
between monetary and fiscal policy. Milton Friedman’s famous k-percent money growth rule 
is  one  example,  as  are  Taylor-type  rules.  Such  approaches  to  systematic  policy  can  be  a 
commitment  device 
to  solve 
that 
time-consistency problems. 
limits  discretionary  behavior  and 
thus  helps 
The breakdown of the accepted boundaries 
Unfortunately,  over  the  past  few  years,  the  combination  of  a  financial  crisis  and  sustained 
fiscal imbalances has led to a substantial breakdown in the institutional framework and the 
accepted  barriers  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  The  pressure  has  come  from  both 
sides.  Governments  are  pushing  central  banks  to  exceed  their  monetary  boundaries  and 
central  banks  are  stepping  into  areas  not  previously  viewed  as  acceptable  for  an 
independent central bank. Let me give you some examples. 
I will start with what I see as a not-so-subtle undermining of the commitment to price stability. 
Despite the well-known benefits of maintaining stable prices, there are calls in both Europe 
and the U.S. to abandon this commitment and create higher inflation to devalue outstanding 
nominal government and private debt. Such an inflation tax would transfer wealth from those 
who  have  lent  money,  in  good  faith,  to  the  borrowers.  I  am  deeply  skeptical  of  such  a 
strategy. In my view, inflation is a blunt and inappropriate instrument for assigning winners 
                                                                                                                                                      
in the short run, over time, it results in higher inflation and higher nominal interest rates and ultimately requires 
painful efforts to restore price stability. 
4  Some of the more notable examples include Germany, Hungary, and Austria after World War I. Hungary and 
Greece  experienced  hyperinflations  after  World  War  II.  More  recently,  countries  from  South  and  Central 
America  have  had  episodes  of  hyperinflation,  including  Argentina,  Bolivia,  Brazil,  Peru,  Mexico,  and 
Nicaragua. Zimbabwe is the most recent example, and its hyperinflation episode ended with a currency reform 
in 2008. 
5  See  Plosser  (2010)  for  further  discussion  on  the  risks  of  unconstrained  policy  tools  and  the  necessity  of 
commitment devices. 
6  Sargent (2010) has a thoughtful and insightful discussion on these and related issues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and  losers  from  profligate  fiscal  policy  or  excessive  borrowing  by  private  individuals  and 
firms.  Forced  redistributions  of  this  kind,  if  undertaken  at  all,  should  be  done  through  the 
political process and by the fiscal authorities, not through the backdoor by the central bank 
by way of inflationist policies. As a monetary policymaker, I do not want to be complicit in 
such a strategy. Moreover, history has shown that once inflation is unleashed, it is not always 
easy to bring it back down, especially if the central bank loses the public’s confidence and 
damages the credibility of its commitment to price stability. Thus, proposals to use inflation to 
fix the debt overhang problem are nothing more than a call for debt monetization to solve a 
problem that is fundamentally fiscal in nature. 
Pressure on central banks is also showing up through other channels. In some circles, it has 
become fashionable to invoke “lender of last resort” arguments as a reason for central banks 
to engage in fiscal actions. This is a strained argument at best. The basic role of a lender of 
last resort is to provide liquidity to financial institutions that are solvent but facing temporary 
liquidity problems. Yet recently, some have used the concept to argue that the central bank 
should  be  the  lender  of  last  resort  to  governments.  This  is  a  perversion  of  one  of  central 
banking’s core concepts. It is a fig leaf to conceal the process of monetizing the sovereign 
debt of those countries that are insolvent due to their inability to manage their fiscal affairs. 
Monetary policy should not be used to solve a fiscal crisis. 
Unfortunately,  from  my  perspective,  breaching  the  boundaries  is  not  confined  to  the  fiscal 
authorities asking  central  banks  to  do  their  heavy  lifting.  The  Fed  and  other  central  banks 
have  also  undertaken  actions  that  have  blurred  the  distinction  between  monetary  policy, 
credit policy, and fiscal policy. These steps were undertaken with the sincere belief that they 
were absolutely necessary to address the challenges posed by the financial crisis. 
For example, the Fed established credit facilities to support particular asset classes, such as 
commercial  paper  and  asset-backed  securities.  In  November  2008,  the  Fed  announced  it 
would  begin  purchasing  housing  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  and  agency  debt  to 
increase the availability and reduce the cost of credit in the housing sector. When the Fed 
engages in targeted credit programs that seek to alter the allocation of credit across markets, 
I  believe  it  is  engaging  in  fiscal  policy  and  has  breached  the  traditional  boundaries 
established  between  the  fiscal  authorities  and  the  central  bank.  Indeed,  some  of  these 
actions have generated pointed criticisms of the Fed. 
I view the breakdown of the traditional institutional arrangements as dangerous and fraught 
with  longer-term  risks.  While  it  is  popular  to  view  such  blurring  of  the  boundaries  as 
appropriate “cooperation” or “coordination” between the monetary and fiscal authorities, the 
boundaries were established for good reasons and we ignore them at our own peril. 
Restoring the boundaries 
Once  a  central  bank  ventures  into  fiscal  policy,  it  is  likely  to  find  itself  under  increasing 
pressure  from  the  private  sector,  financial  markets,  or  the  government  to  use  its  balance 
sheet to substitute for other fiscal decisions. Such actions by a central bank can create their 
own  form  of  moral  hazard,  as  markets  and  governments  come  to  see  central  banks  as 
instruments  of  fiscal  policy,  thus  undermining  incentives  for  fiscal  discipline.  This  pressure 
can  threaten  the  central  bank’s  independence  in  conducting  monetary  policy  and  thereby 
undermine monetary policy’s effectiveness in achieving its mandate. 
I  have  long  argued  for  a  bright  line  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy,  for  the 
independence  of  the  central  bank,  and  for  the  central  bank  to  have  clear  and  transparent 
objectives. I have also stressed the importance of a systematic approach to monetary policy 
that serves to limit discretionary actions by the central bank. At this conference three years 
ago,  I  argued  for  a  new  accord  between  the  Treasury  and  the  central  bank  that  would 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
severely limit, if not eliminate, the ability of the central bank to lend to private individuals and 
firms outside of the discount window mechanisms.7 I argued that decisions to grant subsidies 
to particular market segments should rest with the fiscal authorities – in the U.S., this means 
the  Congress  and  the  Treasury  Department  –  and  not  with  the  central  bank.  Thus,  I 
proposed  that  the  new  accord  limit  the  Fed  to  an  all-Treasuries  portfolio,  except  for  those 
assets  held  as  collateral  for  traditional  discount  window  operations.  Should  the  fiscal 
authority ask the central bank to engage in lending outside of its normal operations, the fiscal 
authority should exchange government securities for the nongovernment assets that would 
accumulate on the central bank’s balance sheet as a result. This type of swap would ensure 
that  the  full  authority  and  responsibility  for  fiscal  matters  remained  with  the  Treasury  and 
Congress and the Fed’s balance sheet remained essentially all Treasuries. 
Congress has mandated the goals  of monetary policy to promote price stability, maximum 
employment, and moderate long-term interest rates. Asking monetary policy to take on ever 
more  fiscal  responsibilities  undermines  the  discipline  of  the  fiscal  authorities  and  the 
independence of the central bank. Central banks and monetary policy are not and cannot be 
real solutions to the unsustainable fiscal paths many countries currently face. The only real 
answer  rests  with  the  fiscal  authorities’  ability  to  develop  credible  commitments  to 
sustainable fiscal paths. It is a difficult and painful task to be sure, but a monetary solution is 
a bridge to nowhere at best, and the road to perdition at worst – a world of rising and costly 
inflation and a weakening of fiscal discipline. 
References 
Plosser,  Charles  I.,  “Credible  Commitments  and  Monetary  Policy  After  the  Crisis,”  speech 
presented  at  the  Swiss  National  Bank  Monetary  Policy  Conference,  Zurich,  Switzerland, 
September 24, 2010. 
Plosser,  Charles  I.,  “Ensuring  Sound  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Aftermath  of  Crisis,”  speech 
presented at the U.S.  Monetary  Policy Forum: The Initiative on  Global Markets, New York 
City, February 27, 2009. 
Sargent,  Thomas,  “Where  to  Draw  Lines:  Stability  versus  Efficiency,”  New  York  University 
Working Paper (September 6, 2010). 
Sargent,  Thomas,  and  Neil  Wallace,  “Some  Unpleasant  Monetarist  Arithmetic,”  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5 (Fall 1981), pp. 1–17. 
 7  See Plosser (2009) and Plosser (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
