G Padmanabhan: Goa to Goa – changed contours of the Indian Forex 
Markets – new realities and priorities 
Inaugural address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the 23rd Annual Forex Assembly of the Forex Association of India, Goa, 18 August 2012. 
 Assistance provided by S/Shri. G Mahalingam and H. S. Mohanty gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  to  once  again  address  the  top  professionals  in  the  Indian 
forex  market.  It  is  exactly  15  years  since  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  the  then  RBI  Deputy  Governor, 
heralded the beginning of a true forex market in India in this city through what has become 
famous as the "Goa Speech". Clearly the attempt of Dr Reddy that day, and I was present in 
the  front  row  of  the  audience,  was  to  drive  home  some  rationale  and  sanity  into  the 
participating audience. The market took the cue and rest as they say is history. Today, we 
are back to the same position but exactly on the opposite side. But what is needed to calm 
the market is the same – may be more sophisticated – levels of sanity and rationality. Let me 
attempt to set out some issues and priorities in this endeavour. 
2. 
An  old  adage,  purportedly  an  old  Chinese  proverb  and  curse,  that  has  been 
fashionable in the post Global Financial Crisis discourse, goes: “May you live in interesting 
times”. To see it as a curse is a bit of an irony; after all, interesting times are what one hopes 
for and looks forward to. Yet, on reflection, it is easy to see what the Chinese sages would 
have  meant.  After  all,  the  only  thing  that  is  interesting  is  uncertainty,  and  therefore, 
interesting times may be enjoyable for the bystander; but for those who are in the thick of it, 
those who are to take various decisions and whose livelihood depended on it, it surely is a 
challenge, to say the least. But the question that I am going to examine today is different. Do 
economic agents, who have a significant exposure to forex risk in their balance sheet deem 
this  phase  of  uncertainty  and  volatility  as  a  challenge  or  do  they  consider  this  as  a  royal 
pathway to boom? I will try finding some answers to this question but with a warning – the 
word “boom” is not too different from the word “doom” both in terms of intonation and reality. 
In  the  same  vein,  another  question.  What  is  the  difference  between  personality  and 
character? To put it simply,  while personality reveals external qualities which often can be 
put  on,  character  is  a  measure  of  internal  strength  of  a  person. While  character  traits  are 
objective,  personality  traits  can  often  be  subjective.  In  markets  such  as  today,  we  need 
participants with character rather than personality if we are to tide over these difficult times.  
3. 
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  has  had  severe  fall  out  for  the  economies  worldwide. 
Almost  every  single  economy  now  faces  deceleration  of  varying  magnitude  in  economic 
growth, increased unemployment, increased fiscal burden, heightened currency volatility and 
so on. The real sector developments are gloomy and challenging; but evolution of the price 
process in the financial markets worldwide during this period is truly interesting. Let us recall 
that  prior  to  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  there  was  optimism  all  around;  risks  were 
underpriced and prices of all assets were moving heavenwards. As soon as the crisis broke 
out,  markets  crashed  and  prices  bottomed  out.  The  response  of  the  monetary  and  fiscal 
authorities  worldwide  was  swift  and  overwhelming.  Consequently,  the  markets  recovered 
sooner  than  expected,  which  however  was  short-lived  as  the  Euro  problem  –  the  root  of 
which lie partly in inherent structural problems of the union but also partly in the post-crisis 
fiscal response, threw the market into fresh turmoil that is yet to be resolved. 
4. 
Asset prices in the financial markets have been on an uncertain roller-coaster ride 
for the past few years. Let me mention a few. The DJIA moved from the pre-crisis peak of 
14164 (Oct 07) to post crisis low of 6547 (March 09) to 11204 (April 10) to 9686 (July 10) 
12811 (April 11) to 10655 (Oct 11) to 13279 (May 12). The US 10-year yield, moved from 
4.27% in June 2008 to 2.05 (Dec 2008), 4% (Apr 10) and historical low of 1.3910 in July this 
year. USD/EUR, the current flavour, was at 1.60 in April 2008. Since then it has seen 1.24 in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Nov 08, 1.51 in Nov 09, 1.19 in June 10, 1.48 in May 11 and the recent low of 1.2036 in July 
this year. The figures I have mentioned only points to a few peaks and troughs, but there is 
whole  lot  of  details  in  the  charts  that  tell  the  same  story  :  The  markets  have  been  highly 
volatile.  
The Rupee story 
5. 
Let us now look at the Rupee. Around the onset of the crisis, we  were inundated 
with  capital  flows  and  the  Rupee  had  appreciated.  It  had  touched  a  high  of  39.27  in 
Nov 2007.  As  the  crisis  unfolded,  the  trend  reversed  and  Rupee  started  depreciating  and 
reached 52.06 in March 2009. The Rupee started correcting soon and for almost two years 
between Nov 2009 and Aug 2011, remained range-bound at 44–47 levels. The sharp decline 
seen  since  September  last  year (with  a  significant  correction  in  Jan  2012)  is too  recent to 
need recounting.  
6. 
There  are  two  issues  involved  here  –  depreciation  and  volatility.  As  far  as 
depreciation is concerned, the facts are well known. India has always had current account 
deficit which has increased significantly during the past few years in view of strong petroleum 
prices, increased gold imports coupled with strong gold prices and deceleration in the growth 
of exports on the back of faltering or even falling growth in most of the developing/developed 
countries  which  also  happen  to  be  the  major  trading  partners.  On  the  other  hand, 
autonomous  capital  flows  also  seem  to  have  slowed  down  because  of  several  factors 
including  global  risk  aversion,  slowdown  of  investment  in  the  Indian  economy  and  several 
structural issues including inadequate infrastructure. In such a situation Rupee exhibiting a 
depreciating bias is no surprise. A depreciating currency is often seen to act as an instrument 
for correction of imbalances in the BoP. However, a sharp depreciation within a short period 
of time has a destabilizing impact inasmuch as it provokes panic reaction amongst market 
participants  which  apart  from  leading  to  sub-optimal  economic  decision  making  further 
accentuates the price process. While the policy response to structural as well as exogenous 
factors that lead to mismatch between inflows and outflows and consequent depreciation (or 
appreciation)  of  the  currency  take  time  to  yield  results,  Reserve  Bank  has  a  mandate  to 
maintain orderliness in the foreign exchange market. 
7. 
to  volatility.  Volatility  essentially  means  unpredictability. 
Unpredictability  not  only  of  the  extent  of  change  over  any  given  time  period  but  also  the 
direction of change. It affects all of us because we are required to take decisions today that 
will fructify at a future point in time. Because all financial prices are inherently forward looking 
in the sense that they incorporate the participants’ future view, it is no wonder that volatility is 
their most important attribute. It is further complicated by the fact that usually our future view 
is  informed  by  our  past  experience.  It  may  be  interesting  to  recall  that  in  2007–08  when 
Rupee was at 39 levels, informed participants were forecasting 35–36 levels by the end of 
2008  and  very  recently,  during  end-June  this  year,  when  Rupee  reached  57,  market  was 
looking  at  58–60  or  even  60–65  as  inevitable.  What  I  wish  to  emphasize  is  that  when 
economic agents take decision based on such a view of the future, it certainly does not bode 
well either for them or for the economy as a whole. This raises a related issue. If we accept 
that market makers/analysts  who  often  are  in  a  position  to  influence  the  market  sentiment 
tend to be either euphoric or despondent, what is the accountability if their forecasts turn out 
to be widely wrong but meanwhile some participants in the market do get taken in by these 
forecasts and their decisions then turn out to be sub-optimal or inappropriate?  
8. 
Thus, it needs to be recognized that increased volatility in the financial markets has 
become  a  way  of  life  –  a  kind  of  new  normal-and  it  has  to  be  accepted  as  such.  Capital 
account  liberalization  during  last  few  decades  and  enormous  increase  in  the  scale  and 
variety of cross border financial transactions has increased the magnitude of exchange rate 
let  us 
Now 
turn 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
movements,  particularly  in  the  emerging  market  economies.  Of  course,  volatility  may  be 
moderate for some stretch of time – recall that in 2006 people were seeking explanations for 
low volatility in the forex market1 – and heightened at other times, as now. The question that I 
will  now  seek  to  address  is:  What  should  be  our  response  to  volatility?  For  ease  of 
exposition, I shall mainly discuss the issue in the context of two sets of market participants. 
The real sector agents – exporters, importers, foreign currency borrowers and so on and the 
banks or authorized dealers. 
Real sector or real culprits? 
9. 
First, the real sector. In view of the extant capital account restrictions, exposure of 
residents to assets denominated in foreign currency (other than overseas direct investment) 
is  marginal  and  therefore  I  exclude  this  from  my  discussion.  Whenever  a  contract  is 
denominated  in  a  foreign  currency,  the  contracting  party  faces  uncertainty  in  its  cost  or 
revenue and ultimately profit on account of fluctuations in the exchange rate. I would like to 
particularly emphasize the case of exporters, who in the face of stiff global competition and 
absence of any significant pricing power, have to reckon with rather thin margins which can 
be easily eroded because of fall in the value of the foreign currency before the payment is 
received. The same applies to importers as well when they are handicapped by incomplete 
pass-through of the increase in their input cost. The foreign currency borrower, who has to 
carry the exposure for a much longer period than the exporter or the importer, can find his 
cash  flows  and  the  bottom  line  seriously  impaired  because  of  depreciation  of  the  home 
currency. You will be aware that one of the Maharatna companies declared a 18% drop in  
Q-1 profit and a loss in excess of Rs 250 crore reportedly ascribed to foreign currency debt.2 
10. 
How do the corporates manage this risk? There are basically two routes available: 
non-hedging techniques and hedging techniques. Non-hedging techniques include: 
a) 
Settlement of transaction through advance payment, which though beneficial for an 
exporter, carries a cost for the importer and is impossible for a borrower. Even for 
the  exporter,  it  is  doubtful,  in  how  many  cases  in  our  context  an  exporter  can 
demand and obtain advance payment without the risk of losing the order.  
Invoicing  in  the  home  currency  has  been  discussed  a  great  deal  in  recent  times, 
which, however is quite some time away before it can be effectively implemented. In 
the current state of global slow-down declining exports, our exporters simply are not 
in a position to dictate terms. 
11. 
Now,  when  it  comes  to  hedging,  are  the  corporates  taking  a  well-deliberated  and 
calculated  call?  To  this,  “no”  would  have  to  be  the  answer  in  most  cases.  The  reason  is 
obvious. The rupee was rock solid in the range of 44 to 46 for about 2 years from 2009 to 
2011.  That  lulled  the  corporates  into  a  sense  of  complacency  that  nothing  can  go  wrong. 
They started believing that this is the eternal range for rupee. A good bit of sales talk from 
various analysts (and some bankers too) convinced then that hedging is an unwarranted cost 
imposed  on  the  business  when  the  rupee  is  so  well-behaved.  It  is  like  saying  that  life 
insurance is of no value since you are alive today!! This is where my answer to the earlier 
question  comes  in.  If  India  is  a  high  inflation  country  in  comparison  to  the  US,  then  the 
classical theory of foreign exchange states that rupee has to depreciate against the dollar to 
the  extent  of  inflation  differential.  But  there  seems  to  have  been  an  optimism  among  the 
corporates that the rupee will continue to be stable even if India is a high inflation country 
and that the financing of the CAD will never be a problem since India will continue to attract 
flows! 
b) 
                                                
1   Dino Koos, Recent Volatility Trends in Foreign Exchange Market, FRBNY, 2006. 
2   http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/article3734210.ece?homepage=true&ref=wl_home. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
12. 
Over  the  years,  we  have  made  available  a  wide  range  of  derivative  products  to 
enable those with foreign currency exposure to effectively manage their risk. The products 
include forwards, options and futures. I would like to mention that one of the motivations for 
introduction of the products like exchange traded futures or options was to enable the small 
and medium enterprises to access the derivative market at competitive cost. But the use of 
these products depends on the agents themselves.  
13. 
But,  unfortunately,  even  these  hedging  instruments  have  become  weapons  in  the 
hands  of  corporates  to  trigger  market  instability.  Whether  it  is  past-performance  based 
booking  or  cancellation  and  rebooking,  or  EEFC  accounts,  the  corporate  deemed  these 
instruments as unfailing profit channels rather than flexible operational tools to manage real- 
life  business  events.  These  instruments  have  a  tendency  to  exacerbate  volatility  in  the 
markets and create a constant undercurrent of instability. That is why Reserve Bank had to 
step in to moderate volatility and cushion the rupee fall. 
Risk management framework 
14. 
What  should  determine  the  use  of  the  derivative  products  by  the  agents?  Like  in 
case of any risk, currency risk requires identification, measurement and management. It is 
important therefore that a firm should have a comprehensive framework for risk management 
and the decision to hedge or not to hedge should flow out of a conscious assessment of risk 
and  the  costs  and  consequences  of  entering  a  zero,  partial  or  full  hedge.  The  potential 
downside of any hedging strategy has to be recognized. Take the case of a forward contract, 
the  most  direct  and  commonly  used  hedge.  An  exporter,  who  had  sold  his  receivables 
forward at a particular level, stands to makes a notional loss in comparison with an unhedged 
position if the foreign currency appreciates beyond the contracted level. Similar is the case 
when an exporter, anticipating a fall in the value of the foreign currency, sold his receivables 
forward only to find the trend reverse, as happened in 2007–08. Exporters cancelling forward 
contracts and importers rushing to cover their exposure are a common phenomenon we see 
when the Rupee depreciates. 
15. 
There is a fallacy of composition involved here. What is a good strategy for one may 
not remain so if everybody adopts the same strategy. After all, a forward contract in essence 
shifts the demand from one point in time to another. If everyone adopted hedging strategy in 
anticipation of Rupee decline at a future point of time, the Rupee decline will happen now 
and  here.  The  point  I  wish  to  make  is  this:  the  hedging  strategy  should  be  part  of  a  well-
conceived  risk  management  framework  built  around  assessment  of  risk  and  risk  appetite. 
Having  bought  certainty  through  a  hedge,  the  agent  should  be  free  to  concentrate  on  his 
chosen  line  of  activity  without  bothering  about  the  potential  gain  or  loss  on  account  of 
currency movement. Having bought a car insurance, one should not regret that no accident 
has taken place.  
16. 
I am told that fear of mark-to-market losses, inhibits many firms from hedging activity 
that their risk assessment and appetite would warrant. I am no expert in accounting. Yet it is 
clear to me that the objective of accounting is to faithfully reflect the true economic essence 
of business affairs. On the contrary, if accounting rules stand in the way of agents’ adopting a 
hedging strategy that economic rationale hold optimal – on the basis of information available 
at the time, I must qualify, and not with the twenty-twenty vision of hindsight – then perhaps 
there is a need to take a relook at this inconsistency.  
Role of banks 
17. 
Now let me come to the role and response of the banks or authorized dealers in a 
volatile  market.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  our  exchange  management  framework  places 
considerable restraint on residents’ holding of foreign currency assets, particularly financial 
assets  and  hence,  clientele  of  the  bank  comprises,  exporters,  importers,  foreign  currency 
borrower  and  overseas  investors.  The  regime  also  extends  differential  hedging  options  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
different classes of exposures. Without going into the rationale for the regime, let us try to 
see what should be the optimal role of banks in a volatile situation. 
18. 
The banks are market makers in foreign exchange not only in the interbank market 
but  also  in  relation  to  their  clients.  Obviously  therefore  they  have  to  carry  a  position.  By 
“position”, I mean trading position involving rupee as one of the currency. The need for this 
position arises from the fact that without this – inventory, as it were – banks would not be in a 
position  to  serve  their  clients  efficiently.  What  should  be  the  magnitude  of  this  position? 
Naturally,  this  would  depend  upon  the  nature  of  their  clientele,  size  of  their  need  and  the 
volume of business. It is natural that like all traders, a forex dealer will also be tempted to 
profit from shortage by building up a hoard. Therefore, to align incentives of the forex dealers 
with  the  larger  public  purpose,  we  are  constrained  to  impose  restrictions  on  positions, 
knowing well that such restrictions may impair liquidity in the market. Let me mention another 
aspect in passing. Because a trading position is a risky market exposure, obviously it has to 
be limited by availability of commensurate capital for the purpose. But that does not mean 
that if you have capital, you can take as large a position as you want, irrespective of your 
needs as mentioned earlier. Not in the present regime, not at times of volatility. 
19. 
We  have  often  spoken  about  appropriateness  and  “fit  and  proper  test”  of  the 
products  as  well  as  the  parties  in  conducting  derivative  transactions.  We  have  also 
underscored the responsibility of banks in ensuring that hedging products used by clients are 
in  consonance  with  the  economics  of  their  exposure  as  well  as  their  risk  management 
strategy  duly  incorporated  into  broader  corporate  governance  framework.  Let  me  again 
emphasize  that  the  banks’  responsibility  to  ensure  appropriateness  of  the  product  for  the 
client is not merely to satisfy a regulatory mandate nor is it motivated by altruism. Foreign 
exchange business in India is a part of relationship banking and it is in the banks’ interest 
that clients do not end up taking unwarranted risk through ill-understood and inappropriate 
hedging  products.  In  this  context,  let  me  flag  an  important  issue  of  what  I  call,  ensuring 
inclusion in forex transactions. Today, the large number of SME customers in this country are 
not getting fair rates for their hedging transactions. This is a serious missed opportunity in my 
perception and calls for some serious cooperative efforts among the banks to offer finer rates 
to the SME Clients who today feel that what they are faced with is a "rip off”. You might argue 
that it has been the age old practice that rates are often way off the normal distribution for 
smaller transactions. But we can always make a sincere effort to change set thoughts and 
practices. I would urge some of the participants to put up their hands and take this thought 
process forward.  
OTC vs. futures 
20. 
Before I close, let me flag one issue for brainstorming. The OTC forex markets and 
the  Currency  Futures  are  two  different  market  segments  for  the  same  product.  Both  are 
governed  by  two  different  regulatory  framework  in  terms  of  requirement  of  underlying, 
delivery and the extent of position taking by participants. We can no doubt have competing 
market segments as competition will bring in more efficiency. But, how can the competition 
be fair when the playing fields are completely asymmetric? This, in my view is an important 
issue  warranting  further  public  debate.  But  we  need  to  underscore  the  fact  that  exchange 
rate  is  a  critical  macro-economic  variable  particularly  for  countries  having  capital  controls, 
perhaps no less sacrosanct than the policy interest rates which are targeted by the central 
banks,  the  world  over.  We  also  need  to  bear  in  mind  that  excessive  overshooting  and 
volatility in such a critical variable can have adverse financial stability implications. I will leave 
you  with  the  thought  that  there  is  a  paramount  need  for  aligning  these  market  segments, 
perhaps with a road map over an acceptable time span. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Concluding remarks 
21. 
Let me now try and summarize what I have discussed. Volatility is an unavoidable 
feature of all financial markets and heightened volatility in the forex market that we witness 
today is neither unprecedented nor unexpected. All economic agents with currency risk will 
have to frame a conscious risk management policy to cope with the impact of the volatility on 
their  cost,  revenue  and  profit.  Even  as  the  Reserve  Bank  strives  to  maintain  orderly 
conditions  in  the  forex  market,  certain  behavioral  issues  that  tend  to  accentuate  volatility 
have to be understood  by all market participants and factored  into their response and risk 
management strategy. I have also flagged the issues of forex inclusion for the SME sector 
and the need to synchronize regulations for the OTC and the Exchange traded markets.  
22. 
Adam Smith famously said “People of the same trade seldom meet together, even 
for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or 
in some contrivance to raise prices.”3 I am sure this does not apply to the meetings of the 
Forex Association and I am confident that in this event, your deliberations will help to make 
the forex markets a place where people can trade with confidence, volatility notwithstanding. 
23. 
I wish your deliberations over the next two days all success. 
                                                
3   Theory of Moral Sentiments. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
