Ipumbu Shiimi: Namibia’s new generation of banknotes 
Remarks by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the official launch of the 
new banknotes during the 22nd Independence Anniversary celebrations, Mariental, Hardap 
Region, 21 March 2012. 
 Directors of Ceremony  
Your Excellency Dr Hifikepunye Pohamba, President of the Republic of Namibia and First 
Lady Meme Pohamba 
Right Honourable Prime Minister, Nahas Angula  
Honourable Speaker of the National Assembly, Dr. Theo Ben Gurirab  
Honourable Chairperson of the National Council, Asser Kapere  
Honourable Chief Justice, Judge Peter Shivute  
Honourable Ministers  
Honourable Members of Parliament  
Members of the Diplomatic Corps  
Honourable Katrina Hanse-Himarwa, Governor of the Hardap Region and other Governors 
from other regions  
Your Worship, Alex Kamburute, Mayor of Mariental and other Mayors from other local 
authorities  
Local and Regional Authority Councillors, Traditional Leaders  
Senior Government Officials 
Members of the Media  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good afternoon  
I  am  humbled  and  privileged  for  this  opportunity  to  make  few  remarks  and  introduce  the 
video about Namibia’s new generation of banknotes.  
Today is a special and momentous Day in the history of our beloved country. Today, we are 
not only celebrating 22 years of our Independence, we are not only celebrating 22 years of 
peace  and  stability,  but  we  also  witnessed  the  launch  of  the  new  generation  of  Namibia’s 
banknotes by his Excellency, the President of the Republic.  
Your Excellency,  
Directors of Ceremonies!  
The  theme  of  my  remarks  is  titled  “Our  Money,  Our  Pride,  Our  heroes  and  heroines,  we 
Honour, know your currency”. This is because the new banknotes launched a moment ago 
are  not  just  decorated  papers  but  are  very  important  national  payment  instruments  that 
symbolize our sovereignty, nationhood, and natural diversity.  
Directors of Ceremonies 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
The Namibian people have given the Bank of Namibia the responsibility to ensure that our 
currency  is  of  high  quality,  safe  and  acceptable  by  the  public.  We  believe  that  continuous 
improvements  in  the  security  features  of  our  currency  is  a  long  term  investment  that  will 
protect the public and the economy from potential counterfeiters. It is for that reason that we 
have decided to introduce a new generation of banknotes with the latest and state of the art 
security features to ensure that our banknotes remain safe, credible and presentable.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Director of Ceremonies  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  preparation  for  this  new  generation  of  banknotes  has  been  an  intricate  process, 
involving  many  role  players.  On  this  note,  on  behalf  of  the  Board,  staff  of  the  Bank  of 
Namibia and indeed my own behalf, I would like to thank the President and the Cabinet for 
the endorsement of the new generation of the Namibia Dollar Banknotes. Furthermore, we 
would like to express our gratitude to the Minister of Finance for her guidance and support 
during  this  process.  Special  thanks  also  go  to  my  predecessor,  Mr  Tom  Alweendo,  who 
started this project, just before he left. I am grateful to my Colleagues at Bank of Namibia 
who  worked  hard  on  this  project  to  ensure  that  we  have  well  secured  banknotes  which 
compare with the best in the World, notes that we are proud of.  
Director of Ceremonies  
Your Excellency  
Our  notes  do  not  only  contain  state  of  the  art  security  features,  but  they  also  honour 
Namibian heroes. Kaptain Hendrik Witbooi will forever remain one of our martyrs, a hero who 
fought  fearlessly  against  the  occupation  of  our  mother  land.  The  battles  he  fought,  for 
example in the Naukluft Mountains on 27 August 1894 and subsequent battles in the Auab 
Valley, were not ordinary, but acts of bravery. Kaptain Hendrik Witbooi died on 29 October 
1905  near  Koes  after  he  was  wounded  in  the  battle  near  Fahlgras.  Your  Excellency, 
according  to  history,  these  were  his  last  words  “It  is  enough  now,  the  children  shall  have 
peace”.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  my  fellow  Namibians,  let’s  treasure  the  peace  we  are 
currently enjoying for this was bought with blood.  
Your  Excellency,  Sir,  we  are  celebrating  and  praising  our  heroes  and  their  heroic  deeds. 
Inspired  by  our  forefathers,  Dr.  Sam  Nujoma,  with  his  compatriots,  carried  the  struggle 
forward.  This  too,  Director  of  Ceremonies,  was  a  long  and  bitter  struggle.  They  sacrificed 
their youth years and many rivers of blood were crossed. Their efforts paid off, on 21 March 
1990, Namibia became a Republic. Dr. Nujoma became our Founding President and Father 
of our newly born Nation, a unique position in the history of our country which no else will 
ever occupy. In his inaugural address on that day, the Founding President also paid homage 
to all fallen heroes and heroines, who sacrificed their lives for the total emancipation of the 
Namibian people. He said: “In accepting the sacred responsibility which the Namibian people 
have placed on me as the first President of the Republic of Namibia, I would like to bow and 
pay homage to our fallen heroes and heroines, whose names Namibia’s present and future 
generations will sing in songs of praise and whose martyrdom they will intone”. Ladies and 
Gentleman, as with the task of leading the liberation movement, on the job of reconstruction 
and nation building he also excelled. His courage and exemplarily leadership are admirable 
and for this we honour him. We are indeed honouring our heroes.  
Director of Ceremonies  
Your Excellency, Sir  
In honoring national heroes, the challenge and questions faced by decision makers in many 
countries is always “why this one and not the other one”. There are many other heroes and 
heroines  in  Namibia.  Why  not  Jacob  Marenga,  a  legendary  personality  in  the  whole  of 
Southern  Africa,  known  as  the  black  Napoleon,  Cornelius  Fredrikies  of  Bethanie,  Samuel 
Maharero, who fought brave battles at Okandjira and Ohamakari in 1904. How about Nehale 
Lya-Mpingana who attacked the forte at Onamutuni in support of Maharero and his people. 
Why not Chief Kutako who also fought at Ohamakari? Where is Mandume ya Ndemufayo, 
who died in combat in 1917 at Oihole? How about Iipumbu ya Shilongo, who was sent into 
exile  in  1932  after  his  palace  was  bombarded  by  the  air  force?  How  about  the  fearless 
warrior, Chief Kai Xamseb, who was beheaded in 1890 and his grave was only found in 2005 
in  the  botanical  garden  in  Windhoek?  How  about  Tobias  Hainyeko?  What  about  Meme 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Gertrud  Kandanga?  Why  not  Brendan  Kangongolo  Simbwaye,  who  disappeared  without 
trace in 1972? How about Anton Lubowski, who was murdered in 1989?  
Director of Ceremonies what about our other heroes and heroines whose names we have 
not  mentioned  today.  The  truth  is  that  we  have  many  heroes  and  heroines  who  have 
sacrificed for our beloved country. To these people we shall remain indebted for ever. To our 
heroes  and  heroines,  we  owe  our  freedom.  Their  aspirations  are  nothing  else  but  for  the 
present and future generations to have unity, to ensure nation building and to work hard to 
achieve Vision 2030. We shall continue to honour them in different ways because their blood 
waters our freedom.  
In conclusion, Your Excellency, a moment ago you have directed us to start a nation-wide 
campaign to inform the nation about the new currency. We shall, oblige Mr. President. For 
the next four weeks we shall travel all corners of this beautiful country to tell our people about 
our  new  symbols  of  nationhood,  to  inform  them  that  through  these  notes  we  honour  our 
heroes. With this money we are singing their names in songs of praise and martyrdom. We 
shall convey the message “Our money, our pride, know your currency”  
I thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
