Edgar Barquín: Recent economic trends and policy issues 
Presentation by Mr Edgar Barquín, President of the Central Bank of Guatemala, at the JP 
Morgan  Investor  Seminar,  Central  America  Panel,  on  the  occasion  of  the  IADB  Annual 
Meetings, Montevideo, Uruguay, 17 March 2012. 
 I would like to thank JP Morgan for the opportunity to share my views on this panel.  
In addressing the recent economic trends in Guatemala and the main policy issues, I would 
first like to highlight some specific features of the current international context that directly 
affect  Guatemala’s  economy.  Then  I  will  give  you  a  quick  overview  of  recent  trends  and 
prospects of Guatemala’s main economic variables, and finally I will share with you the main 
policy challenges we are or will be facing in the near future. 
Regarding the current international context, I would like to highlight six elements:  
First, the deterioration of global economic prospects, which is already being reflected in the 
weakening of global trade. Lower economic prospects are also on the horizon for most Latin 
American countries as well as some key emerging economies such as China and India.  
Second,  high  frequency  indicators  suggest  a  recovery  of  economic  activity  in  the  United 
States  of  America,  though  the  sustainability  of  this  recovery  is  still  uncertain  due  to  high 
levels  of  unemployment,  problems  in  some  key  markets  such  as  the  housing  market, 
potential risks due to the problems in the Euro Area and fiscal consolidation issues, among 
others. 
Third,  uncertainty  arising  from  the  Euro  Area  debt  crisis  with  potential  spillover  effects  to 
other regions and financial markets. 
Fourth, declining commodity prices that have contributed to easing of headline inflation in 
most developing countries. However, prices are still high, particularly oil prices. 
Fifth, high levels of unemployment remain in most advanced economies including the United 
States and the Euro Area as a whole. 
And sixth, insufficient progress in developing medium term fiscal consolidation in advanced 
economies that could deepen global imbalances. 
Regarding recent trends and prospects of Guatemala’s main economic variables, first of all I 
would  to  highlight  that  the  recovery  of  economic  activity  continued  in  2011;  in  that  year, 
GDP increased by 3.8 percent, though still below the pre-crisis levels.  
For 2012 we are expecting a growth rate between 2.9 percent and 3.3 percent, mainly due to 
the impact of the international environment I just mentioned. 
As regards exports, after experiencing negative growth rates in 2009 due to the crisis, the 
growth  rate  in  2011  was  the  highest  of  the  last  13  years  or  more,  at  23.6  percent.  This 
performance was mainly due both to higher prices and higher export volume of Guatemala’s 
main traditional products. For 2012, prospects we are expecting slightly lower growth rates, 
though still positive, due to the deterioration in global economic prospects. 
In the case of imports, the growth rate was quite significant at 20 percent during 2010 and 
2011, reflecting a higher domestic demand of goods and services particularly capital goods, 
fuel and other inputs for the industry. For 2012, a lower growth rate is expected as we are 
estimating a lower demand for consumption goods and inputs for the industry.  
Remittances inflows are recovering at a slow pace. In 2011 the amount was a little bit higher, 
63.3  million  dollars,  than  the  one  of  2008  previous  the  hit  of  the  crisis  in  Guatemala.  For 
2012, even though we are expecting a recovery in the amount of inflows, the growth rate is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reached  highest  historical 
not  significant,  5.7  percent,  as  the Hispanic  unemployment  rate  in  the United  States,  from 
which about 99 percent or remittances come, is still high.  
As  the  Guatemalan  economy  is  more  integrated  with  the  global  economy  and  as  new 
investment opportunities arise due to a greater diversification of its production of goods and 
services, we have experienced an increase of capital flows from Foreign Direct Investment. 
We  expect  these  flows  to  keep  growing  as  specific  actions  are  being  taken  to  promote 
investments  in  the  country  on  the  basis  of  a  public-private  strategic  alliance  which  also 
includes efforts to improve Guatemala’s investment climate. 
As  of  today,  about  55  percent  of  Foreign  Direct  Investment  comes  from  the  United  States 
and Mexico. 
Here it is important to mention that short term capital inflows to the economy have not been 
significant.  Therefore,  we  have  not  experienced  the  problems  of  other  Latin  American 
countries  which  had  to  deal  with  relatively  high  capital  inflows  as  well  as  with  significant 
appreciations  of  their  nominal  currencies  and  increases  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  that 
fueled economic activity over its potential levels. 
International  Monetary  Reserves  have 
levels,  at  over  
USD 6 bn (and expected to reach close to USD 7 bn in 2012), which represents an important 
liquidity cushion for the Guatemalan economy as well as a good signal to the international 
markets and credit rating agencies.  
The banking credit to the private sector has increased, mainly the credit in foreign currency 
due to lower international interest rates as well as the higher Guatemalan industrial activity 
experienced in 2011. The main funding of the credit in foreign currency has been commercial 
lines of credit from American banks.  
The Economic Activity Confidence Index is improving, particularly in the most recent months. 
This performance is highly related with positive expectations about the new government that 
took  office  in  mid  January.  So  far,  the  government  has  given  clear  signals  of  being  a 
pro-private  sector  government.  In  its  first  month  in  office  the  government  has  launched  a 
competitiveness  agenda  and  an  integrated  policy  for  foreign  trade,  competitiveness  and 
investments.  These  and  other  specific  actions  have  contributed  positively  to  expectations 
about economic growth despite the uncertainty on the global economic prospects.  
Declining commodity prices have contributed to easing of headline inflation since mid 2011, 
reaching  6.20  percent  by  the  end  of  the  year,  slightly  above  the  top  limit  of  the  Monetary 
Board’s target of 5.0 percent plus minus 1 percentage point.  
For  2012, 
range 
minus 1 percentage point, though inflationary expectations are still above this range.  
Guatemala’s  Central  Bank  main  goal  is  to  pursue  price  stability  which  is  reflected  in  an 
inflation  range  target  set  out  by  the  Monetary  Board,  the  one  I  have  mentioned.  In  this 
context, if inflationary pressures arise or inflationary expectations continue above the target, 
specific actions will be taken by the Monetary Board in the near future to achieve the 2012 
and the midterm inflation targets.  
In  the  meantime,  the  central  bank  is  monitoring  the  performance  and  prospects  of  key 
external and internal economic variables that may impact headline inflation and inflationary 
expectations. In addition, coordination with fiscal policy continues to be strengthening as well 
as the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
Guatemala  is  known  by  international  organisations  and  credit  rating  agencies  for  its  good 
record of prudent fiscal and monetary management as well as for its low levels of public debt 
and tax burden.  
Fiscal  revenues  were  significantly  hit  during  the  crisis  2008/2009  so  fiscal  deficit  almost 
doubled, reaching 3.3 percent of GDP in 2010. To keep public debt at sustainable levels in 
inflation  estimates  are  within 
target  of  4.5  percent  plus  
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  midterm,  fiscal  deficit  should  be  equal  or lower  than  2 percent  of GDP.  In  this  regard, 
even though further reductions are needed, we can say that the consolidation is underway as 
the fiscal deficit reached 2.9 percent of GDP in 2011 and is expected to be at 2.6 percent of 
GDP in 2012.  
It  is  worth  mentioning  that  during  the  first  month  of  the  new  government  Congress  has 
passed two legal provisions aim at strengthening fiscal revenues on a sustainable path. The 
legal provisions included not just modifications to some taxes but also specific provisions to 
strengthen the Tax Administration powers to fight against tax evasion and smuggling.  
Despite  the  increase  in  public  debt  in  recent  years,  total  debt  to  GDP  ratio  is  still  below 
critical values. We expect that the actions that are being taken to strengthen fiscal revenues 
on a sustainable way will contribute to stabilize this ratio at sustainable levels.  
Given  the  uncertainty  that  remains  about  the  global  economic  prospects  I  would  say  that 
there are three main policy challenges we are currently facing as policy makers:  
The first one is to anchor inflation expectations to the midterm target. This means that the 
Central  Bank  has  to  stand  ready  to  take  any  necessary  measures  to  address  inflationary 
pressures,  even  in  a  context  of  potential  deterioration  of  economic  growth  at  the  national 
level.  This  is  important  because  if  the  downside  risks  to  growth  materialize  and  inflation 
expectations  are  still  above  the  midterm  target,  the  Central  Bank  has  no  room  to  ease 
monetary policy and support economic growth. 
The  second  main  policy  challenge  is  to  secure  fiscal  sustainability  in  the  medium  term 
through the strengthening of tax revenues and the implementation of prudent fiscal policies 
reflected  in  the  stabilization  of  the  rising  debt-to-GDP  ratio  and  the  reduction  of  the  fiscal 
deficit  to  levels  below  2  percent  of GDP.  This  is  particularly  crucial  as  we  need  to  restore 
fiscal  maneuver  in  the  short  term  in  order  to  be  able  to  address  a  more  severe  global 
economic downturn or the impact of a natural disaster which in fact is very likely to happen 
as  Guatemala  is  among  the  world’s  most  vulnerable  countries  to  experience  natural 
disasters. Securing fiscal sustainability is not just an issue of reducing public expenditure as 
besides  high  fiscal  rigidities;  Guatemala  has  important  infrastructure and  social needs  that 
need to be addressed in order to foster sustainable economic growth.  
This drives me to the third main policy challenge which is to foster sustainable economic 
growth in an uncertain international environment.  
To address this challenge commitment is needed not just from the government but mainly 
from the private sector as well as civil society. As I already mentioned, some work has been 
done  to  build  these  strategic  alliances  through  the  competitiveness  agenda  and  the 
integrated  policy  agenda  for  foreign  trade,  competitiveness  and  investments  as  both  have 
been endorsed by the private sector. In addition, efforts initiated by the previous government 
regarding  specific  programs  to  address  poverty  and  creation  of  opportunities  for  the  most 
vulnerable groups are being taken by the new administration as well as specific actions to 
address the high levels of crime and violence that also affect sustainable economic growth.  
Some of these actions will render benefits in the medium term, so in the mean time the main 
contribution  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  would  be  to  preserve  macroeconomic  stability 
while  maintaining  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  as  this  has  been  key  to  address 
adverse  shocks  in  the  past  as  well  as  to  create  a  solid  basis  to  achieve  a  sustainable 
economic growth. 
As a conclusion, allow me to summarise with the following points: 
 
As we have and will be discussing these days  in different forums, our  economies 
are, again, vulnerable to external shocks arising from other regions. 
Even  though  we  have  made  significant  improvements,  particularly  regarding  the 
strengthening of the economic fundamentals of our economies, which is reflected in 
a lower volatility of the main macroeconomic  prices including lower inflation rates, 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
strengthened  financial  systems,  more  sound  fiscal  balances,  improvements  in 
productivity and so on, we are not exempt, now and in the future, from experiencing 
these kind of shocks that at the end affect not just economic and financial variables 
but most important the well being of our populations. 
As  policy  makers,  we  have  the  responsibility  to  preserve  those  economic 
fundamentals  and  to  come  up  with  policy  actions  that  may  reduce  their  negative 
impact,  or  even  better  that  could  make  our  economies  less  vulnerable  to  their 
effects.  
In  this  context,  I  am  glad  to  be  here  and  looking  forward  to  the  discussion  of  our 
challenges as we may come up with specific policy actions that may be needed now 
or in the future to address these challenges. 
  Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
