Ewart S Williams: Economic leadership within the Caribbean with 
particular reference to Trinidad and Tobago 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Employers’  Consultative  Association  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Fifty  Second 
Annual General Meeting, Port-of-Spain, 16 March 2012. 
 Thanks to the Employers Consultative Association for inviting me to address you as part of 
your lecture series. I also take the opportunity to congratulate you on the occasion of your 
52nd Annual General Meeting.  
Your  anniversary  is  taking  place  against  the  background  of  an  uncertain  economic 
environment and in a complicated industrial relations climate.  
Yet  all  birthdays  are  a  time  for  celebration  and  you  have  much  to  be  proud  of,  surviving 
52 years of ups and downs and through it all, making a sterling contribution to the economic 
development of Trinidad and Tobago.  
You have asked me to speak on economic leadership within the Caribbean region, with 
particular reference to Trinidad and Tobago. It is a rather broad topic but I would try to give 
you my perspective, hoping that it touches on the issues that concern you.  
Without getting in too much detail, I will first try to indicate how our economic performance 
compares  with  that  of  our  regional  counterparts,  suggesting  that  we  have  much  to  be 
thankful for. I will go on to make the point that the medium term economic prospects for the 
region  are,  to  put  it  mildly,  very  uncertain.  While  we  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  have  many 
more options than our CARICOM neighbours, given the uncertainties surrounding our natural 
resource  endowments  and  the  more  difficult  global  economic  environment,  we  need  to 
undergo  considerable  structural  transformation,  if  we  are  to  maintain  or  increase  the 
relatively high living standards which we now enjoy. My over-riding thesis is that you, as the 
private sector, would have a critical role to play in this process of economic transformation. 
However,  success  would  ultimately  depend  on  the  extent  to  which  we  could  set  up  a 
meaningful  partnership  with  the  other  developmental  partners,  most  notably  the  state,  the 
trade unions, tertiary educational institutions and the NGOs community.  
First the history…  
There is no doubt that the Trinidad and Tobago economy has made remarkable strides over 
the past two decades, and in so doing, we have assumed the economic leadership of the 
Caribbean region.  
For example, in the period immediately before the global recession, say 2000 through 2008, 
real GDP growth in Trinidad and Tobago averaged 7.6 per cent per year compared with the 
CARICOM average of 2.9 per cent. By 2008, Trinidad and Tobago accounted for 38 per cent 
of regional GDP and our per capita income is about US$19,000 compared with an average of 
US$8,900  for  the  other  CARICOM  territories.  The  Bahamas  and  Barbados  have  higher 
per capita incomes.  
As  we  all  know,  the  entire  region  was  affected  by  global  recession,  some  countries  more 
than  others.  In  2009–2010,  economic  activity  in  the  OECS  declined  by  a  cumulative 
9 per cent. In Barbados and Jamaica, the cumulative decline was about one-half this amount 
– about 5 per cent. In these countries, the main contributing factors were the sharp fall in 
tourist arrivals and workers’ remittances. The OECS were further affected by the impact of 
the CLF/Clico crisis (in fact, it was BAICO) and the devastation caused by Hurricane Tomas, 
particularly in St Lucia and St Vincent and the Grenadines.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
(The region remained in crisis in 2011. While there has been some improvement in tourist 
arrivals, the OECS saw another year of economic decline, albeit at a reduced rate. Jamaica 
and Barbados both reported the start of a very weak recovery).  
In  Trinidad  and  Tobago  real  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  declined  by  3  per  cent  in  2009 
remained flat in 2010 and declined again in 2011 (by just over 1 per cent).  
I  should  note  that  Guyana  and  Suriname  were  the  only  two  countries  in  the  region  that 
emerged  unscathed,  largely  because  of  their  gold  resources  which  benefited  from  rising 
international prices.  
Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  more  resilient  economic  performance,  relative  to  its  neighbours, 
owes much to our energy resources and to the entrepreneurial dynamism of our private 
sector.  These  endowments  are  reflected,  inter  alia,  in  our  stronger  government  finances, 
lower public debt, more robust foreign reserve positions, and in our dominance in regional 
trade.  
The following summary statistics paint the picture.  
 
Regional  governments  have  run  fiscal  deficits  each  year  since  2000,  while 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  run  fiscal  surpluses  for  all  but  two  years,  over  the 
same period.  
The  CARICOM  region  boasts  of  having  among  the  most  highly-indebted 
countries  in  the  world,  with  public  debt  averaging  around  70  per  cent  of  GDP 
(Jamaica, Grenada and St Kitts and Nevis have debt ratios of over 100 per cent of 
GDP).  In  contrast,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  a  public  debt  ratio  of  38  per  cent  of 
GDP.  
The relative fiscal and public debt performance are part of the story that explains the 
differential credit ratings. Trinidad and Tobago is the only Caribbean country rated 
“A”  by  Standards  and  Poor’s.  The  Bahamas  and  Barbados  also  have  investment 
grade ratings – BBB and BBB minus, respectively.  
Trinidad  and  Tobago  dominates  regional  trade.  For  the  period  2000  to  2007, 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  had  a  positive  trade  balance  of  over  US$1.5  billion  vis-a-vis 
our CARICOM partners; this increased to US$2.2 billion in 2008–2010. Much of our 
positive  trade  balance  was  due  to  our  energy  exports.  Excluding  energy  trade, 
there is still an annual positive trade balance of around US$400–$500 million. 
This  latter  statistic  underscores  the  importance  of  the  regional  market  for  our 
manufacturing exports and for employment in the domestic manufacturing sector. It 
raises  the  interesting  question  whether  our  enlightened  self-interest  does  not 
justify some level of financial assistance to the region.  
   And the facts are that Trinidad and Tobago has provided considerable financial assistance to 
the region over the past decade in a variety of ways. Since 2000, private sector firms and 
CARICOM  Governments  have  raised  approximately  US$2.2  billion  on  the  local  capital 
market mainly through bond issuance. In addition, official support provided by the Trinidad 
and Tobago Government includes US$260 million through the Petroleum Stabilisation Fund, 
and about US$50 million by way of its contribution to the CARICOM Development Fund.  
The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  considers  that  the  medium  growth  outlook  for 
many countries in the CARICOM region will be subdued. Excluding Trinidad and Tobago 
for the moment, the IMF envisages only: i) a slow recovery in tourism demand because of 
weaker growth in the advanced economies; ii) increased competition for scarce foreign direct 
investment;  and  iii)  external  shocks,  including  natural  disasters,  which  could  undermine 
economic stability due to limited fiscal space and high debt levels.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  medium  term  economic  outlook  for  Trinidad  and  Tobago  may  be  slightly  better 
but  several  uncertainties  and  challenges  lie  ahead.  It  is  to  these  uncertainties  and 
challenges that I now turn.  
In a speech I made to a Conference you hosted two years ago, I made the point that “while 
oil  and  gas have  brought  us  to  where  we  are,  we  are  not  sure  how much  further  it  would 
carry us”. If that was so in 2010, it is much more so now in 2012.  
(I don’t know about you but) I must confess to be very uncomfortable about the prospects for 
our energy sector.  
The  Scott  Ryder  Report  tells  me  that,  as  at  the  end  of  2010,  proven  gas  reserves  were 
equivalent  to  9  years  of  production  and  proven  oil  reserves,  the  equivalent  of  14  years 
(production).  The  data  show  that  oil  production  has  been  on  a  secular  decline  for  several 
years and anecdotal information suggest that petro-chemical industries are currently facing 
serious  gas  shortages.  This  portrait  underscores  the  urgent  need  for  investment  in 
exploration in order to tap into our probable and possible oil and gas reserves. However, the 
results from two bid rounds conducted so far, have not been as good as envisaged.  
In  addition  to  the  production  uncertainties,  there  are  serious  risks  to  gas  prices  over  the 
medium to long term. These arise from the great proliferation of shale gas technology which 
is likely to lead to a major increase in gas output and depress LNG prices worldwide.  
The  uncertain  prospects  for  the  energy  sector  and  the  central  role  that  this  sector  will 
continue to play in the economy over the next few years, may be contributing to the crisis 
of  confidence  in  the  non-energy  sector.  Perhaps  a  national  dialogue  on  the  subject 
would serve to give investors a better understanding of the real picture in the energy 
sector and facilitate more meaningful planning of the much-needed diversification effort.  
If current trends in the energy sector persist, the transformation of the non-energy sector will 
become all the more urgent, if sustainable growth is to be achieved. This transformation 
would need to be based on the establishment of a range of competitive industries producing 
for new export markets.  
You,  the  private  sector  are  being  called  upon  to  play  the  major  role  in  this  transformation 
effort. I submit, as I have done before, that the market mechanism will not provide the 
necessary incentives for meaningful diversification. State leadership and vision will be 
required and I would add the active participation of other stakeholders such as the trade 
unions and the tertiary educational institutions.  
Among  the  Government’s  roles  is  the  provision  of  public  goods  and  services  that  are 
essential  to  the  growth  process.  Thus,  the  focus  should  be  on  the  improvement  of  our 
economic infrastructure – specifically roads, water, electricity, ports and so on. Government 
has already announced sizable investment programmes in these areas. Government 
has  also  been  placing  great  emphasis  on  education  and  training.  Hopefully  this 
emphasis  would  serve  to  create  a  culture  that  institutionalises  continuous  learning 
and a “can do” attitude, which is critical for an environment conducive to innovation.  
The  Government  also  has  responsibility  for  maintaining  an  enabling  environment.  While 
there are several elements under this heading, “business facilitation” is one that requires 
particular attention.  
In the latest Doing Business Report by the World Bank, Trinidad and Tobago ranks 68 out of 
183 countries. In that Report, two of the areas cited as needing significant improvement are: 
i) dealing with construction permits – it takes around 297 days to get a building permit; 
and ii) registering property, where it takes on average 162 days to complete the process.  
Discussions  with  local  traders  also  suggest  that  there  are  often  significant  delays  and 
charges at our ports, even relative to the rest of the Caribbean countries. I understand that 
some important work has been going on to progressively reduce administrative procedures 
by way of a Single Electronic Window which would help to further automate transactions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  private  sector  also  has  its  challenge.  Entrepreneurs  need  to  move  out  of  their 
existing comfort zones and to invest in new industries for export to some of the more 
promising  and  dynamic  markets.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  following  the  economic 
crisis of the 1980s, local private sector firms took up the challenge, identified new exports 
niches and established a formidable presence in the CARICOM region. In some cases the 
amount  of  capital  needed  may  require  partnering  with  foreign  investors.  In  other 
circumstances, public/private sector partnerships may be the appropriate modality.  
The  trade  unions  clearly  have  an  important  role  in  the  transformation  effort.  Relations 
between  companies  and  unions  need  to  shift  from  being  adversarial  to  one  of 
cooperation. It is critical for both parties to jointly address competitive pressures and work 
to harness the skills and commitment of the workforce.  
Productivity  and/or  profitability  are  the  source  of  an  employers’  capacity  to  pay,  if 
business competitiveness is to be achieved and maintained.  
Some  of  the  more  dynamic  export-oriented  economies  (in  Asia)  have  experimented  with 
compensation systems which provide flexibility through variable pay arrangements which can 
respond  to  changes  in  market  cycles  or  to  poor  enterprise  performance.  I  am  not  sure 
whether it would work here but perhaps, it is worth some consideration.  
Let  me  end  by  returning  to  the  main  theme  …  While  we  are  undoubtedly  the  economic 
leaders of the CARICOM region, our energy advantage is on the wane.  
In these circumstances, in order to ensure medium-term sustainability and increasing living 
standards, we need to become more competitive, and to put the diversification thrust on the 
front burner. Time may not be on our side. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
