Ben S Bernanke: Opening remarks 
Speech by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, at the Federal Reserve Conference on “Central Banking: Before, during, and after 
the crisis”, Washington DC, 23 March 2012. 
More  information  about  the  conference,  held  at  the  Madison  Hotel,  Washington,  DC,  March  23–24,  2012,  is 
available on the Board’s website. 
 Distinguished  guests,  colleagues,  and  friends:  It  is  my  privilege  to  welcome  you  to  this 
conference  on  “Central  Banking:  Before,  During,  and  After  the  Crisis,”  which  is  jointly 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the International Journal of Central Banking. 
We  hope  that  the  conference  will  foster  discussion  among  policymakers  and  researchers 
about  the  evolving  challenges  facing  central  banks  around  the  world.  To  help  get  that 
discussion  started,  the  conference  will  feature  original  research  on  monetary  policy, 
macroprudential  regulation,  and  the  provision  of  liquidity,  topics  that  are  obviously  highly 
relevant to the public policy missions of the Federal Reserve and other central banks. The 
proceedings  from  this  conference  will  be  published  in  a  special  issue  of  the  journal  and 
disseminated to researchers in central banks and academic institutions worldwide.  
Needless  to  say,  the  events  of  the  past  few  years  pose  serious  challenges  to  the 
conventional,  pre-crisis  views  and  approaches  of  central  banks  and  other  financial 
supervisors.  The  crisis,  the  recession  it  sparked,  and  the  subsequent  slow  recovery, 
especially in the advanced economies, have demonstrated that we have much to learn about 
the  workings  and  vulnerabilities  of  our  modern,  globalized  financial  system  and  its 
interactions  with  the  broader  economy.  In  responding  to  these  stressful  financial  and 
economic developments, the Federal Reserve and other central banks have had to deploy a 
variety  of  new  tools  and  approaches  to  carry  out  their  responsibilities  regarding  monetary 
policy and the provision of liquidity, tools about which we still have more to learn. Finally, in 
the  wake  of  the  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  regulatory  agencies  have  been 
charged with challenging new responsibilities in the area of macroprudential supervision, with 
the  objective  of  promoting  financial  stability  and  reducing  the  likelihood  and  the  costs  of  a 
future financial crisis. Although much progress has been made, we are still at an early stage 
in understanding how best to meet these new macroprudential responsibilities.  
All  of  these  developments  have  spurred  a  great  deal  of  research  within  central  banks,  in 
academia,  and  elsewhere.  This  outpouring  of  research  will  help  shape  future  central  bank 
doctrine and policy approaches and, most importantly, should help central banks better carry 
out their mission to promote the public welfare. The papers at this conference make a variety 
of  welcome  contributions  to  this  endeavor.  Two  contributions  consider  the  implications  of 
recent  events  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  both  conventional  and  unconventional.1 
Another  paper  addresses  the  relationship  between  monetary  aggregates  and  financial 
stability.2 And several papers investigate issues in the field of regulation and macroprudential 
supervision,  including  the  design  of  an  integrated  framework  for  regulation,  a  proposal  for 
                                                 
1   See  Mark  Gertler  and  Peter  Karadi  (2012),  “QE  1  vs.  2  vs.  3  .  .  .  A  Framework  for  Analyzing  Large-Scale 
Asset Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool (PDF),” March; and Athanasios Orphanides and Volker Wieland 
(2012), “Complexity and Monetary Policy,” forthcoming. 
2   See Hyun Jeong Kim, Hyun Song Shin, and Jaeho Yun (2012), “Monetary Aggregates and the Central Bank’s 
Financial Stability Mandate (PDF),” March 6. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
dealing with systemically important resolution issues in the repurchase agreement markets, 
and a review of the progress to date in reengineering the financial system.3  
The discussants’ remarks, the general discussions, and the policy panel will surely be very 
helpful in identifying fruitful directions for further research. I thank our guests for coming and 
participating.  I  once  again  welcome  you  to  Washington  and  wish  you  a  stimulating  and 
productive conference.  
                                                 
3   See Charles A. E. Goodhart, Anil K. Kashyap, Dimitrious P. Tsomocos, and Alex P. Vardoulakis (2012), “An 
Integrated  Framework  for  Multiple  Financial  Regulations  (PDF),”  March;  Viral  V.  Acharya  and  Sabri  Oncu 
(2012), “A Proposal for the Resolution of Systemically Important Assets and Liabilities: The Case of the Repo 
Market  (PDF),”  March  23;  and  Darrell  Duffie  (2012),  “Replumbing  Our  Financial  System:  Uneven  Progress 
(PDF),” March 17. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
