Rundheersing Bheenick: Working in the interest of Mauritius – Central 
Banker of the Year 2012, Africa 
Acceptance  speech  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  on 
receiving  the  Central  Banker  of  the  Year  2012,  Africa  Award  from  The  Banker  Magazine, 
London, 25 February 2012. 
 Thank you, The Banker Magazine; thank you, Mr Caplen, respected editor of The Banker; 
thank  you,  members  of  the  panel  for  the  generous  acknowledgement  of  the  Bank’s 
achievements during these most troubled and testing times in living memory.  
Thank you, Chairman of the Board of Investment, for hosting this event this evening and for 
your personal involvement in the organization of tonight’s function.   
I am deeply honoured to have been handpicked to receive this prestigious Award of Central 
Banker of the Year 2012, Africa, by The Banker Magazine. This is more, much more, than a 
personal  honour.  I  see  in  it  an  accolade  for  my  family,  my  friends,  my  teachers,  my 
collaborators, my well-wishers and all those, including my critics, who have made me what I 
am; I also see this as an accolade for the institution which I lead, and for my country.  
I am truly humbled, and deeply moved, that such a distinction is being conferred on a Central 
Bank Governor from a small island lost in the Indian Ocean. My country has a population of 
just  1.3  million,  a  tiny  fraction  of  the  one  billion  teeming  on  the  African  continent.  Our 
economy  is  pocket-sized,  with  a  GDP  of  US  Dollars  11  billion,  against  Africa’s  US  Dollars 
4 trillion. These two metrics suffice to bring out the immensity and the extraordinary nature of 
this distinction – a first in our 45-year history of central banking. We are a gutsy nation; it is in 
our nature to punch above our weight. And we are the first ones to be surprised when we 
walk away with the prize.  
As  I  stand  before  you  tonight,  I  am  lost  for  words.  Just  as  I  was  dumbfounded  and 
incredulous when my long-suffering Chef de Cabinet first announced it to me at the end of a 
regular  daily  morning  one-on-one  consultation  which  had  not  gone  well  and  had  become 
unusually heated. She had been saving it for the end as a piece of good news. The prospect 
of such an award was not even remotely on my radar and I really thought she was joking or 
being  ironical  to  defuse  the  tension.  It  took  quite  some  convincing  before  I  thought  it  was 
genuine and could be persuaded to talk to the editor of The Banker. And my first questions to 
him were: “Why? Why us? What have we done to bring us to your attention?” The news was 
followed by an avalanche of congratulatory phone calls, emails, text messages, and letters 
from well-wishers the world over. I can tell you it is a moving and overwhelming experience. 
Lost for words, for once in my career as Governor. I thought I should share these feelings 
with you this evening.  
I accept the Award. I accept it with great humility. I accept it on my own behalf. I accept it on 
behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  in  particular  my  inner  circle,  my  garde 
rapprochée, who put up with me (well, most of the time), who share my vision, and some of 
my convictions (and talk me out of others) – without their support, I would hardly have been 
effective, and would probably not have survived this long at the Bank. I accept the Award on 
behalf of my countrymen.  
I accept it on behalf of those who placed their trust in me. Here I have a special thought for 
the Prime Minister, Dr Navinchandra Ramgoolam, who nominated me to the position after I 
had served as Minister in his first Government from 1995 to 2000. A staunch believer in the 
rule  of  law,  he  respects  the  autonomy  and  independence  of  the  central  bank.  Can  a 
Governor  ask  for  more?  I  was  lucky  to  get  more.  He  stood  by  me  and  believed  in  me 
particularly when I was subjected to a concerted attack from all sides. I may very well be in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the top league of governors to have been most reviled during their tenure. Goethe had not 
got  it  quite  right  when  he  said  “Viel  Feind,  Viel  Her”  –  I  was  blessed  with  a  plethora  of 
enemies but found little honour in it.  
More than  anything, it is the unwavering support of my Prime Minister that enabled me  to 
maintain an equally unwavering focus on the statutory mandate of the Bank. 
This distinction is also a ray of hope for small jurisdictions like Mauritius. Let this be a source 
of inspiration for SIDS everywhere. Small Island Developing States, do not despair. We are 
not condemned to a life of me-tooism. We can plough our own furrow and seek salvation in 
our own different ways. Regardless of one’s size or location, we can all aspire to the premier 
league. 
We have in our midst this evening my venerated tutors and mentors from my undergraduate 
days  at  Oxford  and  a  bevy  of  dignitaries  –  indeed  this  is  the  kind  of  moment  that  you 
absolutely must share with family, friends, partners, colleagues from international institutions, 
and all those who walked part of the way with you in your life, personal, social, professional, 
or a mixture of all of them. I thank you all for your presence here to-night.  
As I landed at Heathrow the other day, my mind drifted off to my first days in England when I 
was a carefree student, from a remote island colony, a rural country boy from a village with 
no electricity, no telephone, and little running water, who had never spent more than a couple 
of  nights  away  from  home,  and  who  could  read  and  write  Latin  and  Greek  better  than  his 
peers. I was more interested in satisfying my deep curiosity for all the novelties that I was 
discovering. I wasn’t really thinking of my future. In fact, I was wondering what to do with my 
life.  
I was barely out of my teens, not yet twenty. I had a prized seat at Merton College, one of the 
oldest – if not the oldest – at Oxford University. I was going to read Greats…but I was going 
through an existential crisis. I had successfully resisted my parents’ calls to pressure me to 
become  a  lawyer  or  a  medical  doctor,  the  prestigious  occupations  that  attracted  the  six 
“laureates”  of  which  I  was  one.  I  was  quite  aware  that  a  University  education  was  not 
vocational  or  professional  training.  But  I  could  not  help  asking  myself,  was  there  much 
mileage  left  in  the  classics?  I  had  just  been  reading  some  Maupassant  short  stories.  The 
punch line of one of them was fresh on my mind: le latin ne nourrit pas son homme!  
There  used  to  be  an  outfit  called  Mauritius  Students  Unit,  operating  from  a  small  office  in 
Upper Montagu Street, off Baker Street, run by an energetic lady called Miss Rittner. She set 
up an interview for me at Merton. Peter Chellen, also with us tonight, used to work at the 
Unit. I found myself on the short train journey to Oxford – and soon wondering whether I had 
alighted at the wrong destination when the first sign I came across on leaving the station said 
in huge letters: “Welcome to Oxford, the Home of Pressed Steel.” Was this the ancient seat 
of learning I had been reading about? I was confronted by the formidable trio of PPE tutors: 
John Black for economics, John Lucas for philosophy and Dr Pelczynski for politics. I thank 
Dr Pelczynski and John Lucas, and also Vijay Joshi who took over from John Black later, for 
being with us tonight.  
I do not remember much about the interview except for some vague recollection of having 
stirred  some  interest  when  I  qualified  Greats,  the  pride  of  Oxford,  as  being:  “backward-
looking.” Anyway, the upshot was that I was allowed to change over to Modern Greats, as 
the Honour  School of Philosophy, Politics and Economics was known. But life is so full of 
surprises – your footsteps sometimes take you where you do not dream of going in the first 
place.  
To  cut  a  long  story  short,  I  was  swimming  against  the  tide  when  I  returned  to  newly-
independent  Mauritius  in  1968  after  my  studies.  The  flow  was  very  much  in  the  other 
direction,  with  people  leaving  in  droves,  searching  for  better  prospects,  as  Mauritius  was 
seen as a basket-case with no prospects whatever. My journey took me successively to the 
newly-established University of Mauritius, the equally recent Economic Planning Unit of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Prime Minister’s Office, the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation in Vienna, 
the Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, the Ministry of Finance, and the Bank 
of  Mauritius.  I  am  proud  to  have  been  associated  with  all  these  institutions  and  to  have 
brought my modest contribution to the construction of the nation. 
Every position brought its own unique challenges. When I became Governor of the Bank of 
Mauritius in 2007, I was entering new territory. I was a macro-economist and a policy analyst, 
but not a banker or regulator either by temperament or profession. The environment in which 
banks operated had become very complex and highly volatile – quite a challenge for a newly-
minted Governor. I could build on the work of my immediate predecessors who had, in their 
own way, contributed to strengthen the banking sector.  
I also thank the banking community – which is represented tonight by Ravin Dajee, Chairman 
of the Mauritius Bankers Association, and James Benoit, Vice Chairman of the Association, 
in their normal working life, CEO of Barclays Bank Mauritius and the CEO of Afrasia Bank, 
respectively.  The  relative  success  that  Mauritius  has  achieved  in  economic  and  social 
development rests on the solid bedrock of regular public/private dialogue. At the core of this 
is  the  dialogue  between  the  Bank  and  the  CEO’s  of  all  banks  in  Mauritius  –  which  is 
unmatched in its regularity, its frequency and its intensity – which has helped us enormously 
to shield our small open and vulnerable economy from the crisis.  
The  award  is  thus  a  tribute  to  the  collective  contribution  of  the  Government,  the  Central 
Bank,  the  banking  industry,  and  the  Mauritian  private  sector.  I  would  like  to  think  of  this 
distinction  as  a  celebration  of  the  progress  of  my  country  towards  economic  and  social 
salvation.  
The crisis throws up new and unexpected problems around the world everyday: uncertainty 
persists  in  financial  markets;  spillovers  on  the  real  economy  leave  in  their  wake  negative 
sentiment,  poor  growth  and  tenacious  unemployment  levels;  fiscal  and  debt  sustainability 
concerns  cause  serious  apprehension;  and  reduced  incomes  depress  consumption  and 
investment 
levels.  Amidst  such  global  mayhem,  our  resource-constrained  country 
surprisingly fared quite well.  
We have posted positive growth rates throughout the crisis, averaging 4 per cent per year or 
not  far  below  trend  levels.  Unemployment  is  at  8  per  cent,  a  far  cry  from  the  rising 
joblessness in some of our major markets. Inflation has come down. Reserves have gone up. 
Our banks are solid and well-capitalised. I can be forgiven for believing that smallness is no 
longer a liability. Quite the contrary: it can be a source of added adaptive advantage. It gives 
our policymakers a quick-response capacity and the flexibility to change gear quite rapidly to 
adapt to the constantly-changing environment that has become the new normal. And this is 
what has so far spared Mauritius from the worst effects of the crisis.  
My  five  years  as  Governor  coincide  almost  perfectly  with  the  run  of  the  crisis.  As  can  be 
expected,  they  have  certainly  not  been  de  tout  repos.  I  initiated  the  practice  of  issuing  an 
annual Letter to Stakeholders, where I highlight the activities of the central bank during the 
past  year.  I  titled  my  last  letter,  issued  two  weeks  ago,  “Pummeled,  Hammered, 
Buffeted…But Still on Course!”. I was referring to the economy, but the title may also serve 
as a short-hand description of my own tenure as Governor. Pummeled, hammered, buffeted, 
I may have been but, through thick and thin, I have kept my eyes firmly focused on the best 
interest  of  the  nation  as  I  sought  to  live  up  to  the  trust  placed  in  me  to  lead  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius.  
Governors have a very tough job in a crisis-ridden world. They are constantly the subject of 
public scrutiny. They are the butt of jokes, the target of criticism, the object of much invective, 
with  their  fitness  –  occasionally  their  very  sanity  –  being  publicly  questioned.  They  walk  a 
tight  rope  most  of  the  time.  They  need  to  take  bold  and  timely  decisions  that  make  them 
unpopular. If they shirk such decisions, they court disaster. It is a case of “damned if they do, 
and damned if they don’t”. Yet, they have to remain resolute, determined to do whatever their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
job entails. If they are unlucky, they are terminated, with their gubernatorial life being – if I 
can borrow some words from Hobbes – “nasty, brutish and short.” 
I have a long list of “Thank you’s” tonight. I could have kept it short and said simply: I thank 
my  parents  for  making  it  possible  –  and  family,  friends,  and  colleagues  for  making  it 
necessary. But that won’t do, will it? So, please bear with me for a few more minutes. Let me 
call a few to take a bow. 
Zbigniew Pelczynski, Emeritus Fellow of Pembroke College, the Politics Tutor, I shared with 
Bill Clinton. 
John Lucas, Fellow of the British Academy, Emeritus Fellow of Merton College, my tutor in 
Philosophy. 
Vijay Joshi, Senior Research Fellow of St John’s College, Emeritus Fellow of Merton, and my 
tutor in Economics after John Black left Merton to take a chair in Exeter University. 
I thank them for the guidance and advice that they gave me, a young country bumpkin, and 
helped to make me the man I am today. I am extremely grateful to them. 
I  would  have  wished  to  mention  each  and  every  teacher,  family  member,  friend  and 
collaborator by name for their contribution – I can assure you I am not lost for words when it 
comes to gratitude – but time constraints and your patience prevent me from doing that. 
I thank my mother, my wife of 40 years, my son and my daughter for the sacrifices they have 
silently  endured,  while  I  was  away  from  home  –  which  was  most  of  the  time,  since  even 
when I was there physically, I was not really there – I am your proverbial absentee parent – 
absorbed by my other concerns and responsibilities. I thank my wider family who share my 
patronym for stoically accepting their lot when they have had to take part of the flak as I have 
never ceased being publicly lambasted and pilloried, and called all manner of names – some 
of which you cannot mention in polite company – since I traded the comfort and anonymity of 
the civil service mandarinate for the hurly-burly of politics and the unrelenting public spotlight 
in  an  unforgiving  environment  where  fair  comment  has  long  lost  the  battle  against 
outrageous  libel  and  quasi-criminal  defamation.  Some,  closely-related,  regret  the  shared 
patronym  and  have  been  known  to  disown  the  connection.  I  understand.  Lately,  others  – 
quite unrelated – claim a close relation. Such is life. 
My professional career was much enriched by my interaction with colleagues from the World 
Bank, the IMF, the Commonwealth Secretariat, and elsewhere. I thank Michel Devaux and 
Paul Blay, both of the World Bank, and both here tonight, for the great support they gave in 
the  dark  days  when  Mauritius  was  a  patient  in  intensive  care,  undergoing  structural 
adjustment in the early 1980’s, and for their friendship ever since. I thank Bishnu Persaud for 
his  support  in  equally-critical  work  on  small  island-states.  I  thank  Percy  Mistry  for  being  a 
goading critic and a constant source of encouragement.  
I thank Mihaela Smith, and through her, the entire network of the Commonwealth Partnership 
for  Technology  Management,  for  always  pushing  me  in  new  directions  at  that  critical 
interface where academia and technology intersect the world of politics. I thank Ian Downing 
for being such a great Master of Ceremonies tonight. I thank Maurice Lam and the Board of 
Investment for sponsoring this event. I thank The Banker for having provided the reason to 
bring  us  all  together.  And  thank  you  very  much,  all  of  you,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  dear 
friends, for gracing the occasion with your valued presence. 
Finally, beyond those I have mentioned and all of you present here tonight, I am also grateful 
to all those who, one way or another, extended some moral support to me in times of need. I 
am referring here, in the words of Luther King, to all those “people who make a successful 
journey possible – the known pilots and the unknown ground crew.” 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
