B Mahapatra: The global financial crisis – new awakening 
Address  of  Mr  B  Mahapatra,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Convocation  Ceremony  of  Chetana’s  Institute  of  Management  &  Research,  Mumbai, 
21 January 2012. 
 The contributions made by Smt Usha Janakiraman and Tariqa Singh are gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri Shirish Choudhary, Honorary Secretary, Chetana Trust, Dr. Ashok Choudhury, 
Trustee  Member,  Smt.  Madhumita  Patil,  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Dr.  M.  V.  Deshpande, 
Director, Chetana’s Institute of Management & Research (CMIR), other eminent dignitaries 
on  the  dais,  guests,  and  distinguished  faculty  members,  graduating  students,  relieved 
parents and family members: It is a great pleasure for me to deliver the convocation address 
today for the batch of 2011 at the Chetana’s Institute of Management & Research, which has 
evolved as a premier management Institute. It would be in the fitness of things to pause for a 
few  minutes  and  remember  the  Founder  President  of  the  Chetana  Trust:  Late  Shri 
Madhukarrao Chaudhari, Philanthropist, Former Education & Finance Minister, Maharashtra 
and  Speaker,  Maharashtra  Legislative  Assembly.  His  vision  was  to  develop  Chetana  as  a 
world  class  Institute  of  academic  excellence  and  to  develop  outstanding  business 
professionals  who  make  valuable  contributions  to  the  corporate  world  and  society.  This 
vision has been achieved through the rapid strides made by the Institute in the past several 
years in the field of management education and research. 
2.  
I am privileged to be here today on an occasion which is both joyous and solemn. 
For many of you, this day will be an extremely happy one and an important milestone in your 
life. You are graduating from a student life to a corporate life with a splendid future in front of 
you. Opportunities in India today are at par with the best that the world has to offer. When 
you  reach  my  age,  India  will,  in  all  likelihood  be  in  the  forefront  of  nations  that  have 
eliminated poverty and entering the ranks of advanced economies. Some of you would have 
created  companies,  while  some  others  would  have  climbed  your  way  to  the  top  of  the 
corporate  ladder.  Some  among  you  may  have  chosen  to  become  academicians  and  a 
number of you will choose to dedicate your life to social work. 
3. 
Undoubtedly,  you  will  also  a  have  feelings  of  sadness  today  and  in  the  days  to 
come.  Campus  life  creates  a  cocoon  around  you,  only  to  tear  it  apart  today.  You  will  bid 
goodbye to the Institute which has nurtured and chiseled the talent in each one of you, where 
you have developed lifelong bonds. You will feel the loss of friends. But rest assured, you will 
enjoy the challenges ahead when you enter the real world. 
The new awakening 
4. 
As  you  move  to  the  threshold  of  a  new  phase  in  your  life,  I  am  reminded  of  the 
clarion call of Swami Vivekananda, “Arise, awake and stop not till the goal is reached.” I do 
not know how many of you are aware that the birthday of Swami Vivekananda is officially 
observed  in  India  as  the  National  Youth  Day.  The  Government  of  India,  while  declaring 
January 12, his birthday, as the National Youth Day, said, “it was felt that the philosophy of 
Swamiji and the ideals for which he lived and worked could be a great source of inspiration 
for  the  Indian  youths”.  Swami  Vivekananda  was  not  only  a  monk,  he  was  a  scholar  and 
teacher  too  and  his  teachings  are  very  relevant  for  the  youth  even  today.  He  wanted  the 
youth  to  combine  character  with  capability,  values  with  effective  actions  and  ideals  with  a 
practical mind. 
5. 
With this in mind, I would like to leave some thoughts with you on the topic that I 
have  chosen  for  the  evening  –  The  Global  Financial  Crisis:  New  Awakening  –  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
backdrop of the unprecedented economic turbulence faced by the world today and the social 
revolutions underway. It is no mere coincidence that “Chetana”, the name of your Institute 
means consciousness. The starting premise of my talk today is the urgency for awakening 
our consciousness. The first thing you must know in order to awaken your consciousness is 
to know that you may be asleep. The youth revolutions – driven by the passion and zeal of 
the  youth  –  happening  the  world  over  reinforce  this  fact  and  are  partly  the  reason  for  my 
choice of the theme for today. 
6.  
As  you  surely  know,  the  last  few  years  have  been  very  turbulent  for  the  world 
economy and have shaken the foundation of some of the unquestioned beliefs of economic 
theories.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  called  into  question  the  ethical  foundation  of  the 
financial world. Even as we grapple with these challenges, the world has seen revolutions in 
the  Arab  world  to  topple  long  standing  despotic  regimes.  The  Euro  zone  crisis  with  the 
unemployment and welfare cuts in some European countries has added to frustration of the 
people of Europe. 2011 will be particularly remembered as a year of revolution, the beginning 
of  the  end  for  an  unsustainable  global  financial  system  based  on  greed,  inequality, 
misdoings, and lack of leadership. Is it a coincidence that you belong to the batch of 2011that 
stands on the threshold of a new awakening? 
7.  
In  this  backdrop,  I  shall  dwell  on  the  three  most  prominent  youth  protests  that 
marked  the  year  2011  –  the  Arab  Spring,  the  Occupy  Wall  Street,  and  the  Spanish 
Indignados (indignant) Movements. 
The Arab Spring 
8. 
The Arab Spring, otherwise known as the Arab Awakening, as you are aware, was a 
revolutionary wave of demonstrations and protests across the Middle East and North Africa 
(MENA) that began in December 2010. It was sparked in Sidi Bouzid, a neglected Tunisian 
town  by  a  young  man  like  you,  twenty  six  year  old  fruit  vendor  Mohammed  Boulazizi  who 
only wanted to make a simple living. But when his fruit cart and produce was confiscated by 
the police and the town’s governor refused to hear his plea for return of his wares, he set 
himself  on  fire.  A  fortnight  after  his  death,  unprecedented  anti-government  protests  raged 
throughout  the  country,  and  the  dictator  of  Tunisia  had  to  flee.  With  one  tragic  act,  he 
awakened a generation of Arab youth and altered the course of Arab history. 
9. 
The  flame  lit  in  the  little  known  town  of  Sidi  Bouzid  led  to  the  toppling  of  the 
country’s dictator and soon spread to Egypt and Libya, Yemen, Bahrain and Syria as youth-
led uprisings fractured decades old authoritarian order. The geopolitical implications of the 
protests have drawn global attention, with one (Tawakel Karman) of the three laureates of 
the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize being a prominent leader in the Arab Spring. 
Occupy Wall Street 
10. 
Building  on  the  momentum  of  the  Arab  Spring  movement,  another  movement 
popularly known as the Occupy Wall Street began innocuously in another part of the world. I 
used  the  word  “innocuous”  because  here  there  was  no  brutal  crackdown  by  a  dictator,  no 
crushing of demonstrators, no police firing and no self-immolation. In fact, the movement did 
not start in the United States of America, the world’s prominent democracy. In July 2011, the 
Canada-based  Adbusters  Foundation,  championing  the  cause  for  an  ad-free  and  anti-
consumerism  society  through  its  magazine  Adbusters,  proposed  a  peaceful  occupation  of 
Wall  Street  in  Manhattan,  the  citadel  of  modern  finance,  to  protest  corporate  greed  and 
misdeeds, growing income inequality and absence of legal action against bankers blamed for 
the global financial crisis. It was followed with great interest in the US, especially in the social 
circles, and the movement kindled the spirit of disenchanted Americans. But where the Arab 
Spring was a longing for democracy romanticized by the blood of the youth on the streets, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  American  protest  was  a  cry  for  accountability  and  justice,  and  protest  against  all  the 
misdoings of the financial system and the corporate world. 
11.  
What began as a motley crowd in a park in Manhattan gradually went viral on-line. 
As per one estimate there are now more than 2,500 physical Occupy sites around the world 
today.  The  movement  rode  the  social  media  to  generate  a  public  discourse  about  its 
objective and did push inequality to the centre of the debate in the US. Its slogan – “We are 
the  99%”  became  the  phrase  of  the  year.  The  phrase  refers  to  the  vast  concentration  of 
wealth among the top 1% of the income earners compared to the other 99% and indicates 
that most people are paying the price for the mistakes of a tiny minority. One of the highlights 
of this movement is that it has spread to the elite universities of the US, which fall in the one 
per cent category. The fact that the students of the elite universities are now identifying their 
interests with the lower 99% is surprising, but inspiring. 
12.  
What  this  movement  has  done  is  to  bring  the  issue  of  economic  injustice  and 
disparity to the open. In fact Time magazine chose the “Protestor” as the person of the year. 
Occupy  Wall  Street  is  now  turning  out  to  be  contemporaneously  the  most  well-chronicled 
dissent  in  the  history  of  mass  movements,  with  even  the  political  class  in  America  being 
forced to respond to these new age protests. “Occupy” and “Tea Party” have been almost in 
competition to grab headlines. 
Los Indignados or the 15 M Movement 
13. Let me  now talk about the Indignados (meaning “the outraged in Spanish”) Movement 
that started in Spain in 2011. Since the beginning of the recent global financial crisis, Spain 
has been hit hard with the highest unemployment rates in Europe, with the unemployment 
rate amongst the under 25s crossing 40%. It was therefore not surprising to see the wave of 
youth  protests  hitting  Spain  also.  While  the  disappointment  and  frustration  in  youths  was 
building up gradually against the political and banking system since the global financial crisis, 
it  took  shape  in  the  form  of  a  movement  on  May  15,  2011  when  lakhs  of  young  people 
gathered in Madrid calling on more people to act against the follies of the financial markets. 
The  protests  reflected  the  angst  of  the  youth  at  the  efforts  of  government  to  contain 
European  sovereign  debt  crisis  through  bailouts  of  banks  responsible  for  the  crisis  while 
continuing to announce cutbacks in social programmes. 
14. 
The protests attracted wide reactions from political parties and earned broad support 
from the public at large and many famous personalities. The Noble Prize winning economist 
Joseph Stiglitz participated in the protests held in Madrid in July 2011. Former Spanish Prime 
Minister  Felipe  Gonzalez  considered 
important 
phenomena”. 
On October 15, 2011, exactly after 5 months since the first protest in Spain began, 
15.  
global protests against corruption and power of economic elites were held in 950 cities and 
82 countries, with maximum number of people gathering in Spain. One of the things that are 
striking about all these protests is the fact that on the face of it they were targeted at political 
and banking system, but if you look deeper you will find that these were more than that. They 
were  about  changing  the  civil  society  and  about  transforming  the  relationships  amongst 
people. 
the  protests  as  “an  extraordinary 
Youth power 
16.  
There may be a question in your minds as to why I have spoken in such detail on 
these revolutions. The idea is to highlight the power of youth and the positive change that it 
can bring to societies and nations when used constructively. The fact that these movements 
overthrew  some  of  the  governments,  attracted  wide  reaction  from  political  parties  and 
garnered support of the public at large is enough to prove the youth power. As youngsters, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
you  are  filled  with  enthusiasm  and  straining  at  the  leash  to  get  on  with  life.  While  these 
protests  do speak  volumes  about  the  power  of  youth  when  unified,  there  is  also a  related 
issue  of  herd  mentality  which  needs  to  be  considered.  I  personally  believe  that  in  these 
protests  individuals  do  not  lose  their  own  identity,  but  they  start  acting  as  per  a  group’s 
identity. Group identity creates agreement through debate. 
17. However, while it is very common to become a part of a movement (or say a situation in 
corporate  world  where  you  choose  to  go  with  the  group’s  opinion),  I  would  caution  you 
against  being  taken  in  by  the  extant  fashions of  the  world.  Define  what  you  stand  for  and 
understand  that  success  can  become  enduring  only  if  it  is  built  on  a  strong  foundation  of 
values.  You  cannot  enjoy  the  fruits  of  success  if  you  have  to  argue  with  your  own 
conscience. Values are a matter of trust and must be reflected in your actions. Trust takes 
time to be built but can be lost quickly in a moment of weakness. 
Global financial crisis – Lessons to be learnt 
As  management  graduates,  it  is  important  for  you  to  understand  the  economic, 
18. 
strategic  and  ethical  factors  behind  the  global  financial  crisis  that  is  causing  much  of  the 
revolutions among the youth world over. 
19. 
It is often said that those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it. We 
will  have  more  economic  and  market  turmoil  if  our  financial  experts,  political  leaders, 
regulators and nation as a whole have not embraced lessons from the past. It is therefore 
important for all of you to read as much as possible about the crisis that the world has faced 
over the years, the genesis, the reasons and most importantly the lessons that can be learnt 
from them. 
20. 
To quote John Kenneth Galbraith, “let it be emphasized once more, and especially 
to  anyone  inclined  to  a  personally  rewarding  skepticism  in  these  matters:  for  practical 
purposes,  the  financial  memory  should  be  assumed  to  last,  at  a  maximum,  no  more  than 
20 years. This is normally the time it takes for the recollection of one disaster to be erased 
and for some variant on previous dementia to come forward to capture the financial mind. It 
is also the time generally required for a new generation to enter the scene, impressed, as 
had been its predecessors, with its own innovative genius.” 
21. 
A report by the Chartered Financial Analyst Society of UK condemns what it calls 
“financial amnesia” among finance professionals, arguing that a failure to heed the lessons of 
the past led to the most recent crisis and will likely lead to future ones. Every time a crisis 
occurs, experts are confronted with the question why they could not foresee it. The experts 
argue  that  “this  time  is  different”.  However,  evidence  show  that  all  financial  crises  can  be 
traced to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis to another. 
There is therefore an emerging thinking that the study of financial history should form a major 
part of all compulsory education for finance professionals. I will be interested in knowing your 
views on this. 
Micro economic and macro economic factors 
22. 
So, what were the causes of the crisis and the reasons therefor? There are several 
causes and reasons for the crisis. It will be foolhardy on my part to cover all of them. I will 
only touch upon the important few. One reason is that the financial sector grew too big, partly 
because risks were misunderstood and partly because it was encouraged by policymakers to 
expand.  In  other  words,  the  crisis  was  an  outcome  of  the  interplay  between  both 
macroeconomic and microeconomic factors. From a macroeconomic perspective, the crisis 
has  been  attributed  to  the  persistence  of  global  imbalances,  excessively  accommodative 
monetary  policy  pursued  in  major  advanced  economies  and  lack  of  recognition  of  asset 
prices  in  policy  formulation.  From  a  microeconomic  perspective,  the  crisis  has  been 
attributed to the rapid financial innovations without adequate regulation, credit boom and the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
lowering  of credit  standards,  inadequate  corporate  governance  and inappropriate incentive 
system in the financial sector and overall lax oversight of the financial system. The lessons 
that we should draw from the crisis is that the reckless pursuit of profits without considering 
the possible risks, has the potential of destabilizing the markets. 
Corporate governance 
23.  
One  issue  that  has  engaged  the  attention  of  policy  makers  has  been  that  of 
corporate  governance.  Corporate  governance,  at  its  most  basic  level  deals  with  issues 
related  to  the  separation  of  ownership  and  management  and  reconciles  the  interests  of 
owners,  managers  and  other  stakeholders.  The  practice  of  strong  corporate  governance 
standards assures investors that the business environment is fair and transparent and that 
companies can be held accountable for their actions. Empirical studies show that investors 
are willing to pay a premium for companies with superior governance practices. 
24. 
However, there were several weaknesses in corporate governance in the run up to 
the  crisis.  Corporate  governance  arrangements,  when  put  to  test,  failed  to  curb  excessive 
risk  taking  in  banks  and  financial  services  companies.  Studies  have  shown  that  risk 
management systems failed in many cases more due to poor corporate governance than due 
to  the  inadequacy  of  the  mathematical  models  used.  The  Board  and  even  senior 
management,  in  some  cases,  failed  to  establish  an  informative  and  responsive  risk 
measurement and management reporting framework. The institutional arrangements in many 
instances conferred importance and status on the risk takers at the expense of independent 
risk managers and control personnel. Where strategy was in place, boards did not establish 
suitable metrics to monitor implementation. 
25. 
Reform  measures  have  been  initiated  in  the  area  of  corporate  governance.  Major 
structural changes in the areas of risk management, compensation policies and transparency 
in operations with regard to the Board and top management have been introduced in several 
countries  to  improve  the  overall  functioning  of  the  financial  institutions  and  enhance 
governance. 
26.  
The lesson to be learnt from the recurring corporate governance crisis in both the 
developed and developing economies is that eternal vigilance must be exercised at all times. 
A study of the governance failures in different institutions in different countries also helps in 
understanding  that  the  measures  and  reforms  to  address  the  governance  failures  in  one 
context may not be as effective in another, and that the timing and focus of reforms should 
reflect the economic and institutional realities of the country concerned. 
27. 
Where  India  is  concerned,  although  our  banking  sector  has  emerged  largely 
unscathed from the crisis, there is definitely a need to do some introspection as there have 
been  some  issues  of  corporate  governance  failure  here  too.  The  incidents  of  banks 
misselling  forex  derivatives  to  clients  have  been  well  publicised  and is  one  such  example. 
There  is  therefore  a  need  on  the  part  of  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  be  more 
responsive to their obligations towards the larger public interest. 
Compensation practices 
28. 
Out of the many issues that have arisen in the context of the global crisis, executive 
pay and compensation practices in the financial sector have perhaps invoked the maximum 
public outrage. There has been wide spread criticism that incentives and pay packages were 
set  inappropriately,  encouraged  irresponsible  risk  taking,  were  inconsistent  with  the  firm’s 
capital  bases  and  focused  on  short-term  profit  maximization.  Compensation  for  senior 
executives  has  been  perceived  to  be  excessive  with  little  correlation  to  the  long  term 
performance  of  the  institutions  concerned.  Particularly  glaring  was  the  multi-million  dollar 
payments and bonuses to the executives of failed firms which had received public funding. 
The most outrageous case is probably AIG, the insurance and financial services giant. It was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
reported  that  AIG  lost  $61.7  billion  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008  and  received  more  than 
$170 billion in federal bailouts. However, AIG paid over $165 million in bonuses to executives 
by March 2009 as part of a total payout of $450 million. 
29. 
It  is  now  widely  acknowledged  that  the  flawed  incentives  and  compensation 
structures in banks and financial institutions in the advanced countries also played a major 
role  in  the  crisis.  While  investors  have  borne  the  bulk  of  the  losses  and  taxpayers  have 
shelled  out  trillions  of  dollars  to  keep  financial  giants  afloat,  executives  and  employees  of 
these  banks  appropriated  disproportionate  shares  of  the  profits  when  the  market  was 
booming.  This  has  reinforced  the  public  perception  that  bankers  have  got  away  scot  free, 
while the real economy suffered unprecedented output loss and growth.  
30. 
Following the financial crisis, efforts are afoot to make it harder for bad bosses to 
walk  away  with  a  fortune.  A  further  key  trend  regarding  executive  pay  that  has  emerged 
since the start of the crisis is that its regulation has taken on an international dimension. Two 
G20 summits were held in 2009 that both substantially addressed the issue of executive pay. 
Further,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  a  body  of  regulators  to  oversee  the  global 
financial  system,  has  evolved  a  set  of  principles  to  govern  compensation.  The  proposed 
framework involves increasing the proportion of variable pay, aligning it with long-term value 
creation and instituting deferral and claw-back clauses to offset future losses caused by the 
executive. We have recently advised our banks in India to initiate similar steps. 
Ethics 
31. 
What  is  the  common  thread  running  through  these  causes  of  the  crisis  and  the 
swathe of reforms to prevent another? It is the ethical dimension. What the crisis highlighted 
was the massive breakdown of trust – trust in banks, in financial system, in rating agencies, 
in investment advisers and in politicians. Trust is an important element in the functioning of 
financial markets as the very nature of financial contracts requires a high level of trust. This 
trust which takes time to build up was eroded during the crisis. Several questions come to 
mind  in  this  context.  Was  the  behaviour  of  the  players  across  the  chain  of  the  financial 
system  fair  and  ethical  or  was  it  influenced  by  the  greed  to  make  quick  profits  and  fat 
bonuses? Did the bankers and investment advisers explain the risks in the complex financial 
products  they  sold  to  their  clients?  And  what  about  the  credit  rating  agencies?  Did  they 
compromise on their standards? 
32. 
The crisis has triggered an interesting, if also a soul searching debate on whether 
the malaise that we have seen in the financial sector might in fact be a result of degradation 
of value systems in the society as a whole. This brings me to the issue of leadership. Did 
leaders  in  the  field  of  high  finance  let  us  down?  Whether  the  leaders  were  lulled  by  the 
phenomenal  success  of  modern  financial  engineering  and  got  carried  away  by  “irrational 
exuberance” and could not see the “black swan”? Probably; the leadership qualities required 
is to keep the financial system stable so that it can serve the real economy. 
The MBA Oath 
33. 
It is in this context that I will leave with you an important issue to ponder about. I 
hope you have heard of the MBA oath. For those of you who have not, this oath represent a 
small step towards professionalizing the management field in ways similar to the medical and 
law professions. It is the management equivalent of the Hippocratic Oath taken by doctors. It 
is  a  voluntary  pledge  that  asks  graduating  MBAs  to  commit  towards  the  creation  of  value 
“responsibly and ethically”. Two professors at Harvard are working to create an MBA Oath 
that can later be possibly used as a global template. 
34. 
Although the oath is a formalized written version of an ethical code of conduct for 
managers, the concept behind ethics in business can be traced back to the initial formation 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of management education in the early twentieth century. The original intent of instituting a 
management degree was to educate a managerial class that would run corporates in a way 
that would serve the broader interests of society rather than the narrowly defined interests of 
capital or labour. In recent years, management graduates have been blamed for constructing 
a financial system with complex products without adequate controls. This compelled a team 
of  Harvard  Business  School  graduates  to  lead  a  student-based  initiative  to  encourage  all 
graduating students of the class of 2009 to sign on to the MBA Oath. It is understood that 
more than half of the graduating students in that year signed the Oath. 
35.  
True professions must bear a code of conduct and the meaning and consequences 
of those codes ought to be taught as part of the formal education of their members. I have 
personally brought up this topic here today to leave these thoughts with you as I believe that 
youth  is  a  dominant  section  of  our  society.  The  value  system  that  you  practice  in  your 
personal and professional conduct influences the value system of the society. There is thus a 
great  responsibility  on  your  young  shoulders  to  observe  high  ethical  standards  throughout 
your life. 
36. 
Some of the most successful and profitable companies in the world have also been 
those which have been known for observing very high ethical standards. Idealism or ethics 
without  ambition  may  not  achieve  much  but  ambition  without  idealism  or  ethics  can  play 
havoc.  May  you  combine  the  two  in  right  proportion,  only  then  can  you  work  in  a  manner 
which is mutually beneficial to you and the society. 
Conclusion 
37. 
Let me now sum up. I started with the Arab Spring Movement – a social revolution. I 
thereafter  discussed  the  growing  frustration  of  the  public  with  corporate  greed  and  wealth 
disparities  that  symbolised  the  Occupy  Wall  Street  Movement.  I  touched  upon  the  Los 
Indignados Movement in Spain reflecting the angst of the public which has grown resentful of 
the  economic  and  political  systems.  These  have  been  the  three  standout  “awakening” 
movements  of  2011.  All  the  three  movements  have  used  social  networking  platforms 
effectively to arouse public opinion and thus highlight the power of the youth when unified. I 
have  thereafter  touched  upon  the  economic,  strategic  and  ethical  factors  behind  the  crisis 
and the lessons to be learnt. I have particularly underscored the ethical dimensions which 
you must keep in mind throughout your life. 
38. 
My  congratulations  to  all  of  you  on  completing  an  important  milestone  in  your 
journey today. You represent some of the very best that we have. As you step out into the 
real world, please remember that when you reach the limits of analysis, it is this inner sense 
– your moral consciousness or “chetana” – that would guide you. I wish you all the best for a 
bright future and may all your aspirations and dreams come true.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
