Benoît Cœuré: The monetary policy of the European Central Bank 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at Barclays’ European Conference, Tokyo, 26 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is my pleasure to be here at Barclays’ European Conference in Tokyo.  
Today I would like to provide a simple yet comprehensive description of the ECB’s actions 
during  the crisis.  Faced  with  severe  turbulence,  all  central  banks  had  to  take  measures  in 
real time and switch from central banking in “standard operating mode” to “risk control and 
crisis management” mode. We did so by keeping an eye fixed on our objective. This helped 
us to stay on course and provided continuity. 
I  will  start  by  presenting  a  simplistic  model  of  monetary  policy  transmission.  This  is  the 
sequence of events through which central banks’ decisions transmit to economic magnitudes 
which  have  an  impact  on  people’s  welfare.  I  will  then  review  the  effectiveness  of  ECB’s 
monetary  policy  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  when  the  transmission  mechanism  was 
functioning  according  to  the  textbook  definitions.  This  period  was  tranquil,  economically 
speaking, although macroeconomic imbalances were quietly building up beneath the surface.  
I will then portray the crisis as a creating a break in the transmission mechanism. The crisis 
however  was  more  than  that:  at  some  point  we  all  feared  that  the  whole  financial  system 
would  stop  functioning.  But  I  will  analyse  it  from  the  perspective  of  its  implications  for  the 
chain of events on which monetary policy action depends. Here, I will argue that the standard 
tool of central banks – changes to the short-term interest rate – can lose some of its potency 
if  the  sudden  unravelling  of  imbalances  threatens  financial  stability  and  impairs  the 
transmission mechanism. But I will also claim that new untested instruments were deployed 
which  largely  replaced  standard  monetary  policy  interventions.  This  is  perhaps  the  most 
relevant lesson we can draw from the crisis. 
Monetary policy transmission  
Let  me  briefly  elaborate  on  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  You  can  see 
here on slide 2 why the monetary transmission mechanism is so important for central banks. 
The  ECB  has  a  statutory  objective  of  price  stability,  which  has  been  defined  as  a 
year-on-year positive inflation rate below 2%. Within that range, the Governing Council aims 
at an inflation rate not too far from 2%. We say: “an inflation rate below, but close to, 2%”. 
However, in order to exert an influence on agents’ decisions which affect prices and inflation, 
the ECB has to start from the top of this chart and try to reach out to the bottom. The path 
that connects the two extremes – starting from the policy interest rate that the ECB controls 
through  its  monetary  policy  operations  –  is  long  and  convoluted.  This  is  the  transmission 
mechanism: a long and uncertain chain of events during which various asset prices react to 
actions  taken  by  the  ECB  –  on  the  top  layer  of  decisions  in  this  chart  –  to  change  the 
overnight rate at which banks lend to each other in the money market.  
Long-term interest rates form important links in this chain. Aggregate demand is a function of 
credit market conditions, and credit market conditions are a function of medium to long-term 
interest rates: interest rates on mortgages, on non-financial corporations’ loans funding long-
term  investment  projects,  and  so  on.  The  interest  rate  channel  of  monetary  policy  is  the 
specific transmission path – marked in orange – that starts from the overnight rate that the 
ECB can manipulate by its policy operations; it works by way of long-term rates.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  first  equation  on  my  next  slide  [3]  describes  how  long-term  interest  rates  and  the 
overnight  rate  are  connected.  Long-term  rates  (  iL
t)  reflect the  average  expected  overnight 
MP) plus a premium to reward long-term 
rate set by monetary policy (which is indicated by it
investment and lenders’ exposure to uncertainty ( prt).  
To  influence  long-term  interest  rates  the  central  bank  has  two  levers.  These  levers 
correspond  to  the  two  terms  on  the  right-hand  side  of  equation  (1).  The  first  term  in 
parentheses denotes the component of the long-term interest rates that is determined by the 
expectations of the policy rate. Basic arbitrage conditions ensure that the financial reward on 
a long-dated security today ( iL
t) is at least as large as the average of the financial return that 
investors can expect to reap by holding a short-dated security and rolling it over for as many 
periods as the maturity of the long-dated security.  
The central bank can act on those expectations. It can do so by anchoring the current and 
future  policy  rate  at  levels  that  –  if  solidly  incorporated  in  agents’  expectations  –  can  be 
conducive to price stability. This is the central bank’s first lever on the transmission process. 
The  way  the  central  bank  can  influence  expectations  of  its  policy  behaviour  in  the  face  of 
macroeconomic shocks is critical here. It works through the credibility of the central bank’s 
governance and through the way in which the central bank is seen – month after month – 
reacting systematically to the changing economy. In this way, agents start internalising this 
systematic behaviour in their expectations. But this process – easy as it sounds – is in fact 
very complex and reversible.  
No policy rule or macro-model can do justice to the complexity of these interactions. So, it is 
only for the sake of clarity that I am using the stylised policy rule stated in equation number 
two  on  my  slide.  According  to  this  simplistic  representation,  the  central  bank  changes  the 
overnight  policy  interest  rate  by  considering  two  conditions.  First,  it  considers  whether 
inflation is expected to be in line with levels consistent with its quantitative definition of price 
stability. Here the term (E tπ t+1 – π*) denotes the difference between expected inflation and 
its steady state value, in our case below but close to 2%: if inflation expectations exceed the 
objective, the central bank – all other things being equal – is likely to raise its policy rate. A 
second  factor  that  influences  the  policy  stance  is  monetary  conditions.  If  the  volume  of 
money and credit that is created by financial intermediaries exceeds a trend that is consistent 
with price stability in the long run, the central bank is also expected to increase its policy rate, 
because excess money and credit creation can herald risks to price stability. In this simple 
policy  rule,  excess  money  and  credit  growth  is  denoted  by  mt.  The  coefficients  α  and  λ 
capture the strength of the central bank’s reaction. This is of course a simplified model and a 
full representation of the ECB decision-making should include a broad set of variables which 
are leading indicators of future inflation. If consistently followed through, a policy behaviour 
that – as in this rule – resists inflationary pressures and counters exuberance in the monetary 
sector can anchor expectations of inflation and, through that channel, of the future path of the 
policy rate. Ultimately, this anchoring contributes to low and steady long-term rates.  
I  mentioned  the  risk  premium.  The  second  lever  that  central  banks  can  operate  to  try  to 
influence the long-term rates is via the risk premium, prt. Now, the risk premium itself can be 
decomposed into three elements, as stated in the third equation on my slide. Two elements 
reflect  macroeconomic  uncertainty  –  as  measured  by  the  variance  of  inflation  and  the 
variance of real economic activity. If the variance of inflation and the variance of real growth 
are  large,  the  quantum  of  macroeconomic  uncertainty  is  high,  and  lenders  will  charge  a 
higher premium on long-term finance as a remuneration for their risk.  
The  quantum  of  macroeconomic  uncertainty  that  the  premium  compensates  for  can  be 
influenced by the central bank. By avoiding erratic behaviour – again, by following a steady 
and predictable pattern of reaction to the evolving state of the economy – the central bank 
can push volatility out of the system and contribute to a lower premium.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But the premium includes a third element which is beyond the control of the central bank. I’m 
calling this component “d”, because it is associated with credit default risk. But I’ll leave the 
“d” factor aside for now and I will come back to it at the end. 
Measures of performance  
How well has the ECB managed the transmission mechanism and the macroeconomy? 
Since  the  inception  of  the  single  currency  the  ECB  has  fulfilled  its  price  stability  mandate. 
Taking  the  long-term  average  as  a  performance  indicator,  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area 
have been on average a few basis points above 2%. You can see their exact evolution over 
time on this slide [4]. The slight overshoot relative to our aim – close to, but below, 2% – is 
due to the recent renewed pressures on volatile components of the price basket. It certainly 
remains within the strictest tolerance bands.  
Simultaneously, the ECB has managed to compress the volatility of inflation in the euro area. 
Slide  5  shows  a  breakdown  of  the  volatility  of  headline  inflation  into  the  volatility  of  core 
inflation which central banks can influence over the medium term – the solid yellow bars – 
and  the  volatility  of  food  and  energy  prices  –  in  blue  and  grey  respectively.  The  left-hand 
chart  indicates  the  results  for  the  euro  area.  You  see  that  since  the  launch  of  the  euro, 
overall  inflation  volatility  has  decreased  despite  a  substantial  increase  in  energy  and  food 
price  volatility.  During  the  same  period  of  time,  inflation  volatility  in  the  US  has  actually 
increased, as the drop in core inflation volatility was not offset by the surge in the variance 
introduced by energy inflation.  
Did  systematic  compression  of  inflation  volatility  come  at  the  price  of  more  erratic  real 
activity? Let me move on to my next slide [6]. Here, each dot represents a major economy: it 
gives information on the standard deviation of inflation and the standard deviation of output 
growth which each economy has experienced since 1999. In this space, you want to be as 
close  as  possible  to  zero.  Why?  Because  the  lower-left  part  of  the  chart  is  populated  by 
economies  with  low  macroeconomic  instability,  i.e.  low  inflation  volatility  and  low  growth 
volatility.  Indeed,  you  can  see  that  the  euro  area  has  been  closer  to  zero  than  any  other 
economy except one, Switzerland – the dot to its left. The low variance of inflation rates in 
the euro area did not come at the expense of unsteady economic growth.  
Low  macroeconomic  volatility  has  meant  lower  long-term  interest  rates  and  lower  inflation 
compensation  in  financial  contracts.  My  next  slide  [7]  illustrates  a  standard  technique  to 
disentangle long-term euro area bond yields into premia remunerating investors for the risks 
they bear on long-dated securities.1 Two facts are noteworthy. The first fact is a steep decline 
–  since  pre-monetary  union  times  –  in  the  nominal  yield  paid  on  average  by  euro  area 
governments to borrow at a ten-year maturity. This is the blue line in the chart. The second 
fact is that such a steep fall in ten-year yields has resulted from the three components which 
determine nominal interest rates: the real rate, the inflation expectation – which compensates 
investors for the average expected inflation over the life of the security – and the inflation risk 
premium – which compensates investors for inflation volatility. The real rate is the red line, 
and  the  two  risk  premia  are  visible  as  wedges  between  the  nominal  and  the  real  rate. 
Borrowing money in the euro area is cheaper today – in real and nominal terms – than it was 
a decade and a half ago, and the lower cost of borrowing is largely related to a less uncertain 
and a more predictable macroeconomy.  
The euro area has been a stable economy, not a static one. My next slide [8] shows the real 
per  capita  income  progression  of  the  euro  area  and  the  US  since  1999.  Contrary  to  long-
standing beliefs, the euro area’s dynamism has not lagged that of the US. 
                                                 
1  See  García,  J.A.  and  T.  Werner  (2010),  “Inflation  risks  and  inflation  risk  premia,”  ECB  Working  Paper 
No 1162. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I would conclude that the euro and its guardian, the ECB, have made a solid contribution to 
low and stable borrowing conditions, and – through that channel – to moderate fluctuations 
and economic prosperity. The data that I have shown you are in fact even more noteworthy, 
since they cover the long and difficult upheaval suffered by financial markets after the demise 
of Lehman Brothers in the fall of 2008.  
I would now like to consider that particular period.  
The first phase of the crisis  
The  financial  panic  that  followed  Lehman’s  collapse  undermined  the  ability  of  markets  to 
price financial assets. The resulting turmoil disrupted the mechanism which, in normal times, 
central  banks  use  to  transmit  policy  signals  to  the  broader  economy.  The  interest  rate 
channel ceased operating (see slide [9]). The impact of our policy rate on the interest paid on 
securities of different maturities via expectations control was weakened: this is visible in the 
left-hand chart on this slide [10]. The euro area money market froze – as shown by the surge 
of the cross-sectional standard deviation of overnight rates across Member States. (See the 
right-hand chart on slide 10). Banks located in different jurisdictions could no longer obtain 
liquidity  on  the  unsecured  money  market  at  comparable  costs.  Likewise,  parts  of  the  euro 
area  banking  system  had  problems  obtaining  long-term  funding  on  the  financial  markets. 
Slide 11 shows the results of the ECB’s Bank Lending Survey for 2008. Throughout 2008, 
but  increasingly  as  the  year  elapsed,  banks  reported  difficulties  accessing  the  wholesale 
market for virtually all maturities, with the very short-term money market being less affected.  
To address downside risks to price stability, the ECB responded to the shock with a forceful 
application of its standard policy tool, as did many other central banks. We reduced policy 
rates to an all-time low of 1%. (See slide 12). 
At the same time, the disappearance of market arbitrage was a challenge that interest rate 
action could not tackle in full. We therefore started acting as market makers and we played 
an intermediation role which the market was unwilling or unable to perform. We tried to get 
round  the  obstructions  facing  the  standard  transmission  mechanism  by  following  a  new 
route,  the  liquidity  channel.  (See  slide  13).  It  worked  by  being  a  confidence-boosting 
measure: enough central bank liquidity would be forthcoming in case market liquidity dried 
up. 
Our system – centred on overnight and term credit to banks, rather than outright purchases 
of securities – was tailor-made to be used as an instrument to fend off a banking crisis. In the 
event,  it  was  flexible  enough  to  be  activated,  with  only  limited  adjustments,  in  emergency 
conditions. We had to tackle the collapse of private arbitrage, which meant that the market 
could not distribute liquidity across institutions and over time. This was the rationale for two 
main  features  of  our  extraordinary  credit  support.  The  full,  unlimited  accommodation  of 
banks’  demands  for  central  bank  credit  at  our  policy  interest  rate  stepped  into  the  breach 
when inter-bank lending collapsed. The extension of central bank credit provision to longer 
maturities, up to one year in June 2009, replaced market inter-temporal trading, which had 
largely disappeared. (See slide 14). 
Important  for  the  design  was  the  structure  of  euro  area,  where  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises are particularly important for growth and job creation and banks provide most of 
the financing. The importance of banks in the flow of credit to the real economy in the euro 
area can be seen here (slide 15). Fully accommodating the overall higher liquidity needs of 
banks  and  alleviating  bank  funding  stress  is,  therefore,  essential  to  support  the  wider 
economy.  Equally  important  for  the  design  is  the  institutional  set-up  of  euro  area  – 
comprising 17 sovereign states sharing a single currency. Offering unlimited liquidity at the 
discretion  of  banks  makes  it  possible  to  target  exactly  those  parts  of  the  banking  system 
which are subject to particularly high funding stress. This, in turn, contributes to a uniform 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
cross-border  transmission  so  that  households  and  businesses  throughout  the  euro  area 
enjoy credit conditions that are largely homogeneous.  
The impact of this action is evident here [slide 16]; it shows the Eurosystem balance sheet as 
a consequence of the increased lending assistance to our counterparties. As you can see, 
actual  liquidity  demand  exceeded  the  levels  necessary  for  minimum  reserve  requirement 
purposes:  look  at  the  significant  volumes  of  cash  deposited  overnight  with  the  ECB  by 
counterparties on the liabilities side of the balance sheet.  
The  measures  stabilised  the  economy.  Slide  17  depicts  the  economy’s  plunge  after  the 
Lehman shock, with the bell-shaped distributions of market forecasts for the year 2009 GDP 
growth  rates  revised  downward  from  one  update  to  the  next  by  a  few  annual  percentage 
points.2  This  was  an  unprecedented  experience  for  the  ECB  and  for  the  national  central 
banks.  From  the  second  half  of  2009,  growth  prospects  resumed  and  macroeconomic 
uncertainty  –  measured  by  the  dispersion  of  those  forecast  distributions  –  declined 
significantly.  The  densities  become  “thinner”  as  a  larger  probability  mass  concentrates 
around the mean, while the mean growth forecast itself turns positive.  
The second phase of the crisis  
As I mentioned already, the “d” factor is the loose end in the transmission mechanism. It is 
an  important  determinant  of  long-term  interest  rates.  But  it  is  not  controlled  by  the  central 
bank. (See slide 18).  
Between  October  2009  and  May  2010  the  “d”  factor  –  which  had  remained  dormant  for  a 
long  time  after  monetary  union  –  became  destabilised.  Fiscal  sustainability  concerns 
exacerbated  credit  risk  perceptions  and  prompted  investors  to  seek  higher  credit  risk 
compensation. The debt markets of sovereign issuers in precarious fiscal conditions found 
themselves  under  attack.  Starting  in  the  summer  of  2011,  market  distress  spread  more 
broadly. In the end, a massive credit risk re-appreciation took place which affected bank and 
non-bank  borrowing  with  pervasive  effects  on  the  viability  of  the  transmission  mechanism. 
Banks’ creditworthiness as measured via CDS premia correlated strongly with their lending 
to  countries  under  stress  (See  slide  19,  left-hand  chart).  At  times,  this  correlation  was 
reinforced by the perception that governments bore significant contingent liabilities linked to 
“too-big-to-fail”  financial  institutions.  In  response  to  stressed  funding  conditions  and  in 
anticipation of a worsening macroeconomic outlook, banks tightened credit supply standards 
sharply.3 (See slide 19, right-hand chart).  
Once more, private financial intermediation was threatened. In the money market, confidence 
was rapidly draining away and trades were becoming rare. The market for government paper 
was  seriously  impaired.  It  was  against  this  background  that,  in  May  2010,  the  ECB 
announced  its  intervention  in  debt  markets.  As  our  focus  in  that  phase  was  to  preserve 
normal  conditions  for  asset  pricing  in  the  markets  for  securities,  we  called  our  policy  the 
“Securities Markets Programme”. 
Among  fixed-income  securities,  government  bonds  are  very  important  for  three  reasons. 
First, low liquidity and uncertain prices for government bonds have a degrading effect on the 
value  and  acceptability  of  collateral  which  is  used  in  secured  finance.  The  growing  role  of 
secured  lending  in  financial  markets  means  that  financial  intermediation  would  suffer 
enormously from any paralysis in sovereign bond transactions. Second, sharply lower bond 
prices can cause significant losses in the portfolios of financial and non-financial institutions. 
                                                 
2  Forecasts were based on different vintages of Eurozone barometer forecast results. 
3  See ECB Bank Lending Surveys for October 2011 and January 2012, http://www.ecb.int/stats/money/surveys/ 
 
lend/html/index.en.html 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
For  banks,  this  would  reduce  their  ability  to  provide  loans  to  the  economy.  Third,  interest 
rates on government bonds influence the level of interest rates that firms have to pay when 
issuing their bonds and that banks use to price their loans. Government bond yields are the 
basis for the pricing of all assets, from fixed-income instruments to equity.  
The decision to intervene was a decision to support the discovery of prices in markets which 
are key to transmitting our policy intentions and which had become highly dysfunctional.  
As tensions grew in the summer and autumn of 2011, we strengthened our response further. 
(See slide 20). In our first three-year longer-term refinancing operation in December last year 
we  provided  around  €489  billion  of  stable  funding  to  523  banks  in  the  euro  area.  In  the 
second one – conducted on 29 February this year – we supplied €530 billion to 800 banks. 
Both long-term credit operations aimed to break a vicious circle in which sovereign funding 
stress impedes bank access to longer-term financing and ultimately disrupts the flow of credit 
to households and companies. It’s worth noting that the second operation reached a much 
wider group of banks – among them many small banks providing funds specifically to small 
and medium-sized enterprises. Its effect was heightened by an expanded range of collateral, 
which particularly facilitated the participation of small and medium-sized banks. Importantly, 
risks  related  to  the  expansion  of  collateral  have  been  mitigated  by  stringent  risk  control 
measures. For instance, the haircuts on additional credit claims are very high so as to make 
the  riskiness  of  these  additional  credit  claims  about  the  same  as  that  of  the  rest  of  the 
collateral, for which the haircuts are lower. We are confident that wider participation by banks 
can lead to a broader dissemination of credit to small and medium-sized borrowers.  
The  right  half  of  this  picture  shows  the  impact  of  the  new  measures  on  the  Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet. (See slide 21).  
At  present,  we  are  seeing  some  encouraging,  albeit  early,  signs  of  normalisation  across 
financial market segments. Broad money growth increased in January, as did loan growth to 
private sectors. We are also seeing lower stock market volatility (slide 22, left-hand chart). 
Money  market  credit  spreads  have  edged  lower  recently  (slide  22,  right-hand  chart). 
Similarly, corporate bond credit spreads for both financial and non-financial enterprises have 
decreased  (slide  23).  These  developments  remain  to  be  confirmed  and  we  are  closely 
monitoring them. 
I want to stress one important principle which has guided us consistently, particularly over 
the  second  phase  of  the  crisis.  We  did  not  try  to  influence  the  “d”  factor:  we  could  not 
possibly  have  done  so.  The  “d”  factor  originates  elsewhere,  outside  the  monetary  policy 
sphere of influence. It is not the role of the ECB to cure the root cause of the malaise: weak 
fiscal 
fiscal  sustainability,  reinforced  by  diverging 
competitiveness  among  euro  area  countries  and  low  growth  potential  in  a  wide  range  of 
countries due to delayed structural reforms. Monetary policy is not and cannot be a substitute 
for  sustainable  fiscal  policies,  structural  reforms  and  adequate  governance.  These  policies 
are indeed in the remit of governments.  
Governments did not remain inactive – they have contributed to the normalisation. Some of 
them  have 
the  root  cause  of  market 
malfunctioning.  Collectively,  at  euro  area  level,  several  initiatives  are  under  way  or  have 
been implemented. I would like to mention only the most recent ones regarding euro area 
governance.  The  so-called  “six-pack”  introduces  a  macroeconomic  surveillance  procedure 
which  will  detect  and  correct  divergences  at  an  early  stage.  Fiscal  surveillance  has  been 
strengthened  and  procedures  for  correction  have  been  made  more  automatic  and 
dependable.  A  so-called  “fiscal  compact”  will  introduce  fiscal  rules  in  binding  national 
legislation.  In  the  pipeline  is  the  so-called  “two-pack”  that  is  expected  to  strengthen 
surveillance  mechanisms  in  the  euro  area  even  further  and  might  become  the  first  step 
towards  a  fully-fledged  fiscal  union.  Fiscal  federations  impose  strict  controls  on  regional 
budgets and on this basis – and only on those conditions – they build mechanisms for cross-
regional financial solidarity. This is the route that euro area governments are following now. 
institutions  and  concerns  about 
towards  addressing 
important  steps 
taken 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Structural  reforms  promoting  growth  and  job  creation  will  ease  pressure  on  government 
finance. Similarly – as recommended by the European Banking Authority – the build-up of 
capital buffers by banks will reassure markets of the resilience of the banking system and 
create  the  conditions  for  a  more  stable  financial  industry  in  Europe.  Stronger  fiscal 
institutions  combined  with  reforms  boosting  the  long-term  growth  and  competitiveness  of 
euro area economies and a more resilient banking system are the right way to address the 
“d” factor.  
The overarching principles guiding monetary policy 
Knowing  that  monetary  policy  does  not  cure  structural  economic  malaise  is  one  of  the 
overarching principles guiding central banks. Equally important are price stability – as a clear 
overriding objective – as well as central bank independence and credibility. Let me elaborate 
on  these  principles  and  on  how  they  have  supported  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  in  recent 
times.  
Independence  is  essential  for  central  banks,  particularly  in  periods  of  sovereign  funding 
stress.  Whenever  state  finances  are  unsustainable,  the  likelihood  of  governments  exerting 
pressure on central banks to monetise their debts increases. In a monetary union founded on 
monetary independence and a clear mandate for the central bank, this temptation is ruled 
out. In such a union, shocks to the "d" factor can even have desirable collateral effects. They 
can provide incentives to sovereigns to pursue sustainable state finances and to undertake 
the necessary structural reforms. Switching this mechanism off would weaken incentives to 
conduct the right economic policies.  
Monetary  policy  committed  to  price  stability  and  conducted  independently  and  credibly  will 
not only deliver low inflation rates but also contribute to financial stability. I deliberately use 
the word “contribute” as price stability is a necessary but insufficient condition for financial 
stability. Financial stability is the joint outcome of:  
 
sound  prudential  regulation,  supervision  and  oversight  of  financial  intermediaries, 
financial markets and financial market infrastructures, and of 
sound macroeconomic policies – comprising monetary policy and fiscal policy.  
 
Nevertheless, its contribution to financial stability can be significant. In particular, a timely exit 
from non-standard measures and a return to a less accommodative policy stance – once the 
economic  conditions  are  ripe  –  are  essential  for  several  reasons.  First,  because  monetary 
policy  accommodation  for  prolonged  periods  of  time  might  fuel  excessive  risk-taking, 
leverage  and  asset  price  bubbles.  Second,  it  might  discourage  banks,  companies  and 
governments from strengthening their balance sheets and therefore create a dependence on 
low rates. 
Let  me  develop  here  how  exit  can  take  place.  All  the  ECB’s  crisis-response  measures 
involving liquidity provision over long horizons share an important feature: credit is granted at 
a low but adjustable rate. We have already been explicit about the fact that the exact interest 
rate on long-term liquidity will be determined ex post, and be equal to the average policy rate 
prevailing over the life of the respective open market operation. We have also given banks 
the option of reversing the long-term repurchase operation in advance, after one year, if the 
conditions that had warranted the long maturity of central bank credit are no longer in place. 
In any case, we can withdraw the ample liquidity created as a side effect of the long-term 
operation whenever the Governing Council deems liquidity conditions are excessive in view 
of the outlook for price stability. All the tools necessary for large-scale liquidity withdrawal are 
already in place or will be readily available when needed. 
This  is  consistent  with  our  monetary  policy  strategy.  It  emphasises  the  monitoring  of 
monetary and credit developments, which are linked to both financial imbalances and threats 
to  price  stability  over  longer  horizons.  It  ensures  a  more  symmetric  policy  with  respect  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
financial  misalignments  and  some  “leaning  against  the  wind”  if  monetary  trends  signal 
inflationary  pressures  over  and  beyond  what  standard  conjunctural  analysis  and 
macroeconomic projects imply.4  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I return to where I started: the transmission mechanism and how a stability-
oriented strategy can influence its multiple paths (see slide 24). The most important link in 
the long chain is the monetary policy strategy. Clarity about the objective and about the key 
indicators can anchor expectations and empower monetary policy decisions. As you know, 
adjustments to expectations can amplify any action taken by a credible central bank.  
Our  strategy  has  supported  this  mechanism  in  normal  times.  In  crisis  times,  as  markets 
ceased to transmit price signals, our tools had to change. The Eurosystem’s response has 
been  timely;  all  non-standard  measures  have  been  temporary  and  tailored  to  the  special 
features  of  the  euro  area.  Our  tools  have  changed  but  our  strategy  has  not  –  it  is  in  fact 
supporting a gradual process of normalisation.  
The euro area is an economic and monetary union (EMU). Its monetary pillar has performed 
well  so  far  and  will  continue  its  work  in  the  future.  The  economic  pillar  is  now  being 
considerably  strengthened.  The  new  fiscal  framework  should  now  be  promptly  ratified  and 
forcefully implemented under the leadership of the European Commission; as a complement, 
growth initiatives will be welcome, insofar as they address the long-term growth potential.  
                                                 
4  See Fahr, S., R. Motto, M. Rostagno, F. Smets and O. Tristani (2011) “Lessons for monetary policy strategies 
from the recent past” In “Approaches to monetary policy revisited – lessons from the crisis”, ed. M. Jarocinski, 
F. Smets and C. Thimann, pp. 26–67, European Central Bank. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
 14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
 16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17
 18 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19
