Thomas Jordan: Monetary policy in times of crisis. Why central banks 
talk to one another 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Energie-Apéro Etavis, Zurich, 14 May 2012. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website 
 Mandates differ from one central bank to another. So, too, do the economic structures and 
business  cycles  of  different  central  bank  territories.  These  factors  speak  in  favour  of  an 
autonomous  monetary  policy  for  each  currency  area.  This  monetary  policy  autonomy  has 
proved  its  value  for  Switzerland  –  also  in  the  latest  crisis.  Nevertheless,  central  banks  do 
work  with  one  another  in  a  number  of  different  ways.  They  exchange  knowledge  on  a 
continual basis, thereby helping to improve the foundations upon which their own monetary 
policy  decisions  are  made.  Central  banks  are  also  able  to  access  foreign  currencies  by 
concluding swap agreements, allowing them to better counteract liquidity shortages on the 
international  money  market  in  times  of  crisis.  Finally,  joint  measures  can  have  a  strong 
psychological  impact  since  they  signal  to  financial  markets  and  economic  agents  that  the 
central banks are speaking with a single voice. 
Autonomy  and  cooperation  are  not  mutually  exclusive.  On  the  contrary.  In  a  crisis,  good 
cooperation supports and reinforces the effects of autonomous monetary policy measures. 
For  a  small,  open  economy  like  Switzerland,  in  particular,  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy  measures  can  be 
international 
environment.  An  important  example  for  our  country  is  the  minimum  exchange  rate  –  an 
exceptional measure taken in an extreme situation. With this measure, the Swiss  National 
Bank is countering distortions in the foreign exchange market which can be traced back to 
international  events.  The  minimum  exchange  rate  is  accepted  internationally  because 
markets, international organisations and foreign central banks have understood the objective 
and motivation behind it, which they see as justified. 
largely  dependent  upon  acceptance  by 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
