Ardian Fullani: Banking system and economic development 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
with  Mr  Gani  Gërguri,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo,  Tirana, 
12 June 2012. 
 Honourable Governor Gërguri, 
Honourable participants, 
I am honoured to take part in the proceedings of this joint activity organised by the Central 
Bank of the Republic of Kosovo and the Bank of Albania. It is taking place during the jubilee 
year  that  coincides  with  the  100th  Anniversary  of  Albania’s  Declaration  of  Independence. 
After a long cavalcade of torments and existential discourses, finally both our countries have 
entered an irreversible process of transformation and convergence to democracy and market 
economy  standards.  The  respective  financial  systems  have  been  part  of  this  process,  in 
which thanks to the dedicated and hard work done by both our institutions, the achievements 
are  numerous.  The  banking  industry  of  both  countries  has  grown  rapidly  in  recent  years, 
enjoying a stable financial health. It has made a significant contribution to the financing of our 
economies, leading to a stable economic growth over the years. 
It is my pleasure to see that the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo is growing day by 
day,  assuming  more  and  more  the  characteristics  of  a  modern  central  bank,  like  its 
counterparts in the region. 
Let me take this opportunity to express my appreciation for the commendable work done by 
the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo’s staff, led by my old friend, Mr. Gani Gerguri. I 
am  fully  convinced  that  we  have,  and  will  have  even  in  the  future,  a  responsible  and 
committed institution that aims to successfully fulfil its challenging mission and confront with 
dignity all the challenges ahead. 
Distinguished guests, 
For  a  long  time,  our  economies  are  finding  themselves  under  the  global  crisis  pressure. 
Recently, almost all our trading partners, such as the countries in our region and the euro-
area  economies  are  displaying  acute  symptoms.  This  situation  has  induced  elevated 
uncertainties  regarding  probable  macroeconomic  implications  and  contamination  of  the 
financial stability of our countries, mainly through the existence of several European banking 
groups. 
Despite  this  international  turmoil,  our  economies  have  succeeded  in  maintaining  a  stable 
performance. Consumption and private sector investments have continued to play a primary 
role in expanding the Kosovo’s economic activity, while in Albania, the external demand has 
played a primary role. The other indicators have remained in check. However, their trends 
must be monitored scrupulously and constantly.  
At  present,  the  maintaining  of  basic  balances,  i.e.,  the  macroeconomic  balance  and  the 
financial  one,  is  our  major  objective.  These  two  pillars  represent  our  legal  mandate. 
Therefore, we must do the utmost to consolidate the inherited balances, by making cautious 
analyses and taking appropriate measures to best absorb all the risks posed to the country’s 
macro-financial stability. Currently, the fulfilment of our legal mission has become a difficult 
and challenging task, full of surprises. 
Our countries represent small economies, whose share and influence can not play an active 
or imposing role in the international arena. Moreover, I am increasingly convinced that our 
economies are net importers of both material goods and international crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Personally,  I  think  that  the  moments  we  are  currently  experiencing  constitute  an  historic 
opportunity for all of us, to leave a good name as competent managers in times of the great 
crisis. As long as things go well, we fail to understand the need for ongoing adaptation, for 
constant correction. This is the reason that mostly leads to creation of “financial bubbles” in 
the economy. Apparently, decision-makers lack the ability or the willingness to stop blowing 
bubbles,  and  hence  they  burst.  From  this  viewpoint,  I  assess  that  the  Bank  of  Albania’s 
experience carries over elements of preliminary correction, i.e., preventive elements. 
Let  me  be  more  specific.  Since  early  2005,  we  have  addressed  the  interplay  between 
macroeconomic stability and financial stability prudentially. While there was a historic stability 
in  keeping  inflation  in  check,  there  existed  many  unclear  things  in  the  banking  system 
stability. 
I  would  like  to  remind  you,  briefly,  of the fact  that  we  are talking  about a  period  when  the 
banking  system  was  transformed  into  a  100%  private  capital  and  when  credit  expansion 
dominated the banking business. 
Since 2005, the outstanding credit to the economy has expanded by 7–8 percentage points 
of  GDP.  Moreover,  75%  of  credit  was  denominated  in  foreign  currency  and  the  hedging 
against exchange rate risk was frequently overlooked. It was the time when competition for 
market share increased tremendously among banks, even at the expense of credit quality. 
Periodic examinations conducted by banking supervision identified several vulnerabilities that 
could  threaten  the  financial  stability  of  the  system.  I  would  mention:  lack  of  an  electronic 
credit register; risk management weaknesses, structural weaknesses in internal audit; lack of 
transparency in dealing with customers about the supplied products. 
One  of  the  most  important  issues  worth  mentioning  is  bank  management  in  general,  and 
their managers’ role and integrity in particular. 
Identification  of  weaknesses  requires  investigating,  taking  administrative  measures,  and 
making legal and regulatory changes to solve the problems. To this end, several initiatives 
were  launched,  including:  establishing  a  credit  register;  creating  the  Financial  Stability 
Department;  conducting  prudential  supervision;  creating  a  regulatory  base  for  protecting 
Albanian consumers; and, undoubtedly, public education. The latter, in particular, is a very 
important  issue  constituting  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  the  financial  stability  and  of  the 
central bank’s monetary policy success. 
A financially educated public makes fewer mistakes in financial decisions and reacts swiftly 
and predictably to economic developments and policies pursued by a central bank and other 
authorities. Therefore, financial education of the public has been and remains a priority of the 
Bank of Albania. 
Individual decision-making of households and businesses should be assessed as much as 
the  meeting  of  inflation  target  or  the  maintaining  of  financial  stability.  This  assessment  is 
supported  by  the  fact  that  individual  choice  based  on  financial  literacy  and  good 
interpretation of economic information provides benefits to the whole society. 
Financial literacy is essential from the point of view of individuals and social welfare. It should 
be seen as a public good that contributes to strengthening of stability, efficiency of economic 
policies,  but  above  all,  it  increases  individual’s  financial  welfare,  and  hence  the  overall 
economic welfare. This is why the Bank of Albania has adopted the slogan: “Education costs, 
but it is priceless.” 
The Bank of Albania’s approach to financial education has been focused on three directions. 
First, promoting deep knowledge and awareness of basic economic and financial concepts; 
secondly, knowledge of the Bank of Albania, its role and policies, and its decision-making; 
third, knowledge of economic information and its interpretation. 
The Bank of Albania started financial education to the public by communicating openly and 
actively with various groups of interest.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Our experience shows us that financial education should be an integral part of our national 
strategy.  Consequently,  seeking  the  cooperation  and  understanding  of  the  Albanian 
Government  (the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Science),  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  become  an 
initiator  for  defining  financial  education  strategies,  policies  and  practices  in  the  education 
system. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  played  an  active  role  in  preparing  the  teaching  programs, 
implementing  and  coordinating  the  teaching  process,  so  that  students  perceive  financial 
education  as  part  of  high-school  education  curriculum.  This  activity  is  a  special  and 
significant  contribution  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  made  to  financial  education.  It  is 
crowned with the publication of the book “Personal finance in your hands”, conceptualised for 
high schools, incorporated as an elective subject in high-school curriculum, and distributed at 
schools, training of economics teachers also included. 
This  difficult  process  has  consumed  considerable  human  and  financial  resources,  but  the 
interest aroused fully justify it. Education institutions, and students that will have long term 
benefits from financial education, have positively expected this initiative. Along with them, the 
whole economy will also benefit.  
Financial education and financial stability are two important issues and two examples of the 
avant-garde  policies  pursued  by  the  Bank  of  Albania.  These  policies  have  in  common  the 
fact  that  their  effects  on  changing  the  behaviour  of  individuals,  businesses  and  overall 
economy are gradual and life-long. In both cases, what matters is the side of movement, the 
direction in which these policies lead the economy. 
Credibility to institutions, confidence in the financial system and financial literacy help people 
not  only  in  managing  their  financial  affairs  and  raising  their  standard  of  living,  but  also  in 
proposing  and  supporting  the  right  policies.  They  also  contribute  to  sustainability  and 
efficiency  of  the  financial  system  for  the  whole  economy.  Improved  macro-financial 
management  and  financial  education  help  each-other  for  a  successful  journey.  Today’s 
activity, organised by both central banks of one nation, is also part of this journey.  
Currently, we should keep our focus on and harmonise the central banks’ positions to ensure 
macro-financial  stability,  as the  only  way  that  enhances  the  credibility  of  economies  in  our 
region and improves the foreign investment climate. Cooperation and coordination of policies 
of  central  banks  and  financial  authorities  for  creating  a  regional  market,  will  increase  the 
value of existing investments and of our economies in general. Harmonisation of economic 
agendas  to  maintain  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  increase  opportunities  for 
regional cooperation and open new joint projects, is the only way for promoting new private 
investments and attaining the real convergence of our economies. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me once more congratulate you for organizing this event and for your good work done so 
far.  It  is  wonderful  to  see  so  many  individuals  and  organisations  working  for  one  goal,  for 
economic education of Albanians, for boosting confidence in financial institutions, for good 
management  of  the  economy  nation-wide,  for  making  the  best  choices  to  ensure  future 
economic prosperity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
