Andreas Dombret: Europe’s solution for too-big-to-fail 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Institute  for  Law  and  Finance,  Goethe  University,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 May 2012. 
 A special insolvency law for financial institutions – context and objectives 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  visit  the  House  of  Finance  on  the  beautiful  campus  of  Goethe 
University  to  discuss  current  economic  policy  issues  with  representatives  from  academia, 
economics and politics. And when such an important topic as “Effective Crisis Management 
in the Financial Sector” is on the agenda, I am especially happy to be here. So I thank you 
sincerely  for  your  invitation  and  wish  to  present  my  thoughts  on  a  legal  topic,  using  an 
economic point of view. 
What is it about? In the light of the financial crisis the G20 leaders agreed at the London summit 
in April 2009 that, in future, they will supervise and regulate “all systemically important financial 
institutions,  financial  instruments  and  financial  markets”.  Since  then,  a  bulk  of  measures  has 
been adopted at subsequent summits in Pittsburgh, Seoul and most recently in Cannes. One 
focal point were the SIFI rules designed to contain the “Too-Big-To-Fail” problem. The public 
sector often had to rescue institutions using taxpayers’ money. This implicit guarantee for SIFIs 
gives rise to misguided incentives, thus encouraging SIFIs to take excessive risk. Economists 
call this phenomenon “moral hazard”. The scale of this problem is vast! 
This is borne out by the fact that, faced with the financial crisis, the governments within the 
European  Union  provided  banks  with  assistance  equivalent  to  30%  of  the  EU  GDP.1 
However,  the  economic  implications  of  the  crisis  go  far  beyond  the  fiscal  burdens.  They 
affect the real economy and therefore, for instance, every entrepreneur who relies on a bank 
loan to finance his investment decision. Thus, the process of adjustment within the euro-area 
banking sector is not over yet, particularly as the sovereign debt crisis has presented new 
challenges.  Essentially,  banks  have  got  to  remove  problematic  assets  from  their  balance 
sheets, devise sustainable balance sheet structures and develop resilient business models. 
In its recent Global Financial Stability Report,2 the IMF estimates that 58 major banks in the 
EU could reduce their aggregate balance sheet total by €2 trillion, or around 7%, by the end 
of 2013. The IMF fears that this deleveraging process could have a negative impact on the 
credit  supply  within  the  euro  area  and  pose  a  potential  danger  to  economic  development 
throughout Europe and beyond.  
The IMF’s estimate needs to be evaluated in finer detail. Nevertheless, it does illustrate the 
sheer  scale  of  the  problem.  The  point  is,  not  least,  that  it  must  be  possible  in  a  market 
economy for financial institutions to withdraw from competition for economic reasons without 
casting the financial system into turmoil. This underlines how important it is to find a sound 
preventive solution for dealing with big banks. 
What does the G20’s solution proposal entail? The new SIFI rules are built on two pillars. 
First, the likelihood of a SIFI failing has to be reduced, meaning that SIFIs are to be more 
resilient,  mainly  through  specific  capital  surcharges  that  go  beyond  the  requirements  of 
                                                 
1  European  Commission,  Framework  for  crisis  management  in  the  financial  sector,  10  January  2011; 
http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/internal_market/single_market_services/financial_services_banking/mi
0062_en.htm. 
IMF, Global Financial Stability Report – The Quest for Lasting Stability, April 2012. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Basel III. Second, the restructuring or resolution of a SIFI is to be made possible in future 
without jeopardising financial stability and without having to resort to taxpayers’ money.  
2. 
2.1 
A new international standard for resolution regimes 
Basics of the FSB Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for 
Financial Institutions 
For this purpose, the Financial Stability Board, FSB for short, has developed, and the G20 
have  adopted,  a  new  international  standard  for  resolution  regimes:  the  “Key  Attributes  of 
Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial  Institutions”  –  which  I  will  refer  to  as  the  “Key 
Attributes” from now on. This is the first time that the main features that national resolution 
regimes should include have been stipulated at the global level. For example, in future each 
of  the  G20  jurisdictions  will  have  to  set  up  a  designated  resolution  authority  for  financial 
institutions.  Moreover,  specific  requirements 
fostering  cooperation  between  national 
authorities  will  promote  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  management.  Finally,  institutions  and 
supervisors alike will have to become very concrete in their planning of possible responses to 
an upcoming crisis. I will discuss these points in more detail later. 
These  Key  Attributes  were  urgently  needed,  even  if  some  financial  sector  commentators 
would  have  preferred  a  globally  uniform  insolvency  law.  It  goes  without  saying  that  I,  too, 
prefer optimal solutions, but – to put it bluntly – regulators and central banks do not live in the 
“land of Make-A-Wish”. The scope and complexity of the individual and mutually dependent 
issues which have had to be, or remain to be, solved in an overall package are sometimes 
like a Gordian knot. Unlike Alexander the Great in the legend, however, the G20 states have 
no  magic  sword  to  cut  through  the  knot,  and  a  reasonably  timely  approach  that  can  be 
implemented at the global level is perhaps only a first step that may be followed by others at 
a later point in time. 
Establishment of a designated resolution authority for financial institutions 
2.2 
One  end  of  the  rope  forming  the  Gordian  knot  involves  the  institutional  set-up  for  national 
resolution regimes. In adopting the Key Attributes, the G20 states committed to establish a 
designated  resolution  authority  for  financial  institutions  so  that  the  particularities  of  crisis 
situations  in  the  financial  sector,  such  as  the  danger  of  runs  on  banks,  can  be  taken  into 
consideration. This new authority will be given a strong mandate. In particular, its tasks will 
be to 
 
 
 
promote financial stability,  
ensure continuity of systemically important financial services,  
protect depositors, although this could be done – as in Germany – in coordination 
with the deposit guarantee schemes,  
seek to minimise the overall costs of resolution in home and host jurisdictions and  
duly consider the potential impact of resolution actions on financial stability in other 
countries.  
 To fulfil its role, the resolution authority will be equipped with far-reaching instruments. For 
example, it will be able to 
 
remove senior management and replace it with an administrator to take control of 
the firm,  
transfer or sell assets and liabilities to a third party or a bridge bank and  
impose a moratorium with a suspension of payments to unsecured creditors.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 Implementing  the  Key  Attributes  will  lead  to  a  gradual  alignment  of  the  national  legal 
frameworks for resolution regimes. I am convinced that this will most certainly have a positive 
impact on financial stability. 
2.3 
Strengthening international cooperation between national supervisory and 
resolution authorities 
A further cluster of problems – the other end of the rope forming the Gordian knot – concerns 
the handling of crisis situations at large complex financial institutions. I don’t need to explain 
to you that insolvency proceedings are currently carried out on a national and territorial level. 
However,  the  30  largest  systemically  important  banks  hold  on  average  53%  of  their  total 
assets abroad, according to data from a study carried out in 2010.3 68% of their subsidiaries 
are  located  abroad,  and  they  generate  56%  of  their  pre-tax  earnings  from  cross-border 
operations.  In  the  past,  if  institutions  like  these  became  distressed,  national  supervisors 
regularly ring-fenced their assets. The banking groups were broken up according to national 
boundaries or were rescued by the respective home states as separate national entities. This 
meant  systemic  distortions  and  considerable  cost  for  the  taxpayer.  Mervyn  King  once 
summed this up succinctly with the words: “Global banking institutions are global in life but 
national in death”.4  
We  may  not  have  Alexander  the  Great’s  sword,  but  there  are  two  magic  words  which  will 
help deal with these challenges. These words are “cooperation” and “planning”. In order to 
systematically  enhance  cooperation  between  home  and  host  countries,  thereby  improving 
crisis  prevention,  the  Key  Attributes  contain  a  wide  range  of  requirements  which  seek  to 
promote cooperation. First, the competent authorities of the home jurisdictions of a SIFI are 
required to conclude institution-specific cooperation agreements with their counterparts in the 
respective key host countries. Second, Crisis Management Groups are to be set up for each 
SIFI;  within  these  groups,  all  responsible  national  bodies5  will  come  together  at  regular 
intervals  to  discuss  crisis  planning  and  crisis  management.  Third,  in  order  to  lay  the 
necessary foundations for this, all impediments to sharing confidential information must be 
removed. I consider this last point to be especially important! 
We  have  known  for  years  now  that  the  exchange  of  information  between  supervisory 
authorities  is  hampered  by  the  lack  of  or  an  inadequate  legal  basis.  Incidentally,  this 
particular  impediment  not  only  obstructs  resolution  regimes  but  also  affects  many  different 
areas of the G20 financial sector reform agenda. The necessary legislative changes will have 
to  be  made  when  the  requirements  resulting  from  the  Key  Attributes  are  transposed  into 
European  and,  later,  German  law  such  as  the  German  Banking  Act.  The  European 
Commission is already aware of this problem.  
Recovery and resolution planning 
2.4 
Recovery  and  resolution  planning  will  facilitate  cooperation  between  the  authorities.  This 
planning  process  consists  of  three  mutually  dependent  components.  First,  the  responsible 
authorities  agree  on  an  assessment  on  the  banking  group’s  resolvability,  the  aim  being  to 
examine  the  practicability  and  credibility  of  a  resolution  strategy.  Any  impediments  to 
resolution should be identified and removed. In November of last year, the G20 committed 
themselves  to  carry  out  such  assessments  for  all  global  systemically  important  banks  by 
                                                 
3  S Claessens, R J Herring and D Schoenmaker, A Safer World Financial System: Improving the Resolution of 
Systemic Institutions, 2010. 
4  Quoted from A Turner, The Turner Review: A regulatory response to the banking crisis, March 2009. 
5  The FSB Key Attributes specifically mention the supervisory and resolution authorities, the central banks, the 
finance ministries and the bodies responsible for statutory deposit protection. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
October  2012.  As  the  second  component,  the  institutions  themselves  must  submit  plans 
describing  how  they  envisage  a  potential  restructuring  and  discuss  them  with  supervisors. 
Ideally, the supervisory authority would be able to take these plans out of the drawer in the 
early  stages  of  a  crisis  and  restructure  the  institution  in  cooperation  with  the  resolution 
authority. This planning process is useful for the institutions as well. According to a recently 
published survey involving 19 big financial institutions, 40% of those questioned claimed to 
have  drawn  up  complete  recovery  plans.  Despite  the  costs  involved,  the  majority  of  the 
surveyed institutions see the advantages in this planning process, for example in that they 
provide a better operational understanding of the business structures.6  
If restructuring is not possible or fails, the third component comes into play, namely that of 
resolution  planning,  which  is  to  be  developed  by  the  authorities.  The  purpose  of  this  is  to 
prepare for the effective use of the resolution tools. The resolution of an institution has to be 
planned in such a way that  
 
 
 
systemically important functions performed by the institution are continued,  
the stability of the financial system is not jeopardised, and  
the use of taxpayers’ money is avoided.  
3. 
From standard-setting to the application of the new rules 
The European Commission’s proposal for a directive 
3.1 
Ladies and gentlemen, these and other standards from the Key Attributes are a milestone on 
the  road  to  containing  the  Too-Big-To-Fail  problem.  On  the  one  hand,  the  fact  that 
international consensus has been reached with the backing of top G20 policymakers can be 
considered a success. On the other hand, a great deal of detailed work remains to be done 
since the FSB Key Attributes still have to be transposed into legal texts which, by necessity, 
have to be much more concrete than the international standard. Just how difficult this is may 
be seen from the fact that the publication of an EU legislative proposal originally planned for 
the summer of 20117 has since been postponed several times, and has yet to be presented. I 
do appreciate the fact that, before making a publication, the European Commission wants to 
clarify difficult technical and political issues, such as the design of the bail-in instrument or 
implications  for  the  deposit  protection  schemes  in  Europe.  However,  further  delay  in 
publication entails the risk that the European states each implement the Key Attributes on 
their own; this could create unnecessary inconsistencies and, consequently, new problems in 
the event of an institution becoming distressed. Moreover, it would be extremely inefficient if 
all EU states had to transpose standards on resolution regimes into national legal systems 
twice  within  a  short  space  of  time  –  first  to  comply  with  the  G20  commitment  and  again 
shortly afterwards to implement the EU directive.  
Germany: the Bank Restructuring Act 
3.2 
Notwithstanding international initiatives, German legislators responded to the financial crisis 
early  on.  On  1  January  2011,  the  Bank  Restructuring  Act8  entered  into  force,  aiming  to 
                                                 
6  Ernst & Young, Planning for all terrains – Global Banking Recovery and Resolution Planning, Survey 2012, 
[Interviews conducted during September and October 2011]. 
7  Press  release  of  the  European  Commission  of  6  January  2011,  Commission  seeks  views  on  possible  EU 
framework to deal with future bank failures. 
8  Act  on  the  restructuring  and  orderly  resolution  of  credit  institutions,  on  the  establishment  of  a  restructuring 
fund  for  credit  institutions  and  on  the  extension  of  the  limitation  period  of  management  liability  under  the 
German Stock Corporation Act (Gesetz zur Restrukturierung und geordneten Abwicklung von Kreditinstituten, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
facilitate dealing with a distressed systemically important bank without jeopardising financial 
stability  and,  as  far  as  possible,  without  using  taxpayers’  money.  Moreover,  the  Act  is 
intended  to  enable  coordinated  action  with  other  responsible  authorities  at  the  European 
level if a cross-border banking group becomes distressed. This is why, when drawing up the 
Act,  care  was  taken  to  ensure  that  the  new  instruments,  such  as  stronger  powers  of 
intervention  for  BaFin,  fitted  into  the  already  recognisable  contours  of  the  expected  EU 
legislative  proposal.9  In  addition,  with  all  banks  contributing  to  a  Restructuring  Fund  by 
paying a bank levy introduced in 2011, the banking industry is for the first time being made to 
participate in the costs of overcoming future crises – even though the amount accumulated in 
the fund is still far too small. The basic idea is that the  money paid into the Restructuring 
Fund will be saved over many years until the target amount of €70 billion has been reached. 
Admittedly, this leaves us with a problem in the interim. However, the act in itself is a step in 
the right direction since it heightens what the IMF, in its last Article IV Consultation,10 called 
the “level of preparedness”. The fact that legislative change is also still needed in Germany 
before  the  Key  Attributes  and  the  EU  directive  can  be  fully  and  consistently  implemented 
does not contradict my – in principle – positive assessment of the Restructuring Act.  
Rigorous monitoring of the implementation of the new international standard 
3.3 
Experience over the past few years has shown that international standards can sometimes 
be futile if they are not implemented and applied in a consistent and timely manner. For this 
reason,  the  FSB  wants  to  rigorously  monitor  the  progress  made  in  implementing  the  Key 
Attributes in its member states. What makes this all the more important is the fact that the 
Key  Attributes  take  us  into  unchartered  waters.  Moreover,  implementation  will  require 
legislative and institutional changes – some of them extensive – in all G20 jurisdictions. Last 
but not least, monitoring of consistent implementation is crucial for overcoming obstacles to 
cross-border cooperation which will play such an outstanding role. To facilitate the monitoring 
process, work is currently underway, as a matter of urgency, on an assessment methodology 
that  will  make  it  easier  to  objectively  assess  the  level  of  implementation  in  individual 
countries.  This  instrument  is  to  be  used  by  various  bodies:  a)  countries  will  be  able  to 
perform  a  self-assessment  in  order  to  identify  any  gaps  in  implementation;  b)  the  IMF/the 
World  Bank  will  use  this  methodology  when  carrying  out  their  FSAP  assessments;  c)  the 
FSB is already planning a first review for 2012 as part of its peer review process, and d) the 
FSB Peer Review Council, which has not yet been set up, will apply this instrument to global 
systemically important financial institutions. Countries with a below-average performance in 
these assessments will be required to provide an explanation, and can expect the results to 
be  published.  I  believe  implementation  must  be  monitored  rigorously  because  the  new 
standard closes a serious gap in the regulatory framework. 
Conclusion 
4. 
This gap illustrates perfectly that the regulatory framework before the financial crisis was not 
geared  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  This  failure  to  take  sufficient 
account of the systemic stability perspective must and will be remedied. For this reason, let 
me  draw  your  attention  to  the  German  Government’s  draft  of  the  Financial  Stability  Act, 
which  the  German  Cabinet  passed  yesterday.  This  act  will  assign  central  tasks  of 
macroprudential oversight to the Bundesbank. Among other things, the Bundesbank will be 
                                                                                                                                                      
zur Errichtung eines Restrukturierungsfonds für Kreditinstitute und zur Verlängerung der Verjährungsfrist der 
aktienrechtlichen Organhaftung). 
9  Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, June 2011, Fundamental features of the German Bank Restructuring 
Act, pp 59–75. 
10  IMF Country Report No 11/168, Germany: 2011 Article IV Consultation – Staff Report, July 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that 
the  Financial  Stability  Committee  cannot  override 
responsible  for  identifying  risks  to  German  financial  stability  as  well  as  for  proposing 
warnings and recommendations. The Bundesbank will present its analyses and proposals to 
a Financial Stability Committee, a new body that is to be established. However, it cannot be 
made to subscribe to analyses or proposals it does not agree with. To this end, the draft act 
provides 
the  Bundesbank’s 
representatives  on  key  decisions.  I  welcome  this  legislative  initiative,  it  respects  the 
Bundesbank’s independence. 
Difficult  and  complex  legislative  proposals  can  sometimes  pose  a  problem  comparable  to 
unravelling the Gordian knot. Did you know that, according to ancient Greek mythology, the 
gods tied this intricate knot to the chariot of King Gordius to secure the drawbar of the chariot 
to the yoke? There was actually no need to cut the knot. If the peg had been pulled from the 
drawbar, the knot would have fallen apart on its own. To tell the truth, ladies and gentlemen, 
when I compare that image with the Gordian knot as represented by the resolution regime, I 
see neither a brute force solution nor a brilliantly simple one. Like it or not, it looks as though 
we  will  have  to  get  on  with  the  painstaking  work  of  untangling  the  knot  and  work  out  the 
details of the legal contribution to solving the economic problem of Too-Big-To-Fail. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
