Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Singapore’s dynamically changing 
landscape 
Speech  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the opening of One Raffles Place Tower Two, Singapore, 18 September 2012. 
 Wee Ee Cheong, Chairman, OUB Centre Limited,  
Mr Henry Kok, General Manager, OUB Centre Limited,  
Distinguished guests,  
Good  evening.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  invited  to  officiate  the  opening  of  a  new  twin 
skyscraper  in  Raffles  Place  –  One  Raffles  Place  Tower  Two.  It  is  part  of  the  continuing 
rejuvenation  of  the  cityscape  at  Raffles  Place,  which  continues  to  be  at  the  heart  of 
businesses and commerce in Singapore.  
Raffles Place – a continuing history of new blended in old  
Raffles  Place  has  indeed  been  a  continuous  story  of  the  new  inserted  in  the  old,  as  it 
emerged from being a humble docking location for small boats and ships in the early 1800s, 
to become a thriving centre of regional commerce and now a global business and financial 
centre.  
On 8th August 1988, OUB Centre, now called One Raffles Place Tower One, was opened by 
Mr Lee Kuan Yew, who was then Prime Minister. He had noted the building’s quality design 
and distinctive workmanship. It was also an icon for Singapore at the time, as the building 
went  on  to  be  recognised  as  the  tallest  building  in  the  world  outside  of the  United  States. 
Designed by Kenzo Tange, One Raffles Tower One still remains amongst the tallest three 
skyscrapers in Singapore.  
This evening, One Raffles Place continues this evolution with the addition of a second tower. 
How interesting too, that the new tower is designed by Mr Paul Noritaka Tange, son of the 
architect for the original Tower One.  
I am told that One Raffles Place Tower Two has two distinctive features which differentiate it 
from its predecessor.  
First, One Raffles Place Tower Two is a certified BCA Green Mark Platinum Development. 
Some  of  the  building’s  environmentally-friendly  features  include  solar  cells  and  tools  to 
harvest  rainwater.  With  these  sustainable  features,  the  new  tower  will  achieve  an  overall 
energy savings of 32% each year. I applaud OUB Centre on this effort.  
Second,  One  Raffles  Place  Tower  Two  will  not  only  provide  an  additional  360,000  square 
feet of grade A premium office space but has floor plates which are column-free. They grant 
offices the flexibility to apportion their office space efficiently.  
Singapore – charting history as a global financial centre  
While the outlook for US and European economies continues to be uncertain, Asia continues 
to offer growth opportunities.  
Asian  banks,  which  are  moderately  leveraged,  largely  deposit-funded  and  generally 
conservative  in  lending,  have  in  recent  times,  stepped-up  their  financing  activities.  As 
traditional  European  lenders  continue  to  deleverage,  there  are  opportunities  in  corporate 
funding, trade finance and infrastructure finance which Asian banks are well placed to take 
hold of.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Asia  has  also  seen  rising  affluence  amongst  its  population  and  increased  interest  from 
international  investors  as  an  investment  destination.  This  has  presented  greater  investor 
demand,  paving  the  way  for  the  growth  of  Asia’s  capital  markets  and  asset  management 
sectors. These developments will help drive a new chapter in Asian finance.  
We  will  continue  to  ensure  that  we  have  adequate  supply  of  premium  infrastructure  to 
support the sustained growth of the business financial centre here.  
Our  office  rental  rates  in  Singapore  remain  competitive.  Based  on  CBRE’s  Q1  2012 
Singapore Market View, the average monthly rental for Grade A office space dipped by 4.7% 
quarter-on-quarter to $10.10 per square feet (compared to the 3.6 % fall in Q1 2012). (This is 
well priced compared to premium office space in Hong Kong and Tokyo, at about 50% and 
70% of their costs, respectively. Occupancy rates for Core CBD in Singapore remain healthy 
at about 92% (in Q2 2012).  
The increase in premium office space at competitive rental rates bodes well for Singapore, 
and will strengthen our role as a competitive business hub in Asia and globally.  
Conclusion  
I congratulate all those who have played a role in making this new development possible. I 
am  optimistic  that  the  two  towers  of  One  Raffles  Place  will  remain  as  one  of  the  most 
recognised business addresses in the historic Raffles Place and will continue to contribute to 
Singapore’s success story.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
