Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the 
banking community – partners in sustainable development 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (the  central  bank  of  the 
Philippines), at the Bankers’ Reception hosted by the BSP, Manila, 20 January 2012. 
 Distinguished  guests  from  the  banking  community,  the  government,  the  private  sector,  the 
diplomatic  community,  the  multilateral  agencies,  the  media,  dear  friends,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. 
On behalf of the other Members of the Monetary Board, I bid you all good evening…. and 
welcome…  to  the  traditional  reception  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  for  the  banking 
community. 
We  thank  all  of  you  for  accepting  our  invitation  to  recognize  one  important  pillar  of  our 
economy  –  the  banking  sector,  a  key  channel  for  the  transmission  of  Bangko  Sentral’s 
monetary policy. 
Sound, …stable,… and liquid,… the Philippine banking sector provides valuable support to 
our  economy…  helping  sustain  its  growth  trajectory,  through  varied  challenges.  This  was 
particularly true in 2011… a year considered as one of the most challenging for central banks 
across the globe.  
We  had  to  deal  with  the  consequences  of  a  slowing  global  economy  affected  by  global 
developments.  In  the  US,  the  underlying  drift  is  still  for  below-trend  growth  even  as 
employment  has  somewhat  improved.  In  Europe,  the  deleveraging  among  banks  has 
deepened, which has led to a contraction in bank credit, thereby heightening recession risks. 
Some analysts have called this the “deleveraging doom loop”. In the Middle East, the threat 
of  supply  chain  disruptions  has  become  amplified.  Here  at  home,  we  had  to  grapple  with 
destructive typhoons, floods, and other calamities.  
Notwithstanding a fluid environment in 2011, we successfully kept inflation within our target 
range;  this  gave  us  room  to  lower  our  key  policy  rates  yesterday,  our  first  rate  cut  in 
2 ½ years. At the same time, steady inflow of funds kept our external position strong, with our 
international  reserves  hitting  record  levels;  this  provides  us  buffers  for  potential  external 
shocks.  
2011  was  also  characterized  by  robust  bank  credit  that  continued  to  underpin  economic 
activities. For instance, lending as of November 2011 was up 22%, with the productive sector 
claiming four-fifths of total loan portfolio. 
And while we closed banks in violation of banking laws, continued public confidence in our 
banking system kept bank deposits at all-time high levels.  
Along the way, our gains in the monetary sector contributed to the upgrades that both the 
country and the banking sector received in 2011. 
Indeed,  global  and  domestic  challenges  notwithstanding,  2011  emerged  as  another  good 
year  for  the  banking  industry:  balance  sheets  kept  growing,  asset  quality  continued  to 
improve, and bank profitability continued to strengthen.  
This is because we made significant headway in improving our risk management systems, 
strengthening  the  supervisory  process,  instituting  good  financial  governance,  enhancing 
coordination among financial regulators, and aligning our accounting rules with international 
standards.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Our  challenge  is  to  sustain  our  momentum  in  pursuing  our  reform  agenda.  Wisdom  has  it 
that the best time to pursue and invest in reforms is during good times. Given that 2011 was 
an even better year for banks than 2010, we are committed to continue our reform process. 
In this connection, you can say we hit the ground running in 2012. 
Starting this month, stand-alone thrift banks, rural banks and cooperative banks are covered 
by the Basel 1.5 framework that upgrades them to higher capital adequacy standards. 
This month also marks the start of higher capital charge on nondeliverable forwards or NDFs 
for “net open positions” – from 10% it is now 15%. We now require banks to set aside more 
funds to cover NDFs to reduce potential systemic risk and curb speculation. 
For universal and commercial banks, we declared early this month that we are adopting the 
more  stringent  standards  of  Basel  3  in  2014,  four  years  ahead  of  the  timeline  set  by  the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
Essentially, Basel 3 introduces reforms that will improve the ability of bank capital to absorb 
losses, extend the coverage of financial risks, and have stronger firewalls against periods of 
stress.  Similar  Basel  3  implementation  plans  have  been  announced  by  China,  Australia, 
Hong Kong SAR and Singapore. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are able to accelerate our timetable because of the present strong 
capital position of the banking industry. Our confidence also springs from the track record of 
our banks that have… through the years… shown the maturity and the capacity to undertake 
far-reaching reforms that ultimately redound to the benefit of our economy and our people. 
This afternoon, the Monetary Board approved a new set of enhanced standards on corporate 
governance in banks, as well as rules to strengthen banks’ compliance systems. 
Indeed, we continue to reap benefits from years of collaboration between the Bangko Sentral 
and  the  banking  community  in  pursuing  reforms  to  strengthen  our  banks  and  make  the 
system more responsive to the demands of a constantly changing environment. 
Moving forward, we shall continue to stamp out unsafe and unsound practices, encourage 
mergers  to  bolster  the  strength  of  our  banks,  and  build  an  infrastructure  for  a  vibrant  and 
inclusive financial system.  
While bank lending has been on a steady rise, credit delivery to the underbanked and the 
unbanked  also  deserves  a  serious  closer  look.  Bear  in  mind  that,  the  Bangko  Sentral’s 
regulatory  framework  for  the  development  of  microfinance  has  been  rated  as  the  world’s 
best, for three years in a row. 
In  other  words,  we  are  acknowledged  as  a  pioneer  in  advocating  use  of  responsible 
microfinance  while  ensuring  adherence  to  safe  and  sound  banking  practices.  In  fact,  28 
central banks visited us last year to learn from our experience in microfinance. 
Outstanding microfinance loans now average P7 billion. Considering that the average term of 
microfinance loans is two months, we can assume that microentrepreneurs can access as 
much as P40 billion a year in short-term credit. 
Ladies and gentlemen. Our success in developing an inclusive financial system is a crucial 
empowering element in liberating millions of Filipinos from poverty. 
We  have  witnessed so many  inspiring  success  stories  in  microfinance across  our country. 
We  have  seen  how  households  and  communities  have  been  transformed  by  successful 
microfinance ventures. But we need to do more; we need to further broaden and deepen its 
reach. 
At  the  same  time,  we  also  need  to  ensure  access  to  credit  of  viable  small  and  medium 
enterprises who do not have sufficient collateral. One solution is through the Credit Surety 
Fund organized by the BSP and financed by the LGUs, the Industrial Guarantee and Loan 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Fund, DBP and Land Bank. As designed, SMEs that receive credit surety guarantee from the 
Fund can present this to banks as collateral for their loans. 
This is a relatively new program and so far, we have created 20 Credit Surety Funds: in four 
cities and in 16 provinces. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  are  important  to  our 
economy and our people: combined they represent more than 90% of registered businesses 
and employ about 70% of our labor force. 
In the banking industry, financial inclusion, consumer protection and financial education are 
the three-in-one policy agenda. We need to think out of the box in mobilizing savings in the 
region, providing extended financial access through non-mainstream channels and creating 
alternative  sources  of  financing  for  borrowers  and  entrepreneurs.  We  need  to  make  our 
financial system more inclusive. 
If we move forward together on these fronts, we can truly make a positive difference in the 
lives  of  many  more  Filipinos.  The  link  between  the  real  economy  and  our  banking  market 
must stay firm so that liquidity in the latter can translate into new productive capacity in the 
former. 
As it is, we see sustained growth for our economy in 2012 even as global growth continues 
to  weaken.  While  the  debt  crisis  in  the  Eurozone  persists  there  are,  on  the  other  hand, 
welcome signs … such as the strengthening of the US economy. 
Here  at  home,  we  derive  comfort  from  the  fact  that  the  Philippine  economy  has  stronger 
foundations  to  see  us  through  the  global  headwinds,  thanks  to  home-grown  sources  of 
resilience and reforms we continue to pursue. 
We also see benefits from the simultaneous running of both monetary and fiscal engines. As 
early as this month, the Department of Budget and Management has practically released the 
2012 budget to implementing agencies. 
Other sources of optimism are the BSP’s expectations surveys showing that both business 
and consumer sentiment remains generally upbeat. 
Ladies and gentlemen. It is providential that the Philippines is hosting this year’s 45th annual 
meeting of the Asian Development Bank at a time when our economy is primed for growth. 
Finance Secretary and Monetary Board Member Cesar Purisima is the head of the Philippine 
delegation.  The  meeting  will  take  place  from  May  2  to  May  5  and  we  expect  about  4,000 
delegates to participate. The preparations are in full-swing and we call on your full support to 
make the event a success. 
And so, ladies and gentlemen, on this optimistic note, let us wish our banking community, our 
economy  and  our  country  a  happier,  healthier  and  more  prosperous  2012  where  good 
governance prevails and growth is truly inclusive.  
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Cheers! 
Thank you everyone and let’s enjoy the rest of the evening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
