H R Khan: Customising mobile banking in India – issues and challenges 
Address  by  Shri  H  R  Khan,  Deputy  Governor  of the  Reserve  Bank  of India,  at  the  FIBAC 
2012 on “Sustainable excellence through customer engagement, employee engagement and 
right use of technology”, organized by the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI) and the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), Mumbai, 5 September 2012. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  contributions  of  Shri  G  Srinivas,  Shri  Subhas  Chand  and  Shri.  Surajit  Bose  of 
Reserve Bank of India. 
1. 
Distinguished delegates to the FIBAC 2012, ladies and gentlemen. As I was reading 
the  theme  of  the  conference  “Sustainable  Excellence  through  engaged  customers, 
employees  and  right  use  of  technology”  three  words  (sustainable,  engaged  and  right  use) 
helped me to decide how I can use this opportunity to relate with all the stakeholders of the 
payment system industry to introspect the issues and challenges confronting customization 
of mobile banking in India.  
2. 
I  am  sure  you  would  all  recollect  how  cumbersome  it  used  to  be  get  a  draft  for 
outstation payment, clearing used to take a lot of time, outstation cheques would take all the 
more  time,  reconciliation  and  maintaining  books  by  the  bank  branches  would  require 
additional manpower and customers were never satisfied. During the last one decade, things 
have changed and changed at a rapid pace and all because of technology. The initial steps 
of tapping technology came in the form of adoption of the core banking systems (CBS) which 
led to near collapse of geographical location of parent branch. How many of us really need to 
visit our branches to transact business? Not many I am sure as most of us would be tapping 
the  technology  led  internet  banking  and  interconnected  ATM  network.  Our  desktop  PCs 
became our anytime bank branches. Then came the next revolution – mobile banking which 
added anywhere to the truly anytime banking. Weaning the customer from physical banking 
and  building  customer  awareness  and  confidence  in  these  non  face-to-face  modes  of 
banking has been a herculean task for the banking industry. In this exciting and challenging 
journey, the Reserve Bank, as a pro-active regulator, has defined enabling policies and, at 
times, has goaded the industry in achieving the desired results. The Governments, both at 
the central and the state levels, have also been taking measures in encouraging electronic 
payments and receipts, such as, electronic benefit transfers and e-mode of transactions for 
their receipts and payments. 
Small steps and a giant leap 
3. 
As  I  have  briefly  indicated  above,  technology  adoption  has  changed  the  face  of 
banking  in  India.  What  started  as  a  mere  automation  of  some  routine  work  processes  in 
banks  in  the  mid  80’s  has  moved  on  and  resulted  in  business  process  re-engineering 
culminating in making banking services branchless, anytime and anywhere, facilitated new 
product development and enabled near real time service delivery. Technology helped banks 
to  reach  the  doorsteps  of  the  customer  by  overcoming  the  limitations  on  geographical/ 
physical reach in branch banking and easing the resource and volume constraints posed by 
the brick and mortar model. For the banks the question is no longer limited to whether mobile 
banking  will  be  an  important  part  of  their  business  but  how  best  to  approach  a  rapidly 
evolving  channel  to  deliver  better  customer  service,  expand  product  range,  retain  market-
share,  enhance  revenue,  drastically  reduce  operating  expenses  and  above  all  remain 
socially relevant without sacrificing sustainability in ICT based financial inclusion plans. 
We all now recognize that mobile banking has come to occupy an important place in 
4. 
banking  in  a  very  short  time  and  is  expected  to  provide  much  needed  platform  for  taking 
banking to the unbanked masses. Mobile banking certainly seems to be one of the biggest 
innovations along with CBS and ATMs in the field of banking and this will have a long lasting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
effect  on  how  banking  business  is  conducted.  CBS  and  ATMs  provided  banks  the  much 
needed  technological  fillip  to  break  the  shackles  of  branch  banking  architecture.  CBS  and 
ATMs have enabled banks to provide banking services 24x7x365 but have not really helped 
in  expanding  their reach  to the  unbanked  or  reach  to the customer  wherever  s/he  is. One 
tends to concur with the view of many academicians and practioners that this limitation can 
be overcome to a large extent by  leveraging the mobile phone enabled  banking or mobile 
banking. We must see it as the giant leap of the banking industry – leveraging technology to 
promote  anytime  and  anywhere  banking  and  more  deeper  and  sustainable  financial 
inclusion.  
Origin and potential of mobile banking in India 
5. 
Recognizing the potential of mobile banking, Reserve Bank of India issued the first 
set  of  guidelines  in  October  2008.  The  guidelines  defined  mobile  banking  as  undertaking 
banking transactions using mobile phones by bank customers that would involve credit/debits 
to their accounts. This definition in a sense provided larger canvas to mobile payments which 
in  a  narrow  sense  involved  only  payment  made  for  a  product  or  service  using  the  mobile 
phone either remotely or at the point of sale (PoS). These guidelines, which were very broad-
based, laid down the technology and security standards pertaining to safety, confidentiality, 
integrity, authenticity and non-repudiability. As this was a nascent technology and, to build up 
customer  confidence  in  terms  of  minimizing  frauds,  the  Reserve  Bank  mandated  that  all 
transactions  should  be  encrypted  irrespective  of  the  value.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  made 
inter-operability  a  cornerstone  of  its  policy.  After  the  initial  set  of guidelines,  several  policy 
relaxations  have  been  made  to  further  encourage  the  use  of  mobile  banking  taking  into 
account  changing  economic  environment  and  feedback  of  the  industry  and  customers. 
(Box1) 
October 8, 2008 
Mobile  banking  transactions  defined  as  undertaking  banking  transactions  using  mobile 
phones by bank customers that involve credit/debit to their account. 
Some of the significant norms were as under:  
• 
All transactions to be encrypted irrespective of value limit 
Technology & security standards were laid down. 
- 
Inter-operability was ensured. 
Customer complaints and grievance mechanism were laid down. 
Daily cap of  5,000 per customer for funds transfer and  10,000 per customer for 
transactions involving purchase of goods & services were prescribed.  
Banks to seek one-time prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India after obtaining 
their respective Board’s approval. 
Such services could also be offered through the BCs. 
   December 24, 2009 
• 
Raise in the daily cap transaction limits for funds transfer and for purchase of goods 
& services to  50,000  
Transactions  upto  1,000  can  be  facilitated  without  end  to  end  encryption  of 
messages. 
Permitted to provide cash-outs to the recipients through ATMs or BCs subject to a 
cap of  5,000 per transaction and a maximum of  25,000 per month per customer.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2 
 May 4, 2011 
• 
Transaction  upto  5,000  can  be  facilitated  without  end  to  end  encryption  of 
messages.  
 December 22, 2011 
• 
 Transaction  cap  limits  for  funds  transfer  and  for  purchase  of  goods  &  services  of 
50,000 per customer per day removed. 
Banks may place their own limits based on their risk perception with the approval of 
their Board. 
Ceiling on cash-outs to the recipients through ATMs or BCs raised to  10,000 per 
transaction subject to the existing cap of  25,000 per month.  
6. 
The growth in mobile banking that has taken place in the country till date, though 
has been rapid, is yet to reach the critical mass that will enable it to deliver on its promise of 
reaching banking including payment services at a cheaper, secure and seamless manner to 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the existing and potential customers. It has the potential to be the next wave of financial and 
technological  innovation  in  banking  by  universalizing  access  to  banking  service  without 
jeopardizing prudential and regulatory framework of the financial sector. 
Leveraging the mobility of mobile phones for anywhere banking 
7. 
Any  technology  that  is  well-accepted  and  widely  available  at  affordable  costs  and 
suitable for banking and payment services provides an immense opportunity to extend these 
services  to  all  areas  and  all  sections  of  the  society  –  banked  and  unbanked.  Mobile 
technology scores on all these parameters and can act as a catalyst to usher in the universal 
goal of financial inclusion shared by all the stakeholders. In a large country like ours where a 
majority of population still lives in rural areas that do not have presence of formal banking 
providing banking facility has been a major challenge. Of the 0.6 million villages in India, the 
total  number  of  villages  with  banking  services  through  brick  and  mortar  branches  and 
alternate  banking  channels  stands  at  approximately  0.14  million  villages  as  at  end  March 
2012.  India  has  the  highest  number  of  households  (approximately  145  million)  who  are 
excluded from banking. However, with the growing reach of the mobile in hinterland, it has 
now become possible to provide the banking facilities to people who were not able not able 
to enjoy this facility so far. At the end of January 2012, the total wireless subscriber base was 
936  million  out  of  which,  313  million  subscribers  were  from  rural  areas.  Use  of  mobile 
banking services among this huge base of subscribers is, however, very low. Even amongst 
the  existing  bank  customers  less  than  one  percent  of  them  are  covered  under  the  mobile 
banking services. Notwithstanding the existing low base of customers, the growth in mobile 
banking transactions has shown increasing trend. For example, in the month of June 2012, 
3.43  million  transactions  amounting  to  3067.10  million  were  processed  as  compared  to 
1.41 million transactions amounting to  984.66 million processed in June 2011 – an increase 
of  about  143  per  cent  in  volume  and  approximately  211  per  cent  in  value  terms.  It  is, 
however, evident that the potential of mobile banking technology is yet to be fully exploited.  
8. 
Another  potential  factor  that  has  attracted  all  the  stakeholders  including  policy-
makers to this innovative technology is the lower cost associated with this model in providing 
banking services both amongst existing customers and in taking banking to the hinterland as 
well. According to a study, mobile banking based transaction costs about two per cent of the 
branch banking cost, 10 per cent of the ATM based transaction cost and 50 per cent of the 
internet banking cost. The main reason for non-availability of banking to a large part of our 
population is the limited economic viability of the brick and mortar model of branch banking. 
The  Business  Correspondent  (BC)  model  is  also  facing  problems  on  account  of  lack  of 
proper  ICT-based  business  models  and,  amongst  other  things,  due  to  issues  related  to 
remuneration  of  the  BCs,  their  training  and  orientation,  product  mix  and  volume  of 
transactions  handled  by  them,  management  of  cash  and  the  risks  associated  with 
outsourced models. Even ATMs and internet banking have their limitations when it comes to 
penetration in rural areas. I need to mention here that our recent guidelines on deployment of 
White Label ATMs (WLAs) has a very distinct slant towards the deployment of ATMs in the 
smaller  tier  3  to  6  centres.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  Reserve  Bank,  given  its  constant 
endeavour  to  link  every  citizen  of  the  country  with  the  formal  financial  system,  is  keen  to 
expand  mobile  banking  penetration.  With  the  availability  of  the  mobile  with  almost  every 
household,  it  has  now  become  possible  to  make  the  giant  leap  to  a  reality  by  providing 
everybody with banking services including payment services. The potential of mobile banking 
is also underscored by the fact that the consumers are conveniently placed in terms of using 
the product anytime anywhere and could develop ease of using the product once they are 
made aware of the same. 
Customized mobile banking products in India 
9. 
The generic definition of mobile banking involving credit/debit to the account of the 
customer using mobile has been customized in India to provide two rather unique services. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These are the Inter-bank Mobile Payment System (IMPS) and the Mobile linked Kisan Credit 
Card (m-KCC). 
IMPS – mobile based remittance system 
10. 
The IMPS is a mobile based remittance system which is inter-bank in nature and is 
owned  and  operated  by  the  National  Payment  Corporation  of  India  (NPCI).  The  IMPS 
facilitates  access  to  banks  accounts  and  transfer  of  funds  through  mobile  phones.  The 
system,  launched  in  November  2010,  provides  real  time  transfer  of  funds  between  the 
customers  of  different  banks  on  24x7  basis.  In  other  words,  funds  can  be  transferred  any 
time  to  the  beneficiary  who  receives  the  funds  instantaneously  and  both  the  sender  and 
receiver  get  the  confirmation  of  debit  and  credit.  50  banks  have  started  providing  IMPS 
services to their customers so far1 and as at the end of July 2012, banks have issued 36.32 
million Mobile Money Identifiers (MMIDs) to their customers.  
Mobile linked Kisan Credit Card (m-KCC) 
11. 
Let  me  also  share  some  details  on  the  mobile  linked  Kisan  Credit  Card  (m-KCC) 
launched  by  NABARD  on  a  pilot  basis  on  October  2,  2011  in  Villupuram  district  of  Tamil 
Nadu  for  the  farmers  having  KCC  accounts  with  the  Pallavan  Grama  Bank  (an  RRB 
sponsored  by  the  Indian  Bank).  The  m-KCC  using  mobile  technology  enables  farmers  to 
carry out purchase of agricultural inputs in a cash-less manner. All transactions are carried 
out through mobile phones of farmers and vendors registered with the bank and the technical 
service  provider  (TSP).  The  transaction  is  performed  through  a  combination  of  a  secured 
SIM  card  and  a  PIN  using  an  interactive  voice  recording/SMS  system.  This  enables  the 
farmers to buy agriculture inputs by putting through the transactions through a mobile phone 
enabled system linked to the banks CBS. NABARD is now encouraging banks, in particular 
the RRBs, to use this pilot for extending mobile based KCCs to the farmers. 
Current issues in the mobile banking landscape 
Why a bank led model? 
12. 
Mobile as a technology, which is low-cost, ubiquitous and efficient with a potential to 
enable achievement the goal of deeper financial inclusion, has been recognized across the 
world. Different countries are following different mobile banking models depending upon their 
requirements  and  availability  of  infrastructure.  In  our  larger  vision  of  financial  inclusion, 
provision of payment services is one amongst the four services that we have clubbed under 
financial inclusion viz., a deposit product, a credit product, a micro-insurance product and a 
remittance product. Given this orientation, you would all agree that only banks can provide 
these services while adhering to the KYC/AML requirements. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank 
of India has consciously adopted the bank-led mobile banking model. The bank led model 
has also been endorsed by the Inter-Ministerial Group of the Government of India constituted 
in November, 2009. 
There  are,  however,  counter-views  within  the  country  and  internationally  as  well 
13. 
suggesting  that  the  non-bank  led  mobile  banking  model  that  have  been  found  to  be  very 
successful elsewhere should be tried out here. It is often not appreciated when citing these 
success stories that only one service, i.e., a remittance product, is being offered and not the 
complete bouquet of financial services envisaged by us. The other three products identified 
under  financial  inclusion  can  obviously  not  be  offered  by  a  non-bank.  Moreover,  particular 
environments  in  a  few  countries  enabled  the  non-bank  led  model  to  be  successful  viz. 
presence  of  a  monopoly  operator,  very  poor  banking  infrastructure  and  availability  of  a 
                                                
1   Source – NPCI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
national identification number. Is it not surprising that the same success story has not been 
repeated by the same service operator in a neighbouring country?  
Cross border remittance through mobile banking 
14. 
An  issue  that  has  been  often  raised  is  that  if  mobile  banking  has  the  potential  of 
reaching  anywhere,  why  cross-border  remittance  through  mobile  banking  is  not  permitted 
liberally or why it is not taking off? One of the regulatory challenges in encouraging inward 
remittance from abroad is to maintain a balance between regulatory-compliant flow of funds 
(for example, whether they are bona-fide current/capital account flows) and ease of transfer 
of funds to the beneficiary. Given the higher level of anonymity in cross-border transactions, 
concerns on the associated AML/CFT related risks and the fact, as has been acknowledged 
in a World Bank report, that with a very few exceptions, supervision of m-money has really 
not  been  implemented  effectively,  Reserve  Bank  has  allowed  only  banks  and  authorized 
entities to undertake such cross-border transactions. To obviate any operational difficulty in 
remitting  and  receiving  funds,  bank  account-to-bank  account  cross-border  remittance  has 
been  permitted  under  the  money  transfer  service  scheme  (MTSS).  Realizing  the  need  for 
facilitating  hassle-free  withdrawal  of  funds  at  the  beneficiary  end,  Reserve  Bank  has  also 
permitted  transfer  of  funds  to  the  beneficiary’s  account  or  to  a  pre-paid  instrument  (PPI) 
issued by banks which could be m-wallet also. The underlying rationale is to ensure flow of 
cross border funds through the banking channel only irrespective of the media, (which could 
also be mobile sets) opted for undertaking the transactions. 
Customer ownership and grievance redressal 
The most often faced problem in mobile banking is as to who owns the customer – 
15. 
the mobile network operator (MNO) or the bank? Whom shall the customer contact in case of 
any  service  related  grievance?  Who  is  required  to  resolve  the  issue?  Since  India  has 
accepted the bank-led mobile banking model, the customers of the banks get full protection 
for effecting transactions through this delivery channel as in the case of any other banking 
transaction.  Reserve  Bank  lays  particular  emphasis  on  its  continuing  pursuit  of  customer 
satisfaction  and  protection  and  timely  resolution  of  complaints.  Accordingly,  the  customers 
using  mobile  banking  have  recourse  to  the  Banking  Ombudsman’s  customer  complaint 
redressal machinery.  
Role of MNOs as Technology Service Provider (TSP) 
The  Reserve  Bank  recognises  the  role  of  another  important  stakeholder  –  the 
16. 
mobile  network  operator  (MNO)  in  the  process  of  encouraging  mobile  banking  in  India. 
Reserve Bank has advocated a collaborative and co-operative model between the banks and 
the MNOs. The MNOs are expected to play the role of a technology service provider while 
banks are expected to provide banking services. With these clear role definitions, both the 
stakeholders should work together to take banking through the medium of the mobile to the 
masses. The customer vetting including compliance with KYC norms, customer protection, 
etc. should remain within the domain of the banking sector. It is heartening to note that this 
unique  approach  is  taking  roots  with  a  couple  of  successful  collaborations  between  banks 
and MNOs. While there may be some headwinds in taking this experiment forward, it should 
be recognised that these are not serious in nature and can be overcome. Issues related to 
customer ownership, revenue sharing and other such related matters which, I am sure, can 
be  resolved  through  meaningful  dialogue  in  the  mutual  interest  of  banks  and  the  MNOs, 
particularly  when  both  of  them  need  to  explore  additional  source  of  revenue  as  they  face 
severe margin pressures.   
Role of MNOs as TSP-cum-BC 
17. 
You may all be aware that “for-profit” companies can now be engaged as BCs by 
banks. This provides another avenue to the MNOs for tapping their reach in taking banking to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the masses. MNOs are particularly well placed to make use of this opportunity to become the 
BCs of banks keeping in view the fact that mobile phones have become ubiquitous. I am glad 
to  note  that  a  few  MNOs  have  indeed  become  BCs  of  some  banks.  I  am  sure  that  the 
nascent strides being taken in this regard are likely to fructify into major achievements soon. 
Such collaborations between the banks and the MNOs enables each of them to exclusively 
perform their respective designated roles – as bankers and service providers. Reserve Bank 
expects that these experiments get upscaled and across the spectrum and result in a win-win 
partnership for both the parties, leveraging their respective capabilities and reach.  
Tapping USSD to expand access to mobile banking services 
18. 
The  Unstructured  Supplementary  Service  Data  (USSD)  platform  offers  a  common 
gateway to customers of all banks to easily access and use mobile banking services. The 
major advantage of USSD is that the IMPS could become accessible even through low-end 
hand-sets. If USSD enabled mobile remittance system offers such a potential what is holding 
up this unique product from taking-off? This is of particular relevance for the IMPS system of 
NPCI. I am given to understand, that MNOs have expressed concerns on revenue sharing 
and  are  keen  on  negotiating  the  rates  with  individual  banks  rather  than  provide  the  same 
through NPCI. While these concerns may be justified, the payments play in India is a volume 
game and all stakeholders including the MNOs need to dovetail the same in their business 
plans. If the common USSD platform is offered by all MNOs, the same is expected to lead to 
an  exponential  growth  of  transactions  in  the  IMPS.  Simultaneously,  the  IMPS  platform  for 
person-to-business  (P2B)  transactions  (i.e.  in  the  merchant  transactions)  has  now  been 
enabled. Along with it, person-to-person (P2P) remittances can now be made to beneficiaries 
based  on  their  bank  account  number  or  Aadhaar  number  which  is  mapped  to  the  mobile 
number  of  the  beneficiary.  The  requirement  of  MMID  at  the  beneficiary  end,  therefore, 
becomes optional. Further, the non-bank entities like the Pre-Paid Instruments (PPI) issuers 
have  been  permitted  to  join  the  IMPS  network  through  a  sponsor  bank  for  facilitating 
domestic money transfers. All these measures should lead to an increase in transactions and 
should significantly contribute to the revenue streams of the MNOs also. With this enabling 
technology within reach of the stakeholders, they need to work together in a co-operative and 
collaborative manner to promote and popularize this unique product.  
Permitting cash-out in mobile wallets 
19. 
The  mobile  wallet  is  a  pre-paid  instrument  (PPI)  issued  in  electronic  form  which 
resides on the mobile phone. Seeing the potential of PPIs including mobile wallets, Reserve 
Bank of India has laid down an enabling regulatory framework for such instruments. Simply 
put,  the  mobile  wallets  being  issued  in  India  are  e-money  products  and  can  be  used  for 
purchase of goods & services. Mobile wallets can also be used for funds transfers where the 
holder  has  been  subjected  to  a fully  compliant  KYC.  The  only  difference  in  mobile  wallets 
issued by non-banks in India and other countries is that cash-out is not permitted in India as 
it is akin to acceptance of demand deposit. The rationale behind the decision is based on the 
fact  that  non-banks  are  not  permitted  to  accept  deposits  for  maturity  less  than  one  year. 
While  this  being  so,  the  mobile  wallet  has  a  great  potential  to  grow  as  it  can  be  used  for 
payments of goods & services without the customers having to carry any additional card. Ten 
entities  have  been  authorized  to  issue  mobile  wallets;  of  them,  one  is  a  subsidiary  of  a 
leading  telecom  player. Several  others  are  in the  pipeline  with  three to four  of them  being 
leading telecom players.  
Security and acceptability issues 
20. 
Any  system  has  to  have  certain  minimum  features  to  attract  customers  and  keep 
them  engaged  in  the  long  run;  such  features  are:  ease  of  use,  safety  and  security, 
accessibility and affordability. Mobile banking meets all these requirements but still the usage 
is nowhere near its potential. In the case of mobile banking, which  is a novel product, the 
customer needs to be assured that it would provide her with the same kind of comfort levels 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
that any other payment mechanism currently makes available. Comfort can be derived by the 
customers when they are able to put through transactions with ease with a zero-fail rate and 
not have any concerns regarding security issues. Customers should also be made aware as 
to  whom  they  should  approach  in  case  of  a  failed  transaction  and  how  speedily  their 
grievances are redressed. This is where a lot of work needs to be done to make the public 
aware  of  customer  friendly  as  also  safety  features  of  mobile  banking  and  engage  the 
customers  for  a  long  term  relationship.  I  would  also  like  to  inform  you  that  recently,  the 
Institute  for  Development  &  Research  in  Banking  Technology  (IDRBT),  established  by  the 
Reserve Bank of India launched the Mobile Banking Security Lab (MBSL). The Lab aims at 
exploring  and  providing  solutions  to  the  much  needed  safety,  security,  reliability  and  inter-
operability,  for  both  on  low  end  and  high-end  mobile  sets.  The  Lab  will  also  provide  the 
benefit  of  a  common  technical  centre  for  all  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  testing 
platform of the Lab would help the banks to test their security applications in mobile banking. 
The Lab will also help in providing education services on security related matters in all Indian 
language enabling awareness creation amongst the users. 
Quality of service – issue of sustainable excellence 
21. 
TRAI has come out with the “Mobile Banking (Quality of Service) Regulations 2012” 
(Box 2) specifying the standards for MNOs while facilitating mobile banking which will go a 
long way in further improving the mobile banking services in the country. The MNOs should 
strive  towards  meeting  these  service  standards  to  the  banks  to  enable  the  customers  to 
enjoy customer friendly banking services. 
 The  Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  (TRAI)  has  issued  Mobile  Banking  (Quality  of 
Service)  Regulations  2012  prescribing  quality  of  service  standards  for  mobile  banking  to 
ensure faster and reliable communication for enabling banking through the mobile phones. 
The salient features of the Regulations are as under: 
• 
Access  service  providers  shall  facilitate  banks  to  use  SMS,  USSD  and  IVR  to 
provide banking services. 
The response time for delivery of message for mobile banking services generated 
by the customer or the bank shall be within the prescribed time frame. 
If  the  SMS  sent  by  the  bank  is  not  delivered  to  the  customer  due  to  network  or 
handset related problems, an USSD communication to the customer confirming the 
completion of the transaction should be sent. 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Service  providers  have  to  maintain  complete  and  accurate  record  of  transactions, 
using mobile banking services through mobile phones. 
Engaged employees 
Role  of  employees  in  driving  any  business  to  reach  a  critical  mass  is  the  most 
22. 
important but the least understood issue. The role of BCs or agents, who are being deployed 
by  banks  to  expand  their  reach  is,  equally  important  as  they  represent  the  banks  to  the 
common man and are going to lay down the foundation of bank-customer relationship. It is 
being  assumed  that  technology  will  take  care  of  every  aspect  of  banking  as  most  of  the 
processes are being automated. While this is true to a certain extent, it is the combination of 
frontline human-resources and front-end of technology which acts as the catalyst for service 
delivery in a nation like India. Employees are expected to help customers to move from being 
“assisted” initially to becoming “self-reliant” in use of banking related technologies including 
mobile banking. For the employees to hand-hold the customers, they themselves should be 
fully  conversant  with  the  product.  Thus,  for  mobile  banking  to  grow,  the  employees  would 
have  to  strive  towards  improving  customer  service,  enhancing  customer  satisfaction  and 
removing  any  apprehensions  regarding  the  safety  and  security  of  mobile  banking 
transactions.  
   Customer focused 7 A framework  
23. 
Having briefly touched upon the various issues related to mobile banking, keeping in 
view the focus on customers/end-users, I intend to provide a 7A framework for its evaluation 
using  a framework  comprising  seven  parameters  –  Availability,  Accessibility,  Acceptability, 
Affordability, Awareness, Assurance and Appropriateness. Of the seven, I had spoken about 
the  first  five  As  in  my  last  year’s  address  at  the  same  forum  though  in  a  slightly  different 
context.  
• 
Availability  implies  the  availability  of  technology  solutions  and  wide  range  of 
products offering mobile banking services to the customers.  
Accessibility  of  technology  is  its  spread  across  both  rural  and  urban  India 
irrespective of the mobile handset being used.  
Acceptability  of  the  product  is  dependent  on  making  it  available  in  the  local 
language with easy-to-use operational menu.  
Affordability  is  another  benchmark  which  should  guide  the  product  offering  as 
being value for money in providing cost effective and quality services.  
Creating Awareness about the availability of the product through financial literacy 
campaigns  to  increase  the  volumes  in  mobile  banking  business  and  generate 
necessary network effects.  
Assurance is an aspect which is related to trust in the products and processes and 
the security and authenticity relating to the transactions.  
Appropriateness is combined effect of all the above features. The mobile banking 
as  a  product  and  as  a  process  scores  well  on  all  the  above  parameters  and  is, 
therefore, very appropriate for providing cost effective, easy to use product by both 
existing and prospective customers. 
24. 
Accordingly,  an  appropriate  business  model  taking  into  account  all  the  above 
aspects  should  form  part  of  the  corporate  plan  of  the  banks  as  well  as  the  MNOs.  Thus, 
using the 7A framework, the stakeholders can provide mobile banking services which, as we 
have  discussed,  suits  the  needs  of  the  customers  leading  to  its  widespread  adoption  and 
usage.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Concluding remarks 
25. 
In conclusion, let me list out some of the issues that we need to focus and deliberate 
on  as  we  move  ahead.  That  the  mobile  banking  is  moving  up  on  the  adoption  curve  is 
evident in the number of implementations both on a pilot and real-time basis and also from 
the  level  of  interest  evinced  in  the  discussions  held  among  the  various  stakeholders  at 
different fora including the one that we are participating today. It is also evident in the number 
of  TSPs  emerging  in  the  mobile  banking  space.  Once  awareness  is  created  among  the 
general  public  on  its  benefits  and  more  banks  offer  this  service  to  their  customers  there 
would  be  a  further  growth  in  transactions  with  both  existing  and  new  customers  using  the 
service. We, therefore, need to ask ourselves: Whether our systems are equipped to handle 
additional transaction volumes? Have we done any forward planning in this regard? Whether 
technology  used  for  interaction  with  customers  is  easy  and  friendly  and  not  intimidating? 
Answers to these questions assume importance when our target is the aam aadmi. It maybe 
noted that so far only 52 banks have started mobile banking for their customers and, of them, 
only a few have achieved sufficient traction in mobile banking transactions. This needs to be 
reviewed by each individual bank at the corporate level and strategy should be worked out to 
operationalise mobile banking to reap all its benefits. Banks need also have to be proactive 
in  upscaling  their  mobile  banking  products  and  services  if  they  have  to  safeguard  their 
traditional advantage in the payment system terrain and leverage it to expand their customer 
base including the tech-savvy GenNext.  
26. 
Educating  users  and  potential  users,  particularly  through  engaged  employees, 
remains a challenge in the sphere of mobile banking which is true for any new technology 
based service offering. All the stakeholders need to put in concerted and sustained efforts in 
spreading awareness about the benefits of mobile banking. Reserve Bank would be happy to 
collaborate  with  banks  and  the  Indian  Banks’  Association  (IBA)  as  part  of  its  e-BAT 
(electronic  Banking  Awareness  and  Training) 
to  spread  retail  e-payment 
awareness. The IBA has the wherewithal to do  a lot in the area of awareness creation by 
conducting  mass-media  campaigns,  simulation/training  camps, 
town-hall  events  and 
reaching out to schools and colleges across the nation to “catch them young.” It is expected 
that  these  initiatives  will  bring  awareness  of  the  various  technology  payment  products 
including the mobile banking and the ease with which they can be used to encourage the use 
of non-cash payment products.  
27. 
Let me conclude by saying that mobile banking has a great potential. We are at the 
initial stage of this development. It should be the earnest endeavour of all the stakeholders – 
banks, MNOs, technology vendors, NPCI, Reserve Bank, Government of India, IBA, industry 
associations  like  the  FICCI,  and,  of  course,  the  customers  to  make  mobile  banking  as 
ubiquitous as the mobile itself. It is for us to harness this potential to achieve the objective of 
reaching  to the  customer  wherever  s/he  is,  deepening the financial  inclusion  supported  by 
low cost, secured ICT based mobile banking model and moving towards a less-cash society 
as envisaged in our draft Payment System Vision Document for 2012–15.  
Thank you very much for a patient listening.  
initiatives 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
