Agustín Carstens: Cooperation among central banks at the beginning of 
the XXI century 
Keynote speech by Mr Agustín Carstens, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, on the occasion of 
the  60th  anniversary  of  the  Center  for  Latin  American  Monetary  Studies  (CEMLA), 
Mexico City, 19 July 2012. 
 Monetary stability, 
Financial stability, and 
Regional and international coordination. 
Good evening, everyone. We are pleased to welcome you in Mexico and we are honored to 
share  this  dinner  with  you  to  commemorate  the  60th  anniversary  of  CEMLA. We  are  very 
proud  of  the  fact  that  the  Center  for  Latin  American  Monetary  Studies  is  celebrating  its 
60th anniversary. 
We  are  particularly  thankful  to  Javier  Guzmán  for  the  invitation  and  I  congratulate  him  for 
having  organized  this  Conference to  discuss the  importance  of cooperation  among  central 
banks at the beginning of the XXI century. 
Precisely this spirit of collaboration was the foundation in the creation of CEMLA. Today, just 
like at its beginnings, such spirit is the element supporting the institutional bonds among its 
members, providing cohesion and substance to the joint efforts aimed at confronting similar 
challenges, recognizing, at the same time, the differences and peculiarities of each member, 
which add richness and variety to the cooperation and collaboration.  
Nowadays, CEMLA’s main objective is to promote a better understanding of the core issues 
in central banking in Latin America and the Caribbean, giving priority to the following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
There is no doubt that in the last 60 years the economic environment in Latin America and 
the  Caribbean,  and  of  course  around  the  world,  has  changed  considerably.  For  example, 
central  banks’  functions  have  evolved  throughout  these  six  decades.  It  has  been  a  long 
institutional  development,  which  emerged  from  a  relatively  narrow  vision  where  central 
banks’  key  role  was  to  provide  money  to  the  economies.  Later  on,  Latin  America  went 
through a period when our institutions put an emphasis on credit allocation policies. Finally, 
with greater institutional independence came the next step towards a modern central bank, 
where the main priority is the mandate to procure monetary and financial stability. Thanks to 
this transition, the concurrent periods of economic and financial crises in the region came to 
an  end.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  major  advances  have  been  accomplished  in  this 
regard. 
However, the fact that we have greater macroeconomic stability in Latin America does not 
mean  that  we  can  lower  our  guard.  On  the  contrary,  we  should  maintain  discipline  in  our 
fiscal and monetary policy frameworks and strengthen regional cooperation in order to face 
external shocks to which we all are exposed. 
It  is  clear  that  one  of  the  lessons  of  the  recent  global  crisis  was  to  highlight  the  close 
economic and financial ties of the world economy. Thus, the crisis once again exposed the 
paramount  importance  of  international  agreements  regarding  cooperation  among  financial 
and  monetary  authorities  worldwide.  And  this,  I  believe  we  have  already  learnt  it,  is 
indispensable  both  in  times  of  crisis  and  in  those  periods  of  relative  calm,  that  we  call 
“normal”. 
If we speak of the global crisis, of which we in Latin America are still more or less passive or 
suffering subjects, we cannot avoid the consideration of certain points, which, if analyzed in 
retrospective, revealed insufficient international monetary cooperation. Likewise, this review 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
allows  us  to  mention  some  areas  that  we  must  attend  to  as  a  priority  in  our  region  to 
strengthen the current framework that has been established to encourage this cooperation. 
As  you  know  very  well,  the  international  macroeconomic  situation  before  the  crisis  was 
characterized  by  low  interest  rates  and  abundant  liquidity  in  search  for  yield.  Great  global 
imbalances, together with the rapid financial innovation, contributed to accelerate the lending 
boom, in particular in advanced economies. 
Despite  the  alerts  from  different  international  forums  and  economic  analysts  regarding  the 
risks of global imbalances and the accelerated growth in prices of certain financial assets, no 
one imagined the magnitude of the problem. 
In  turn,  although  the  monetary  authorities  in  advanced  countries  were  aware  of  the  risks 
posed by global imbalances, the necessary corrective actions were not implemented on time. 
On the other hand, there was no sense of urgency, or at least evident concern, among the 
competent  authorities  regarding  the  lending  boom  or  the  great  expansion  of  complex 
financial instruments that in essence escaped conventional regulation and supervision tools. 
During  the  first  phase  of  the  current  crisis,  the  authorities  responded  with  caution,  facing 
specific problems of the financial markets as they arose. In retrospect, the authorities did not 
manage to react timely in a forceful and decisive manner given the magnitude of the crisis. 
There  was  a  lack  of  a  comprehensive  vision,  a  strategic  point  of  view  that  would  have  a 
global perspective. In particular, we could state that, apart from the swap lines established 
among the U.S. Federal Reserve and other central banks, in the early stages of the crisis no 
decisive measures were taken to face it in a coordinated manner at the international level. 
It was not until the collapse of Lehman Brothers when the first multilateral measures were 
implemented.  This  was  the  moment  when  a  series  of  coordinated  and  multilateral  actions 
were taken in order to tackle the crisis. 
For instance, the coordinated policy rate cuts at the beginning of October 2008, by the U.S. 
Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, the 
Swiss National Bank and Sweden’s central bank. 
Later, U.S. dollar liquidity facilities, which had been established by the U.S. Federal Reserve 
and  other  central  banks  of  advanced  economies,  were  expanded  in  order  to  include 
emerging economies, such as Mexico, Brazil, Korea and Singapore. In Europe, injections of 
capital  into  the  banking  system  in  various  countries  were  agreed  upon,  as  well  as  the 
commitment to jointly confront the crisis. 
Regarding  fiscal  policy,  several  advanced  and  emerging  countries  started  to  implement 
countercyclical programs to stimulate the economy and to foster a faster recovery, taking into 
account  that  a  broad  simultaneous  stimulus  would  yield  better  results  relative  to  unilateral 
increments in public spending. 
Additionally, efforts were made to strengthen the international financial architecture in several 
international forums, aimed at designing a system which would allow a timely, efficient and 
coordinated response during global episodes of stress. 
These turbulent episodes showed that international coordination in implementing policies is 
more  productive  and  efficient  than  unilateral  implementation. This  thesis  is  not  only  widely 
supported by academic literature, but also by recent and even current experience: in times of 
crisis the benefits of coordinated action are more than evident. A multilateral response has 
positive externalities and the costs of not acting in concert are much higher, such that the 
different parties have sufficient incentives to strengthen their cooperation. 
Thus,  the  challenge  is  to  design  international  arrangements,  which  facilitate  greater 
cooperation among our countries. In this sense, the existence of international institutions and 
forums that contribute to the early identification of risks and signs of instability are of utmost 
importance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In Latin America and the Caribbean we should continue to strengthen the dialogue. The first 
point  in  order  to  understand  the  importance  of  this  collaboration  is  the  lack,  the  great 
deficiency, of a consistent theoretical framework to analyze the role that the financial sector 
has in economic activity and its function in the propagation of crises. Despite all the progress 
made in order to model the contagion through trade, as concerns the financial channels, it 
seems  as  if  we  spoke  different  languages.  There  is  no  consistent  framework  that  would 
provide  us  with  a  standard  model  to  set  up  our  discussions.  There  does  not  even  exist,  I 
need  to  point  out,  a  common  terminology.  Unfortunately,  it  is  clear  that  even  today 
international liquidity and macroprudential measures can be understood quite differently. 
Recognizing these deficiencies, I consider that there is a great value added in strengthening 
research activities in the central banks of our region. One way to do this is to support more 
vigorously the work of CEMLA. Research and divulgation activities are essential in order to 
assure the relevance of the Center. Even though training is its fundamental activity, it cannot 
be  sustained  without  a  continuous  program  of  economic  research,  nurtured  by  the  active 
participation of central bank members. Something similar happens with technical assistance, 
which should be a link between the Institution and its members. 
During the last decades, CEMLA played a fundamental role in increasing and facilitating the 
collaboration among central banks in Latin America and I am sure that this will not change in 
the following decades. It is precisely the permanence of institutions like CEMLA that helps to 
maintain and improve our common goals. They are the institutional witnesses of our shared 
work  and  responsibility.  We  are  able  to  detect  the  change,  and  the  evolution  of  our  goals 
thanks to the continued presence of our institutions, of our will to continue collaborating. 
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
