Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Naigai Josei Chousa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 4 June 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to have this opportunity to address you today at the Naigai Josei Chousa Kai. 
The last time I spoke here was in late May 2011. At that time, Japan’s economic activity had 
just started picking up from the sharp decline in production following the downturn resulting 
from the Great East Japan Earthquake. The pace of the subsequent economic recovery was 
much faster than initially expected thanks to firms’ strenuous efforts. After the beginning of 
autumn 2011, however, economic activity temporarily became flat due to the effects of the 
slowdown in overseas economies, the appreciation of the yen, and the flooding in Thailand. 
Since then, it has become increasingly evident that the economy is shifting toward a pick-up 
phase, particularly in domestic demand, which shows signs of firming. Price developments 
have gradually been improving as well. On the other hand, as evident in financial markets 
recently, some nervousness has been seen in developments regarding the European debt 
problem. 
Today,  I  will  first  discuss  economic  and  price  developments.  I  will  then  explain  the  Bank’s 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  After  doing  so,  I  will  offer  my  thoughts  on  the  importance  of 
engaging in efforts to overcome challenges facing Japan’s economy, such as strengthening 
the economy’s growth potential and ensuring fiscal consolidation. 
I. 
Current developments in and the outlook for economic activity and prices 
Current developments in economic activity and prices 
I will start with developments in economic activity and prices. Overseas economies obviously 
have the largest impact on developments in Japan’s economy. These economies have yet to 
emerge  from  a  deceleration  phase,  but  some  improvement  has  been  observed.  On  the 
whole, the U.S. economy is in the process of moderate recovery. As for domestic demand, 
reconstruction-related demand including public investment has clearly started to increase. In 
the corporate sector, business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend, 
with  improvement  in  business  sentiment  reflecting  a  favorable  turn  in  the  outlook  for 
corporate  profits.  In  the  household  sector,  private  consumption  has  been  increasing 
moderately against the background of improvement in consumer sentiment. Consequently, 
as I mentioned earlier, the Bank judges that it has become increasingly evident that Japan’s 
economy as a whole is shifting toward a pick-up phase. 
Reflecting  these  economic  developments,  gradual  changes  in  prices  start  to  emerge 
(Chart 1). Deflation is often referred to when discussing developments in Japan’s economy. 
As  for  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI,  all  items  less  fresh  food),  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  registered  minus  2.4  percent  in  August  2009.  Thereafter,  the  rate  of  decline 
moderated at a steady pace, recovering to 0 percent in fiscal 2011. The year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI for the past two months, for which data is available, registered 0.2 percent. 
Looking  at  a  breakdown  by  item,  the  rates  of  change  are  negative  for  items  that  are 
infrequently  purchased  and  for  which  prices  have  declined  substantially  as  a  result  of 
technological  innovation,  such  as  personal  computers  and  televisions,  whereas  they  are 
around 1.9 percent for those purchased more than about once a month. Focusing solely on 
items closely related to consumers’ daily lives, such as food, the year-on-year rate of change 
has more clearly entered positive territory than in the case of other items. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Baseline scenario for the outlook through fiscal 2013 
Next, I would like to talk about the outlook for economic activity and prices. At the Monetary 
Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  at  the  end  of  April,  the  Bank  released  its  assessment  of  the 
outlook through fiscal 2013. An economic outlook undoubtedly entails various uncertainties 
and  depends  on relevant  assumptions. The most  important  assumption made  in  the  latest 
outlook rules out the possibility that an extreme intensification of the European debt problem 
would  trigger  a  significant  downturn  in  the  global  economy  through  the  turmoil  in  global 
financial markets. On this basis, in the baseline scenario – that is, the scenario for economic 
activity  and  prices  considered  to  be  the  most  likely  by  the  Bank  –  Japan’s  economy  is 
expected to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability in the longer run. 
More specifically, the economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path in the first 
half of fiscal 2012 as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picks up, led by emerging 
and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  as  reconstruction-related  demand  after  the 
earthquake disaster gradually strengthens. In terms of figures, the growth rate of real GDP is 
projected  to  be  2.3  percent  and  1.7  percent  for  fiscal  2012  and  2013,  respectively. 
Concerning  prices,  as  the  level  of  economic  activity  continues  to  rise  moderately,  the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  gradually  rise  to  a  range  of  above 
0.5 percent  and  less  than  1  percent  by  fiscal  2013,  the  latter  half  of  the  projection  period. 
Thereafter,  it  will  likely  be  not  too  long  before  the  rate  reaches  1  percent,  which  is  the 
inflation rate that the Bank aims to achieve for the time being. 
Upside and downside risks to the outlook 
Such an outlook entails various uncertainties. 
The  first  concerns  developments  overseas,  including  those  in  global  financial  markets 
(Chart 2).  Of  these,  the  European  debt  problem  should  be  a  risk  factor  that  requires  the 
closest attention. From the summer of 2011 to the end of that year, strains in global financial 
markets  intensified  due  to  the  effects  of  the  European  debt  problem.  Thereafter,  financial 
markets  regained  stability  temporarily,  mainly  due  to  liquidity  provision  by  the  European 
Central  Bank  (ECB).  Recently,  however,  some  nervousness  has  started  to  be  seen  once 
again. In Greece, a re-election is scheduled for mid-June, as the government failed to form a 
ruling  coalition  following  the  general  election  in  May  due  to  public  opposition  to  fiscal 
tightening  measures.  In  Spain,  concern  about  financial  institutions’  non-performing  loan 
problem has heightened with the delay in efforts toward fiscal consolidation. Reflecting these 
circumstances,  global  investors  have  become  increasingly  risk  averse  on  the  whole. 
Government bond yields in Greece and Spain have risen while those in the United States, 
Germany, and the United Kingdom have recorded historical lows, or reached levels close to 
them. As suggested by the Lehman shock in autumn 2008, whether a risk will materialize in 
an extreme manner, leading to a significant economic downturn, largely depends on whether 
stability can be maintained in interbank funding markets. So far, interbank funding markets 
have  generally  been  stable,  mainly  due  to  the  massive  liquidity  provision  by  the  ECB,  a 
situation  that  stands  in  sharp  contrast  to  that  observed  around  the  end  of  2011. 
Nevertheless, liquidity provision by a central bank is a measure to “buy time”, so to speak. It 
is  therefore  vital  that  governments  and  authorities  steadily  proceed  with  efforts  toward 
achieving sustainable growth and stability in the European economy before time runs out. 
In  addition  to  risks  stemming  from  developments  in  Europe,  the  global  economy  entails 
various uncertainties. With regard to the U.S. economy, while business fixed investment and 
private consumption have been firm, the effects of the bursting of the housing bubble remain 
deeply  ingrained and the pace of recovery in employment is weakening. Although inflation 
rates  have  declined  compared  with  some  time  ago,  developments  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies  –  which  are  expected  to  lead  the  global  economy  –  also 
remain  highly  uncertain  in  terms  of  the  extent  to  which  they  can  grow  without  causing  a 
resurgence of inflation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In terms of uncertainties, we monitor the recent appreciation of the yen. The development in 
the  foreign  exchange  market  since  last  summer  is  closely  linked  to  changes  in  global 
investors’  risk  aversion  against  the  background  of  the  European  debt  problem.  The 
adjustment of the yen’s appreciation from February to the first half of March reflected abating 
risk aversion by global investors as the situation in Europe improved. The movement of the 
yen  thereafter  was  merely  a  reflection  of  the  reversal  of  such  investors’  behavior.  In  any 
case,  the  Bank  carefully  monitors  the  development  of  the  foreign  exchange  rate  from  the 
viewpoint of how it affects the economy through its impact on business sentiment. 
Second,  developments  in  reconstruction-related  demand  at  home  remain  uncertain.  The 
portion  of  the  budget  earmarked  for  reconstruction  amounts  to  about  19  trillion  yen  –  a 
sizable budget over five years – and most of this is ready for disbursement. This represents 
about 4 percent of Japan’s nominal GDP and 60 percent of the total nominal GDP of the four 
severely  disaster-stricken  prefectures  of  Iwate,  Miyagi,  Fukushima,  and  Ibaraki.  Steady 
disbursement is expected to significantly increase demand. However, a bottleneck – such as 
a shortage in construction workers – could also occur at various stages of implementation 
given the large scale of the budget. 
Third, there is uncertainty with regard to firms’ and households’ expectations or their degree 
of confidence as pertains to the medium- to long-term growth outlook for Japan’s economy. 
Japanese firms are currently increasing production overseas against the background of high 
growth in emerging economies. While this is a rational business strategy, medium- to long-
term growth expectations are bound to change in either direction depending on whether new 
businesses  will  be  created  at  home.  With  regard  to  problems  concerning  the  supply  and 
demand of electric power, the issue for the time being is how businesses will operate during 
the  upcoming  summer. Other  important  points to  pay  attention  to  are  (1)  whether  concern 
about electricity supply constraints and a rise in electricity costs would lead to an eventual 
decline  in  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations,  and  (2)  whether  efforts  to  conserve, 
create, and store energy would lead to a strengthening of growth potential. 
Fourth,  there  is  uncertainty  with  respect  to  various  issues  regarding  Japan’s  fiscal 
sustainability. Despite unfavorable fiscal conditions, some argue that the situation in Japan is 
not  a  problem  given  the  abundant  domestic  savings  and  little  need  to  rely  on  foreign 
investors.  Having  said  this,  no  government  can  keep  expanding  its  liabilities  forever.  The 
current  stable  low  level  of  the  government  bond  yields  reflects  market  participants’ 
confidence that Japan ultimately has the ability to work on fiscal consolidation. As I will get 
into later, confidence in fiscal sustainability is the most fundamental prerequisite for stability 
in prices and the financial system. Once damaged, it will adversely affect the economy. By 
contrast, considering the possibility that concern about the outlook for the fiscal situation is 
causing a decline in households’ and firms’ propensity to consume, a clear path toward fiscal 
consolidation may in fact heighten economic growth over a relatively long term. 
II. 
The Bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
The price stability goal in the medium to long term 
I  will  now  explain  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  taking  into  account  the 
aforementioned economic and price developments. 
The Bank recognizes that the critical challenge for Japan’s economy is to overcome deflation 
and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Based on this recognition, it has 
been  implementing  powerful  monetary  easing  measures  for  a  while.  Looking  at  its  policy 
decisions since the beginning of 2012, it introduced “the price stability goal in the medium to 
long  term”  in  February  while  simultaneously  further  enhancing  monetary  easing.  Taking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
another  step  forward,  the  Bank  decided  to  enhance  monetary  easing  again  at  the  end  of 
April. Let me explain in more detail.1 
The  first  point  is  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”.  The  objective  of 
monetary policy is price stability. As stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act, the Bank conducts 
monetary  policy  based  on  the  principle  that  the  policy  shall  be  aimed  at  “achieving  price 
stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy”. In light of 
such  principle,  the  price  stability  that  the  Bank  aims  to  achieve  must  be  one  that  is 
sustainable  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Among  major  central  banks,  the  need  to  place 
importance on medium- to long-term price stability has been widely accepted. For example, 
the United Kingdom – known for its adoption of inflation targeting – has continued to register 
an actual inflation rate exceeding its goal by more than 1 percent for over two years. During 
this  period,  however,  its  central  bank  has  conducted  monetary  easing,  not  tightening. 
Considering  that  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  are  transmitted  with  a  time  lag,  price 
developments in the medium to long term, not those in the short term, must be taken into 
account,  and  policy  conduct  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  based  on  its  assessment  that  the 
inflation rate is expected to decline, judging from the output gap. 
The level of inflation at which prices can be perceived as stable in the medium to long term 
depends  on  such  factors  as  the  characteristics  of  the  economic  structure  of  respective 
countries  and  the  perception  of  prices  held  by  those  who  have  adapted  to  such  an 
environment. Taking these into account, the Bank decided to express “the price stability goal 
in the medium to long term” with a degree of latitude, judging it to be in “a positive range of 
2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI”. Furthermore, the 
Bank more specifically expressed that it set a goal of “1 percent for the time being” and that it 
would aim to achieve this goal in conducting monetary policy. I will elaborate upon why we 
chose “1 percent” later in my talk. 
Pursuit of powerful monetary easing 
The  second  point  involves  the  specifics  of  the  monetary  easing  measures.  Given  that  the 
overnight  call  rate,  or the  policy  rate,  is  already  virtually  zero,  generating  easing  effects  in 
terms of monetary policy calls for a new approach. This is where the Bank’s comprehensive 
monetary easing measures implemented in autumn 2010 come in. The first part of its efforts 
focuses on its commitment aimed at generating policy duration effects – in other words, the 
Bank’s  determination  to  continue  with  its  monetary  easing.  The  other  involves  working  on 
longer-term  interest  rates  and  risk  premiums  by  establishing  a  program  through  which  to 
mainly  purchase  financial  assets,  such  as  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  and  risk 
assets. The Bank, establishing a link with its “price stability goal in the medium to long term”, 
clarified at the February MPM that it would aim to achieve the goal of 1 percent inflation in 
terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  through  the  pursuit  of  powerful 
monetary easing, conducting its virtually zero interest rate policy and implementing the Asset 
Purchase Program (hereafter the Program) through the purchase mainly of financial assets, 
and that it will continue with this powerful easing until it judges the 1 percent goal to be in 
sight. As for the size of the Program, the Bank increased the amount by about 10 trillion yen 
at the MPM in February and about 5 trillion yen at the MPM at the end of April. In doing so, 
while  reducing  its  funds-supplying  operations  with  a  6-month  term  reflecting  a  decline  in 
market  needs,  it  substantially  increased  its  purchase  of  JGBs  by  about  10  trillion  yen  and 
expanded the range of eligible JGBs and corporate bonds to be purchased from those with a 
remaining maturity of up to two years, to those with a remaining maturity of up to three years. 
                                                
1  For  more  details  on  the  Bank’s  measures  to  enhance  monetary  easing  in  February  2012,  please  see 
Masaaki Shirakawa,  “The  Bank  of  Japan’s  Efforts  toward  Overcoming  Deflation”  (Speech  at  the  Japan 
National Press Club in Tokyo), February 17, 2012. http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/ 
data/ko120217a1.pdf 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Through  these  measures,  the  Bank  intends  to  proceed  with  and  complete  its  purchase  of 
financial assets under the Program, amounting to about 65 trillion yen  by the end of 2012 
and  about  70  trillion  yen  by  the  end  of  June  2013  (Chart  3).  Given  that  the  amount 
outstanding of the Program has recently been about 51 trillion yen, the Bank is to accumulate 
nearly 20 trillion yen worth of financial assets in over a year from now and is currently in the 
process  of  enhancing  monetary  easing  every  month.  However,  the  simple  truth  about  its 
monthly efforts tends to be overlooked, since the Bank announces such efforts in advance in 
a  collective  manner.  In any  event,  this  pursuit  of  powerful  monetary  easing  is  expected  to 
exert  positive  effects  on  economic  activity  and  prices  through  the  following  transmission 
mechanism, together with the cumulative effects of easing to date. 
First, the Bank’s purchases of financial assets through the Program and the clarification of 
the  policy  time  horizon  mentioned  earlier  will  encourage  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest 
rates  and  a  reduction  in  risk  premiums.  For  example,  while  yields  on  JGBs tend to rise  in 
accordance with an increase in maturity, those on JGBs with a remaining maturity of three 
years have recently declined to around 0.1 percent, reaching levels close to money market 
rates.  Reflecting  these  developments  in  market  interest  rates,  firms’  funding  costs  have 
decreased at a moderate pace. 
Second, such effects of low interest rates in terms of stimulating the economy will strengthen 
with improvement in economic conditions (Chart 4). Let us consider, for example, an interest 
rate in two different environments: one in which it is difficult to make profits, and the other in 
which an adequate return can be anticipated by investing with the use of loans. Of the two 
cases, the latter provides a larger economic stimulus. Monetary easing effects in Japan are 
expected to strengthen further in the future, considering that economic conditions and prices 
are heading toward improvement. 
Third,  financial  markets  remain  extremely  stable  compared  to  other  countries,  as  market 
participants have been reassured by ample fund provision. Reassuring firms and households 
about their funding plays a role in supporting their confidence, especially at a time when we 
are witnessing high uncertainty at home and abroad, particularly with regard to the European 
debt problem. 
Some points about monetary policy 
III. 
So far, I have explained the Bank’s powerful monetary easing and its effects. In the conduct 
of  monetary  policy,  we  recognize  that  there  are  different  opinions.  One  opinion  is  that  the 
Bank should pursue more aggressive easing. Another is that it is too risky to embark on such 
aggressive measures. For our part, we listen to these opinions and conduct monetary policy 
as we judge most appropriate. Bearing these differences in mind, let me explain our thinking 
behind the conduct of monetary policy in order to facilitate better understanding of our policy 
making. 
Level of the “price stability goal in the medium to long term” 
The first  is  the  level  of the  price  stability  goal. The general  public’s  perception  of  prices  is 
deeply  ingrained  and  it  influences  their  actions;  thus,  it  is  hard  to  imagine  a  situation  that 
does not take account of experiences over the decades (Chart 5). 
Although the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI turned negative in  1998, the average 
rate  of  inflation  since  the  middle  of  the  1980s  –  after  the  effect  of  the  second  oil  shock 
dissipated – is nearly 0.5 percent. It has consistently been lower than the equivalent rates in 
overseas economies. During the bubble period (1987–89) when the economy was booming, 
the CPI inflation was 1.3 percent. Over the last 30 years or so, there were only three cases 
when  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  reached  2  percent.  The  first  was  at  the 
beginning of the 1990s, when the remnants of the bubble were still in place. The second was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
in 1997, when the consumption tax was lifted. The third was in 2008, when the sharp rise in 
energy and food prices hit the household sector. 
Notwithstanding  these  past  benchmarks,  simply  announcing  out  of  the  blue  that  the  Bank 
aims  to  achieve  2  percent  inflation  is  not  enough.  Above  all,  this  might raise  unnecessary 
uncertainties for businesses and households. Furthermore, if the announcement was trusted 
and inflation expectations rose accordingly, it is financial markets that would respond most 
quickly.  There  would  then  be  a  risk  of  a  premature  rise  in  long-term  yields  before  actual 
prices  and  wages  start  to  rise.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  prices  of  Japanese 
government  securities,  a  large  share  of  which  is  owned  by  financial  institutions,  would  go 
down, thereby heightening the risk of undermining such institutions’ lending activities. Owing 
to these concerns, we judged that it was best to leave the CPI inflation rate at 1 percent for 
the time being and exert efforts to achieve that goal. On top of this, the Bank will review “the 
price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  once  a  year  while  analyzing  the  level  of 
progress  that  has  been  made  toward  strengthening  the  growth  potential  and  the  changes 
that have occurred in the general public’s perception of prices. 
Achieving the “price stability goal” and conduct of monetary policy 
The second point concerns the timing of achieving the price stability goal and its relationship 
with  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  the  Outlook  Report  published  in  April  2012,  the 
median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of CPI (all items less fresh food) for fiscal 
2013 was 0.7 percent year on year. Our decision to enhance monetary easing at that time 
was not made simply because our forecast fell short of the goal of 1 percent. Rather, given 
that it will likely be not too long before the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI reaches the 
Bank’s “price stability goal in the medium to long term” of 1 percent for the time being, the 
Bank judged from a somewhat long-term perspective that the likelihood of Japan’s economy 
returning to a sustainable growth path was fairly high. It was against such a background that 
the  Bank  enhanced  monetary  easing.  A  central  bank  aims  to  achieve  price  stability  in  the 
medium  to  long  term,  and  no  country  has  accepted  the  idea  that  its  central  bank  must 
achieve a certain percent of inflation by a certain period of time in an automatic manner. 
Having  said  that,  we  are  hoping  that  1  percent  inflation,  specified  as  the  Bank’s  “price 
stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  for  the  time  being,  is  achieved  at  the  earliest 
possible  time.  However,  there  are  structural  and  corrosive  problems  behind  the  cause  of 
deflation. Furthermore, one has to take into consideration that there is a long time lag before 
the effects of monetary policy permeate the economy. 
Under  such  circumstances,  if  the  Bank  presses  on  too  aggressively  with  the  purchase  of 
financial  assets  –  the  monthly  purchase  of  JGBs,  for  example,  has  already  reached  a 
significant level – this could hold down long-term yields temporarily; however, it subsequently 
could trigger an event that would lead to a jump in such yields as a result of the government 
bond market being too dependent on the central bank’s purchases (Chart 6). This will have a 
significant impact on financial institutions’ management, and will jeopardize price stability as 
well as the sound development of the economy. 
The Bank continues to examine whether economic activity and prices are moving in the right 
direction, and to assess risks including the accumulation of financial imbalances. The Bank 
will conduct policy in an appropriate manner while carefully assessing the effects of further 
monetary easing in the pipeline. 
Large-scale purchase of government bonds and the credibility of currency 
The  third  point  is  related  to  the  large-scale  purchase  of  government  bonds  and  its 
relationship with maintaining the credibility of currency. Related to this point, we sometimes 
hear the criticism that once the purchase of government bonds by a central bank is perceived 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is 
through 
to  purchase 
long-term  government  bonds 
as  financing government  debt,  and  not  conducted  for  the  purpose  of monetary  policy,  this 
could entail a risk of undermining the credibility of currency. 
The Bank conducts such purchases for two different purposes. First, it regularly purchases 
long-term government bonds under the ceiling of the amount of banknotes in circulation. This 
is based on the rationale that, as long as such purchases are in line with an increasing trend 
of  demand  for  banknotes,  the  Bank  should  hold  long-term  assets  instead  of  short-term 
assets.  From  this  viewpoint,  a  ceiling  has  been  set  that  is  equivalent  to  the  amount  of 
banknotes in circulation. 
The  second  purpose 
the 
aforementioned  Asset  Purchase  Program,  with  a  view  to  pursuing  its  powerful  monetary 
easing. Such purchase is aimed at encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest rates 
on  the  basis  of  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  is  not  restricted  to  the  ceiling  of  the 
amount  of  banknotes.  At  the  end  of  May,  the  amount  of  JGBs  held  by  the  Bank  for  this 
purpose was about 10 trillion yen, and it will be increased by about 29 trillion yen by the end 
of  June  2013.  Adding  these  values  together,  the  total  amount  of  the  Bank’s  holdings  was 
approximately 73 trillion yen at the end of April 2012, is expected to total 92 trillion yen at the 
end  of  this  year,  thereby  exceeding  the  amount  of  banknotes  in  circulation,  and  reach 
97 trillion yen at the end of June next year (Chart 7). 
Given that special deficit-financing bonds issuance in fiscal 2012 is about 38 trillion yen, the 
growth in size of the Bank’s purchase of JGBs appears fairly straightforward. Nevertheless, 
the Bank’s purchase of long-term government bonds has never been – and will never be – 
intended as financing government debt. I emphasize that the Bank’s intention is crystal clear 
on this point. 
Considering the relationship between currency and government securities, it is important to 
go back to basics.2 The Bank purchases the government securities because the banknotes it 
issued against such purchases are ultimately accepted by the public, whose confidence in 
banknotes is maintained. However, such confidence is backed by the government securities. 
Put  differently,  it  is  hard  to  imagine  a  situation  where  public  confidence  in  banknotes  is 
maintained  but  not  that  in  the  government  securities.  Hence,  once  the  confidence  in  the 
government securities is lost, so is that in banknotes. After all, if the central bank’s purchase 
of the government securities exceeds the amount of banknotes the public wishes to hold, this 
will  eventually  lead  to  inflation.  Alternatively,  the  anticipation  of  inflation  will  lead  to  a 
preemptive hike in long-term yields, exerting a negative influence on the economy and the 
financial system. Thus, the amount of the government securities that the Bank can purchase 
has a ceiling that is specified by “confidence”. The Bank has been purchasing a significant 
amount of JGBs, but its operation rests on a subtle balance that is based on sustaining such 
confidence. Above all, it is vital that steps toward fiscal consolidation make steady progress 
in  order  not  to  create  any  room  for  misunderstanding  the  Bank’s  action  as  financing 
government debt. 
Role of monetary easing 
The fourth  point  is  the role  of monetary  easing and  its  relationship  with  other  policies  and 
measures.  Related  to  this  point,  we  hear  the  view  that  insufficient  monetary  easing  has 
caused both the persistent deflationary pressure and the resurgent appreciation of the yen. 
At  the  same  time,  we  are  aware  of  the  opposing  view  that  monetary  easing  has  delayed 
structural reforms in the economy and fiscal situation. Our thinking on this is clear: we need 
                                                
2  On  the  relationship  between  currency  and  government  securities,  please  see  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “The 
Importance of Fiscal Sustainability: Preconditions for Stability in the Financial System and in Prices” (Remarks 
at  the  Banque  de  France  Financial  Stability  Review  Launch  Event  in  Washington  D.C.),  April  21,  2012. 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/data/ko120422b.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
to  make  efforts  to strengthen growth  potential  and  provide  support from  the financial  side. 
For our part, we will make our utmost efforts from the financial side. 
Monetary  easing  permeates  the  economy  through  two  stages.  The  first  consists  of  the 
central  bank’s  action  influencing  financial  conditions,  and  the  second  involves  such 
conditions  inducing  increased  spending  by  firms  and  households.  As  far  as  financial 
conditions  are  concerned,  the  levels  of  interest  rates  in  Japan  –  whether  they  be  interest 
rates  on  loans  or  issuance  rates  of corporate  bonds  –  are  at  least  as  low  as  those  in  the 
United States (Chart 8). This is also the case whether they be nominal interest rates or real 
interest rates adjusted for inflation expectations. 
Nevertheless,  the  reason  behind  the  recurring  argument  for  insufficient  monetary  easing 
comes  from  a  misunderstanding  concerning  the  amount  of  currency  the  central  bank 
supplies. Under a zero interest rate, the cost associated with holding either banknotes or the 
central bank’s current deposits is negligible; no matter how much money it supplies, this will 
be  held  in  such  a  form  as  the  central  bank’s  current  deposits.  In terms of  quantity,  this  is 
completely ineffective. In fact, Chairman Bernanke has stated that the degree of monetary 
accommodation cannot be measured properly based on the quantity. Having said that, the 
fact  is  that  the  quantity  itself  is  the  highest  in  Japan.  Considering  that  Japan  had  been 
increasing its quantity well before European countries and the United States, which started 
boosting their quantities after the Lehman shock, perhaps the public has been used to such 
an environment without being particularly aware of it. It is our strong desire that advantage 
be taken of such accommodative conditions. 
Importance of strengthening growth potential 
IV. 
Up to now, I have explained our thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy. In order for 
Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price 
stability,  support  from  the  financial  side  is  an  important  and  necessary  condition,  and  the 
Bank will do its utmost while examining the developments in economic activity and prices, as 
well  as  assessing  risks.  Nevertheless, this  is  not  enough to  lead  Japan’s  economy toward 
overcoming deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Efforts to 
strengthen growth potential are particularly important. With this in mind, I would now like to 
change the subject and talk about how to strengthen growth potential. 
Growth  potential  is  the  potential  growth  rate  of  real  GDP.  In  the  short  run,  the  economy 
fluctuates at a rate around the potential growth path, but will converge to that path in the long 
run, say over 10 and 20 years. 
The  real  GDP  growth  rate  is  decomposed  into  the  growth  rate  of  the  workforce  and  the 
growth  rate  of  real  per  capita  GDP.  Japanese  data  for  the  last  10  years  show  that  the 
working-age population declined by 0.3 percent year on year and labor productivity increased 
by  0.8  percent  year  on  year.  When  combining  these  numbers,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate 
increased by around 0.5 percent. The decline in the workforce reflects the rapid aging that is 
in  progress.  For  the  next  10  years,  assuming  that  the  labor  participation  of  male/female 
workers  and  that  of  different  age  groups  remain  constant,  the  working-age  population  is 
expected  to  decline  by  0.6  percent.  Meanwhile,  labor  productivity  in  Japan  increases  at  a 
somewhat higher rate than in other major economies. With that in mind, there are only two 
ways to boost economic growth: either raise the rate of growth in the working-age population 
or raise labor productivity. Of course, the economic growth rate can still increase somewhat 
once the output gap has been filled through the process of encouraging an unutilized labor 
force to participate. According to the Cabinet Office, the recent output gap estimate is nearly 
2  percent,  and  it  appears  that  this  does  not  provide  enough  impetus  to  lift  the  economic 
growth rate once the output gap is filled (Chart 9). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Raising labor participation and productivity 
Based on the information provided thus far, the direction in which we should be heading is 
clear. 
The first move would be to increase labor participation, or at least make efforts to stop its 
decline.  In  particular,  society  has  to  take  steps  to  allow  more  females  and  the  elderly  to 
participate  in  the  labor  market.  If,  by  2030,  (a)  the  labor  participation  of  female  workers 
became as high as that in Sweden, (b) the participation of those at the age of 60–64 became 
as high as those at the age of 55–59, and (c) the participation of those at the age of 65+ went 
up accordingly, then the working-age population would rise by 0.2 percent in the 2010s, not 
decline by the 0.6 percent that I mentioned earlier (Chart 10). 
The  second  is  to  exert  efforts  to  raise  productivity.  This  sounds  as  though  we  need 
technological  advances  in  order  to  achieve  efficiency  gains,  but  this  is  not  necessarily  the 
case. Labor productivity is the value added – the sum of wages and profits – per worker, and 
raising  productivity  is  equivalent  to  creating  goods  and  services  that  satisfy  consumers’ 
needs and shifting resources to produce such goods and services. Here, it is imperative to 
further  efforts  toward  cultivating  overseas  demand  and  capturing  domestic  demand. Given 
that emerging economies are the driving force of global economic growth, it is imperative not 
just  to  accelerate  exports  but  also  to  increase  production  in  those  areas.  While  Japanese 
firms’  aggregate  income  associated  with  foreign  direct  investment  and  M&A  activity  is  not 
included in the GDP, it will lead to an increase in the GNI, which represents the aggregate 
income earned by Japanese. 
As for domestic demand, efforts are called for that aim to realize potential demand that has 
been  increasing  as  the  aging  of  the  population  proceeds.  In  this  regard,  there  have  been 
some promising episodes. The recent firming in household consumption is not just supported 
by policy measures such as tax credits for the purchase of hybrid cars and other eco-friendly 
cars. It is also supported by firms’ efforts to successfully provide products and services – at 
somewhat  higher  prices  than  usual  –  that  meet  the  diversifying  needs  of  households, 
particularly those of the elderly. 
Related to the aging of the population, the prospects for medical and nursing services will 
become all the more important. In fact, the number of employees in the medical and nursing 
service industry is clearly on an increasing trend over the long run. Moreover, in this industry, 
there are many firms that have only recently started up but have expanded their businesses 
successfully.  However,  given  that  one  often  hears  about  a  lack  of  medical  and  nursing 
services that meet the needs of elderly people who have enough cash, it seems likely that, in 
Japan, either not enough of these services have been provided or not enough progress has 
been made in facilitating an infrastructure that makes the provision of these services possible 
in  view  of  the  potential  demand  arising  from  the  aging  population.  In  fact,  among  leading 
economies, the growth rate of the elderly population during the last 10 years is the highest in 
Japan.  During  the  same  period,  expenditure  related  to  medical  and  nursing  services 
increased  at  the  slowest  pace  in  Japan  (Chart  11).  The  case  for  the  medical  and  nursing 
service industry merely serves to illustrate the point concerning increasing potential demand. 
Indeed,  there  are  a  number  of  opportunities  that  lead  to  the  strengthening  of  economic 
growth potential, such as capturing the diversifying consumer demand and purchasing power 
in  a  rapidly  growing  Asia,  in  addition  to  efforts  dealing  with  resources,  energy,  and 
environmental problems. 
Relationship between strengthening growth potential and overcoming deflation 
Next,  how  should  we  interpret  the  importance  of  strengthening  growth  potential  or  making 
efforts to raise the growth rate of real GDP, and their relationship with raising nominal GDP 
or  overcoming  deflation?  Here,  I  stress  the  importance  of  generating  domestic  demand 
through making efforts to raise economic growth in order to overcome deflation. The reason I 
say this is that it has been the case that prices start to rise as the output gap improves. There 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
were cases in the past where upticks in inflation took place without economic improvement, 
but these occurred as a result of rising import prices – crude oil prices, for example – that 
were  then  passed  on  to  domestic  prices.  We  are  not  waiting  for  such  a  situation  to  take 
place. Of key importance is how to raise growth expectations. 
Will to overcome deflation 
The issue is how we should encourage efforts to raise economic growth in Japan. I believe 
that,  if  Japanese  make  a  collective  effort,  the  goal  of  overcoming  deflation  can  surely  be 
achieved. On this issue, the following two factors provide good starting points. 
The  first  is  that  we  ourselves  need  to  accurately  recognize  the  challenges  facing  Japan. 
While the country still enjoys a fairly high level of income, this will not be sustainable without 
taking  necessary  measures.  The  fundamental  problem  facing  Japan’s  economy  is  its 
declining growth, and deflation is a reflection of such a problem. 
At this juncture, however, neither pessimism nor fatalism is called for. For example, both the 
declining birthrate and the aging population generate strong headwinds for Japan, but they 
are not the fundamental cause of low economic growth and deflation. Delayed responses to 
structural changes such as these and to globalization – a large structural change for Japan – 
are  the  fundamental  causes  of  low  growth  and  deflation.3  Based  on  such  recognition, 
necessary measures will surely be made. 
Second,  be  it  raising  economic  growth  or  overcoming  deflation,  all  economic  entities  
–  including  business  firms,  financial  institutions,  the  government,  and  the  Bank  –  need  to 
share  the  recognition  that  it  is  imperative  that  they  continue  to  exert  themselves  in  their 
respective roles. Without delving into the Schumpeterian view of innovation, the challenging 
spirit  of  enterprises  is  all  the  more  important.  More  concretely,  it  is  necessary  for  firms  to 
switch their fundamental strategy from the “Red Ocean Strategy”, under which they continue 
price competition in the shrinking markets, to the “Blue Ocean Strategy”, under which they 
create  new  markets  and  provide  high  value-added.  If  firms  are  successful  in  raising 
profitability not by cutting costs but by generating value-added, they can pay higher wages to 
their  employees.  Subsequently,  consumers  will  have  higher  incentives  to  purchase  value-
added goods and services; hence, a virtuous circle prevails. The role of financial institutions 
to support such firms’ efforts is also important. 
In  order  to  lay  the  foundation  for  firms  to  demonstrate  their  spirit  of  challenge,  such 
government initiatives as deregulation are also important. I understand that such initiatives 
will move forward steadily through the launch of the comprehensive strategy for the rebirth of 
Japan,  by  mid-2012.  Ultimately,  these  reforms  will  only  move  forward  with  the  help  of  the 
general public’s understanding. In this sense, it is important to build a society, which accepts 
the economy’s metabolism as a concept of values, promotes deregulation to support such 
metabolism,  and  provides  the  safety  net  that  enables  entities  to  embark  on  a  renewed 
challenge. I have touched on the roles of firms, financial institutions, and the government, as 
well  as  the  general  public’s  understanding.  For  our  part,  the  Bank  continues  to  make  its 
utmost  effort  to  overcome  deflation  and  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price 
stability. 
                                                
3  As  for  problems  accompanying  the  aging  of  the  population,  please  see  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “Demographic 
Changes  and  Macroeconomic  Performance:  Japanese  Experiences”  (Opening  Remark  at  2012  BOJ-IMES 
Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, the Bank of Japan), May 30, 2012. 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/data/ko120530a1.pdf 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
The  world  now  faces  a  big  challenge.  Each  country,  including  the  United  States,  those  in 
Europe, and those in emerging economies, also faces respective challenges. Japan is by no 
means an exception. There is commonality among the challenges each country faces, but 
there also are differences. 
Over  the  past  quarter  of  a  century,  Japan  has  gone  through  a  number  of  challenges:  the 
emergence and bursting of the bubble, the outbreak of a financial crisis, corrosive deflation, 
and the rapid progression of an aging population. Japan has faced these challenges much 
earlier than any other leading economies. While we are accustomed to learning lessons from 
overseas  experiences,  these  only  provide  hints  –  not  solutions.  We  ourselves  must  face 
reality, struggle to find solutions, and then put them into effect. Given that Japan managed to 
significantly change its structure of foreign trades, Japanese certainly have the potential to 
adapt to and cope with changes. In conclusion, let me reiterate that the Bank continues to do 
its utmost as a central bank to overcome deflation and achieve sustainable growth with price 
stability. 
Thank you for listening.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
