Mario Draghi: Statistics to deliver price stability and mitigate systemic risk 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Sixth  ECB 
Statistics Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 17 April 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
On behalf of the Executive Board I would like to welcome you to our sixth biennial European 
Central Bank (ECB) statistics conference. I am very pleased to see that the event has once 
more attracted many distinguished participants.  
Let me take the opportunity to share with you some thoughts on the topics on the agenda.  
As  policy-makers  in  the  fields  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  we  are  deeply 
dependent on the work being done to maintain a stream of timely, relevant and reliable data.  
Today and tomorrow you will have the opportunity to discuss ways of further strengthening 
the information basis for the fulfilment of the mandates given to the ECB and the European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).  
Key challenges 
The financial crisis has dramatically increased the need for very timely granular data. And it 
has led to a rethinking of a number of organisational and conceptual aspects in statistics. 
To give just one example, the traditional monetary statistics derived from individual banks’ 
balance sheets are insufficient to gather information on financial groups that operate across 
borders  and  through  non-bank  subsidiaries.  This  is  because  the  monetary  statistics  cover 
only the euro area and do not focus on the various kinds of risk to which banks are exposed 
and the adequacy of their capital in view of these risks. This means that it is vital to collect 
data consolidated at the level of banking groups or insurance groups.  
Some  of  these  data  are  already  available  at  the  national  level  for  micro-supervisory 
purposes, but they are not always comparable across countries. The ECB, the ESRB and the 
three new European supervisory authorities (ESAs) are all working to fill remaining data gaps 
and to meet the challenge of timely, frequent and high-quality data for their macro-prudential 
functions. 
Moreover, there is an increasing need to consider measures of dispersion not just averages, 
and to consider micro data as well as macro aggregates. For financial stability purposes, in 
particular, a wider variety of granular data and indicators are needed, and more emphasis 
needs to be put on data “outliers” and so-called “tail risks”.  
As we have learned, systemic risk may stem from any part of the financial system, including 
the  shadow  banking  sector.  That  is  why  we  also  need  more  data  to  monitor  unregulated 
financial institutions and markets.  
In recent years, significant steps have been taken to identify the data gaps and to fill them by 
gathering more and more detailed quantitative information. But we are just at the beginning 
of this process, and I know that statisticians are all too well aware of the fact that the data 
perimeter may change again in the future.  
It  is  vital  that  the  work  done  at  the  European  Union  level  is  consistent  with  the  worldwide 
dimension.  In  2009,  the  G20  endorsed  a  report  on  “The  Financial  Crisis  and  Information 
Gaps”. That report contains 20 high-level recommendations on the measurement of risks in 
the  financial  sector,  international  financial  linkages  and  the  communication  of  official 
statistics.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Quite some progress has been made in the implementation of these recommendations. For 
example,  accounts  for  economic  sectors,  statistics  on  securities,  and  the  Principal  Global 
Indicators website supported by seven international organisations, including the ECB. But it 
is still necessary to continue with these efforts, in particular on quarterly government finance 
statistics  and  on  the  FSB  common  template  for  systemically  important  global  financial 
institutions. And the transposition of the new rules into all national legal systems needs to 
proceed swiftly. 
The role of statisticians 
Going beyond the pure data challenges, the statistical community is still coming to grips with 
the fact that their work is now more than ever in the spotlight of public debate. “Statistical 
errors” were once something in which only specialists were really interested. Now, they can 
receive headline coverage, sometimes even more so than everything else coming out of both 
official and non-official statistical sources.  
Public  scrutiny  is  good  for  statistics  but  it  also  brings  new  challenges  for  statisticians. 
Alongside  their  more  traditional  role  of  collecting  data  and  assisting  in  the  correct 
interpretation of data, statisticians also need now to be more involved in the communication 
of results – to the markets, to the media and to the wider public. The role of dashboards and 
the  narrative  use  of  data  are  examples  of  tools  where  the  input  of  statisticians  is  clearly 
essential. 
Selected ECB statistical initiatives to fill data gaps 
Together  with  the  rest  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  ECB  is  undertaking  a  number  of  important 
statistical initiatives to support fulfilment of the ECB’s mandate to deliver price stability and 
the  ESRB’s  mandate  to  mitigate  systemic  risk.  The  initiatives  will  also  help  other 
policy-makers and decision-makers.  
Let me briefly mention three of these initiatives:  
First, the Eurosystem is developing a Securities Holdings Statistics database. The financial 
crisis has highlighted the lack of transparency  in a number of financial markets as well as 
difficulties  in  assessing  financial  exposures  and  linkages  between  institutions.  Securities 
holdings represent a field where exposures are often concentrated, and a lack of sufficiently 
comprehensive, consistent and granular information has been identified.  
The  aim  of  developing  a  detailed  dataset  on  securities  holdings  is  to  combine  holdings  of 
large  players  in  the  euro  area  with  information  on  the  individual  issuers  across  the  world. 
This will provide a potentially very useful tool for both monetary policy and macro-prudential 
analysis. 
Second,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  extending  its  database  to  provide  more  detailed 
information  on  the  activities  of  financial  institutions  and  instruments.  This  covers  more 
detailed  balance  sheet  information  on  banks  but  also  on  investment  funds,  insurance 
corporations  and  pension  funds.  Complex  securitisation  operations,  which  played  a  major 
role  in  the  financial  crisis,  are  reflected  in  new  data  on  the  activity  of  financial  vehicles 
resident in the euro area.  
Information on who is lending to whom in the euro area economy can help us to understand 
the process of financial intermediation better. It is now published on a quarterly basis in the 
matrix  of  the  integrated  sector  accounts.  The  provision  of  quarterly  information  on 
cross-border holdings of financial assets and liabilities by euro area residents allows users to 
detect cross-border exposures. 
Third, the Eurosystem is amending its statistical legal acts to align its economic and financial 
statistics with the recently revised international statistical standards. These revised standards 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
aim at achieving consistency between domestic sector accounts and statistics for the rest of 
the  world.  This  consistency  will  give  users  a  much  more  complete  view  of  inter-linkages 
between the rest of the world and the domestic sectors of the economy.  
Reporting burdens 
The ECB is well aware that closing information gaps requires significant efforts by all parties 
involved – the statisticians, the reporting agents and the data users. It is also clear now more 
than ever that a lack of good quality information on which to base decisions can be far more 
costly to society than the collection of new, additional data.  
In any case, all data collections by the Eurosystem are subject to a prior, strict “merits and 
cost” procedure. Importantly too, there is a strong emphasis on ensuring that there are no 
double collections of the same information by different statistical authorities and that, as far 
as possible, existing information serves multiple purposes.  
These data collections must be detailed and comprehensive enough to meet various current 
and potentially future statistical needs. When banks or other agents report the raw data, the 
compilation  of  aggregates  and  distribution  measures  for  monetary  policy,  macro-prudential 
and  other  statistical  purposes  can be  done  by  the  respective  statisticians  and  be  used  for 
several  purposes.  The 
reporting  agents 
these  compilation  
exercises – saving them resources and cost.  
Of  course,  this  requires  effective  coordination  between  the  various  statistical  authorities  to 
ensure their data needs are matched. As an example, the ECB is working with the ESRB and 
the ESAs aiming to achieve the highest possible coordination and synergies with regard to 
data for supervisory purposes, macro-prudential analysis and monetary policy.  
A good example of this is the recent collaboration of the European System of Central Banks 
and the European Banking Authority (EBA) through the Joint Expert Group on Reconciliation 
of credit institutions’ statistical and supervisory reporting requirements. The second edition of 
the group’s report has just been published on the websites of the ECB and the EBA.  
The problems faced in such initiatives are often very complex, and progress takes time. For 
example,  as  supervisory  data  on  consolidated  group  structures  are  currently  not  fully 
harmonised within the European Union, efforts are needed to make these data comparable 
across  countries  and  time.  The  quality  and  timeliness  of  such  data  requires  efficient  data 
transmission and processing between different organisations.  
thus  can  be  spared 
Confidentiality 
One  of  the  thorniest  issues  in  such  coordinated  activities  concerns  the  confidentiality  of 
individual data, and supervisory data in particular.  
The protection of confidentiality is sacrosanct for all statistical activities. It is enshrined in the 
relevant legal texts of the ECB and it is central in standard practices for all official statistics. 
Where  “Chinese  walls”  need  to  exist,  they  are  strictly  respected.  Reporting  agents  should 
know and should have the right to know where the confidential information they are providing 
is to be used.  
But a big effort is needed to ensure the harmonisation of divergent practices in the protection 
of  data  and  sometimes  conflicting  legal  texts  in  the  different  fields  of  competence  and  in 
different countries.  
Restrictive  “blanket”  confidentiality  rules  that  cover  all  types  of  information,  irrespective  of 
whether there are real risks of a breach of confidentiality, are often counterproductive. They 
end up not only being damaging to information sharing and disclosure, but also to the real 
protection of confidentiality where and when this is needed. These rules confuse what is truly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
confidential and what needs strong protection with what is possibly market sensitive or what 
is simply inconvenient.  
So here is yet another area of activity on which statisticians and legal experts need to focus. 
They  need  to  ensure  that  legal  frameworks  and  existing  practices  find  the  right  balance 
between the need for confidentiality and the possibility of data sharing.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. As I hope all of my remarks have illustrated, statistics is a core activity of 
policy-making,  and  central  banking  in  particular.  Right  now,  it  is  also  a  highly  dynamic 
activity. 
I  personally  attach  great  importance  to  progress  in  the  areas  I  have  mentioned.  I  am 
convinced that your discussions today and tomorrow will offer valuable contributions on how 
best to face the challenges and how to take advantage of the opportunities.  
Producing high-quality statistics on the financial sector remains a core task of a central bank. 
It is a central input not only for decision-making processes but also for the communication of 
our decisions, and thus, for the credibility of our actions.  
In light of these challenges, the central bank statisticians of the future will have to serve both 
areas – the pursuit of price stability as well as the support of financial stability. 
I  wish  you  a  very  fruitful  conference  and  very  much  look  forward  to  the  results  of  your 
deliberations. 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
