Jwala Rambarran: Financial inclusion in the Caribbean 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Caribbean conference on financial inclusion “From agenda to action”, Port of 
Spain, 28 August 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I thank the Commonwealth Secretariat for the invitation to speak at this important Caribbean 
Conference on Financial Inclusion, an issue that has jumped quite quickly to the front burner 
for policymakers and financial regulators, and which is now integral to the G-20 international 
economic agenda.  
Indeed,  the  growing  priority  placed  on  unlocking  the  economic  and  social  potential  of  the 
“unbanked” is illustrated in the fact that more than 60 countries have implemented financial 
inclusion  reforms  in  recent  years.  In  addition,  financial  regulators  from  over  25  developing 
and  emerging  market  countries  have  endorsed  the  2011  Maya  Declaration  on  Financial 
Inclusion,  the  first  global  and  measurable  set  of  commitments  to  foster  greater  financial 
inclusion. More governments are expected to endorse the Maya Declaration over the coming 
year.  
I believe that a convenient starting point for my remarks is to first clarify what we mean by the 
term  “financial  inclusion”  since  there  is  no  universally  accepted  definition  of  financial 
inclusion. Some definitions imply that all persons should have access to financial services; 
others  define  a  vulnerable  group,  usually  with  lower  income  or  the  poor,  as  the  target  of 
inclusion.  
A definition that I consider appropriate for the purpose of policy is the one used by the World 
Bank. “Financial inclusion refers to efforts to expand public access to and usage of tailored 
financial services”. By this definition, the scale of the financial inclusion challenge is daunting. 
Almost  half  of  the  world’s  adults  –  an  estimated  2.5  billion  people  –  lack  access  to  basic 
financial services.  
Imagine what it would be like if you had no access to banking services or credit; if you did not 
understand how mortgages or credit cards work, or if you had no way to save some of your 
earnings to invest in your education or to start a business.  
Imagine if you were cut off from opportunities to improve your economic well-being against 
illness, accidents, theft and unemployment, and, over time, to escape poverty.  
This, Ladies and Gentlemen, is the case of those who endure financial exclusion. Sadly, the 
global economic crisis, which is now in its fifth year, has worsened the plight of those who 
face financial exclusion, preventing even more of the world’s poor from gaining a foothold on 
an important ladder out of poverty.  
In  my  Remarks  this  morning,  I  will  first  share  my  perspective  on  why  financial  inclusion 
matters to  our  economic  development  in  the  Caribbean.  Second,  I  will  briefly  describe  the 
efforts of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago to promote financial inclusion, focusing on 
the Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman, which is the only such Ombudsman Office 
in  the  Caribbean,  and  on  the  National  Financial  Literacy  Program,  which  is  another 
pioneering 
the 
Commonwealth Secretariat. I will end with some key messages for moving financial inclusion 
issues from agenda to action.  
that  has  received  strong  support 
the  Caribbean 
initiative 
from 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Financial inclusion in the Caribbean  
Ladies and Gentlemen, for most people, having an account at a financial institution not only 
serves as an entry point into the formal financial sector, but also meets their core financial 
needs.  
For some time, rigorous, objective and reliable indicators of how people save, borrow, make 
payments,  and  manage risk  had  been  lacking for  most  countries. In  April  2012,  the World 
Bank’s Development Research Group released the Global Findex database, which provides 
some systematic indicators of financial inclusion in almost 150 countries.  
Unfortunately,  the  Global  Findex  covers  only  2  countries  in  the  Caribbean  –  Haiti  and 
Trinidad  and  Tobago.  It  is,  therefore,  very  difficult  to  know  about  the  overall  reach  of  the 
Caribbean financial sector – the extent of financial inclusion and the degree to which such 
groups  as  the  poor,  women  and  youth  are  excluded  from  the  region’s  formal  financial 
systems.  So, I  will  use  the  available  data  that  covers  what  is  considered  a  relatively  high-
income country (Trinidad and Tobago) and a low-income country (Haiti) to give some sense 
of the financial inclusion gap across Caribbean countries.  
While  about  half  of  all  adults  around  the  world  have  an  account  with  a  formal  financial 
institution – a bank, credit union, cooperative, post office or micro finance institution – within 
the Caribbean the limited data suggest a large variation in account penetration. In Trinidad 
and Tobago, more than 75 percent of adults report having an account at a formal financial 
institution. On the other hand, in Haiti, almost 80 percent of adults are “unbanked” (that is, 
they do not have an account at a formal financial institution).  
Not  surprisingly,  the  gap  between  both  countries  is  very  wide  from  an  income  distribution 
perspective.  In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  adults  in  the  richest  income  quintile  are  as  likely  as 
those  in  the  lowest  income  quintile  to  have  an  account  at  a  formal  financial  institution.  In 
Haiti, adults in the highest income quintile are six times as likely to have a formal account as 
those in the poorest income quintile.  
Financial inclusion also differs in important ways by individual characteristics such as gender, 
education level and age. The data suggests that, in the Caribbean, men are more likely than 
women to have an account at a financial institution, though the gender gap in account use is 
relatively wide in Trinidad and Tobago, but not in Haiti. While 82 percent of men in Trinidad 
and Tobago have an account, only 70 percent of women do. In Haiti, 23 percent of men have 
an account while 21 percent of women do.  
In both Trinidad and Tobago, and Haiti, adults with at least a secondary education are more 
likely to report having an account at a formal financial institution than those with a primary 
education or less.  
In Haiti, older adults ages 25–64 are five times more likely to report having an account at a 
formal  financial  institution  than  young  adults  ages  15–24.  This  situation  is  reversed  in 
Trinidad and Tobago, where young adults are as likely as older adults to have an account.  
In  many  Caribbean  countries  with  the  deepening  of  the  financial  sector,  more  financial 
services, especially credit, is now provided to individuals and enterprises. If one compares 
the  ratio  of  private  sector  credit  to  GDP  –  a  main  indicator  of  financial  depth  –  to  the 
indicators  of  account  penetration,  it  shows  a  positive  but  imperfect  relationship.  In  other 
words, Caribbean financial systems can become deep without delivering access to all.  
I believe that we should all reflect on this cautionary note. The current economic challenge 
facing  the  Caribbean  is  how  to  reinvigorate  and  sustain  growth  while  reducing  high 
unemployment  and  poverty  rates,  restoring  fiscal  and  debt  sustainability,  and  securing  a 
more sustainable external position in an increasingly competitive global environment.  
Unless growth is enhanced and debt reduced, Caribbean economies are at risk of eroding 
the social gains of the past three decades and curtailing any meaningful progress towards 
financial inclusion.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Central bank’s efforts to strengthen financial inclusion in Trinidad and Tobago  
For many central banks, financial inclusion is now seen as a complement to their financial 
stability  goals.  More  importantly,  the  absence  of  strong  financial  consumer  protection  may 
severely  erode  the  benefits  of  expanded  financial  inclusion,  even  threatening  financial 
stability. In fact, the third commitment of the 2011 Maya Declaration on Financial Inclusion 
recognizes  consumer  protection  and  empowerment  as  “key  pillars  of financial inclusion 
efforts to ensure that all people are included in their country’s financial sector”.  
In this regard, Trinidad and Tobago is seen as a frontrunner in the Caribbean, establishing 
the  first  and  only  financial  services  ombudsman  scheme  in  the  region.  In  May  2003,  the 
Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  established  the  Office  of  Banking  Services 
Ombudsman to facilitate the resolution of complaints from individuals and small businesses 
with respect to banking services. The Ombudsman’s mandate was expanded in May 2005 to 
include  oversight  of  the  insurance  industry,  and  the  Office  renamed  to  the  Office  of  the 
Financial Services Ombudsman.  
In  the  case  of  the  banks,  the  Ombudsman  is  empowered  to  treat  with  specific  types  of 
complaints  involving  deposit  and  loan  accounts;  investment  services,  trusts  and  mutual 
funds.  Outside  the  Ombudsman’s  terms  of  reference,  however,  are  complaints  related  to 
interest rates, fees and charges and other pricing decisions.  
The  Ombudsman’s  jurisdiction,  in  the  case  of  the  insurance  sector,  covers  life  policies, 
individual  annuity  products,  fire  and  general  insurance  and  third  party  property  damage 
claims  (up  to  $50,000)  under  motor  insurance  policies.  However,  the  complaint  must  not 
involve a company’s risk management policies, product pricing or interest rates.  
Despite its limited jurisdiction, the Ombudsman’s Office can claim many successes over its 
near  decade  of  operations.  The  number  of  qualifying  banking  complaints  referred  to  the 
Financial Ombudsman amounted to 215 over the past nine years. The number of qualifying 
complaints against the insurance companies referred to the Office amounted to 1,792 over 
the period 2005 through 2011, most of which were related to motor vehicle insurance.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  instructive  to  note  that  the  Ombudsman  has  been  able  to 
achieve an  impressive 94 percent resolution rate for banking complaints and a 97 percent 
resolution  rate  for  insurance  complaints.  The  objective,  confidential  and  speedy  dispute 
resolution mechanisms of the Financial Ombudsman are no doubt major contributing factors 
to these accomplishments.  
Notwithstanding these successes, there is a genuine concern that the Ombudsman’s Office 
lacks “teeth”. Upgrading the existing regime of financial consumer protection in Trinidad and 
Tobago  requires  that  we  expand  the  Ombudsman’s  mandate  and  empower  the  Office. 
Ultimately, this will require a change in legislation from a voluntary scheme to one enshrined 
in law.  
In  the  meantime,  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  is  preparing  a  Strategic  Plan  which 
would give consideration to:  
1.  
Removing the current limitations in the scope of services for addressing complaints 
that come under the Ombudsman;  
Expanding  the  Ombudsman’s  mandate  to  have  oversight  over  new  financial 
institutions  –  Credit  Unions,  the  Unit  Trust  Corporation,  Pension  Schemes  and 
Mutual Funds;  
Formalizing the Office’s consumer protection programs in line with the World Bank’s 
Good  Practices  for  Financial  Consumer  Protection,  and  the  G-20  High  Level 
Principles for Financial Consumer Protection, which are useful reference points;  
Resourcing  the  Office  with  the  skill  sets  and  talent  consistent  with  the  increased 
scope and expanded mandate.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  work  of  the  Financial  Ombudsman’s  Office  is  complemented  by  that  of  the  National 
Financial  Literacy  Program  (NFLP),  another  ground-breaking  project  for  the  Caribbean 
region. In January 2007, the Central Bank launched the NFLP to give citizens of Trinidad and 
Tobago  the  knowledge  and  skills  to  understand  the  risks  and  rewards  of  using  financial 
products and services.  
As  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  and  the  CL  Financial  debacle  harshly  illustrate, 
consumers who can make informed decisions about financial products and services not only 
serve their own best interests, but collectively they can also help promote financial stability.  
For  a  country  in  which  the financial  sector  accounts for  almost  one-fifth  of  the  non-energy 
economy  and  employs  close  to  one-tenth  of  the  non-energy  workforce,  many  citizens  in 
Trinidad and Tobago still have limited knowledge about basic financial practices and money 
management.  
Indeed, the results of a 2007 financial literacy survey conducted by the NFLP revealed that a 
worrying 36 percent of respondents were classified as having a low financial literacy. Even 
more worrisome is that just over one-fifth of respondents reported that they had defaulted on 
their financial commitments for 3 months or more at least once during the past five years.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the 2007 survey took place at a time when Trinidad and Tobago was 
experiencing  its  third  energy  boom,  marked  by  a  period  of  strong  economic  growth, 
increasing employment and rising incomes. Since then, the world has been grappling with a 
global financial crisis which has impacted the economic fortunes of Trinidad and Tobago.  
Despite the NFLP’s impressive outreach efforts, Trinidad and Tobago’s prolonged economic 
slowdown and tepid recovery have undoubtedly forced lower and moderate income families 
to make some very difficult financial choices about budgeting, saving for emergencies and 
even postponing retirement, for which many are still not well prepared. We need to ramp up 
our financial literacy program.  
As a result, the NFLP has begun preparations to launch a follow up national financial literacy 
survey  during  the  first  quarter  of  2013.  This  survey  would  be  consistent  with  the  fourth 
commitment under the 2011 Maya Declaration on Financial Inclusion which states “making 
evidence-based  financial  inclusion  policy  a  priority  by  collecting  and  analyzing 
comprehensive  data,  tracking  the  changing  profile  of  financial  inclusion,  and 
producing comparable indicators in the network”.  
The findings of the follow up survey would not only help the NFLP to determine its impact in 
raising  national  awareness  of  personal  finance  issues,  but  also  better  target  its  financial 
literacy  training  interventions  to  more  vulnerable  segments  of  the  population.  The  survey 
results would also complement that of the Global Findex, giving local policymakers a richer 
data set from which to craft a national financial inclusion strategy.  
In  this  regard,  the  Central  Bank  again  looks  forward  to  working  with  the  Commonwealth 
Secretariat  in  developing  and  taking  the  NFLP’s  interventions  to  the  next  level  of  financial 
inclusion and financial education.  
From agenda to action  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen, I  have  noted the  wide  scope  of  this  Conference  agenda  and I am 
most impressed with the calibre of the presenters. I have no doubt that you have the right 
ingredients for stimulating and fruitful discussions over the next two days.  
But we must be realistic. There is no silver-bullet solution to the challenge of empowering the 
excluded. The expansion of financial services as a priority is only a start. Achieving the ideal 
of  full  financial  inclusion  in  the  Caribbean  will  require  sustained  action  from  governments 
across the region.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Please allow me to make three suggestions for us here in the Caribbean to move financial 
inclusion  matters  from  agenda  to  action.  In  all  three  areas,  I  see  the  Commonwealth 
Secretariat playing an active role.  
First, we must demonstrate a strong commitment to developing national  financial inclusion 
strategies.  The  evidence  suggests  that  comprehensive  programs  and  clear  mandates  can 
accelerate progress towards financial inclusion.  
As  I  indicated  earlier,  more  than  25  developing  countries  have  signed  onto  the  Maya 
Declaration on Financial Inclusion. No Caribbean country is yet on that list, although many 
countries already have elements of a financial inclusion strategy in place.  
I encourage Caribbean financial regulators to build on these components to create a national 
platform for financial inclusion consistent with the Maya Declaration. Different countries will 
inevitably  progress  at  different  rates.  But  it  is  progress  within  countries,  not  between 
countries, that matter.  
Second, we must inform our financial inclusion strategies with “demand side” data directly 
from users of financial services (e.g. individuals and firms). This information is important to 
understand  financial  needs  (met  and  unmet)  of  users,  barriers  encountered  when  seeking 
formal financial services, and to provide socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of 
users.  Demand  side  data  will  help  policymakers  to  more  accurately  diagnose  the  state  of 
financial  inclusion,  agree  on  targets,  identify  existing  barriers,  craft  effective  policies,  and 
monitor policy impact.  
I urge more Caribbean countries to actively participate in the next round of the Global Findex 
survey and to launch their own national financial literacy education surveys, so as to better 
inform the design and sequencing of their financial inclusion strategies.  
Finally, we must ensure that financial inclusion reform is “Responsible”. Financial inclusion 
strategies  need  to  include  sufficient  focus  on  responsible  finance,  with  financial  capability 
and  consumer  protection  as  central  themes.  In  this  framework,  consumers  must  take 
responsibility  for  their  financial  decisions.  It  is  my  respectful  view  that  advancing  work  on 
establishing  Financial  Ombudsman  Schemes  across  the  Caribbean  region  is  critical  to 
building more responsible finance.  
Conclusion  
In closing, Ladies and Gentlemen, we must recognize that the road to financial inclusion is 
long and challenging, but models for accelerating the journey are emerging.  
Let  me  assure  you  all  of  the  continued  support  and  collaboration  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Trinidad and Tobago in closing the gap and reaching full financial inclusion, every step of the 
way.  
I, thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
