Fernando Restoy: Remarks on banking union 
Remarks by Mr Fernando Restoy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the round table 
“Systemic  risk  and  securities  markets”,  II  International  Conference  on  Securities  Markets, 
held  by  the  Comisión  Nacional  del  Mercado  de  Valores  (CNMV),  Madrid,  14  September 
2012. 
 Let me first  thank  the organisers for  their kind  invitation  to  participate  in this event held by the 
CNMV, of  which  I was Vice-Chairman from  2008 until  my  recent  appointment  in the Banco de 
España. I also had the privilege to participate in the highly successful conference  organised  in 
2011. A glance at the quality  of  the papers  and speakers in the programme of this conference 
is  sufficient  to  confirm  that  the  organisers have succeeded in maintaining  the  high  standards 
achieved  last  year.  Our  Chairman  today,  Oscar  Arce, deserves much credit  for that. I am sure 
that the CNMV’s new top  management – who will be taking over in a few weeks – will continue 
to support  this event, as the President Julio Segura and myself did the first two editions. 
The  current  financial  crisis  has  shown  up  numerous  deficiencies  in  the  functioning  of  the 
global  economic  and  financial  system.  Many  of  those  deficiencies  are  the  consequence  of 
imperfect rules,  policy  mistakes  and  inappropriate conduct by  private  agents.  Some  of those 
deficiencies  are the  subject  of  an on-going  policy  debate  and  of  regulatory  reform which, with 
varying degrees of ambition, is taking place in different jurisdictions. 
However,  in  addition  to  imperfect  rules and  policy  actions,  the  crisis  has  revealed a series of 
institutional  deficiencies  which  need to  be eliminated in order to  restore economic  and financial 
stability. 
The clearest example in this  regard is probably  the European institutional  framework.  Over the 
last three years we have witnessed how the perception  of country risks has climbed to very high 
levels as a consequence  of  both  sovereign credit  risk  as well  as the  so-called redenomination 
risk. This development  has impeded  the adequate functioning  of monetary union  by  leading  to 
sizeable differences  in  the  financing  conditions  for  agents  located  in different States within the 
monetary union and by instigating the renationalisation of financial markets. 
There can  be  no  doubt  that  much  of  what  has  happened  is  directly  linked  to  the  significant 
macroeconomic  and  financial  imbalances  accumulated  by  several euro area countries,  as well 
as to  the  emergence  of  vulnerabilities  within  the  financial  sector.  It  is  also  clear  that the main 
remedy for those destabilising developments lies  in  effective adjustment  of  domestic  policies, 
which  is currently  being  implemented  in those  countries  suffering  the most significant stress. 
But,  at  the  same  time,  the  elimination  of  any  perception  of  redenomination  risks  can  only be 
fully accomplished  if  – in addition  to  the  required  domestic  policy  action  – the central bank  is 
fully  and  credibly  committed  to  intervening  in  sovereign  markets  as  far  as  is necessary  to 
In  that  regard,  the  recent 
avoid 
announcement  by  the  European  Central  Bank  of  its  determination  to  conduct  unlimited 
intervention  in  the  sovereign  secondary  markets,  provided  effective  conditionality  is  fulfilled, 
constitutes  a significant step towards the normalisation of market conditions in the euro area. 
Yet,  the  return  to  a  smoothly  operating  monetary  union  cannot  be  completely  achieved  by 
simply  relying  on  ad-hoc  reactions  by  policy-makers.  Institutional  arrangements  must  be 
reviewed  in  order  to  restore  adequate  incentives  for  domestic  authorities  to  prevent  the 
reemergence  of  destabilising  imbalances  and  to  ensure  that  any  residual  risks  arising  in 
specific  jurisdictions  that  could  affect  the  area  as  a  whole  would  be  addressed  by  integrated 
mechanisms  operating  at  the  euro area level. The recent  changes  introduced  in the European 
Union to strengthen the requirements and the mechanism for the surveillance of domestic  fiscal 
policies  and structural  reforms, together  with  the creation  of the  EFSF  and  the  ESM  –  which 
we  now  know  will  be  soon  be  launched  –  are  good  examples  of  the  required  institutional 
reforms. 
the  pricing  of  sovereign  risk  becoming  self-fulfilling. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
At the same time,  a specific  source  of  risks for  the smooth  functioning  of  monetary  union that 
needs  to be  addressed directly is  the  financial  instability experienced in  specific jurisdictions. 
As  we  have  seen  in  the  last  few  years,  the  deterioration  of  the  perceived  solvency  of 
financial  institutions  located  in  specific  countries  within  the  monetary  union can  have  spill-
over effects across  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole,  can  contribute to  a disorderly functioning 
of wholesale markets and can put great stress on the public finances  of  the  countries  affected. 
Consequently,  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions  is  of  systemic  importance  within  the 
monetary  union  and  should  therefore  be  preserved through  the appropriate  integrated  crisis 
prevention and resolution mechanism. 
Against  this  background, a  consensus  has  emerged  of  unprecedented strength  on  the need 
to  take  steps  to  create  a  banking  union.  The  first  step  would  be  the  adoption  of  a  single 
supervisory  mechanism.  A  regulatory  proposal for  such  a  mechanism  has  been released this 
week by the European Commission. 
The  proposal  has  three  main  features.  First,  the  assignment  to  the  ECB  of  supervisory 
responsibilities  for  all  banks  in  the  euro  area,  and  possibly  also  for  banks  in  countries 
outside the euro zone  willing to enter into cooperation arrangements with the ECB. Second, the 
adoption  of  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  the  ECB’s  supervisory  tasks  are  strictly  separated 
from  the  conduct  of  its  monetary  policy.  Third,  the  involvement  of  national  supervisors  in  the 
preparation and implementation of decisions. 
The  proposal is  in  my  view  well  founded. In  particular, it  makes  sense  to subject all financial 
institutions in the euro area to a single supervisory mechanism. Recent experience  shows  that 
limited  links  to  other  European 
the  instability  of  medium-sized  or  small  institutions  with 
institutions  may  sometimes  generate  disruption  at  both  the  national  and  the  euro  area  level. 
Moreover,  the  coexistence  of  different  supervisory  regimes  for  institutions  sharing  the  same 
market place may generate competitive distortions, which should be avoided. 
Similarly,  it  is  important to  establish  institutional mechanisms  to  mitigate  any  potential conflict 
between the objectives pursued by the supervisory and the monetary policy functions. I  believe 
that  the  crisis  has  already  helped  to  allay  our  concerns  about  the  extent  to  which  those 
conflicts  could  actually  arise  in  practice.  Indeed,  most  central  banks  have  understood  that 
financial  stability  considerations  should  be taken into  account  when designing  monetary  policy 
measures without  challenging  the  priority  that  should  be  given to  the  price  stability objective. 
In  any  case,  from  a  procedural point of  view  it  seems reasonable for  the Governing Council 
of  the  ECB  –  the  interest-rate  setting  body  –  to  make  relatively  extensive  delegations  to  the 
Supervisory  Board  envisaged in the draft  regulation as the operational body  through  which  the 
ECB will exercise its new supervisory functions. 
Finally, on the involvement of national supervisory authorities, the draft regulation envisages  a 
model  under  which  the  ECB  will  have  ultimate  responsibility for  the  tasks conferred on  it  by 
functions,  the  ECB  will  however  take  full 
the  new  regulation.  In  performing  the  new 
advantage  of  the  expertise  of  national  authorities.  The  principle  under which national  central 
banks  and  supervisory  authorities are  to help  in  preparing and implementing  decisions  is  an 
essential  ingredient  of  the  new  supervisory  mechanism.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  probably 
reasonable  to  develop  that  model  in  such  a  way  that  the  principle  of  delegation  is  flexibly 
used so as to  take into  account  the different  nature of the supervised  financial  institutions and 
the  specific  supervisory  functions  to  be  performed.  Although  the  involvement  of  national 
authorities should always  be required, the ECB should  normally  participate more  directly  when 
institutions of  systemic  importance and actions of a strategic nature are involved. 
The  draft regulation foresees  that the  ECB  will start performing its functions through national 
supervisors  already  in  January  next  year  and  that  the  new  system  will  be  fully operational  in 
2014. That is quite  a demanding  timetable.  I can well  understand  the need to speed things up 
as  much  as  possible  as  the  new  system  should  already  be  being  used  to  help  solve  the 
problems  the  euro  area  is  facing  now.  That  includes  the  possibility  it  will  open  for  direct 
recapitalisation of financial institutions  requiring public  aid by the European Stability Mechanism, 
thereby helping to mitigate the destabilising association of sovereign and financial risk. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
their 
importantly,  the  mitigation  of  destabilising  financial  risks  and  of 
It  is  probably  reasonable to  expect  that  the  overall supervisory  framework  should  evolve over 
time  beyond  January  2014.  In  particular  the  distribution  of  responsibilities  between the centre 
and the national authorities could naturally change as a result of the accumulation  of expertise in 
the ECB and the progress  made in developing  the other  two pillars  of  banking  union:  namely, 
an integrated  resolution  regime and a common  deposit guarantee scheme. 
Indeed,  the  idea  that  a  fully  effective  banking  union  requires  also  the  establishment  of those 
two  additional  components is  quite  compelling  in  my  view.  Moreover,  it  could  be argued  that 
the  combination  of  a  centralised  supervisory  mechanism  with  decentralised  resolution 
schemes may generate  some dysfunctionalities and incentive compatibility issues. 
impact  on 
More 
sovereign  risks  requires  not  only  a  strong  crisis  prevention  scheme,  but  also  an  effective 
common  crisis  resolution  regime.  Even  if  banks  are  supervised  under  a  common  system, 
episodes  of  financial  distress  may  still  deteriorate  the  perceived  cohesion  of  the  eurozone if 
purely  domestic mechanisms  are  used  to  restructure  or  resolve  weak  banks  and  to protect 
depositors.  That is conceptually  contradictory  with the goals of a banking union. In that context, 
the communication  by the Commission  to shortly make legislative proposals in this  area  above 
and  beyond the  Directives  which are  currently under  discussion is obviously welcomed. 
In  any  event,  there  is  a  lot  of  work  to  be  done  in  the  short  term  to  put  in  place  the  new 
important  differences  remain  between  the 
unified  supervisory  mechanism.  At  present, 
characteristics  of  the  national  supervisory  models  which  affect  powers,  means,  practices and 
procedures. The  use  of permanent on-site supervision, the link between off-site supervision  and 
on-site  inspections  or  the  powers  of  the  supervisory  authority  (if  any)  in relation to accounting 
regulations,  are  simply  some  examples.  Differences  between  national  supervisors  also  exist 
regarding  the  availability  of  data.  To give  you  an  example, Central Credit Registers – which in 
our experience are a highly valuable source of information for prudential supervision purposes – 
are not yet available in all jurisdictions. 
The  EBA  has  played  a  very  important  role  by  improving  cooperation  between  national 
supervisors  and promoting  supervisory  convergence.  But  these improvements  fall  short  of  the 
needs  of  an  effectively  unified  supervisory  system.  Substantial  and  swift  progress  in this field 
is therefore needed. 
Let  me  just  finish  by  making  a  general  comment. It  is  obvious that the  creation  of  a banking 
union  poses  enormous  challenges  for  Europe  that  will  require  strong  political support  and 
effective  cooperation  among  all  authorities  involved. The good  news  is  that  if  we  look  at  the 
process  of  European  integration  from  a  historical  perspective,  we  realise that  this  is  not  the 
first  time  that  the  way  forward  has  been  highly  complex. And,  past experience  has regularly 
shown  that  the  response  has  always  been  to  deepen  integration and  increase  the  transfer  of 
national  powers  to  the  Union  as  the  best  –  and  possibly  only  –  way  to  preserve  all  the 
achievements made so far.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
