Peter Praet: The TARGET2-Securities Framework Agreement 
Address by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the event marking the first signatures to the T2S Framework Agreement, Frankfurt am Main, 
8 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is no exaggeration to say that today is a historic date for the T2S project. It marks the end 
of more than two years of negotiations on the T2S Framework Agreement, one of the most 
critical legal documents underlying the whole project.  
The President reminded us in his address of how important it is to cooperate if we want to 
achieve our Single Market objectives. T2S is a clear example of the very good cooperation 
amongst  stakeholders  in  the  post-trade  industry:  as  of  today,  the  spirit  of  the  project  will 
move  on  from  negotiation  to  cooperation.  We  shall  work  together  with  the  CSDs  to 
implement T2S – for the benefit of the European financial markets.  
I  would  now  like  to  congratulate  the  CSDs  that  signed  the  Framework  Agreement  today. 
They have demonstrated their willingness to adapt to change. They will play a central role 
until T2S goes live by preparing and conducting the testing of the system, and they will help 
us to ensure that the operations of T2S run smoothly from the beginning. This is especially 
true  for  those  CSDs  that  will  transfer  their  operations  to  T2S  as  part  of  the  first  migration 
waves.  It  is  in  acknowledgement  of  this  contribution  that  those  CSDs  will  be  entitled  to 
financial incentives reserved for the early joiners . I am delighted to welcome them to T2S. 
The  CSDs  that  signed  the  Framework  Agreement  today  represent  about  two-thirds  of  the 
total settlement volume in the euro area. In addition, several other CSDs are expected to join 
over the next few weeks, once their feasibility assessments are complete. In total, we expect 
to reach more than 90% – possibly 100% – of the euro settlement volume by June 2012. 
T2S is a truly European project, which is capable of generating great economies of scale and 
of bringing benefits to its users and to Europe as a whole. It is a network business: the larger 
the  volumes  settled  in  T2S,  the  more  benefits  for  all  of  its  participants,  in  terms  of  cost 
reduction  and  collateral  savings.  A  large  participation  in  T2S  will  also  result  in  a  wide 
harmonisation  of  practices  and  procedures  across  Europe  –  harmonisation,  which  will,  in 
turn, bring significant efficiency gains for T2S participants.  
The close involvement of CSDs has been a crucial factor throughout the project so far, and it 
will  become  even  more  crucial  from  now  on.  I  wish  to  join  the  President  in  congratulating 
those who have been involved in the project’s governance.  
T2S  is  an  entirely  new  concept.  It  is  unique  and  nothing  comparable  has  ever  been  done 
before.  From  the  inception  to  the  go‐live,  it  will  have  required  the  engagement  and 
collaboration of numerous different stakeholders, from the industry, from central banks and 
from other public authorities. Effective cooperation is key to the success of T2S. Decisions 
need  to  take  into  account  several  different  points  of  view,  while  ensuring  that  the  final 
outcome meets the objectives set in pursuit of deeper market integration in Europe.  
This  complexity  is  the  reason  why  we  had  to  develop  a  specific  governance  structure  to 
manage the project. Let me dedicate a few words to the governance bodies that have made 
the T2S Framework Agreement a reality: the T2S Programme Board and the CSD Contact 
Group. 
The T2S Programme Board has run the daily management of the project up to now, regularly 
reporting  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  members  of  the 
T2S Programme Board for their dedication and commitment over the past three years. They 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
have coordinated effectively the several work streams constituting the project and fulfilled the 
mandate  they  were  given  by  the  Governing  Council.  They  have  made  an  enormous 
contribution to making the project a success. 
My gratitude also goes to the members of the CSD Contact Group, the main forum for the 
Framework Agreement negotiations, which has played an instrumental role in ensuring that a 
mutually satisfactory agreement could be reached.  
Following  the  signatures  of  the  T2S  Framework  Agreement  in  June,  the  role  of  these  two 
governance  bodies  will  be  assumed  by  their  successor  bodies:  the  T2S  Board  and  the 
CSD Steering Group.  
In this new phase of cooperation, the T2S Board will concentrate on the implementation and 
testing  of  the  T2S  platform,  and  then  on  the  CSD  migration  to  the  new  settlement 
environment.  The  CSD  Steering  Group  will  articulate  and  coordinate  the  views  of  the 
participating CSDs within the T2S governance. A major change to the current setting is that 
the Chair of the CSD Steering Group will be a CSD representative. Together, the two groups 
will cooperate to make sure that T2S delivers on its promises. I trust they will continue the 
good work accomplished so far. 
I would also like to thank the T2S Advisory Group. In the next phase of the project, this group 
will retain its important function of ensuring that T2S delivers in line with market needs. The 
group has provided invaluable advice to the Programme Board and to the Governing Council 
over the past few years. The level of transparency on the T2S project through the Advisory 
Group has been – I believe – unprecedented. This has certainly been one of the key drivers 
of the project’s acceptance amongst CSDs, market participants and political authorities.  
Finally,  I  wish  to  thank  the  High  Level  Group  T2S  as  well  as  the  T2S  teams  both  at  the 
ECB and the 4CB. Their work is not always visible, but it is invaluable.  
Indeed it is thanks to their work “backstage” that the construction of the T2S platform is well 
on track. The system is now over halfway to delivery point and the development and testing 
of the application are proceeding on a firm footing. 
On this basis, and with the signature of the T2S contracts, we now have the solid foundations 
to  continue  building  T2S  and  to  transform  post-trading  in  Europe,  making  it  both  more 
efficient and safer. 
We have taken a major step today towards making T2S happen. In years to come, we will 
see  the  Eurosystem,  participating  CSDs,  and  market  participants  more  widely  working 
together to make this project a success. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
