Choongsoo Kim: 62nd anniversary of the Bank of Korea 
Speech by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, commemorating the Bank of 
Korea’s 62nd anniversary, Seoul, 12 June 2012. 
The following is an unofficial English translation. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
We  are  all  gathered  here  today  to  commemorate  the  62nd  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of 
Korea’s  establishment. We take  pride  in  the  Bank  of  Korea's  dedicated  performance  of  its 
role  as  the  central  bank  of  the  Republic  of  Korea  during  our  economy's  achievement  of 
remarkable  economic  development  in  the  world  over  the  past  half  century,  rising  from  the 
level of one of the poorest countries to reach the threshold of advanced country status, and 
there cannot be even the slightest wavering in our resolution to continue sincerely carrying 
out our duties going forward as well. Exactly one year ago today, in this place, we pledged to 
make the following year’s anniversary ceremony an occasion to confirm the Bank of Korea’s 
heightened stature. We also solemnly expressed it as our call in this age to set up a new 
stature of the Bank of Korea, standing tall in the world upon the foundation of the enduring 
history and tradition built up over the many years since our Bank’s establishment by those 
who  served  before  us. I  in  addition  appealed  to  you  to  set  out together  to  create  a global 
BOK, with the resolve to be reborn – as the Bank had come to complete what is comparable 
to a 60-year life cycle in the Orient and embarked on a new one. Each year we have used 
this  anniversary  ceremony  as  an  opportunity  to  straighten  our  backs  and  reaffirm  our 
determination.  And  at  this  year’s  ceremony  I  would  like  to  look  first  into  the  domestic  and 
external conditions surrounding us, to examine secondly the changing role of central banks 
called for since the global crisis, and to then finally examine the waves of change that all of 
us are together now seeking to push forward. I should like to take this opportunity to reflect 
once  again  on  our  vision  and  resolution,  with  a  “new  self  each  day  and  the  next” 
(日日新又日新)  conviction  embodying  the  self-discipline  to  always  ceaselessly  develop 
oneself further. 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
First of all, let us look at the international economic environment surrounding us. Despite the 
efforts  on  the  parts  of  individual  countries  over  the  past  five  years  the  global  economy 
remains unable to pull itself out of the Global Financial Crisis, referred to as the most severe 
since  the  1930s  “Great  Depression.”  Commenting  on  the  gravity  of  this  economic  crisis, 
some scholars say that the “Great Recession” is underway. Not only is there still no way to 
tell  when  this  crisis  will  end,  but  even  the  conditions  for  its  conclusion  cannot  be  clearly 
defined. The financial crisis that began on Wall Street in the US spread to Europe and has 
turned into a sovereign debt crisis, solutions to which are unfathomable. To prevent future 
outbreaks  of  financial  crisis  the  introduction  of  various  tasks  for  global  financial  reform  is 
being pushed forward, as represented by Basel III, OTC derivatives reforms, publication of 
the  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  and  regulations  associated  with  shadow 
banking. And in this world, where all economies are interconnected, these reform tasks must 
be  applied  in  all  countries  without  exception;  otherwise  the  so-called  regulatory  arbitrage 
issue  will  emerge,  and  the  global  financial  reforms  will  be  unable  to  show  their  desired 
effects. 
If these new regulations are introduced uniformly, however, in a situation where the reality is 
that stages of financial development differ across countries, the issues we will need to worry 
about will likely number more than just one or two, including whether the level of impact and 
strain  on  an  individual  country’s  financial  competitiveness  can  indeed  be  bearable,  and 
whether as a consequence its financial system can be operated smoothly. And although on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the one hand these regulations are expected to be effective in preventing recurrence of the 
kinds  of  financial  crises  observed  to  date,  challenges  will  continue  to  emerge  concerning 
whether future financial crises will indeed come in the same patterns as in the past, and if not 
what crisis defense mechanisms should be devised. 
Worldwide economic uncertainty will not disappear unless there is a convergence of opinions 
among  European  countries  as  to  whether  the  eurozone  system  will  be  preserved  in  its 
current state or take on some new form. The situation urgently requires determination on the 
part  of  political  leaders.  With  regard  to  the  Greece  problem,  I  anticipate  that  the  Greek 
people and the eurozone countries will make wise choices; no matter what political decisions 
are made, however, the fallouts under various possible scenarios may be assumed to have 
already been reflected to some extent in market conditions. There will of course be costs of 
risks  accompanying  political  decisions,  but  we  can  say  that  the  uncertainties  arising  from 
unexpected events have decreased probabilistically compared to in the past. In the case of 
Spain’s troubled banks, which are being highlighted as a problem recently, I hope that the 
decision at last weekend’s European finance ministers’ meeting to provide a massive bailout 
will  provide  a  lead  to  solving  the  problem,  and  expect  that  the  related  governments  and 
financial sectors have developed the capacities for dealing with banking distress, given the 
learning effects related to the manner in which such distress progresses rapidly. 
The problem of whether the single currency system that is the euro will continue to exist may 
be said to hinge on whether a consensus is formed on a project duly recognized since the 
early  days  of  the  system’s  establishment,  i.e.  finding  a  way  for  members  engaging  in 
differentiated  economic  activities  to  appropriately  share  and  shoulder  the  different  benefits 
and costs to each created in the course of their all using a single currency. A pressing issue 
linked to this is the problem of whether all advanced countries’ debt problems will be solved 
and their fiscal policy soundness ultimately achieved. Debates surrounding the effectiveness 
of  Keynesian  policy  are  not  ending.  Moreover,  the  expression  “Keynesian  Populism”  is 
making  an  appearance.  If  austerity  policies  cause  economic  contraction  and  thus  further 
exacerbate  recession, the  issues  then  are  how  far fiscal  soundness  can  be  compromised, 
what the means for expanding government finance unlimitedly are, and what the expected 
effects are. In the past, such discussions took place within the walls of the fiscal authorities; 
since the crisis, however, central banks are also participating in these macroeconomic policy 
discussions. And as I have stressed many times, this is because in overcoming a crisis the 
role of central banks cannot be neglected. 
We have to seriously analyze whether, in the absence of recoveries in the U.S. and Europe 
of  their  own  economic  growth  potentials,  there  is  a  possibility  of  the  current  crisis  being 
resolved  by  any  other  means. With  their  fiscal  spaces  exhausted,  it  is  not  easy  to  expect 
them to come up with any growth-inducing measures on their own. If the quantitative easing 
policies, termed LTRO and QE, are additionally implemented, this should help temporarily in 
for  instance  stabilizing  the  financial  markets  and  enhancing  soundness  by  preventing 
excessive deleveraging on the parts of troubled banks thanks to their securing of liquidity; in 
a situation in which such additional supply of money does not fundamentally lead to credit 
extension to the private sector, however, i.e. even when liquidity is injected it is only financial 
institutions’  soundness  indicators  that  are  improved,  via  purchases  of  government  bonds 
only, what is critical is how measures can be formulated to enable these improvements to be 
transmitted to the real sector so that the economy runs properly and growth is achieved. 
Another real problem is that the political responses to outbreaks of crisis are not swift. When 
trouble  at  a  financial  institution  arises,  potential  problems  that  had  been  latent  materialize 
from  the  moment  trouble  is  first  recognized,  and  their  sizes  then  grow  exponentially,  but 
government policies in response, and particularly in the case when a number of nations are 
involved,  are  bound  to  be  made  slowly  since  political  decisions  require  reconciling  the 
conflicts of interest among individual countries that inevitably arise. In most cases this then 
leads to the inferior, sub-optimal results instead of the optimal ones. Consequently, I would 
say  that  there  is  a  tendency  for  the global  economy  to  face  a  situation  in  which  the  trend 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
shown  is for any problem once it arises to instead of improving rather worsen. And this is 
attributable to the fundamental vulnerability of the global economy, i.e. that we live in a global 
economy but there is no global jurisdiction. 
Inducing of global economic growth through growth in regions with high growth potentials can 
perhaps  be  considered  as  a  shortcut  to  resolving  this  crisis  that  broke  out  in  advanced 
economies.  Why  not  apply  the  basic  rule  of  economic  restructuring,  whereby  capital  and 
labor  in  sectors  having  low  productivity  are  shifted  to  those  with  higher  productivity?  The 
current state of affairs that has resulted is one in which policies are carried out au contraire to 
the economic principles of restructuring, as the world’s capital is now concentrated in its least 
productive areas. In the past as well, the premise of economic recovery was that a certain 
region of the world had to be growing. There is no doubt, for example, that during the Asian 
currency  crisis  U.S.  and  European  economic  growth  contributed  to  the  Asian  economies’ 
recoveries from it. 
According to IMF estimates, emerging Asian economies’ contribution to global GDP growth 
has risen from below the 30% level in the 1970s, to the mid-40% range in the 1980s up until 
the global financial crisis and as high as 50% during the past five years of the crisis, and is 
expected to be maintained at such a level for the time being going forward as well. It follows, 
then,  that  Asia’s  emerging  economies  should  play  a  pivotal  role  in  resolving  the  current 
economic crisis. To this end, we need to ensure above all that emerging economies’ policy 
responses  for  maintaining  growth  are  not  frustrated  due  to  external  risk  factors,  by 
developing measures to minimize the negative spillover effects from the quantitative easing 
policies  in  the  U.S.  and  Europe,  and  hence  preserving  financial  system  stability.  Various 
types of macroprudential measures can be considered as alternatives in this regard. The key 
is  that  emerging  economies  must  take  the  initiative  and  devote  concerted  efforts  to 
convincing  various  international  fora  of  these  proposals  and  to  seeing  them  through.  The 
crisis-stricken  countries  will  not  be  able  to  create  such  an  environment  for  emerging 
economies. I believe that Korea, too, has reached the point where it must take the lead in 
contributing to the creation of such an environment in the international arena, and that the 
Bank of Korea is also not free from this responsibility. 
Dear members of the Bank of Korea, 
I should like us to look now into what changes in central bank monetary policies are implied 
by the changes in the global economic environment we have discussed together so far. Our 
economy has become one in which macroeconomic management including the conduct of 
price  stability,  financial  stability  and  fiscal  policies  cannot  be  effective  when  these  are 
determined separately. Creating an optimal macroeconomic policy mix was certainly a major 
challenge  in  the  past  as  well,  in  terms  of  maximizing  their  impact,  but  as  the  degree  of 
interconnectedness among all sectors has risen it has now become a necessary condition for 
achieving results. The reality today is that most advanced economies have been for a long 
time unable to pull out from the zero-lower bound – which if now were like in the past would 
have raised concerns about an erosion of monetary policy effectiveness due to liquidity traps. 
It is an open secret now that our Economics textbooks need to be rewritten in the wake of the 
global financial crisis. I have emphasized time and again that the global trend has not only 
caused economic borders to disappear, but also removed pre-existing divisions of business 
areas in terms of the varieties of economic activities carried out in them. In this world, whose 
individual economies are all interlinked in one form or another, the strange phenomenon of 
the  tail  wagging  the  body  can  no  longer  be  deemed  exceptional.  It  has  become  more 
important to understand tail risks, which are hard to predict due to their low probability, than it 
is high probability events. What we have to reflect seriously on is the issue of whether an 
event that has occurred was from the tail as originally expected, or whether the shape of the 
distribution had already changed and the event had in fact migrated from the tail to the body 
but we were oblivious of this change in circumstances and had sought to analyze it as a low 
probability event based upon an outdated distribution. We can all see ourselves as facing a 
situation in which even the world’s leading financial institution in the area of risk management 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
suffers huge material and reputational losses on its derivatives transactions, and in  which, 
while  the  financial  industry  is  said  to  have  contributed  to  national  welfare  through  the 
development  of  financial  engineering  we  are  now  instead  intellectually  besieged  by  the 
advances  made  in  it,  i.e.  where  financial  engineering  dominates  the  thinking  of  market 
participants. A situation is unfolding in which it would be difficult for us to discuss monetary 
policy  in  isolation  from  risk  management,  and  in  this  sense  we  can  see  that  an  organic 
relationship  between  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  is  in  the  making.  This  is 
also  the  reason  why  the  central  bank  must  simultaneously  worry  about  both  price  and 
financial stability. 
In a situation in which risk management is being pushed anew as an important undertaking 
amid a prevalence of information asymmetries, I question whether the conduct of monetary 
policy using a set of several rules established based upon past economic conditions can be 
said  to  be  proper  and  valid.  The  situation  has  become  such  that  the  impact  on  monetary 
policy of the negative burdens placed on the central bank’s balance sheet in the course of 
implementing  policies  of  fiscal  dominance  cannot  be  ignored.  Arguments  disputing  the 
effectiveness of inflation targeting policies have been presented by academia. The fact that 
the first direct trade between the Japanese yen and the Chinese yuan has now been made 
also makes those of us accustomed to the dollar reserve currency regime think that there is a 
possibility of a paradigm shift coming. We can see that the importance of building networks 
among  central  banks  is  growing  larger  by  the  day,  and  the  role  of  central  banks  too  is 
becoming  greatly  diversified.  It  is  no  stretch  to  say  that  it  is  becoming  the  norm  in  many 
countries  now  for  all  of  their  relevant  institutions  to  cooperate  in  pursuing  their  nation’s 
macroeconomic  and  risk  management.  A  consensus  has  grown  that  the  overcoming  of 
dynamic economic crises we have never encountered before is difficult to achieve if we stick 
only  to  our  existing  knowledge  and  practices.  Under  these  circumstances,  flexibility  in  our 
institutional and policy operations is needed, and contemplation and concern to understand 
new developments demanded. The principle that if all economies are interconnected, then so 
too  must  be  the  pursuit  of  measures  for  dealing  with  this,  can  be  seen  as  in  accord  with 
common sense. 
The  revision  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  Act  last  year  may  be  taken  as  having  established  the 
conditions enabling us to adapt to the rapidly changing international financial environment. A 
variety  of  opinions  can  be  suggested,  from  the  historical  and  cultural  perspectives,  as  to 
which central bank system a country should have and what kinds of relationships it should 
form with the relevant government departments. One certainty in the global economic trends, 
however,  is  that  maintaining  a  domestic  system  inconsistent  with  these  global  trends  is 
undesirable.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  I  appraise  the  Bank  of  Korea  Act  revision  as  a  highly 
desirable change, in that it created the minimum conditions enabling the Bank of Korea to act 
on behalf of national interests on the international stage. It is a global trend for the central 
bank to  carry  out financial  stability  functions,  and  the  Bank  of  Korea  can  now  take  part  in 
doing so. What remains then is for us to fulfill our part. We must build the capacity to properly 
understand and accommodate the global reform agendas related to financial stability being 
put together recently, and by so doing be able to identify and handle in advance risk factors 
that break out on the international scene. We must raise our stature high enough to break 
from  the  past,  when  having  immersed  ourselves  in  domestic  risk  factor  analysis  alone  we 
could  not  but  plead  that  we  were  innocent  bystanders  when  struck  by  crises  driven  by 
international factors. 
As important as redefining the role of the Bank of Korea from a global and from a medium- to 
long-term perspective is, wisely overcoming the difficulties that befall us in the short term is 
also  a  very  important  matter.  It  is  difficult  to  expect  that  the  uncertain  international 
environment will be conducive to stable growth of our economy. When the US and European 
economies are not growing as they should, and as a consequence Chinese economic growth 
is  also  slowing,  we  cannot  expect  the  Korean  economy,  whose  dependence  on  exports  is 
very high, to be unaffected and its economic activity brisk. The negative effects of the US 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  European  quantitative  easing  policies  are  also  threatening  us.  And  although  their 
influence is said to be less than in 2008, the adverse effects on our stock and capital markets 
and  on  our  stable  management  of  foreign  exchange  rates  cannot  be  overlooked.  The 
consumer  price  index  has  been  posting  a  rate  of  increase  in  the  mid-2  percent  range 
recently, but when adjusted for the effects on its decline attributable to the child care support 
and  other  government  welfare  policies  consumer  prices  are  inferred  to  be  running  in  the 
lower 3% range still, and since the inflation expectations of the general public sit at the mid-to 
upper-3% range – although they are showing a downward trend these days – we cannot let 
our guards down. We are at a point where we must analyze even more diligently the gap and 
distinction  between  the  CPI,  which  indexes  the  costs  of  living,  and  our  economy’s  core 
inflation. The fact that the work that we need to do and agonize over is increasing must not 
lead to an outcome where we neglect the Bank’s price stability mandate, our innate calling. 
Dear members of the BOK family, 
I  should  like  finally  for  us  to  together  solidify  our  resolve  once  more,  while  identifying  the 
reform  tasks  that  we  must  push  ahead  in  order  to  cope  with  the  changes  in  economic 
environment  at  home  and  abroad  that  I  have  alluded  to,  and  while  also  going  over  our 
achievements to date. We must move forward internally to make the numerous challenges 
facing us opportunities for growth. Such challenges have always been lurking around us, and 
we  must  henceforth  proactively  detect  them  and  make  use  of  them  as  opportunities  for 
development, both individually and collectively as an organization. There is not a moment to 
lose in the task of opening our eyes wide to identify the changes in this world and developing 
our  abilities  for  responding  to  them.  This  age  that  we  live  in  has  become  one  in  which 
policies not in harmony  with the international community cannot be effective, and in  which 
credibility cannot be maintained if we lose touch  with domestic society. I suppose that the 
focus by central banks around the world on communication comes from this same logic.  
According to data released just a few days ago, the Bank of Korea has engaged in a total of 
84  research  projects  since  2011:  27  joint  research  projects  with  foreign  institutions, 
20 domestic joint research projects at the headquarters level and 24 at the regional branch 
level,  and  13  collaborative  research  projects  within  the  Bank  itself  –  of  which  49  projects 
have  already  been  completed.  In  addition,  our  executives  are  participating  in  16  working 
groups of international organizations such as the BIS, and another 63 of our staff members in 
50 working groups. When each of these people is viewed as representing the Bank of Korea, 
the outcome achieved should be taken as having been an expansion in the Bank’s presence 
in the world stage by some tenfold in relative terms. Changes that we could not even imagine 
just a few years ago are happening this vibrantly before we are even aware of them. We are 
face to face with dynamic economic change. In addition, the on-the-job training opportunities 
at international organizations participated in by 10 or so of our staff continue to be available, 
and  our  Global  Initiative  Program  (GIP),  to  which  world-renowned  figures  are  invited  and 
which we attend together with staff from other central banks, is also being actively promoted. 
Our overseas representative offices moreover deliver useful information to headquarters in a 
timely  manner,  and  at  our  regional  branches  as  well  various  high  quality  joint  research  is 
being conducted – all of which things were hard to foresee in the past and of which I am very 
proud. Self-praise that others might not agree on should of course be cautioned against. The 
significances  of  the  changes  that  I  have  mentioned  could  be  found  in  the  context  of  their 
being actual supporting evidence of your potentials coming to be recognized in communities 
at  home  and  abroad.  Needless  to  say,  these  changes  should  be  regarded  as  outcomes 
produced  through  the  joining  of  all  of  our  forces,  to  heighten  our  organizational  strength, 
rather than through the efforts of only a few people. 
Since last summer, and for the first time since the Bank’s foundation, gatherings of all of our 
almost 200 team heads have been held twice. At these meetings changes in our roles in line 
with the revision of the Bank of Korea Act were discussed, and medium- to long-term visions 
pledging  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  development  were  established  on  our  own  and  announced. 
Last month an athletic meet was held that brought together all staff from our headquarters 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
and 16 regional branches – also for the first time since our foundation. I believe that this was 
an opportunity for all of our members to meet one another and an occasion to confirm our 
being “one family”. The most prized reward of these gatherings was the instilling of a strong 
sense of belonging in all employees. In addition, we developed the administrative capacity to 
organize and run such large events, and together shared an awareness that there are always 
people  serving  and  sacrificing  for  the  sake  of  this  whole  organization  –  important  rewards 
that I must say cannot be overlooked. 
We must renovate our thoughts and behavior, to bring ourselves closer to the international 
community  while  at  the  same  time  avoiding  isolation  from  domestic  society.  The  Korean 
economy is no longer small in world society now. We need to develop our abilities to present 
to the world our ideas for world development and lead international society in the directions 
that we desire, rather than remaining at the level only of understanding the words that others 
speak.  And  our  opinions  should  not  be  limited  to  those  concerning  the  impacts  of  the 
international environment on our economy; we can be leaders only when we can talk about 
proposals for world development and our contributions to it. At home as well, we should take 
one  step  further  from  the  passive  stance  of  criticizing  opinions  suggested  by  others,  and 
strive to actively propose alternatives and enthusiastically contribute to social development. 
To this end we must possess leadership and a volunteer spirit, to make efforts greater than 
others and to lead them. It is however difficult to bring about such a change in thinking by 
remaining  complacent  behind  the  walls  of  the  central  bank  with  its  monopoly  status.  We 
should boldly show ourselves, and play a part in making the Bank of Korea an organization 
of  a  higher  intellectual  level.  Making  the  Bank  of  Korea  a  world-class  organization  is  our 
mandate, and our efforts to achieve this should not halt for even one single moment. And in 
order for the Bank of Korea to be first-class, each of us must also be first-class. We cannot 
expect our organization to be first-rate if we ourselves are second-rate. 
The  Bank  of  Korea  continues  to  change.  And  the  key  to  this  change  is  making  an 
organization that invests in people and nurtures talent, has an international eye so as not to 
fall behind the global trends, and contributes actively to social development. Change must be 
as well-managed as it is well-initiated if it is to produce the desired effects. Only when the 
seeds are sown will there be someone who reaps; and now is the time to sow. These are old 
words, but I would like to paraphrase President Kennedy here, and say that now is the time 
for many staff members to step forward, asking not what the Bank of Korea can do for them 
but pondering what they can do for the Bank of Korea. And our “pool of resources” should be 
enlarged  abundantly  as  a  result.  I  would  like  in  particular  to  ask  our  long-serving  staff 
members  to  make,  i.e.  sow  the  seeds  of,  a  tradition  of  without  fail  leaving  behind  the 
footprints of your contributions over the years to the Bank of Korea’s development. 
Change  will  at  first  generate  dust.  However,  we  should  strive  to  incessantly  improve 
ourselves  so  that  once this  dust  settles  we  can  confirm that  our  stature has  risen  another 
notch. There is nothing that we can gain without sacrifice and pain, and there is no royal road 
to success. The time when we took pride in protecting the Bank of Korea from outside in a 
passive sense has now become the past. Let us try to become inscribed in Bank of Korea 
history as dedicated people who played a leading role through their progressive, aggressive 
efforts  to  remake  the  Bank  of  Korea  as  an  advanced  central  bank  with  an  international 
stature, and a new central bank contributing actively to national economic development. 
I would like to conclude my 62nd anniversary remarks now, trusting that when we meet again 
at this same spot one year from today we will be able to share together great pride in having 
shaped with all our might a Bank of Korea whose status is one notch higher. I wish the very 
best of health and fortune to all of you and your families. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
