Ipumbu Shiimi: Opening of the office of the Payments Association of 
Namibia 
Speech by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the official opening of the 
office of the Payments Association of Namibia, Windhoek, 6 March 2012. 
 Director of Ceremonies  
Mr. Erastus Hoveka, Chairperson of the Bankers Association of Namibia  
Mr. Paul Hartmann, Chairperson of Payments Association of Namibia  
Members of PAN Management Council  
Banking industry and Payments Service Providers, present here  
Members of the Media  
Distinguished Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am pleased to join you in witnessing and celebrating the official opening of the office of the 
Payments Association of Namibia, PAN. Let me first use this opportunity to thank the entire 
banking industry for their respective contributions in the process of making the operation of 
this office a reality. Without your input it would not have been possible to arrive at this very 
important milestone.  
At this occasion, I am also privileged to introduce the new Chairperson of PAN. Please join 
me in welcoming Mr. Paul Hartmann to the Management Council of PAN. We are confident 
that  given  his  background  as  a  pioneer  of  payment  system  reform  project  and  thus  his  in 
depth  knowledge  of  payments  systems  will  be  of  immense  value,  and  that  through  his 
leadership  PAN  will  be  able  to  make  a  great  impact  on  the  National  Payment  System  of 
Namibia.  
In the same vein, I would also like to thank the former chairperson, Mr. Gift Kavari for his 
contribution. Your guidance and input has provided a significant foundation for PAN.  
As financial systems have become increasingly complex, stricter control, oversight and co-
ordination of payment systems are required. Namibia is not an exception in this regard. PAN 
was therefore born as an integral part of this process, having been established in 2005 by 
virtue of the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003). PAN is a legal 
body,  self-regulatory  non-profit  association,  made  up  of  banking  institutions  and  non-bank 
payment  service  providers.  But  why  was  this  Association  established  and  what  is  its 
mandate?  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the mandate of PAN is, amongst others, the following:  
 
to provide a forum for the consideration of matters of policy and mutual interest of 
members relating to the national payment system of Namibia;  
to  authorize  and  set  standards  for  non-bank  payment  service  providers  related  to 
payment instructions, clearing and settlement with the endorsement of the Bank of 
Namibia. Current examples of authorized service providers authorized by PAN are 
SmartSwitch, Real Pay and Paym8. This allows the Bank of Namibia to focus on its 
mandate  to  authorize  payment  instruments  such  as  Nampost  Smart  Card  and 
electronic money instruments such as issued by MobiPay.  
to  assist  the  Bank  of  Namibia  in  carrying  out  the  functions  of  oversight  of  the 
abovementioned service providers to ensure compliance with set standards.  
  Since its establishment, PAN has developed in terms of both its structural arrangements and 
its stature. Today, PAN has a governing council, an executive office which is being launched 
today, and several Payment Clearing House (PCH) working groups or committees. This has 
increased its operational efficiency and service delivery.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
PAN has achieved many goals over the last several years. Although I do not want to go into 
details of all the particular achievements, allow me to highlight a few major milestones at this 
occasion.  
 PAN facilitated the development of the National Payment System Vision 2015 which 
casts  the  roadmap  for  both  bank  and  non-bank  stakeholders  to  participate  in  a 
broader payment system which is efficient, cost-effective and secure.  
 PAN currently runs three PCHs, each representing a retail payment stream being; 
cheque,  cards  and  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  (EFT).  This  has  increased  the 
operational efficiency and effectiveness of the industry for the benefit of the National 
Payment System in the provision of these services.  
Ladies and gentlemen, with the commissioning of this office, PAN will be better positioned to 
continue to be the co-ordinating body through which Payment System Stakeholders are able 
to  voice  their  views,  contribute  to  a  mutually  beneficial  National  Payment  System  and 
through  which  payment  system  projects  can  be  co-ordinated.  Any  providers  of  payment 
services that are not authorised by PAN are operating illegally and we therefore call on any 
payment service providers to please enquire at this office.  
It is with great pleasure therefore, that I commission the office of PAN together with its new 
logo and website. Please join me in congratulating PAN on these achievements which pave 
the way towards an exciting and bright future for the National Payment System of Namibia.  
In conclusion, I have no doubt that PAN will live up to its mission, “to maintain a world-class 
payment system that meets domestic, regional and international requirements”.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
