Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Recent developments in the Spanish 
economy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the 
Parliamentary Committee on Budget Affairs, Madrid, 17 April 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear today before this Committee as I have regularly done so each time the State Budget 
has  been  debated  in  Parliament.  This  picture  of  normality  is  in  stark  contrast  to  the 
exceptional  circumstances  which  mark  the  economic  background  against  which  the 
2012 Budget is being debated.  
The  Spanish  economy  is  currently  immersed  in  a  complex  and  costly  adjustment  process 
which entails, among other things, a major fiscal consolidation drive. The adjustment must, 
moreover, be made in an external context strongly influenced by a sovereign debt crisis in 
the  euro  area  which,  for  reasons  not  very  different  from  those  that  have  made  this 
adjustment  necessary,  is  affecting  us  most  severely.  Under  these  conditions,  the  State 
Budget for this year takes on singular importance.  
Allow me first to remind you that the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, far from being resolved, 
took on a new dimension last summer. Then, tensions spread to the debt of certain Member 
States with sounder fundamentals and economic policies more in step with the patterns of 
behaviour befitting a monetary union than those of the countries initially affected. From being 
confined to a relatively limited group of particularly vulnerable economies, the crisis became 
systemic.  
It is not easy to pinpoint the ultimate reasons behind this qualitative leap. True, at the root of 
the crisis as it initially unfolded, various macroeconomic imbalances of a fiscal, financial and 
competitiveness-related nature built up by some economies played a pivotal role. Yet, at the 
same time, the very accumulation of these imbalances and the difficulty of devising a widely 
accepted strategy to redress them in an orderly fashion within the euro area highlighted the 
existence  of  substantial  weaknesses  in  the  European  economic  governance  framework. 
These  included  most  notably  the  absence  of  a  powerful  and  flexible  crisis-management 
mechanism  to  provide  financial  support  to  members  in  difficulty.  These  mechanisms  are 
essential for heading off tensions at a sufficiently early stage in the process, which is when 
tackling them is less difficult.  
The  duality  of  the  problems,  with  one  purely  national  component  and  another  genuinely 
European  one,  coupled  with  the  growing  interrelatedness  of  euro  area  economies  as  a 
whole, created a breeding ground in which the tensions took on a systemic nature.  
Moreover, it is widely known that, to correct the weaknesses detected in the initial design of 
the euro project, the Member State governments have embarked on a thorough revision of 
the mechanisms for European governance. This process has already yielded some results, 
including the legislative initiatives adopted in what is known as the “six plus two package”; 
the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  the  new  permanent  European 
crisis-management mechanism; or the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in 
the euro area. But the flip-side is that this process has moved forward in fits and starts, it has 
not enjoyed a broad degree of consensus and it has sometimes failed to be as rigorous and 
ambitious as the gravity of the situation required.  
Likewise, since the onset of the tensions there has been – occasionally notable – headway in 
the ongoing adjustment of the most vulnerable national economies, sometimes in step with 
the  strict  conditionality  imposed  under  the  financial  support  programmes  under  way.  But 
here, too, action has broadly tended to be behind instead of ahead of events.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  these  conditions,  it  is  the  European  Central  Bank  that  has  positioned  itself  as  the 
fundamental bulwark against the crisis. And, ultimately, this is buying time for the Member 
State  governments,  in  both  their  responsibility  for  domestic  economic  policies  and  as 
co-managers of the common European Project, to make resolute progress in resolving the 
problems at the root of this crisis.  
We should not forget that the extensive range of non-conventional measures deployed by the 
ECB  since  the  start  of  the  crisis  –  the  3-year  LTROs  being  one  of  the  most  recent  and 
successful examples here – are, by their very nature, limited over time. And, more important 
still, these measures do not affect the fundamental imbalances which are ultimately at the 
source of and responsible for the crisis.  
Unfortunately, the tensions we have once again experienced in recent weeks are a powerful 
reminder  that  the  crisis  is  still  far  from  over  and  that  our  economy’s  situation  remains  a 
particular cause for concern in Europe.  
And this despite the fact that since the start of the sovereign debt crisis, and more forcefully 
so in recent months, Spain has implemented major reforms.  
A frequently voiced criticism of the ECB’s 3-year LTROs is that such an extremely generous 
provision  of  liquidity  will  tend  to  mask  the  underlying  problems  of  the  most  vulnerable 
financial systems, thereby weakening the thrust of governments’ reforms in this area. This 
has  not,  of  course,  been  Spain’s  experience.  A  glance  at  the  measures  adopted  in  Spain 
shows that the process to clean up, restructure and recapitalise the Spanish credit system 
has lost no momentum whatsoever. Rather, the opposite is true. Throughout last year and in 
the  opening  months  of  2012  the  process  has  been  stepped  up  to  adapt  it  to  changing 
circumstances, marked by a growing deterioration in economic and funding conditions. After 
resolving the governance and ownership-structure problems affecting the system in the initial 
stages of the tensions, efforts have focused recently on further strengthening banks’ capital 
and provisions, thereby keeping up the pressure for the necessary restructuring of the sector.  
In a different sphere, a labour market reform has recently been approved which affects core 
aspects  of  this  market’s  workings.  On  one  hand,  its  aim  is  to  decentralise  collective 
bargaining and increase firms’ internal flexibility. As I previously stated in this House, both of 
these  aspects  are  essential  for  adapting  labour  market  conditions  to  firms’  specific 
circumstances  and,  ultimately,  for  allocating  the  productive  resources  available  more 
efficiently, in particular labour, to different economic activities and sectors. On the other, by 
rationalising the conditions under which permanent contracts may be terminated, the reform 
shapes an environment which will be more conducive to job creation and job stability, once 
the current difficult circumstances are behind us. Overall, the labour market changes should 
help promote the adjustment of working and productivity conditions as means for restoring 
competitiveness. 
However, it cannot be ruled out that some of the effects of this reform will not be immediately 
discernible  and  that,  given  the  setting  of  sluggishness  and  uncertainty  in  which  Spanish 
economic  activity  is  currently  unfolding,  there  may  be  some  further  adjustment  in 
employment  levels.  This  effect  would  be  softened  if  firms  were  swiftly  to  use  the  various 
forms of internal flexibility provided by the new labour legislation.  
In  turn,  the  favourable  effects  of  this  reform  will  be  amplified  if  they  are  accompanied  by 
measures that enhance the competitive environment in which firms take decisions and that 
provide for the liberalisation of sectoral aspects that are key to ensuring efficient and flexible 
economic  behaviour.  Ambitious  measures  here  would  help  bring  about  a  virtuous  circle 
which, through job creation and growth, would see more rapid progress in the difficult tasks 
of the financial deleveraging of the private sector, the normalisation of the banking system 
and fiscal consolidation. Confining myself to this latter consideration, without a recovery in 
employment  it  will  prove  costlier  to  further  budgetary  adjustment,  since  the  increases  in 
revenue  will  be  limited  and  because  turning  expenditure  around  will  require  an  additional 
effort to offset the necessary increase in unemployment benefit payments.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  any  event,  budgetary  policy  is  key  in  circumstances  such  as  the  present.  As  I  stated 
earlier, we are in the middle of a sovereign debt crisis. There is no doubt that the Spanish 
economy’s  vulnerability  has  a  significant  fiscal  component,  although  our  difficulties  are 
compounded by the persisting downturn – and its dreadful impact on employment – and the 
still-high  dependence  on  external  funding.  The  budget  deficit  ended  last  year  at  a  level  of 
8.5%, far off the 6% target set in the Stability Programme. And the year-end public debt/GDP 
ratio was 68.5%, more than 30 pp up on 2007, before the international financial crisis broke. 
In turn, the deficit targets have been set at 5.3% for 2012 and at 3% for 2013, which entails a 
most  significant  budgetary  effort.  It  is  crucial,  however,  to  rigorously  meet  these  targets. 
Attaining them is vital for restoring credibility in the Spanish economy, and here the overall 
interests  of all  economic  and  social  agents  and  all  levels  of  government  converge.  A  high 
degree of unity and consensus among the respective parties will be pivotal to success in the 
arduous  task  ahead.  Failure  in  fiscal  consolidation  would  lead  us  to  scenarios  involving 
further contraction and further losses in employment and welfare.  
The exceeding of the deficit targets last year has highlighted the difficulty of correcting fiscal 
dynamics  in  adverse  cyclical  situations.  But  it  has  also  revealed  the  faults  existing  in  the 
monitoring, early warning and budgetary control procedures then in force, especially for the 
regional  governments,  which  the  budgetary  stability  law  currently  before  Parliament  and 
which I shall refer to later must correct.  
In this respect, the experience of the last two years shows how important it is that budgets be 
prepared  on  the  basis  of  a  prudent  macroeconomic  scenario  and  that  the  measures  are 
suitably designed to ensure their effectiveness. It is also important to have early information 
available  on  the  budget  outturn,  so  that  any  deviations  can  be  corrected  in  time.  These 
principles affect both the Stage Budget, the reason for my appearance here today, and the 
regional government budgets, which I am not going to discuss, although I do wish to take this 
opportunity to convey my concern regarding the obsolescence of some of the assumptions 
on which the latter were prepared during the latter months of 2011. These assumptions need 
to  be  updated  and  the  appropriate  measures  urgently  adopted  to  ensure  that  the  regional 
governments achieve their targets. 
Allow me to refer briefly to the delicate cyclical situation that frames the context of the State 
budget for 2012. The intensification of the sovereign debt crisis from the summer of last year 
interrupted  the  mild  recovery  that  the  Spanish  economy  had  begun  a  year  earlier,  with  a 
decline in GDP of 0.3% in the final quarter of 2011. This pattern ran into the first quarter of 
this year, so that the Spanish economy is, once again, in recession. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  2008–09  recession,  national  demand  is  displaying  the  greatest 
weakness. All domestic demand components declined in the fourth quarter of 2011 and have 
continued to do so during the first few months of this year. A strongly negative factor during 
all  these  ups  and  downs  has  been  the  need  to  reverse  the  accumulated  imbalances  (the 
assignment  of  excessive  resources  to  housing,  high  indebtedness  and  competitiveness 
losses), as part of an adjustment process that has still to be concluded. More recently the 
intensification  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  its  effects  on  the  financial  system  has 
compounded  matters,  leading  to  a  tightening  of  the  economy’s  financing  conditions  and 
eroding agents’ confidence. The downward revision of euro area growth prospects and the 
stepping  up  of  fiscal  consolidation  have  contributed  to  a  further  contraction  in  consumer 
demand  and  investment,  and  the  acceleration  in  the  decline  in  employment  has  further 
fuelled these trends. 
In the face of slack national demand, the external sector has once again acted as a shock 
absorber,  alleviating  the  negative  impact  of  lower  spending  on  output.  In  recent  quarters, 
however, this relief has come about more through the channel of lower imports than that of 
more  buoyant  exports,  which  is  attributable  to  the  parallel  weakness  of  some  of  our  main 
European customers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  these  conditions,  the  outlook  for  2012  is  not  favourable  and  remains  subject  to  a  high 
degree of uncertainty. Broadly, the Banco de España’s view does not differ greatly from that 
of  the  Government  implicit  in  the  macroeconomic  table  accompanying  the  Budget.  The 
process of adjustment of national demand will continue. Private consumption will be affected 
by  the  decline  in  employment  and  by  the  lower  support  that  general  government  will  be 
giving to household income. However, the impact of these two factors will be partly offset by 
more moderate price increases and, probably, by a continuation of the decline in the saving 
rate, although the margin available for this to smooth the pattern of private consumption is 
increasingly limited. 
Business investment will undoubtedly be affected by the slackness of domestic spending and 
because  many  firms  will  continue  aiming  to  reduce  their  level  of  indebtedness.  Nor  are 
significant changes in the ongoing adjustment of residential investment foreseeable. On the 
demand side, no improvement can be expected in affordability conditions given the outlook 
for private sector income and wealth and, on the supply side, the overhang of unsold housing 
will continue to hold back the launching of new construction projects.  
The need to reduce the levels of indebtedness of all sectors and the prevailing conditions of 
access  to  external  financing  will  continue  to  curb  the  possibilities  for  any  expansion  in 
domestic  spending.  Exports  might  be  the  only  component  of  output  to  increase  in  2012. 
Admittedly,  the  international  situation  is  subject  to  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  and,  in 
particular, the activity of the euro area as a whole is expected to flatline or fall slightly. But it 
is also true that the behaviour of exports has been very favourable over the last two years 
and  Spanish  firms  have  been  increasingly  diversifying  their  exports  towards  third  markets 
with more dynamic demand. 
Unfortunately, the stimulus provided by external demand will not suffice to offset the effect of 
the other contractionary forces on employment, which can be expected to fall further. If the 
labour reform were to begin to produce its effects soon, wages might grow somewhat slower 
than  in  2011.  And  along  with  productivity  gains,  that  would  lead  to  further  declines  in  unit 
labour  costs,  thus  enabling  competitiveness  gains  to  be  made.  Prices  will  continue  on  the 
moderating path on which they embarked in the second half of last year, although the risk of 
rising energy prices has not disappeared. 
To sum up: the scenario described indicates that domestic demand will continue to adjust in 
step with the ongoing financial deleveraging and fiscal consolidation. In these circumstances, 
it is vital that the gain in the share of our sales, both abroad and at home, should be the main 
driver  of  activity  in  Spain.  And,  accordingly,  achieving  sustained  competitiveness  gains, 
which must come from the implementation of ambitious supply-side reforms and measures, 
is crucial. If these reforms and measures should restore confidence in the Spanish economy, 
reduce financing costs and improve the foundations for future growth, 2013 may witness a 
recovery. 
In this situation, the 2012 Budget forms part of a more general medium-term consolidation 
strategy, requiring the collaboration of all levels of government. Details will be available in a 
few  weeks,  when  the  Government  presents  the  Stability  and  Growth  Programme  to  the 
European authorities. The Stability Programme should contain precise and explicit details of 
all the elements on which this consolidation process will be based. The targets set by this 
Programme  must  anchor  the  budget  measures  of  the  coming  years,  ensuring  that  the 
general government deficit can be reduced to below 3% of GDP in 2013 and, subsequently, 
that a balanced budget can be achieved. In addition, they must seek to stabilise the public 
debt ratio and subsequently reduce it to below 60% in 2020. 
The  fiscal  consolidation  so  defined  must  be  considered  unavoidable  and  necessary  to 
restore economic growth in the medium term, although the size and timing of the adjustment 
required may have negative effects on activity in the short term. In an environment like the 
present  one,  characterised  by  the  extreme  sensitivity  of  economic  agents  to  economies’ 
fiscal  situation,  in  particular  in  the  euro  area,  any  other  strategy  that  might  jeopardise  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
achievement  of  the  fiscal  targets  in  the  terms  established  would  have  very  negative 
consequences for market confidence in the Spanish economy, seriously damaging its growth 
possibilities both in the short and in the medium and long term. By contrast, strict compliance 
with the commitments made may generate a virtuous circle of improvements in confidence 
and expectations that is conducive to the recovery. 
The 2012 Budget for the State and the Social Security system, along with the budgets of the 
regional and local governments, are the first link in this strategic chain. It is vital that these 
budgets be fully consistent with achievement of the target set for the budget deficit of 5.3% of 
GDP this year, down from 8.5% of GDP in 2011. This reduction in the budget deficit requires 
an  unprecedented  adjustment  in  the  primary  structural  deficit,  since  it  must  offset  the 
expected increase in the interest burden and the effect that the fall in economic activity is 
forecast to have on public finances. 
The draft State Budget for 2012 details the measures proposed to meet targets in the case of 
the  State  and  the  Social  Security  system,  distributing  the  adjustment  on  both  the  public 
revenue  and  expenditure  sides.  Admittedly,  as  I  have  noted  on  previous  occasions  in  this 
House,  the  evidence  on  the  effectiveness  of  previous  fiscal  consolidation  processes 
implemented  in  other  developed  economies  shows  that  it  increases  when  they  are 
concentrated on public expenditure, in unproductive expenditure. However, the scale of the 
adjustment  required  in  our  country  is  so  great  that  we  need  to  make  use  of  all  the 
instruments available, including taxes. 
The 2012 Budget envisages an increase in revenue from tax measures falling basically on 
household and corporate income. Also, a special charge is imposed for the regularisation of 
hidden assets. The revenue-raising potential of these measures is expected to offset the fall 
in  revenue  due  to  the  unfavourable  trend  in  tax  bases  deduced  from  the  macroeconomic 
scenario  accompanying  the  Budget.  Last  year’s  experience,  when  the  bulk  of  the  budget 
deviation stemmed from the adverse performance of government revenue, showed that it is 
essential to budget prudently for this variable. In this respect, the projected course of overall 
budget revenue is subject to downside risks. The reasons for this are various. First, because 
both the expected corporate income tax receipts and any other tax revenue will depend on 
the ultimate effectiveness of the numerous legislative changes, which is particularly uncertain 
in the case of the special charge on undeclared income. It should also be emphasised that 
the  Spanish  economy  is  in  the  midst  of  a  process  of  macroeconomic  adjustment  and,  as 
noted above, its growth prospects depend on the external sector, which tends to yield only 
moderate  increases  in  tax  revenue  in  the  short  and  medium  term,  particularly  if  this  is 
accompanied, as in the Spanish case, by an adjustment in the real estate sector. 
On 
the  draft  Budget  proposes  highly  significant  reductions 
concentrated  in  capital  expenditure  and  also  in  current  transfers  and  goods  and  services 
purchases. In the case of transfers to government-owned corporations, it is important for the 
planned  reduction  to  be  accompanied  by  adjustments  of  similar  size  in  the  effective 
expenditure of these entities, so as to achieve a lasting reduction of the imbalances. Here, 
too, the Budget projections are generally not free from risk. First, because it is often difficult 
to  restrain  the  high  inertia  of  certain  items,  frequently  resulting  in  the  past  in  overshooting 
with  respect  to  the  initially  budgeted  figure,  particularly  in  the  case  of  goods  and  services 
purchases.  Nor  can  we  rule  out  further  unfavourable  changes  in  those  items,  such  as 
unemployment  or  pension  benefits,  whose  size  depends  on  external  factors,  such  as  the 
unemployment rate, population or inflation. This is related to the fact that the risk of deviating 
from the budget is higher in social contributions. 
It is essential to prevent these risks from materialising by ensuring a meticulous and rigorous 
budget outturn allowing budget deviations to be detected in time and any required remedial 
action to be taken. Should this be necessary, additional adjustments would have to be made 
in current expenditure, given that the freedom of action in relation to capital expenditure has 
shrunk enormously, and new tax measures would have to be taken, preferably in the area of 
the  expenditure  side, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
indirect taxation, which has fewer distorting effects on growth and the allocation of resources 
and  where  the  tax  burden  in  Spain  is  lower  than  in  other  developed  countries.  Looking 
ahead, moreover, it cannot be ruled out that the temporal tax increases applied may have to 
be replaced in time by measures of a permanent nature. 
Simultaneously, it is important that the process of budgetary consolidation be accompanied 
by a strengthening of the national budgetary framework, so as to allow governments at all 
levels to meet their commitments. In this respect, the reform of the Constitution in September 
2011  so  as  to  include  the  deficit  and  debt  ceilings  set  at  European  level,  which  was 
subsequently  implemented  in  the  draft  budgetary  stability  law,  was  designed  to  meet  this 
need and is fully consistent with the recent EU governance reforms. 
Following the approval of the budgetary stability law by Parliament, it is crucial that all the 
instruments  envisaged  in  it,  particularly  the  monitoring  and  control  mechanisms  and  those 
aimed  at  ensuring  that  the  targets  set  are  met  by  all  levels  of  government,  be  set  in  train 
immediately. I think it is worth looking more closely at this law because the success of the 
fiscal consolidation process depends largely on whether it is applied properly. 
The 2011 budget outturn highlighted the consequences of the unavailability of information, 
which prevented budget deviations from being detected in time and delayed the activation of 
mechanisms  to  ensure  the  consolidation  targets  were  met.  The  new  stability  law  should 
significantly improve the transparency of government action in at least three respects. First, it 
is  essential  for  the  budget  outturn  of  local  and  regional  governments  to  be  published 
regularly,  with  the  same  periodicity,  level  of  detail,  lag  and  ease  of  access  as  that  of  the 
State. Second, the information contained in the State and regional government budgets must 
be  improved,  so  that  the  assumptions  underlying  revenue  and  expenditure  projections  are 
known  and  the  information  is  made  available  on  these  items  in  national  accounts  terms, 
which  is  the  relevant  definition  for  the  existing  fiscal  rules.  Finally,  the  information  in  the 
adjustment plans at the various levels of government should be made public and presented 
in a format allowing it to be analysed and compared with the initial budgets. 
In addition, the mechanisms obliging government deficits to be corrected have clearly proved 
to  be  insufficient.  In  this  case,  the  draft  stability  law  includes  new  coercive  instruments  to 
ensure  the  budget  targets  are  met  by  all  levels  of  government.  Provision  is  made  for 
imposing  sanctions,  regional  government  expenditure  must  be  automatically  adjusted  in 
certain cases of non-compliance and it is even envisaged that the central government may 
impose compulsory adjustment measures on local and regional governments. I consider that 
these  new  legal  mechanisms  can  be  extremely  effective  in  ensuring  discipline  if  they  are 
applied  rigorously  and  appropriate  procedures  are  established  to  supervise  the  budget 
outturn during the year. In this respect it is vital, as established in the law’s passage through 
Parliament, that these provisions are applied as from their approval, in time to be used in the 
current consolidation process. 
Finally, the draft stability law retains the clause stipulating “no bail-out” between governments 
which was introduced in the previous law. I consider that, as at European level, this clause is 
crucial to prevent the cost of a government’s inadequate fiscal conduct from being passed on 
to  others  and  to  ensure  that  the  capital  market  exercises  disciplinary  effects.  At  the  same 
time  this  draft  law  allows  regional  and  local  governments  to  request  extraordinary  liquidity 
support measures from the State. In this case a plan to ensure that the fiscal targets will be 
fulfilled  must  be  submitted  and  the  payment  of  each  tranche  of  financial  aid  must  be 
dependent  on  such  fulfilment.  In  this  respect,  in  the  opening  months  of  this  year,  the 
Government set in train various regional and local government support mechanisms in order 
to smooth the refinancing of their existing debts or payment to trade creditors. The financing 
mechanisms agreed also require fulfilment of adjustment plans. It is now crucial to insist on 
strict compliance so that this type of aid does not provide inappropriate incentives. 
The  consolidation  strategy  must,  finally,  be  completed  while  keeping  in  mind  the  medium- 
and long-term factors affecting public finances, particularly those deriving from the pressure 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
exerted  by  population ageing  on  certain  items  of  expenditure.  In  this  connection, following 
the enactment in July 2011 of the Social Security Reform Law, an appropriate definition of 
sustainability  is  needed  as  soon  as  possible  so  that  the  system’s  parameters  may  be 
automatically adapted to demographic changes. 
In short, the current budgetary imbalance has become one of the main obstacles to growth of 
the  Spanish  economy.  Correcting  it  is  urgent  and  unavoidable.  What  is  thus  needed  is  a 
fiscal adjustment strategy based on commitments made at European level. This strategy has 
to be accompanied by a strengthening of the national budgetary framework, as reflected in 
the constitutional reform, and by the application of the medium and long-term reforms that 
enable the challenge of population ageing to be addressed. The credibility of this strategy, 
which calls for absolute rigorous compliance with the short-term objectives set in the 2012 
draft  Budget  law,  will  determine  whether  economic  agents  regain  their  confidence  in  our 
economy, which is the key to a sustained recovery of activity. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
