Choongsoo Kim: New role of central bank and regional financial 
cooperation after the global crisis 
Opening address by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, the 47th SEACEN 
Governors’ Conference, High-Level Seminar and the 31st Meeting of the SEACEN Board of 
Governors, Seoul, 13 February 2012. 
 Distinguished governors, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to express my gratitude to all my fellow central bank governors for taking part in 
the 47th SEACEN Governors’ Conference, High-Level Seminar and the 31st Meeting of the 
SEACEN Board of Governors. 
My  special  thanks  go  to  5  distinguished  speakers,  Mr.  Pier  Carlo  Padoan,  Deputy 
Secretary-General  of  OECD,  Mr.  Stephen  P.  Groff,  Vice-President  of  the  ADB,  Professor 
Charles Engel from University of Wisconsin, Mr. Hannoun from BIS and Mr. Chia from IMF 
who have come from afar to deliver the keynote addresses. 
It is a great honor and pleasure for us to be hosting the SEACEN Governors’ Conference in 
Seoul again after 13 years. 
Though  I  stand  before  you  today  as  the  representative  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  I  bid  you 
welcome on behalf of all the Korean people. 
In the wake of the global financial crisis, emerging market countries recovered faster than the 
advanced countries.  
However, the increasing uncertainties surrounding the world economy since then still pose a 
threat to the Asian economies. 
At this juncture, we should learn the lessons of the Global Financial Crisis. 
This  means  setting  the  financial  infrastructure  right  and  establishing  an  effective  policy 
response system in order to ward off further crises by speeding up global economic recovery.  
I  think  now  is  the  time  to  change  the  policy  stance  and  also  strategies.  Global  financial 
resources  may  have  in  recent  years  been  directed  toward  financing  of  unsustainable 
financial deficits and debt-ridden countries, and little toward growth and job creation. I believe 
that  redirecting  of  financial  resources  more  toward  growth,  and  more  specifically  toward 
countries with high productivity could yield substantial benefits to all in the long run. This is 
why I see a greater role for Asia going forward. Asia overcame the global financial crisis well, 
and  has  remained  resilient  to  negative  spillover  from  ongoing  crisis  in  Europe.  Moreover, 
many expect Asia to develop even more into an engine of global economic growth.  
If we look at the outbreak and spread of the Global Financial Crisis and the policies adopted 
in response, we can draw many precepts and pointers as to the role of central banks and 
monetary policy. 
The most important lesson from the Global Financial Crisis that we should particularly bear in 
mind when setting policy options for the avoidance of future crises is that there is a strong 
linkage  between  the  real  and  the  financial  sector  and  this  linkage  has  to  be  reflected  in 
setting up a new international financial architecture and monetary policy framework.  
The  real  and  financial  linkage  implies  that  price  stability  can  hardly  be  separated  from 
financial  stability.  And,  behind  the  financial  crisis,  there  lurk  the  imbalances  in  the  real 
economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Unless we understand the mutual linkages running between the financial and real sectors, 
we  may  well  not  be  able  to  deal  with  the  fundamental  problems  but  end  up  killing  the 
messenger.1  
By  taking  this  opportunity  today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  several  matters  relating  to  the 
harmonization of monetary and macro-prudential policy, which has emerged as a new issue 
since the Global Financial Crisis.  
I should also like to say a few words about proposals for strengthening financial cooperation 
in  the  Asian  region,  where  intra  regional  trade  and  financial  transactions  have  been 
increasing. 
Harmonizing Monetary and Macro-prudential Policy 
Orthodox monetary policy exercises an influence on both price and financial stability but this 
does not always run in the same direction.  
In  this  regard,  monetary  policy  hits  a  road-block  in  achieving  at  once  price  stability  and 
financial stability. 
To elaborate, adjustment of the policy rate is something of a blunt instrument and ineffective 
for  achieving  financial  stability,  hence  “financial  imbalances”  are  better  handled  using 
micro-and macro-prudential instruments, such as capital and liquidity requirements.2 
Macroprudential  policies  can  contribute  to  reducing  economic  costs  associated  with  crisis 
prevention as it can alleviate policy tradeoff that traditional monetary policy faces.  
An  appropriate  mixture  of  orthodox  monetary  policy  focused  on  price  stability  and 
macro-prudential policy oriented to the prevention of bubble formation would make it possible 
to  achieve  price  stability  and  financial  stability  at  the  same  time  with  minimal  costs  to  the 
economy. 
In  order  to  prevent  conflict  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy, 
governance structure should be clarified.3 
Broadly speaking, there are two types of governance structure here. In one the central bank 
in charge of monetary policy is also responsible for macro-prudential policy.  
In  the  other  a  supervisory  agency  apart  from  the  central  bank  is  fully  in  charge  of 
macro-prudential policy. 
We have recently witnessed a sea change in the governance structures of macro-prudential 
policy in major financial center countries, where central banks have now become responsible 
for – or at least involved in – both monetary and macro-prudential policies.  
As there is no solution which can be universally applied, however, I believe that governance 
structures should rather be tailored to individual countries’ circumstances. 
It  should  nonetheless  be  made  clear  that  the  central  bank  needs  to  play  a  role  in  a 
macro-prudential oversight of systemic risk, and that close dialogue and policy coordination 
                                                 
1  Speech by Governor Choongsoo Kim at KMFA Academic Conference on “Monetary Policy Reform after the 
Global Financial Crisis” (June 11, 2011) 
2  Lars  E.O.  Svensson,  Central-banking  challenges  for  the  Riksbank:  Monetary  policy,  financial-stability  policy 
and  asset management , Sveriges  Riksbank, Stockholm  University, CEPR and NBER, November 17,  2011 
(revised December 6, 2011) 
3  BIS (2010)., “Macroprudential instruments and frameworks: issues for central banks”, A note for a meeting of 
Governors on Monday 8 March 2010 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
between  the  central  bank  and  the  supervisory  authority,  when  they  are  not  one  and  the 
same, is crucial for financial stability. 
Taking into account these changes in the domestic and overseas environment and in order 
to bolster macro-prudential foundation for the domestic financial system, the Bank of Korea 
was given responsibility for achieving financial stability through the revision of the Bank of 
Korea Act in September 2011. 
The recent IMF report similarly recommends that it is desirable for the central bank to play an 
important  role  in  constructing  the  macro-prudential  policy  framework  for  pursuing  financial 
stability.4 
An individual country’s macro-prudential policy should be operated in harmony with its own 
monetary policy in line with its specific conditions and there cannot be a one-size-fits-all type 
of macro-prudential framework. 
Meanwhile I want to suggest some points to be considered, if macro-prudential policy is to 
take deep root as a new policy framework for financial stability. 
Firstly, as the macro-prudential policy instruments now under discussion internationally have 
the  nature  of  binding  regulations,  care  must  be  taken  in  the  drive  for  their  introduction  to 
avoid any undue inhibition of financial industry dynamism.  
Likewise, international or regional policy cooperation will have to be stepped up to prevent 
any emergence of regulatory arbitrage. 
Secondly, the macro-prudential policy framework needs to be designed in such a way that 
the central bank as the lender of last resort plays an active role.  
This is because successful conduct of macro-prudential policy requires accurate judgment of 
the  business  cycle  and  a  profound  understanding  of  the  linkages  between  the  financial 
market and the real economy. 
Thirdly, macro-prudential policy runs the danger of becoming vulnerable to political pressure. 
The neutrality and transparency of policy-making must therefore be adequately guaranteed 
in macro-prudential policy just as in monetary policy. 
Lastly, I think we need to bear in mind that potential risks in the financial system may still 
build up due to both micro- and macro-level incentives.  
In this regard, we must try to strike a balance between macro-prudential and micro-prudential 
policy. 
Strengthening Regional Financial Cooperation 
At  the  time  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  what  began  as  a  crisis  in  the  U.S.  and  other 
advanced  countries  spread  to  emerging  market  countries,  making  no  distinctions  and 
causing several of them willy-nilly to suffer the fate of innocent by-standers.  
Notably, Asian emerging market countries were not free from the repercussions of the crisis, 
even though they enjoyed favorable macroeconomic conditions and had built up their foreign 
reserves as a buffer against external shocks. 
These  countries  saw  their  financial  markets  thrown  into  turmoil  due  to  huge  outflows  of 
foreign capital.  
In  response  to  such  abrupt  swings  in  international  capital  flows,  discussions  are  now 
underway on measures such as increasing foreign reserves, expanding and institutionalizing 
                                                 
4 
IMF Staff Discussion Note, “Institutional Models for Macroprudential Policy”, November 1 2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
is  very  encouraging 
currency  swaps  between  central  banks  and  establishing  global  financial  safety  nets. 
Moreover, there is a growing consensus of opinion that macro-prudential policies should be 
put  in  place  to  enhance  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions’  behavior  and  ease  the 
procyclicality of foreign capital flows.  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  there  have  been  a  series  of  discussions  on 
improving systems, regulatory policies and market structure, and progress has been made in 
terms of financial regulation such as the adoption of BASEL III.  
However, we still have many tasks to deal with.  
Notably, due to the growing interconnectedness between countries, capital flows have been 
acting as a transmission channel for the worldwide spread of what was originally a national 
or regional crisis.  
In  this  regard,  we  need  a  global  jurisdiction  which  can  maintain  stable  global  liquidity  and 
monitor cross-border transmission.  
It 
that  regional  cooperation  organizations  such  as  SEACEN, 
ASEAN+3  and  EMEAP  have  recently  stepped  up  their  cooperation  in  promoting  regional 
financial market development and stability, by drawing up joint response plans, such as the 
launch of the CMIM, to tackle such financial crises, and by seeking ways to foster regional 
financial market development and improve macroprudential frameworks.  
To my mind, the best way for Asian economies, which are vulnerable to external shocks, to 
expand their mutual economic interests is to strengthen their collective response by making 
integration of their real economies, by way for example of FTAs and the setting up of regional 
financial safety nets.  
Meanwhile,  the  establishment  of  policies  within  the  Asian  region  and  within  individual 
regional countries should be in line with the reforms underway in the international financial 
architecture.  
Amid the increased possibility of systemic risk, where shocks arising from certain financial 
institutions  or  markets  spread  rapidly  due  to  the  heightened  financial  interconnectedness, 
financial stability cannot be achieved based solely on policies of individual countries, unless 
accompanied by international cooperation.  
Above all, in order to regulate the financial market, where globalization has progressed the 
most,  we  should  participate  energetically  in  networking  among  central  banks  around  the 
world, thereby strengthening international cooperation in regard to macro-prudential policies.  
Closing Remarks 
While undergoing the bitter experience of previous financial crises, Asian countries at least 
profited from them in drawing lessons that, I believe, greatly helped them see off the Global 
Financial Crisis successfully.  
Although  we  are  not  at  the  epicenter  of  the  ongoing  global  financial  crisis  and  euro  area 
sovereign debt crisis, we should also take them as object lessons. 
Above all, I hope that we can look to a brighter future as the dark shadows shrouding the 
world  economy  fade  this  year,  blown  away  by  the  energy  of  the  black  dragon  which  is 
believed to rule the dark.  
I wish the best of luck throughout this year to all of our SEACEN member economies and our 
partners around the world. 
Thank you very much for listening! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
