Matthew Elderfield: The regulatory agenda for the funds industry 
Address by  Mr  Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Irish Funds Industry Association, Dublin, 12 September 2012. 
 Thank you very much, IFIA, for the invitation to speak at this year’s conference. IFIA plays an 
important role in the Irish international financial services sector and it is my pleasure to be 
here  today  to  share  some  thoughts  about  the  regulatory  agenda  for  the  funds  industry. 
Before I do that, can I take a moment to acknowledge the significant contribution that has 
been made by Gary Palmer, as the outgoing CEO of IFIA, to the growth and success of the 
funds industry in this country and to thank him publicly for the good working relationship he 
developed with the Central Bank. Let me also welcome Gary’s successor and say that I look 
forward to maintaining a good dialogue with Pat Lardner: indeed, that has already begun.  
IFIA is an important representative body because the funds industry is an important sector 
for Ireland. You are all well versed on the key statistics that illustrate this, in terms of assets 
under management (€1.2 trillion) or number of employees in the sector (some 12,000 or so). 
One statistic that is not so readily accessible – and required a bit of digging around – is the 
number of investors in Irish regulated funds or funds supported by Irish fund administrators. 
There  are  in  fact  over  1.3  million  such  investors  –  a  very  significant  number  indeed.  That 
shows  the  importance  of  the  Irish  market  place  in  providing  a  service  to  investors  across 
Europe and the world. And, indeed, it shows the important responsibility that we both have  
–  as  industry  and  regulator  –  in  ensuring  high  standards  of  investor  protection.  These 
investors place trust in the Irish system of regulation and our reputation for maintaining high 
standards  is  vital  to  the  success  of  the  international  financial  services  sector  including  the 
funds industry. 
The  key  message  I  have  for  you  today  is  that  getting  the  regulatory  framework  right  for 
investor protection is important for the reputation of the IFSC and the success of the funds 
industry. I want to explain that we have an opportunity to revisit and improve that framework 
in Europe and domestically, with respect to our regulatory processes, and by enhancing our 
approach to supervision. 
The starting point for approaching regulation of the fund sector should be an acceptance that 
funds are different. The traditional concerns of the prudential supervisor do not apply to the 
funds  industry.  Nor  do  the  traditional  consumer  protection  issues  relating  to  the  sales 
process apply directly: these are not relevant to the fund or funds service provider per se, but 
are picked up elsewhere in terms of the regulatory framework applying to investment firms 
and  intermediaries.  Instead,  our  concern  is  one  of  investor  protection  along  a  number  of 
dimensions: ensuring that the investment that is available has an appropriate risk profile for 
the type of customer involved; ensuring adequate disclosure to investors so they can make 
an informed choice about risk. addressing operational risks related to valuation or protection 
of assets; and, reducing the risk of fraud and other financial crime problems. There is also a 
new  dimension  to  funds  regulation,  going  beyond  investor  protection  and  considering  the 
systemic risks posed by particular aspects of the sector, which I will return to at the end of 
these remarks. 
This  different  regulatory  focus  correctly  argues  for  a  different  supervisory  approach.  This 
involves clear standards around investment products, which as you know are mostly set at a 
European level. As a supervisor, it means the focus of effort is on the authorisation process 
and  ensuring  robust  arrangements  are  in  place  regarding  the  approval  of  new  funds  and 
ensuring adequate disclosure. Our supervisory model is also designed to place the emphasis 
of our work on the fund service providers – both administrators and custodians – rather than 
on the individual funds themselves.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Bearing  this  supervisory  model  in  mind,  let’s  explore  the  individual  elements  and  consider 
what  changes  are  afoot  –  and  what  scope  there  is  to  re-engineer  the  current  regulatory 
framework. 
European developments 
It is right that we should start at the European level. The EU is of ever increasing importance 
to the funds industry. The volume of initiatives from Europe in financial services generally, 
but  with  respect  to  funds  in  particular,  seems  at  times  overwhelming.  The  structure  of 
regulation  and  standard-setting  in  Europe  has  undergone  fundamental  changes,  with  the 
advent  of  the  European  supervisory  authorities  including  ESMA.  And  the  rules  that  now 
emerge from Europe tend to have direct binding effect on financial services firms, rather than 
being  transposed  and  sometimes  modified  by  national  authorities.  The  trend  is  for  more 
Europe, affecting more parts of financial services regulation, with less national discretion. 
This means that engagement in Europe is more important than ever. At the Central Bank of 
Ireland our strategy has been to develop specialist policy teams responsible for key areas of 
European directives and regulations, to invest more time in the European and international 
policy-making  processes,  to  be  more  focused  in  our  goals  and  to  get  in  early,  trying  to 
influence European developments while they are still at the formative stage. It is important 
that industry also raises its game on engagement in Europe and I would encourage IFIA to 
carefully  re-examine  its  strategy  for  European  advocacy  to  ensure  it  is  having  maximum 
impact. 
The need for engagement is immediate and pressing – and in the short term Ireland will have 
a  central  role  to  play  as  Presidency  of  the  EU  in  the  first  half  of  2013.  This  will  be  a  big 
responsibility  and  will  involve  a  number  of  complicated  and  high-profile  portfolios,  such  as 
banking  union  and  resolution  and  MIFID  II.  And  in  the  funds  industry  there  will  also  be 
important portfolios, including UCITS V and UCITS VI. 
We expect the AIFMD to have mostly completed the EU legislative process by the time our 
Presidency  begins,  although  certain  technical  standards  will  remain  to  be  issued.  The 
finalisation  of  Level  II  requirements  for  the  sector  is  imminent  and  some  important  issues 
remain unresolved. The ball is currently in the Commission’s court. A lot of disappointment 
has been expressed that some of the issues that were heavily debated in ESMA – and where 
we  believe  sensible  proposals  were  reached  –  have  been  revisited  and  changed.  I  can 
understand that sense of frustration. For example, we think it’s important to recognise that 
the  business  model  of  the  funds  industry  involves  a  significant  degree  of  delegation  and 
outsourcing  of  activity.  We  hope  that  the  final  Level  II  text  being  developed  by  the 
Commission  reflects 
that  have  been  expressed  by 
stakeholders and regulators in this area. 
In terms of UCITS V, there is still considerable debate on the appropriate liability regime for 
custody.  I  think  it  should  be  accepted  that  there  will  be  alignment  of the  liability  regime  in 
UCITS V with the standards in AIFMD. Given the substantial obligations which depositories 
will  be  asked  to  comply  with  under  AIFMD,  we  believe  that  UCITS  V  should  mirror  these 
requirements,  no  more,  no  less.  Also,  the  Central  Bank  will  seek  to  ensure  that  Ireland’s 
rigorous  but  streamlined  approach  to  the  licensing  and  supervision  of  depositories  is 
reflected in UCITS V.  
On UCITS VI, we are at an earlier stage in the process of consultation. One central area of 
debate  will  be  whether  to  revisit  the  types  of  assets  eligible  for  investment  in  the  UCITS 
structure. Our initial thinking at the Central Bank is that it would be inappropriate to restrict 
the  current  set  of  eligible  assets  or  to  impose  general  restrictions  on  OTC  derivative 
instruments. However, the current “no look through rule” does deserve further examination in 
relation  to  particular  areas  such  as  indices,  where  we  have  seen  the  eligible  asset 
restrictions  arguably  being  circumvented.  ESMA  has  already  done  some  good  work  in  its 
recent guidelines on the use of indices, but there may be more that can be done. We can 
the  very  reasonable  concerns 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
also expect the output from the debate on shadow banking and systemic risk in the money 
market funds industry to feature heavily in UCITS VI.  
As I mentioned, I will come back to this topic of shadow banking a bit later. 
Domestic developments 
Europe will clearly be the main driver of the regulatory framework for the funds industry in 
Ireland. But there is also, as you know, a domestic regulatory framework in place that is not 
derived from EU law and which in many cases predates it. The implementation of the AIFMD 
provides  an  opportunity  to  revisit  this  framework.  We  are  working  hard  on  AIFMD 
implementation  with  the  goal  of  providing  certainty  to  industry  as  soon  as  possible.  My 
colleague Gareth Murphy, who spoke to you last year, is chairing a working group on AIFMD 
implementation involving representatives from the Department of Finance and industry. We 
will be consulting publicly on proposals very shortly. This process provides an opportunity to 
revisit our domestic framework for non-UCITS funds.  
Let me take a little time to explain our approach and highlight one or two issues under active 
discussion. 
We believe it is important to use the implementation of the AIFMD as an opportunity for a 
systematic  rethink  of  our  non-UCITS  regime.  Our  current  domestic  regime  has  evolved 
piecemeal over many years in response to particular concerns and without any relevant EU 
standards to refer to. We now need to be prepared – in light of the implementation of this 
major piece of European legislation – to re-examine those elements of the existing domestic 
framework.  Our  approach  will  be  informed  by  the  principals  included  in  the  Taoiseach’s 
strategy  for  the  international  financial  services  sector,  namely  the  need  to  carefully 
re-examine  the  case  for  domestic  standards  which  exceed  EU  requirements,  in  terms  of 
establishing that they are in the public interest. We are prepared to retain additional domestic 
standards if we believe the public interest test is met. But our starting point is of a rigorous 
case-by-case  reassessment  of  the  existing  domestic  framework  to  see  whether  these 
domestic requirements need to be retained. 
For example, one issue under discussion is whether we should establish a new category of 
fund  based  purely  on  the  minimum  standards  of  the  AIFMD.  This  would  provide  a  clear 
choice  of  a  fund  that  is  being  managed  in  a  way  fully  compliant  with  the  relevant  EU 
standards for pass-porting fund management without any additional domestic requirements 
on the fund, except as directly required by existing Irish law. This would be a major initiative 
and we want to see the matter very fully considered before we decide on it. As an alternative, 
or perhaps even in addition, we are also undertaking a rigorous reassessment of our non-
UCITS qualifying investor regime. To what extent should the domestic standards for the QIF 
regime  be  adjusted  to  reflect  the  AIFMD?  We  are  itemising  the  differences  between  the 
AIFMD requirements and the QIF regime for funds and reviewing each in turn. For example, 
our current domestic regime sets specific requirements on directed brokerage programmes. 
These requirements can be dis-applied in light of AIFMD where rules on conflicts of interest, 
best  execution  and  annual  account  disclosure  provide  adequate  comfort  to  investors.  This 
would  seem  to  be  a  sensible  area  for  potential  adjustment.  There  are  a  number  of  other 
areas to be considered, which will each be examined in turn. 
The introduction of the directive also provides an opportunity to revisit the promoter regime 
for non-UCITS. The AIFMD now imposes significant requirements on fund managers, which 
would appear to meet many of the objectives of our current domestic promoter framework. 
We also believe there may be scope for us to provide additional guidance on what we expect 
of directors when a fund runs into financial or operational difficulties. In that context, we plan 
to consult on proposals to remove the current promoter regime at least for qualifying investor 
non-UCITS.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I should caution that our domestic framework for non-UCITS will remain in place where we 
believe  it  is  in  the  public  interest  to  do  so.  But  we’re  serious  about  rigorously  and 
systematically challenging ourselves as to which particular provisions are indeed appropriate 
to  retain.  This  is  a  very  big  job.  While  we  will  have  done  a  lot  of  work  before  going  to 
consultation, we will not have finalised our views on all these matters. We will present what 
we  hope  will  be  seen  to  be  a  well-considered  approach,  but  we  are  very  much  open  to 
submissions. Our public consultation will offer you a real opportunity to challenge any aspect 
of the envisaged approach. I urge you to take that opportunity. 
Before I finish on the question of domestic regulation let me say a word about the important 
role that industry bodies can play in supporting good standards. I would like to commend IFIA 
and the funds industry more generally for rising to the challenge of developing its corporate 
governance code for fund service providers. This has helped raise standards in a pragmatic 
and sensible way. It has helped improve governance in the industry and provided a practical 
framework  regarding  the  number  of  directors  at  funds.  You  will  have  noted  that  a  leading 
funds  jurisdiction  was  heavily  and  prominently  criticised  for  its  approach  to  multiple 
directorship.  By  tackling  this  issue  head-on  in  its  corporate  governance  code,  IFIA  has 
helped bolster the international reputation of the Irish fund sector. I should note that we will 
be revisiting our existing statutory codes for banks and insurance companies next year. We 
will use that process to review the success and take-up of the IFIA code. Also on the horizon, 
MIFID II will be coming into force before too long and will be prompting a reassessment of 
corporate  governance  standards  for  investment  firms,  which  of  course  would  include  a 
number of fund service providers. 
Authorisation 
If the starting point of the regulatory model for funds is about getting the rulebook right – both 
in Europe and here in Ireland – it is equally important to get the process of reviewing fund 
applications right. I tend to get very good feedback from industry sources about the quality of 
our authorisation and approval process for funds, not just here in Dublin but when I speak to 
industry participants in London and New York as well.  
But we think there is scope to get better yet. Mindful of industry expectations and also of the 
need  to  ensure  an  effective  and  efficient  use  of  resources,  the  Central  Bank  regularly 
reassesses its internal processes and turnaround times for fund authorisations. However, in 
this  area,  we  still  rely  extensively  on  manual  processes  and  handling  hard  copies  of 
documents. We want to move towards the receipt of information in electronic format. And we 
want to develop automated workflow processes to make us more efficient. 
This  is  not  just  a  matter  of  automating  existing  processes,  but  of  challenging  ourselves  to 
ensure our process is as efficient as possible. We want to decompose the “as is” process for 
funds  authorisation  and  rigorously  assess  it,  challenging  its  individual  component  parts, 
before constructing our “to be” process under this re-engineering exercise. Our intention is to 
engage closely  with  industry  and to  seek  your advice:  tell  us  which  aspects  of the  current 
process could work even better. 
I caution that it will take a little time to implement these changes. We don’t want to rush and 
destabilise  the  current  platform  which  is  working  well.  But  we  are  committed  to  making 
improvements  in  efficiency  without  loss  of  effectiveness.  These  improvements  go  hand-in-
hand with the introduction of online reporting by individual funds which we consulted on in 
June.  
The  industry  itself  can  play  its  part  in  improving  the  authorisation  process.  Sometimes the 
quality  of  applications  can  be  uneven  and  incomplete.  At  other  times  some  stakeholders  
– often those highly inventive and over-exuberant lawyers – can test the boundaries of what 
is an acceptable interpretation of European law without giving sufficient consideration to the 
difficult legal and policy questions involved.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The funds industry continues to grow. Innovation is a key feature of its progress. Change is a 
positive  driving  force  for  all  of  us.  While  there  will  always  be  a  natural  tension  between 
financial  regulation  and  product  innovation,  the  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  proper  and 
active engagement with industry to resolve issues. We regularly take stock of our approach, 
drawing on the output of quarterly meetings with IFIA, bi-lateral engagement with law firms 
and regular contact with fund promoters and investment managers at home and abroad. And 
we press matters with our colleagues in Europe when necessary. 
the 
the  management  companies, 
fund  service  providers.  These  are 
Supervision 
What  then  of  our  approach  after  authorisation,  namely  to  supervision?  In  our  view,  the 
structure  of  the  industry  here  in  Ireland  and  the  risks  that  it  poses  to  the  Central  Bank’s 
objectives means that the principal (but not exclusive) focus of our supervisory effort should 
be  on 
fund 
administrators and custodians that are so important in ensuring the key elements of investor 
protection, such as accuracy of valuation and safeguarding of assets. Indeed, it is impractical 
(or at least prohibitively expensive) to have close supervisory engagement with all individual 
funds. 
This  supervisory  model  is  reflected  in  our  PRISM  system,  which  is  the new  framework for 
risk-based supervision that the Central Bank has implemented for all firms operating in the 
Irish financial services sector. PRISM operates by calculating an impact categorisation of our 
more than 10,000 regulated entities to allow us to decide on the level of engagement and 
therefore resources we will apply to any individual firm. Under PRISM, fund service providers 
tend  to  have  a  higher  impact  categorisation,  with  more  subsequent  engagement  from 
supervisors (and will therefore pay more). As part of the introduction of the PRISM process 
there have been a few structural changes in the way Supervision is operated by the Central 
Bank. On the ground, the differences you will note if your firm is in this category are more 
effective liaison with your direct supervisory team as well as more frequent on-site visits with 
yourselves by my staff. I will be asking my supervisors to look more closely at where those 
investor  protection  and  financial  stability  risks  I  talked  about  earlier  exist,  including 
challenging assumptions that lie behind business models and strategies in the sector and the 
governance, systems and controls that underpin them. 
In contrast, each individual fund, in itself, has a limited potential impact on financial stability 
and investors in the event of failure – and so, each of the more than 5,000 funds domiciled in 
this jurisdiction – cannot and should not expect the same level of supervisory engagement as 
afforded  to  the  fund  service  providers.  Our  supervisory  model,  however,  does  provide 
capacity for us to react to triggers and problems that emerge in individual funds as well as 
random  spot-checks. We  will  also  increasingly  rely  on  the  use  of  our thematic supervisory 
tool, namely examining a specific issue across a cross-section of institutions. 
Shadow banking 
While  individual  funds  may  be  low  impact  entities  in  our  supervisory  model,  the  funds 
industry is of course a high impact sector viewed collectively. This is not just a question of 
investor  protection.  Increasingly,  the  interest  of  the  international  regulatory  community  is 
directed at the level of systemic risk posed by particular parts of the funds industry, namely 
money  market  funds.  The  backdrop  to  this  interest  is  the  risk  of  investor  runs  on  money 
market funds as a result of a threat of breaking the buck and the onward impact of such a run 
on the markets in which those money market funds are invested. As you are no doubt aware, 
this is clearly on the regulatory agenda at the G20, in IOSCO, at the European Commission 
and also in the US at the SEC. A few concluding thoughts on the regulatory agenda in this 
area. 
My  first  high-level  message,  is  that  the  industry  in  Ireland  must  be  prepared  for  change. 
During the financial crisis, investor runs on MMFs led to a disruption in the flow of finance to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the real economy and necessitated dramatic interventions by public financial authorities. The 
Central  Bank  believes  that  regulatory  reform  should  focus  on  the  need  to  reduce  the 
probability of investor runs, to curb implicit support from sponsors and to reduce the need for 
support from the taxpayer.  
In  order  to  avoid  disruptive  industry  shifts,  my  preference  is  for  international  alignment 
between Europe and the US in this area. It appears that the SEC will not be driving further 
regulatory reform in the short term. European action may be needed to drive matters forward. 
IOSCO  also  has  an  important  role  to  play.  But  it  is  critically  important  that  the  U.S. 
perspective continues to be articulated and heard. The optimal outcome remains a shared 
perspective  across the Atlantic  on reducing the  risk  of runs  in  this sector  and  we  must  do 
everything we can to ensure that we can continue to move towards that goal. 
What action should Europe take now? Market conditions in European Prime MMFs which are 
earning negative yields may pre-empt the conclusions of the FSB and other policy decision-
makers.  As  you  know,  some  promoters  are  contemplating  new  structures  where  investors 
earn  negative  returns.  We  should  see  how  this  plays  out  and  in  particular  the  investor 
response to the structures that the promoters offer. In the meantime, consultation exercises 
on this very question are well advanced and the Central Bank has actively engaged in this 
debate.  Having  regard  for  the  experience  of  MMFs  during  the  financial  crisis  and  more 
importantly for the low risk appetite of MMF investors for capital losses, the Central Bank’s 
view  is  that  a  mandatory  switch  from  constant  net  asset  value  to  variable  net  asset  value 
does  not  adequately  address  the  fundamental  problem  of  whether  an  investor  run  on  a 
money  market  fund  may  take  place  –  though  we  would  acknowledge  it  may  affect  the 
dynamic of that run.  
Substantial  reform  can  be  achieved  through  a  range  of  measures  such  as  capital  buffers, 
dilution levies for exiting investors and tighter liquidity measures. Indeed, it would appear that 
one of the recommendations of IOSCO – which was mandated by the FSB to look at MMFs 
as part of the Shadow Banking system – is to seek tighter rules on the liquidity of MMFs so 
as  to  ensure  that there is  enough  liquidity  to  meet  redemptions.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the 
SEC addressed this with their MMF reforms in 2010.  
The other key issue exposed by the financial crisis was that investors expected sponsors to 
support  MMFs  where  assets  show  excessive  volatility  to  the  downside.  This  in  turn  put 
pressure  on  the  liquidity  position  of  the  sponsoring  institution  which  was  invariably  a  bank 
with  access  to  a  central  bank  liquidity  window.  Future  reform  of  the  MMF  industry  should 
ensure  that  any  insurance  that  this  “recourse  to  sponsor”  provides  is  properly  charged  to 
MMF investors. In this regard, one of the other IOSCO recommendations is likely to be the 
mandatory  requirement  of  gates  as  a  redemption  tool,  which  to  our  thinking  would  be 
sensible. Where  support  from  a  sponsor  is  implicit  it  should  be  made  explicit,  though  it  is 
worth  acknowledging  that  this  may  have  implications  for  the  capital  requirements  of  the 
sponsor. 
Whatever the detail of the reforms for money market funds, change is coming and it will be 
significant. As I said, my key message is to engage in the debate and be prepared to adapt. 
Conclusion 
The more than 1.3 million investors who rely on the Irish fund sector highlight the need for 
robust  standards  of  investor  protection  in  our  market.  Funds  may  be  different  from  other 
financial services sectors, but it is still vitally important to get the right regulatory framework in 
place so that investor protection is assured. This will improve the reputation of Ireland as an 
international financial services sector and support the success of the funds industry. There is 
an opportunity to re-examine the different elements of that regulatory framework for investor 
protection: the standards in place at a European level and domestic level, the processes the 
Central Bank uses to authorise new funds, the supervisory framework applied to the sector, 
and the emerging standards relating to Shadow Banking.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  I  have  explained,  the  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  a  level  of  high  engagement  with 
Europe in crafting that framework – and to rigorously reassessing our domestic framework, 
processes and supervisory approach. We would encourage IFIA and the Irish fund sector to 
play its part in this process by contributing to the regulatory dialogue at the European and 
Irish level, by offering constructive ideas to address the changing regulatory priorities of the 
post financial crisis world, and by maintaining high standards of practice in the Irish market 
that ensure a continued reputation for high standards of investor protection.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
