Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Policy actions and risks going forward 
Keynote remarks by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
(the  central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  FinanceAsia  4th  Annual  Corporate  Treasury 
& CFO Summit, Manila 23 August 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
Let me begin by thanking the organizers and sponsors of this Summit for this opportunity to 
connect  more  closely  with  those  directly  involved  in  our  financial  markets  –  the  CFOs, 
corporate treasurers and senior treasury professionals…  
Treasury professionals are always an interesting audience to address… You are known to be 
sharp and analytical. It is in your DNA to be direct in your communication… You use very few 
words and  yet everyone understands. You say “yours”, “mine”, “give”, “take”. …You follow 
simple rules. For instance, in fixed income, you buy high (in terms of yields) and sell low… in 
foreign exchange, you buy the swap points in your favor… and in origination, you dot every I 
and cross every T… In this respect, there are no two camps of treasury professionals. 
But when it comes to patience, there are generally two diametrically opposed groups among 
treasury professionals – 1) the notoriously impatient and 2) the unflappably patient. Some of 
you coolly follow trends (the trend is your friend!), while some either calmly or feverishly wait 
for the inflection points (this is where you make the one-time big bucks), and yet quite a few 
trail blaze and themselves radically create the trend.  
Knowing this, I thought that for this afternoon, I shall try to speak squarely on the issues that 
interest  you  –  from  the  perspective  of  the  BSP  –  Where  do  we  think  interest  rates  are 
headed? Will we see further peso appreciation? Is there an asset bubble? Are banks safe? 
What can you expect from the BSP in terms of policy when dealing with these issues?  
This  approach  is  for  the  impatient  side  of  this  Summit…  However,  it  is  in  my  nature  as  a 
central  banker  to  provide  an  appropriately  balanced  operating  environment…  Therefore  to 
equally address the patient constituents of the Summit, I shall first provide the fundamental 
basis for our policy actions including the risks that we see going forward.  
I  hope  this  broad  outline  works  for  everyone  here.  I  was  quite  pleased  to  see  that  in  the 
sessions  preceding  this,  particularly  the  one  at  9.30  am,  there  would  already  have  been 
discussions  of 
that  can  be  expected—strong  economic  growth, 
manageable inflation, robust external position, sound banking system…. So I shall no longer 
repeat those. Instead, I shall deal directly with the risks in our operating environment that fall 
from those trends.  
The first risk… Global headwinds will continue to be formidable. Despite collective efforts to 
address  systemic  weaknesses,  Europe  continues 
to  struggle  with  economic  and 
socio-political  obstacles  to  the  implementation  of  much-needed  rehabilitation  and  reform 
measures… The  economic  outlook  in the  US  is  also  uncertain,  as  unemployment  remains 
elevated  and  private  sector  demand  continues  to  be  weak…  and  the  so-called  “fiscal  cliff” 
continues to limit the room for fiscal stimulus. 
Even  for  Asia,  less-than-favorable  indicators  in  major  emerging  Asian  economies  as  of 
late – in particular, slowing growth in China and India – suggest a vulnerability to the global 
slowdown, as weak external demand from advanced economies exerts its impact across the 
region. 
As a result, the IMF, in its World Economic Outlook update in July, cut its global economic 
growth projections for both 2012 and 2013 to 3.5 pct and 3.9 pct, respectively.  
the  macro 
trends 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
For  the  Philippines,  however,  it  is  of  some  comfort  that  the  economy  has  been  resilient 
against  the  global  downturn.  Growth  continues  to  be  driven  by  a  vibrant  services  sector, 
robust  private  demand,  and  accelerating  government  consumption…  The  Q2  GDP  is 
expected  to  be  released  at  the  end  of  the  month  (30  August).  Let  us  therefore  see  if  the 
second-fastest growing economy in Asia would continue to beat market expectations.  
Second  risk…  Europe’s  apparent  deleveraging  –  or  the  shrinkage  of  assets  in  light  of  the 
current stream of global regulatory reform – may result in squeezes in the rest of the world, 
particularly Asia. For instance, in response to Basel 3, some international banks, instead of 
raising  more  capital,  have  resorted  to  reducing  their  risk-weighted  assets  as  a  way  of 
increasing their capital adequacy ratio or CAR. In the CAR build-up recently required by the 
European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  on  71  banks,  this  form  of  deleveraging  seems  to  be 
recurring.  It  is  thus  no  surprise  that  some  quarters  estimate  that  complying  with 
Basel 3 alone will reduce bank profitability and/or impair GDP. The 2011 study of the OECD 
led  to  a  result  that  Basel  3  implementation  would  mean  up  to  a  15  basis  point  drop  in 
GDP growth per year due to higher interest rates passed on to borrowers. McKinsey (2011), 
on the other hand, suggests that the return on equity of US banks can fall by as much as 
320 bps as a result of Basel 3. 
These are not very encouraging thoughts but the upside is that we do not believe right now 
that such is the case for Philippine banks. With industry CAR of between 16% and 17% of 
which Tier 1 capital is 13% to 14%, there should be no reason to deleverage for the sake of 
hitting the capital standards of Basel 3. 
All  these  notwithstanding,  the  weaknesses  in  the  US  and  the  eurozone  as  well  as  the 
displayed  strength  of  the  Philippine  banking  industry  will  have  capital  flow  implications  as 
investors  seek  destinations  for  the  freed  up  assets,  or  for  funding  sources,  as  a  result  of 
deleveraging. This brings us to the third risk. 
Third  risk…  Capital  inflows  to  EMEs,  including  the  Philippines,  could  continue  in  light  of 
prolonged easy monetary policy in the advanced economies and as growth prospects and 
financial  markets  remain  relatively  healthier 
in  EMEs.  Yesterday,  we  reported  a 
US$3.2 billion surplus in BoP in July 2012, a large part of which was due to portfolio inflows 
on top of the current account surplus. From a macro perspective, the broader concern with 
continued foreign inflows is that it could encourage more leveraging or risk-taking activities 
beyond  the  economy’s  absorptive  capacity  for  risk.  This  complicates  monetary  policy  and 
more  particularly,  strong  and  rapid  inflows  of  capital  are  often  associated  with  asset  price 
bubbles that could potentially undermine financial stability.  
What are BSP’s policy thrusts in light of these three risks? To answer this question, let me 
first give you four lessons from the recent past. 
One key lesson we, at the BSP, have drawn from the last few years is that achieving price 
stability is no longer enough to ensure macroeconomic stability. As we witnessed during the 
“Great Moderation”, an extended period of price stability can also plant the seeds of future 
distress  by  causing  agents  to  take  on  a  disproportionate  amount  of  risk.  In  short,  price 
stability must go hand-in-hand with financial stability.  
Another  lesson  we  have  learned  is  this  –  Capital  can  move  freely  across  borders.  Thus, 
policymakers  must  maintain  a  delicate  balancing  act  between  ensuring  a  relatively  stable 
currency  and  sustaining  the  use  of  independent  monetary  policy  to  offset  macroeconomic 
shocks. 
Together, these two lessons have taught us that it is prudent to use a wide set of available 
policy  instruments  to  achieve  low  and  stable  inflation,  prevent  undue  volatility  in  the 
exchange  rate,  and  maintain  broad  financial  stability.  Our  policy  toolkit  has  till  now 
encompassed, in addition to the policy rate and bank reserve requirements, mechanisms to 
better  understand  the  nature  of  the  flows,  international  reserve  accumulation  and  the 
associated 
reforms,  and 
liquidity  management, 
foreign  exchange 
financial  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
macroprudential regulations. By employing this strategy, the BSP has thus far been able to 
keep inflation in check while containing the risks associated with strong capital inflows. 
A third lesson we have learned is that policy responses must be oriented towards preventing 
a build-up of system-wide risks that may be brewing underneath the growth momentum. We 
need to keep an eye on the broader objective of maintaining financial stability. The regulator 
can  no  longer  simply  look  at  transactional  risks,  but  we  need  to  also  consider  how  these 
individual  transactions  impact  on  other  financial  transactions.  Our  commitments  to  the 
Basel 3 Accord exemplify this belief as we have placed greater scrutiny on linkages between 
our financial institutions and the non-banking corporate sector.  
This  now  brings  us  full  circle.  For  financial  stability  to  translate  fully  to  solid  and  durable 
economic  growth,  the  BSP  must  continue  to  enable  different  stakeholders  to  participate 
confidently  in  the  financial  system.  This  is  where  our  continuing  reform  initiatives  toward 
greater consumer protection come in. The fourth lesson we can draw from recent experience 
is that consumer protection complements financial stability. These twin goals ultimately help 
address the expanding needs of the growing economy.  
I have given you the lay of the land, so to speak…Clearly, the coming months are likely to 
continue to prove to be challenging for the Philippines… As such, our strategy in addressing 
potential threats to the economy continues to revolve around using a broad-based policy tool 
kit that aims to bolster our domestic sources of resilience.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I have noted that many of you (the patient side of the Summit) have 
been listening intently… But for the “other side” of the Summit, you may anxiously ask, what 
do all these mean for the economic variables that matter to us? Quickly, three guideposts: 
1. 
to  pursue 
the  exchange  rate  –  We  will  continue 
On the policy rate – We continue to see the average inflation rate falling within the 
lower half of the target range. With this relatively favorable inflation outlook and our 
still-positive  real  interest  rate  structure,  we  continue  to  have  the  policy  space  to, 
should  it  be  needed,  respond  to  sudden  changes  in  the  global  and  domestic 
environment.  
On 
the  policy  of  a 
market-determined  exchange  rate.  But  while  we  don’t  expect  drastic  moves,  the 
market should bear in mind that the exchange rate is no longer a one-way bet. The 
BSP is carefully monitoring market behavior. So the market would be the wiser if it 
acknowledges that the BSP has several tools up our sleeve to ensure that market 
dynamics do not result in misalignments in the fundamental value of the exchange 
rate.  
On asset prices – We don’t see stretched asset valuations at this time, but we will 
continue to watch out for build-ups in asset price pressures. The experiences in the 
US  sub-prime  and  in  the  European  debt  crisis  have  given  rise  to  the  “lean”  vs. 
“clean” debate. We now know that it could be expensive to “clean up” after an asset 
price mess. Therefore, the market could expect the BSP to cautiously “lean against” 
such price pressures. The BSP will carefully calibrate policy rates, being cognizant 
that our first line of defense is still the use a mix of macroprudential tools to address 
potential excessive risk taking among market participants.  
2.  
3.  
Just  last  week,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  the  introduction  of  a  more  comprehensive 
method of measuring the real estate exposures of banks. This measure will include, among 
others, not only bank loans but also investments in debt and equity securities, the proceeds 
of which are intended to finance the activities of real estate companies. The objective is to 
get a more complete picture of the amount of funds going to the property sector. 
If you have been observing the BSP, one thing should be pretty clear to all of you by now… 
The  BSP considers  any  situation  with  circumspection  and  addresses  it in  a gradualist  and 
market-consultative fashion. We always aim to provide clear guidance to the market. I hope 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
over the past few minutes, I have been able to convey to you that the BSP will continue to 
craft policy with the broader objective of financial stability in mind.  
The  theme  that  you  have  chosen  for  this  Summit  is  “Excellence  in  Optimizing  Your 
Treasury”. This is a point worthy of discussion. The phrase “Optimizing Treasury” brings to 
mind the debate between the efficient market hypothesis proponents and the advocates of 
behavioral  finance.  To  believers  of  efficient  markets,  the  price  contains  all  relevant 
information  to  make  a  decision  and  market  forces  will  trade  away  arbitrage  opportunities. 
Believers of behavioral finance, on the other hand, look at a trader’s psychology and how he 
values  “prospects”  and  “gambles”  as  the  drivers  of  prices.  To  its  supporters,  behavioral 
finance explains market overshooting, over/under-reaction and loss aversion. Well, the jury is 
still in out on this debate… but whether you believe in one school of thought or the other, one 
thing is clear – to be able to maximize your treasury potential, you need information… correct 
and  timely  information.  I  hope  that  by  having  distilled  our  current  market  environment  into 
three risks, four lessons and three policy guideposts, I have moved this discussion further to 
help you optimize your potential.  
As  I  close,  let  me  point  out  that  your  chosen  theme  is  not  limited  to  parochial  bottom-line 
optimization. Your theme calls for “Excellence”. To me, that is a call for you to be responsible 
stakeholders. If you are on the sell-side, sufficient disclosure and transparency are central in 
your dealings. If you are on the buy-side, bounded risk taking is relevant in your investments. 
As you perform your jobs, I hope you appreciate that you are an invaluable partner of the 
BSP in transmitting the impact of our policies to the real economy….I hope also that you bear 
in mind that as participants in the financial market, you have a responsibility to the broader 
community that you are in… Finally, I trust that you will remember that your reason for being 
is to finance activities in the real sector. 
On that note, let me once again thank the organizers of this conference and wish all of you a 
productive and rewarding afternoon.  
Good day to all! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
