Charles L Evans: A risk management approach to monetary policy 
Speech by Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the Ball 
State  University  Center  for  Business  and  Economic  Research  Outlook  Luncheon,  Muncie, 
IN, 5 December 2011. 
 Introduction 
It is my pleasure to be here in Muncie today to speak to you about my views on the progress 
of  the  recovery  and  on  the  course  of  monetary  policy.  I  would  like  to  thank  Steve  Smith, 
president of the Muncie Forecasting Roundtable, for that kind introduction. 
For those of you who follow monetary policy deliberations, you will certainly be aware that I 
was the lone dissenter at the last policy meeting held in early November. So it should come 
as  no  surprise  when  I  say  that  the  views  that  I  am  presenting  today  are  my  own  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or my other colleagues in 
the Federal Reserve System. 
Real output gap 
Four years ago the U.S. economy entered what developed into the deepest recession since 
the  Great  Depression.  Two  and  a  half  years  ago  the  recovery  began.  Yet,  despite  both 
accommodative  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  stimulus,  the  pace  of  improvement  has  been 
agonizingly slow. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is only just back to where it stood at its 
pre-recession peak in 2007, employment growth is barely enough to keep pace with natural 
growth in the labor force and the unemployment rate remains extraordinarily high. 
Earlier  this  year,  most  forecasters  thought  that  the  recovery  was  gaining  traction  and  that 
economic activity would increase at a solid – though not spectacular – pace through 2012. 
The labor market was beginning to show some long-awaited improvement, and the financial 
repair process seemed to be making progress. Analysts thought that higher prices for energy 
and  other  commodities  would  weigh  on  output  growth,  as  would  supply-chain  disruptions 
from  the  disaster  in  Japan.  But  these  factors  were  expected  to  be  transitory,  and  most 
forecasters thought growth would improve significantly once these influences had passed. 
Unfortunately,  the  news  over  the  past  several  months  has  proved  this  forecast  to  be  too 
optimistic. To use an automotive analogy, employment and growth are stuck in neutral. Job 
growth  has  been  disappointing,  and  the  unemployment  rate  just  last  month  dipped  below 
9 percent. Revised data indicate that annualized real GDP growth in the first half of 2011 was 
only  1  percent  and  improved  only  modestly  to  a  2  percent  pace  in  the  third  quarter. 
Consumer  spending  has  been  particularly  sluggish.  Furthermore,  the  weakness  in  GDP 
growth  began  before  the  bulk  of  the  effects  of  higher  energy  prices  hit  the  economy  and 
before  the  disaster  in  Japan  happened.  This  timing,  along  with  the  continued  softness  of 
most economic indicators into the early summer, indicates that the slowing in output growth 
was not all due to temporary factors. Even with slightly firmer economic data that have come 
out recently, the sense of building momentum seems absent. Rather, the headwinds facing 
consumers and businesses are even stronger than we had thought. 
Against this backdrop, the outlook has weakened substantially. Last June my colleagues on 
the FOMC and I were projecting real GDP growth would be around 2-3/4 percent in 2011 and 
3-1/2 percent in 2012. As I alluded to a moment ago, some of the recent incoming numbers  
– on manufacturing activity and automobile sales, for example – have improved. Even so, 
our  latest  forecast  made  in  early  November  revised  down  our  outlook  for  2011  by  a  full 
percentage  point  and  projected  GDP  growth  at  just  2-3/4  percent  in  2012  –  barely  above 
most  analysts’  views  of  the  potential  rate  of  output  growth  for  the  economy.  Such  growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
rates certainly are not strong enough to make much of a dent in the unemployment rate and 
other  measures  of  resource  slack.  Indeed,  the  FOMC’s  latest  forecasts  are  for  the 
unemployment  rate  to  remain  above  8-1/2  percent  through  2012  and  to  fall  only  to  about 
8 percent in 2013. Without new developments or changes in policy, I don’t believe the U.S. 
economy is poised to achieve escape velocity anytime soon. 
Inflation outlook under 2 percent 
What  about  inflation?  Large  increases  in  energy  prices  pushed  headline  inflation  –  as 
measured  by  the  12-month  change  in  the  total  Personal  Consumption  Expenditures  Price 
(PCE) Index – up from about 1-1/4 percent last fall to almost 3 percent this summer. These 
higher  prices  certainly  took  a  bite  out  of  households’  budgets.  But  they  did  not  portend  a 
permanent ratcheting up of inflation. Core PCE inflation – which excludes the volatile food 
and energy components and is a better predictor of future overall inflation – has been just 
1.7 percent over the past year. Furthermore, prices for energy and many other commodities 
have softened of late. And with the unemployment rate still high and capacity utilization low, 
resource  slack  continues  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  In  addition,  measures  of 
longer-run  inflation  expectations  are  at  the  low  end  of  the  range  they  have  been  running 
since last November. 
Putting these factors together, I would argue that inflation is likely to remain moderate over 
the  foreseeable  future.  The  FOMC  forecasts  for  core  inflation  were  concentrated  near 
1.8 percent this year, and its forecasts for total inflation were in the range of 1.5 percent to 
2.0 percent for 2012, 2013 and 2014. My own assessment is that inflation will be at the lower 
end of these ranges. 
Fed performance 
These disappointing forecasts pose a challenge for monetary policy. The Fed is charged by 
Congress  in  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  to  encourage  conditions  that  foster  both  maximum 
employment  and  price  stability.  This  is  what  you  hear  us  refer  to  as  the  Fed’s  “dual 
mandate”. Given the high unemployment rate and low job growth, I think it is clear that the 
Fed has fallen short in achieving its goal of maximum employment. I will return to this point 
shortly.  As  for  the  price  stability  component  of  our  dual  mandate,  the  majority  of  FOMC 
participants  –  including  me  –  judge  our  objective  for  overall  inflation  to  average  2  percent 
over the medium term. With my own view that inflation is likely to run below this rate over the 
next few years, I believe we run the risk of missing on our inflation objective as well.  
Two different perspectives on the economy 
Central bankers must formulate monetary policy with the understanding that our knowledge 
is  imperfect.  We  may  have  incomplete  and  sometimes  competing  views  of  the  forces  that 
generate current economic conditions. This is especially true in the difficult circumstances we 
face today. In my view, we should try to formulate a monetary policy strategy that carefully 
balances  the  risks  associated  with  the  reasonable  alternative  economic  scenarios  that  we 
face  and  is  as  robust  as  possible  to  miscalculations  as  to  which  of  these  scenarios  is 
predominantly true. 
Let me now discuss two quite different perspectives that could account for the disappointing 
slow growth and continued high unemployment that we confront today. These two conditions 
are important to consider in that they have markedly different monetary policy prescriptions. 
The first storyline I will refer to as the “structural impediments scenario”. In this scenario, the 
recent period, which has been referred to as the Great Recession, was accompanied by an 
acute  period  of  structural  change,  skills  mismatch,  job-killing  uncertainties  and  excessive 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
regulatory burdens. Accordingly, these structural impediments have caused the natural rate 
of unemployment to increase. 
The  structural  impediments  scenario  sounds  plausible  to  many,  but  I  do  not  find  it 
compelling.  As  best  I  can  tell,  it  rests  on  lots  of  conjecture  about  economic  forces  and 
outcomes  that  are  not  confirmed  by  the  evidence  at  hand.  As  an  economist  seeking  firm 
quantitative explanations, I am not  aware of any rigorously studied economic models1 that 
both match critically important time-series properties of the data and support the notion that 
today’s high unemployment rate arises from special structural impediments.2 Even generous 
estimates of the impact of structural reallocation and other factors on today’s equilibrium, or 
the  so-called  natural  rate  of  unemployment,  do  not  come  anywhere  near  the  current 
9 percent rate of unemployment. 
Nevertheless suppose this scenario were true. In this case the role for additional monetary 
accommodation  is  modest  at  best:  the  economy  faces  a  supply  constraint  that  monetary 
policy simply cannot address. Accordingly, those subscribing to this view think that additional 
easing would likely raise inflation without having a sizable impact on unemployment. In this 
scenario, our running a more accommodative monetary policy potentially risks repeating the 
stagflation of the 1970s. At that time, the Fed did not understand that the changing structure 
of the economy had caused the natural rate of unemployment to rise. In an effort to reduce 
the  unemployment  rate,  it  provided  too  much  accommodation  that  only  served  to  raise 
inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  To  avoid  that  mistake  today,  under  the  structural 
impediments scenario, the Fed should revert to a “business-as-usual” monetary policy and 
begin to consider removing excess accommodation before inflation rises above its target and 
inflation expectations start to creep unalterably upward. 
There is a second competing storyline – one that I refer to as the “liquidity trap scenario”. 
First,  consider  what  occurs  during  normal  times  when  nominal  rates  of  interest  are 
considerably  above  zero  and  real  rates  of  interest  are  positive.  If  the  supply  of  savings 
increased  but  the  demand  for  investment  remained  unchanged,  market  forces  would  drive 
down  real  interest  rates  to  some  natural  rate  of  interest  that  equilibrates  savings  and 
investment. This market dynamic is thwarted in the case of a liquidity trap. 
Here, cautious behavior holding back spending – whether it is due to risk aversion, extreme 
patience  or  deleveraging  –  causes  the  supply  of  savings  to  exceed  the  demand  for 
investment even at very low interest rates. Today short-term, risk-free interest rates are close 
to zero and actual real rates are only modestly negative. But they are still not low enough – 
because short-term nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero, real rates cannot become 
negative enough to equilibrate savings and investment. 
As I weigh the evidence, I find the case for the liquidity trap scenario more compelling than 
one  for  the  structural  impediments  scenario.  My  assessment  has  been  influenced  by  the 
book titled This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly3 by Carmen Reinhart and 
Kenneth  Rogoff.  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  document  the  substantially  detrimental  effects  that 
financial crises typically impose on the subsequent economic recovery. As we all know, the 
recent  recession  was  accompanied  by  a  large  financial  crisis.  When  I  look  at  the  U.S. 
economy today, I see it tracking Reinhart and Rogoff’s observation that such recoveries are 
usually  painfully  slow  –  and  are  so  for  reasons  that  have  little  to  do  with  structural 
impediments in the labor market and the like. 
Liquidity  traps  are  rare  and  difficult  events  to  manage.  They  present  a  clear  and  present 
danger that we risk repeating the experience of the U.S. in the 1930s or that of Japan over 
                                                 
1  See Christiano, Eichenmbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007) and Chung et al. (2010). 
2  Federal Open Market Committee (2011). 
3  Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  past  20  years.  However,  liquidity  traps  have  been  studied  over  the  years  in  rigorous 
analytical  models  by  a  number  of  prominent  economists,  including  Paul  Krugman, 
Gauti Eggertsson,  Michael  Woodford  and  Ivan  Werning.4  Variants  of  these  models  have 
successfully explained business cycle developments in the United States. The lesson drawn 
from this literature is that the performance of economies stuck in a liquidity trap can be vastly 
improved by lowering real interest rates and lifting economic activity using an appropriately 
prolonged  and  forward-looking  period  of  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  such 
monetary  accommodation  is  the  antithesis  of  the  policy  prescription  for  the  structural 
impediments scenario. 
A risk-management approach to policy changes 
Of  course,  I  realize  that  I  could  be  wrong  in  my  assessment.  So  let  us  consider  how  we 
should conduct policy when we don’t know for sure which scenario is really the one we face 
today. How can we avoid risking a repeat of either the stagflation of the 1970s or the slow 
growth of the 1930s? 
The problem, of course, is that policies that are optimal for the liquidity trap scenario would 
tend  to  generate  higher  inflation  without  significant  reductions  in  unemployment  if  the 
structural  impediments  scenario  were  true.  Conversely,  policies  that  are  optimal  for  the 
structural impediments scenario would leave the economy unnecessarily mired in depression 
and deflation if we were actually in the liquidity trap scenario. 
A middle ground proposal 
Fortunately,  between  these  two  extreme  scenarios,  there  is  a  robust  middle  ground  policy 
approach. The Fed could sharpen its forward guidance in two directions by implementing a 
state-contingent policy. The first part of such a policy would be to communicate that we will 
keep the funds rate at exceptionally low levels as long as unemployment is somewhat above 
its natural rate. The second part of the policy is to have an essential safeguard – that is, a 
commitment  to  pull  back  on  accommodation  if  inflation  rises  above  a  particular  threshold. 
This inflation safeguard would insure us against the risks that the supply constraints central 
to the structural impediments scenario are stronger than I think. Rates would remain low as 
long as the conditions were unmet. 
Furthermore,  I  believe  the  inflation-safeguard  threshold  needs  to  be  above  our  current 
2 percent  inflation  objective  –  perhaps  something  like  3  percent.  Now,  the  “3  percent 
inflation” number may seem shocking coming from a conservative central banker. However, 
as Kenneth Rogoff recently wrote in a Financial Times piece, “Any inflation above 2 percent 
may  seem  anathema  to  those  who  still  remember  the  anti-inflation wars  of  the  1970s  and 
1980s,  but  a  once-in-75-year  crisis  calls 
I  agree 
wholeheartedly with Professor Rogoff. 
And actually, this middle ground policy guidance is not as out-of-the box as one might think. 
Importantly,  it  is  consistent  with  the  most  recent  liquidity  trap  research,  which  shows  that 
improved  economic  performance  during  a  liquidity  trap  requires  the  central  bank,  if 
necessary, to allow inflation to run higher than its target for some time over the medium term. 
Such policies can generate the above-trend growth necessary to reduce unemployment and 
return  overall  economic  activity  to  its  productive  potential.  In  fact,  I  have  seen  model 
simulation results that suggest to me that core inflation is unlikely to rise as high as 3 percent 
under such a policy. 
for  outside-the-box  measures.”5 
                                                 
4  See Eggertsson and Woodford (2003); Krugman (1998); and Werning (2011). 
5  Rogoff (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But  suppose  the  structural  impediments  scenario  turns  out  to  be  correct.  In  this  case, 
inflation will rise more quickly and without any improvements to the real side of the economy. 
In  such  an  adverse  situation,  the  inflation  safeguard  triggers  an  exit  from  the  now-evident 
excessive policy accommodation before inflation expectations become unhinged. We would 
not have the desired reductions in unemployment, but then again, there wouldn’t be anything 
that monetary policy could do about it. We would suffer some policy loss in that a 3 percent 
inflation rate is above our 2 percent target. But we certainly have experienced inflation rates 
near  3  percent  in  the  recent  past  and  have  weathered  them  well.  And  3  percent  won’t 
unhinge  long-run  inflation  expectations.  We  are  not  talking  about  anything  close  to  the 
debilitating higher inflation rates we saw in the 1970s or 1980s. We would also know that we 
had made our best effort. 
Conclusion 
Today,  I  have  outlined an  appropriate  course  for  monetary  policy  to  take  when  we  cannot 
know with certainty the degrees to which various forces are driving the economic weakness 
we currently face. If, as I fear, the liquidity trap scenario describes the present environment, 
we risk being mired in recession-like circumstances for an unacceptably long period. Indeed, 
each passing month of stagnation represents real economic losses that are borne by all. In 
addition, I worry that even when the economy does regain traction, its new potential growth 
path will be permanently impaired. The skills of the long-term unemployed may atrophy and 
incentives  for  workers  to  invest  in  acquiring  new  skills  may  be  diminished.  Similarly, 
businesses facing uncertain demand are less inclined to invest in new productive capacity 
and technologies. All of these factors may permanently lower the path of potential output. 
As I said in the fall of 2010 and I repeat the message again today: I think state-contingent 
policies  such  as  those  I  just  described  are  a  productive  way  to  provide  such  necessary 
monetary  accommodation.  There  is  simply  too  much  at  stake  for  us  to  be  excessively 
complacent  while  the  economy  is  in  such  dire  shape.  It  is  imperative  to  undertake  action 
now. 
References 
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles L. Evans, 2005, “Nominal Rigidities 
and  the  Dynamic  Effects  of  a  Shock  to  Monetary  Policy”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
February, Vol. 113, No. 1, February, pp. 1–45. 
Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider and John C. Williams, 2010, “Have 
We  Underestimated  the  Probability  of  Hitting  the  Zero  Lower  Bound?”,  at  the  conference, 
Revisiting Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Environment, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 
October 13. 
Eggertsson,  Gauti,  and  Michael  Woodford,  2003,  “The  Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates  and 
Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 139–211. 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  2011,  Minutes  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee, 
January 25–26, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 16. 
Krugman, Paul R., 1998, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 137–206. 
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries 
of Financial Folly, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Rogoff, Kenneth S., 2011, “The Bullets Yet to Be Fired to Stop the Crisis”, Financial Times, 
August 8, available by subscription. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters, 2007, “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A 
Bayesian DSGE Approach”, American Economic Review, Vol. 97, No. 3, June, pp. 586–606. 
Werning,  Ivan,  2011,  “Managing  a  Liquidity  Trap:  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Policy”,  National 
Bureau of Economic Research, working paper, No. 17344, August.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
