Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Renminbi trade settlement and investment in Malaysia 
 – future prospects 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Seminar  on  “Renminbi  trade  settlement  and  investment  in  Malaysia  –  future  prospects”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 27 September 2012. 
 This decade has seen significant change in the configuration of the global economy. In this 
evolving global landscape, Asia is emerging as an increasingly important component of the 
world  economy.  During  this  period,  most  of  the  Asian  economies  have  experienced 
remarkable  growth,  despite  a  most  challenging  environment.  With  rising  incomes  in  the 
region,  Asia  has  also  become  a  huge  cumulative  market. This  trend  has  in  turn  prompted 
greater intra-regional trade and investment activities. A more recent trend in the Asian region 
is  the  greater  regional  financial  integration  that  is  facilitating  greater  cross-border  financial 
flows in the region that is funding productive investment activities in the region. 
Following  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  the  most  pressing  challenge  for  the  world 
economy is to achieve economic strength that is sustainable. While most national economies 
have implemented wide  ranging policy measures to promote growth, equally important are 
the efforts to sustain world trade which will be mutually reinforcing to global growth. China’s 
economic journey in this global shift and the growing influence of renminbi ushers us into a 
new  exciting  era.  China,  by  its  sheer  size  and  its  economic  performance  has  significant 
potential  to  contribute  to  world  growth.  Its  demand,  trade  and  cross-border  investment 
activities  will  reinforce  this  potential.  The  recent  trend  for  the  use  of  the  renminbi  for 
settlement of trade and cross-border investment activities will facilitate this potential. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  Seminar  on  “Renminbi  Trade  Settlement  and 
Investment”.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  our  guest 
speakers from the People’s Bank of China and the Ministry of Commerce (Mofcom) of the 
People’s Republic of China. I also wish to welcome our panellists from the financial industry 
and the corporate sector that are here today to share their experiences in operating in the 
current challenging economic and financial environment. 
The  economic  relationship  between  Malaysia  and  China  is  longstanding  and  grounded  on 
strong foundations. Today, China is Malaysia’s largest trading partner accounting for 14% of 
our country’s total trade. Malaysia also ranks as China’s most significant trading partner in 
the  Asean  region.  Our  trade  with  China  has  continued  to  expand,  increasing  by  20% 
annually, in this recent two decades. Our bilateral trade with China is now seven times higher 
than the level in the early 1990’s. 
Our economic relations have also evolved and expanded beyond the area of trade – into the 
services sector, particularly the financial sector, tourism and education. China is among the 
top  five  tourism  markets  for  Malaysia  and  Chinese  nationals  represent  the  largest  foreign 
student population in Malaysia’s private universities and colleges. Bilateral investment is also 
gaining  importance,  notably  with  the  two  recent  Government-to-Government  agreements, 
involving  the  establishment  of  an  industrial  park  in  both  countries.  The  cornerstone  to  the 
strength of our bilateral economic relations is the ability to continually harness the synergies 
and economic complementarities that exists between our economies. 
The  use  of  renminbi  for  trade  settlement  provides  a  natural  hedge  for  businesses  with 
renminbi  obligations. It also  generates  cost  savings  and minimises  exchange  rate  risks,  in 
particular, it reduces the exposure to exchange rate fluctuations of a third currency. While the 
dollar  will continue to remain an important currency for settlement of trade obligations, the 
availability  of  renminbi  would  provide  companies  an  additional  currency  for  such  trade 
settlement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The benefits to be gained can be significant given the large and increasing trade base with 
China  which  stood  at  RM167  billion  in  2011.  By  undertaking  the  transactions  in  local 
currency,  exporters  and  importers  in  China  would  be  able  to  eliminate  the  hedging  and 
conversion  costs.  The  reduction  in  transaction  costs  for  the  exporters  and  importers  will 
contribute  towards  more  competitive  pricing  for  both  exporters  and  importers.  The  full 
potential benefits are however expected to be realised in stages. The benefits will rise as the 
trade  volume  settled  in  renminbi  increases  and  reaches  a  critical  volume  in  terms  of  size 
which will in turn allow for the realisation of economies of scale. 
For the renminbi to be considered an option for both exporters and importers to settle their 
trade  obligations  in  addition  to  the  major  currencies.  There  needs  to  be  an  efficient  and 
cost-competitive  source  of  financing  in  renminbi  and  a  diversified  investment  avenue.  In 
particular, it is recognised that discernible progress in three areas are needed to be put in 
place at an early stage to support the use of renminbi, that is, to improve access to renminbi 
liquidity, to have the supporting infrastructure and framework and to provide information on 
the  use  of  the  renminbi  for  trade  and  productive  investment transactions.  More  than  three 
years  ago,  in  early  2009,  the  Bank  entered  into  a  Currency  Swap  Arrangement  (CSA) 
Agreement  with  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  which  was  renewed  early  this  year  with  an 
expanded  amount  of  Renminbi  180  billion.  The  objective  is  to  ensure  a  ready  supply  of 
renminbi in the domestic financial markets to meet the demand by businesses. 
An important piece of the infrastructure that was put in place in 2010 was the provision of 
direct quotes between renminbi and ringgit in the interbank foreign exchange market on the 
China  Foreign  Exchange  Trade  System  (CFETS).  Efforts  were  also  made  to  enhance  the 
transparency  in  the  exchange  rate  between  renminbi  and  ringgit  for  the  trade-related 
settlement transactions. In March this year, the real time gross settlement system in Malaysia 
was expanded to include settlement services in renminbi. This serves to provide a safe and 
efficient  clearing  and  settlement  platform  that  supports  trade  and  investment  flows  in 
renminbi. 
A nationwide awareness program by the banking institutions and the business chambers is 
also creating greater awareness on renminbi for trade settlement and investment. The Bank 
has  also  participated  in  the  Chinese  interbank  bond  market.  In  2011  alone,  the  size  of 
renminbi  trade  settlement  in  Malaysia  expanded  by  four  times  from  the  level  a  year  ago, 
reflecting a growing interest in renminbi as a settlement currency. 
The  expansion  in  renminbi  usage  has  also  been  underpinned  by  a  diffusion  of  corporate 
players, both in size and across the sectors. Not only has the number of corporate players 
increased, but there has been a shift in relative significance in the use of renminbi as a trade 
settlement currency from the smaller to the larger corporations. There has also been more 
widespread  corporate  participation  from  a  larger  cross-segment  of  economic  activities, 
namely  the  commodity  based  industries,  manufacturing  and  services  sectors  that  also 
includes tourism and education. There has also been an increase in the number of financial 
institutions participating in renminbi trade settlements. There are now 19 financial institutions 
that facilitated such trade settlements, double the number in 2009. 
More recently, there has been an increase in the use of the renminbi as an investment and 
funding  currency.  In  the  first  seven  months  of  this  year,  renminbi  deposits  in  the  banking 
system  had  tripled.  Also  evident  is  the  growing  interest  in  raising  financing  in  renminbi  to 
meet funding requirements, with two issuances of offshore renminbi sukuk out of Malaysia 
and a renminbi bond issuance by Malaysian corporations. 
The  progress  made  thus  far,  while  modest,  has  significant  potential  given  the  significant 
volume  of  the  bilateral  cross-border  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment  between  our 
economies.  Trade  settled  in  renminbi  currently  only  represents  slightly  above  1%  of 
Malaysia’s  bilateral  trade  with  China.  There  is  therefore  potential  for  this  to  increase.  In 
addition, funding and foreign direct investment activities in renminbi have also increased with 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  greater  awareness  on  the  use  of  renminbi  for  the  settlement  of  trade  and  direct 
investment transactions and on the potential to raise financing by businesses. 
Important to this initiative is the access to a wider array of portfolio investment avenues in 
renminbi. The availability of renminbi bonds and sukuk as well as other financial products for 
portfolio investment will not only encourage renminbi receivables, but it will also help to build 
a pool of trade-driven renminbi liquidity in the Malaysian market. Another important channel 
that  would  support  the  use  of  renminbi  in  trade  and  investment  is  repatriation  as  foreign 
direct investment in real sector activities in China increases. 
Raising funding in renminbi has also emerged as a further form of business in the Malaysian 
financial system. This has been the conventional channels by the banking institutions and the 
issuance of renminbi instruments in the bond and sukuk market in Malaysia. Malaysia is well 
positioned to realise this growth potential in renminbi bond and sukuk, given our market size 
and  supporting  infrastructure.  Malaysia  not  only  has  the  largest  debt  securities  market  in 
Southeast Asia, but it is also a leading international centre for sukuk issuance. Both markets 
are evolving as a multi-currency bond and sukuk market. 
As the renminbi market expands, more information would be needed to provide awareness 
on market developments. As we transition to using other currencies for trade settlement it will 
also require businesses to gain new expertise, develop new arrangements and to build new 
networks. 
Let me now conclude my remarks. As Asia, and in particular, China’s greater prominence in 
the global economy, a dynamic response is required in this new operating environment that 
is now upon us. One of the changes that will shape the international financial system in the 
years  to  come  is  the  wider  role  of  the  renminbi  in  trade  and  finance.  While  existing 
international reserve currencies will remain to be important, this will represent an additional 
currency in the international financial system. This is an expected development as the world 
economy becomes increasingly multi-polar. 
In a more complex and more challenging economic and financial environment that is prone to 
greater  volatility  and  increased  uncertainty,  there  will  be  a  greater  trend  to  diversify  risks. 
This will also contribute to overall global stability in the international financial system. On our 
part, the Bank is committed to collaborate with the Chinese authorities to facilitate the use of 
renminbi  that  is  anchored  on  real  sector  activities  for  the  mutual  benefit  of  our  countries. 
Today’s  seminar  will  discuss  the  issues  concerning  the  use  of  renminbi  in  trade  and 
investment. On this note, I wish you all a productive and successful engagement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
