Ivan Iskrov: Global and regional challenges to the economy and the 
financial system. Do we have working solutions? 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ivan  Iskrov,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  before  the 
International  Scientific  Forum  “Global  and  Regional  Challenges  to  the  Economy  and  the 
Financial  System:  Do  We  Have  Working  Solutions?”  organised  by  the  VUZF  University, 
Sofia, 10 May 2012. 
 Dear Mr. Rector, 
Dear Participants and guests of the conference, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour and a pleasure for me to take part in the opening of this International Scientific 
Forum  organized  by  the  VUZF  University.  I  would  like  to  thank  its  Rector,  Prof.  Vazov  for 
inviting me, and through him to congratulate the University on the occasion of its remarkable 
10th Anniversary. 
The academia are famous for their conservatism but here, only a decade after its foundation, 
your University established itself as one of the leading universities in Bulgaria in the area of 
finance  and  insurance.  An  example  of  the  high  European  standards  to  which  the 
VUZF University aspires, are the joint bachelor’s and master’s degree programmes with the 
University of Sheffield. In addition, the Extended “Erasmus” University Charter awarded by 
the European Commission provides opportunities to VUZF University students to train and 
have internships at EU universities and companies.  
It  was  announced  lately  that  in  the  recent  five  years  55  thousand  people  have  graduated 
economy  in  Bulgaria.  Against  the  background  of  this  interest  to  higher  education  in 
economics,  the  VUZF  University  gained  a  reputation  as  one  of  the  most  attractive  higher 
education  establishments  for  young  people  seeking  the  optimum  combination  between 
theoretical knowledge and practical training. One of the reasons is that VUZF University is 
known  for  its  policy  of  attracting  as  priority  professors  of  great  experience,  acclaimed  as 
practiced professionals in their area of expertise. 
This  is  very  gratifying  for  me,  because  as  an  employer  in  large  financial  institutions  since 
1997 I have been aware that the discrepancy between theoretical knowledge and practice is 
a  serious  issue  facing  newly-minted  economists  upon  their  graduation.  And  practical 
experience  gives  a  great  momentum  at  the  beginning  of  any  young  person’s  career 
–  because  it  not  only  teaches  them  specific  professional  skills,  but  also  develops  their 
comprehensive qualities, such as team work skills, efficient time management, motivation to 
seek alternative solutions in a competitive environment, etc. 
VUZF  University  however  is  not  just  a  place  of  education,  it  is  a  centre  of  research, 
discussions and generation of ideas. Today’s forum is another proof of this. 
A  year  ago,  again  before 
the  audience  of  a  scientific  conference  organized  by 
VUZF University,  I  expressed  my  purely  professional  dissatisfaction  with  the  fact  that  we 
rarely hear the prudent voice of the Bulgarian academia. While the world has been analyzing 
and discoursing for years on the causes, manifestations, and lessons learned from the global 
crisis, our academic community rarely expresses any views on these issues and seems to be 
still encapsulated in its own circle, engaged in its internal management or even day-to-day 
problems. 
Therefore I am glad now to admit that in this also VUZF University is an exception. I have 
been  following  with  interest  the  public  appearances  of  your  rector,  vice  rector,  and  other 
professors  and  academics  of  your  university.  VUZF  University  representatives  have  often 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
come  up  with  authoritative  public  comments  on  topical  economic  subjects  of  great  public 
significance. 
Today I congratulate VUZF University for outpacing “the older” universities of economics by 
organizing this timely discussion. The announced topic – “Global and Regional Challenges to 
the Economy and the Financial System: Do We Have Working Solutions?” – speaks for itself 
and is an eloquent testimony to the importance of today’s forum. 
Because  external  environment  is  of  special  significance for the  dynamics  of  such  an  open 
economy as that of Bulgaria. It is a known fact that the original causes of the global financial 
and subsequently economic crisis did not stem from our region or from Europe’s emerging 
markets. Still, we should in no way take comfort in the external origin of the crisis because no 
matter  what  the  origins  of  the  crisis  might  be,  we,  here  in  Bulgaria,  must  deal  with  its 
consequences. 
This  is  the  right  place  to  stress  that  the  BNB  is  aware  of  its  huge  responsibility  for  the 
financial stability of this country and consistently works in fulfilment of the functions and tasks 
assigned to it by law. 
In  its  work,  the  Central  Bank  collaborates  with  many  other  international  and  national 
institutions,  and  whenever  a  need  arises,  it  steps  into  the  role  of  a  constructive  opponent. 
Because, as I have stressed on various occasions, it should not surprise us, nor should we 
show intolerance to the fact that the political institutions in the democratic countries are very 
sensitive  especially  with  regard  to  quick  achievements  within  the  context  of  the  electoral 
cycle. Whereas the tasks of central banks go beyond the horizon of the next parliamentary or 
presidential  elections.  We  are  guided  by  the  understanding  that  we  have  to  keep  our 
reputation  as  institutions  with  national  responsibility,  holding  as  our  priority  the  long-term 
economic  interests  of  the  people  and  of the  state.  Hence, the fundamental  logic  of the  so 
very important (and very strictly adhered to throughout the EU) principle of national central 
bank  independence  and  the  need  to  provide  independent  analyses  and  information  to  the 
general public.  
In this sense, we, at the BNB, just as we have done so far, will always support an economic 
policy in Bulgaria that does not threaten long-term economic interests at the cost of achieving 
quick economic effects – such as the policy of continuing structural reforms, enhancing the 
efficiency  of  institutions  and  improving  the  general  environment  for  doing  business  in  this 
country.  The  BNB  traditionally  supports  conservative  fiscal  policy  owing  to  which  Bulgaria 
today demonstrates excellent fiscal indicators and given the stable banking system we have 
reasons  to  expect  that  our  new  issue  of  euro-denominated  Bulgarian  global  bonds  will  be 
well  received.  We  would  also  welcome  efforts  at  speeding  up  privatization  and  active 
concessioning – inasmuch as they would not only strengthen our country’s fiscal position, but 
would also improve the long-term competitiveness of the Bulgarian economy. We, however, 
cannot be indifferent to any ungrounded economic experiments whatsoever.  
At  the  same  time,  the  range  of  working  solutions  for  Bulgaria’s  economic  prosperity  must 
also take into account the analysis of the comparative advantages of the Bulgarian economy 
in a global context. 
In fact, it is exactly the current crisis that has highlighted and provided empirical evidence of 
the resilience of Bulgaria’s economy. Allow me to recall that before the crisis many argued 
that the currency board in Bulgaria was restraining the economy’s flexibility and that the high 
current account deficit (above 1/4 of GDP in 2007) was a dreadful “imbalance” that could in 
no  way  be  funded  in  the  event  of  capital  flight  from  the  country.  To  the  surprise  of  many 
institutions and experts, a great part of them of proven experience and repute, BNB’s gross 
international  foreign  exchange  reserves  increased  from  BGN  24.9  billion  as  at  the  end  of 
2008 to BGN 26.1 billion at the end of 2011. Presently the lev is more than 150% covered 
with  BNB’s  international  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  highest  quality  (not  even  taking 
into  account  the  government’s  deposit).  In  short,  for  fifteen  years  now  businesses  and 
citizens have benefited from the predictability and stability resulting from the fixed exchange 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rate and the stable Bulgarian banking system. Not lastly, in the past year the current account 
turned positive after an impressive growth of Bulgaria’s exports for two years in a row (by 
over 30% annually in each year), and at a growing share in total EU imports. All this offers 
interesting  matter  for  discussion  at  a  forum  like  this  one.  How  do  adjustments  and 
counteracting  “imbalances”  in  a  small  and  open  economy  with  a  currency  board  fit  into 
orthodox  economic  theories  and  explanations  from  popular  textbooks,  which  are  as  a  rule 
written about economies quite different from that of Bulgaria, and by authors of a radically 
different economic background? I am curious as to what conclusion today’s scientific forum 
will reach.  
Another  big  myth  about  Bulgaria  was  the  imminent  “collapse”  of  our  banking  system 
(because  of  the  “avalanche”  of  bad  loans  and  the  “dependence”  on  foreign  banks  which 
would have run away in panic and withdrawn their capital from Bulgaria). None of all these 
apocalyptic  prophecies  has  happened.  Our  banking  system  kept  sizable  buffers  and 
demonstrated impressive for the whole EU ratios of capital adequacy and liquidity. Given the 
high level of domestic depositors’ trust (only in one year, until March, total deposits increased 
by  over  BGN  5  billion),  the  dependence  on  foreign  sources  of  funding  diminished 
considerably – at end-March less than 13% of total attracted resources comes from parent 
banks  abroad,  as  opposed  to  nearly  1/4  at  end-2008.  Ultimately,  unlike some  of  the  more 
advanced economies, no bank in Bulgaria needed to be rescued. 
And the very frequent headlines about “bad” loans do not reveal the true picture in Bulgaria 
as compared with the other economies in the EU. The reason is that the legal framework, 
financial reporting standards and regulatory practices in the various countries are rarely the 
same, and this seriously hampers any comparisons across countries (as an example, some 
countries  directly  write  off  and  keep  off-balance  sheet  a  large  part  of  their  non-performing 
loans).  For  instance,  focusing  solely  on  ‘bad’  loans  may  be  misleading  if  it  is  not 
accompanied  by  the  clarification  that  the  assets  in  the  banking  system  balance  sheet  are 
very little exposed to the risk of mark-to-market revaluations (and exactly the manifestation of 
that  risk  became  the  biggest  problem  in  many  of  the  “advanced”  banking  systems). 
Furthermore, it is very common in Bulgaria to comment on the gross non-performing (over 
90 days  past-due)  loans  ratio,  whereas  the  economically  more  significant  ratio  is  the  “net 
non-performing (over 90 days past-due) loans/net loans” ratio – it correctly reflects the fact 
that the risk has already been taken into consideration in the income statement through the 
impairment costs that banks have actually made. Also, as a rule, net non-performing loans 
represent  the  part  of  the  loan  portfolio  covered  by  highly  liquid  (and  acceptable  under  the 
BNB‘s  high  standards)  collateral.  Net  non-performing  loans  in  Bulgaria  hold  a  share  of 
10.71% at end-March 2012. What I mean to say is that the analyses and conclusions about 
non-performing loans across countries are useful only when they are based on comparable 
values. 
Despite  the  objective  indicators,  all  the  resilience  and  adaptability  of  the  economy  and 
banking  system  in  Bulgaria  remain  unnoticed  by  many  international  observers  and  the 
leading world media. Even the analyses made by European and international organisations, 
known  for  their  high  expertise,  still  lack  understanding  of  the  economic  specifics  in  the 
different countries. Instead, they often use the easier approach (which has proved wrong) to 
group countries and entire regions by meaningless geographical characteristics, and these 
are  simply  “labelled”  along  with  superficial  and  clichéd  conclusions.  Such  geographical 
approach  that  fails  to  take  into  account  the  very  diverse  economic  structures,  institutional 
environment,  or  even  political  and  historical  traditions,  may  well  be  appropriate  in 
meteorology, but definitely not in economic analyses! I believe that today’s conference will 
touch on this range of issues too. 
That is why I expect to have some of the above-mentioned issues analysed today at your 
forum. Seeking useful ideas and working solutions for exiting the crisis would continue, as 
the crisis itself is not over yet. We are far from having ensured that lasting recovery of the 
economy  back  to  the  rates  of  growth  that  correspond  to  its  potential.  In  Bulgaria  and  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Europe  as  a  whole  the  risks  to  economic  development  remain,  as  can  be  seen  from  the 
continuing flows of negative data – limited consumption, weak investment interest, subdued 
labour market, volatile financial markets. 
I wish you fruitful discussions and success to your forum! 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
