Benoît Coeré: The reform of financial regulation – priorities from a 
European Central Bank perspective 
Dinner speech by Mr Benoît Coeré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, to the Association for Financial Markets in Europe (AFME), Paris, 6 March 2012. 
 I wish to thank Marco Protopapa, Johannes Lindner, Balázs Zsámboki, Jürgen Kirchhof, Giacomo Caviglia, Gábor 
Gyura  and  Olya  Ranguelova  for  their  contributions  to  the  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am very pleased to be with you here in my new capacity as a Board member of the ECB. In 
my  remarks  today  I  wish  to  focus  on  some  regulatory  initiatives  which  I  regard  as  being 
instrumental to a stable, well-functioning financial sector. 
At the peak of the financial crisis, the Group of Twenty (G20) committed to an unprecedented 
overhaul of the financial regulatory framework. As you may know, it assigned the Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  a  central  role  in  developing  and  overseeing  the  concrete  regulatory 
initiatives  as  well  as  monitoring  their  implementation.  Indeed,  international  coordination  is 
vital when dealing today’s complex and integrated financial system. Three and a half years 
after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, I can safely say that much has been done to 
improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  drawing  on  the  lessons  learned  during  the 
crisis. Still, the overhaul of the regulatory and supervisory landscape is not complete: several 
pieces of the puzzle still have to be fitted in. 
Of the various areas that have been addressed by the FSB, I would like to focus today on 
three main issues that I deem of special importance from the ECB’s perspective. First, I will 
discuss  the  timely  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  new  Basel  III  framework,  both  at 
international and EU level. Second, I will consider the ongoing work to address the “too big to 
fail”  problem,  particularly  within  the  specific  EU  landscape.  Third,  I  will  address  some  key 
policy issues in the field of OTC derivatives, financial markets infrastructures and the review 
of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive, taking into account their importance for the 
orderly working of financial market activities. 
Timely and consistent implementation of Basel III  
2. 
The new Basel III rules form the cornerstone of the new prudential regime for banks. In view 
of the G20’s commitment, a timely and consistent cross-country implementation of the Basel 
standards as well as the subsequent enforcement of the new rules are clearly high-priority 
issues  which  will  pose  significant  challenges  for  the  authorities  and  the  banking  industry 
alike.  I  very  much  welcome  in  this  regard  the  Basel  Committee’s  decision  to  assess  the 
implementation of Basel III in parallel across major jurisdictions, namely the EU, the US and 
Japan this year. This effort is instrumental for promoting an international level playing field.  
In the EU, as we all know, the EU Commission published last year its proposal for a Capital 
Requirements Directive and the Capital Requirements Regulation, which together constitute 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  “CRD  IV”,  the  purpose  of  which  is  to  implement  Basel  III  in  the  EU.  The  ECB,  in 
accordance with its statutory task, provided its Opinion1.  
Let  me  first  and  foremost  stress  that  we  acknowledge  the  leading  role  of  the  Commission 
and  welcome  its  commitment  to  a  consistent  transposition  of  the  new  capital  and  liquidity 
rules into European law. One very important topic is the introduction of a single rulebook in 
the  EU.  We  consider  such  a  rulebook  as  an  important  step  towards  establishing  a  single 
market  for  financial  services  and  enhancing  financial  integration  in  Europe.  One  of  the 
benefits  of  this  rulebook  would  be  a  commonly  agreed  definition  of  regulatory  capital.  The 
consistent  application  of  such  a  definition  would  make  it  easier  to  compare  eligible  capital 
instruments from bank to bank within the EU, thereby strengthening the confidence of market 
participants  in  the  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  banks’  capital  and,  more  generally,  in  the 
resilience of the EU’s financial sector. 
The ECB proposes in its Opinion the possibility for national authorities, within the framework 
of a single EU rulebook, to adopt – with specific safeguards – stricter requirements in their 
respective Member States for macro-prudential reasons. This is necessary because Member 
States need to address country-specific financial stability concerns stemming from different 
structural features of their domestic financial systems. It is key that the possibility for Member 
States to apply these stricter requirements should be framed within the single EU rulebook 
framework. To this end, specific safeguards should be put in place. First, definitions should 
remain  intact;  only  quantitative  ratios  and  limits  can  be  tightened.  Second,  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board could play a coordinating role in assessing financial stability concerns 
and possible unintended consequences and spillovers to other Member States. Furthermore, 
the European Banking Agency (EBA) and the ESRB should publish regular updates on their 
websites  of  measures  adopted  by  Member  States  and  the  underlying  reasons  for  stricter 
requirements. Third, where financial stability concerns that triggered the application of more 
stringent  measures  cease  to  exist,  the  quantitative  ratios  and  limits  should  return  to  a 
harmonised level set by the regulation. 
3. 
Towards a pan-European approach to the resolution of systemic financial 
institutions 
The  FSB  has  adopted  a  dual  approach  to  deal  with  the  so-called  systemically  important 
financial institutions (SIFIs), namely by targeting both tighter loss absorbency requirements 
as  well  as  improving  the  resolution  technology  available  to  authorities.  A  milestone  in  this 
area  is  the  international  framework  for  global  systemically  important  banks  agreed  by  the 
FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  The  framework  proposes  a 
progressive capital surcharge, depending on a bank’s systemic importance. This surcharge 
system is necessary to provide banks with correct incentives to decrease over time their own 
systemic footprint.  
Even more crucial, and much less advanced, is the resolution approach to the “too big to fail” 
problem. During the financial crisis, the failure of a large cross-border banking group was not 
a  credible  option.  As  a  result,  governments  had  to  resort  to  massive  taxpayer-sponsored 
bailouts, in some cases even the ring-fencing of banks’ assets within national jurisdictions. 
This was a clear sign of the lack of adequate resolution powers, which would have minimised 
disruption to the financial system as well as the burden on public budgets. 
                                                 
1  Opinion of the European Central Bank of 25 January 2012 on a proposal for a Directive on the access to the 
activity  of  credit  institutions  and  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  investment  firms  and  a 
proposal  for  a  Regulation  on  prudential  requirements  for  credit  institutions  and  investment  firms  at 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_con_2011_5_f.pdf 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This shortcoming was realised both globally and in the EU. Last November in Cannes, the 
G20  endorsed  the  FSB’s  new  international  standards  called  “Key  Attributes  of  Effective 
Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions”. On the basis of this document, the European 
Commission  is  about  to  finalise  its  legislative  proposals  for  an  EU  framework  for  bank 
recovery and resolution.  
The  consistent  implementation  of  these  Key  Attributes  at  international  level  is  clearly  a 
priority for the near future. How will all this work in practice for large cross-border banks in 
the EU’s Single Market? The Commission’s proposals – which I fully support – will provide a 
common  language  for  domestic  authorities  for  recovery  and  resolution  planning,  set  up  a 
common toolbox of supervisory and resolution measures, and also establish some principles 
for cross-border cooperation. All this already looks like a huge step forward from the status 
quo,  where  national  regimes  are  lacking  the  necessary  resolution  powers,  and  not 
harmonised with each other, either. Moreover, we should not forget that in the Single Market 
major banks operate in more than a dozen countries via branches and subsidiaries. When 
Fortis  was  broken  up  in  2008,  only  three  countries  were  involved  directly  in  its  crisis 
management, but cooperation still proved to be difficult. That is why I strongly believe that 
the EU needs to make progress towards a truly integrated resolution regime that adequately 
mirrors the cross-border nature of its banking sector.  
First, let me mention that bank levies have been already imposed in several EU countries. 
Although they are undeniably a burden on the financial sector, I believe collecting ex ante 
funds  for  resolution  is  ultimately  beneficial  for  all  parties,  if  the  financial  system  becomes 
safer in the long run. But having purely national financing arrangements would again present 
the practical and political challenges of coordination and eventually sharing burdens among 
several countries. A superior option would be to collect levies directly at EU level. Should this 
prove  politically  unfeasible,  we  would  still  at  least  need  to  have  rules  on  how  the  national 
financing  arrangements  should  together  contribute  to  the  overall  resolution  costs.  Pooling 
resources in a single pan-EU resolution fund would bring a number of positive elements into 
the  resolution  framework  of  cross-border  banking  crises:  it  would  reduce  the  amount  that 
would  be  subject  to  burden-sharing;  it  would  increase  risk  diversification  and  additionally 
provide the right incentives for cooperation. In any case, precise and transparent procedures 
and  balanced  decision-making  mechanisms  relating  to  the  activation  and  use  of  the  funds 
will be necessary to make it acceptable for Member States. 
Second, I also think that a pan-European financing arrangement is the pre-condition for an 
even more ambitious step forward, namely the establishment of a single European resolution 
authority. Why would we need such a body? We have already learnt from past experience 
that  crisis  management  and  resolution  calls  for  incredibly  quick  decisions.  This  typically 
means taking over a bank on a weekend and opening it for customers on the Monday, for 
example in the form of a bridge bank. Considering all the legal and technical complexities of 
such a move in a cross-border context, the only efficient way to do this is to have a single 
authority taking the lead and relying on national resolution authorities as its agents.  
Certainly, a lot needs to be done to set up an integrated European resolution regime like this. 
But it is not something for the distant future. Recent events have underscored the need to be 
more ambitious – now. During the recent financial and sovereign crisis in Europe, we have 
seen  the  pernicious  interaction  between  weaknesses  in  the  financial  sector  and  fiscal 
imbalances. Many policy initiatives have been put in place to restore confidence in European 
banks, despite concerns over their sovereigns. Low short-term interest rates in the euro area 
should  in  the  short  term  help  to  prevent  a  disorderly  adjustment  of  balance  sheets  and 
support  the  profitability  of  financial  institutions,  but  they  may  weaken  the  incentives  for 
repairing balance sheets in the first place. A pan-European financing arrangement would be 
one of the most effective measures to break the link between the creditworthiness of banks 
and that of their sovereigns. Its establishment would also remove the need for ad hoc policy 
measures in response to crises, such as the one-off EU-wide capital exercise conducted by 
the EBA, which incorporated market valuations of sovereign exposures in times of stress. I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
am  also  convinced  that  such  an  integrated  resolution  framework  is  likely  to  be  the  most 
suitable for the industry as well, since it ensures a level playing field and that the relevant 
rules are consistent throughout the EU.  
illustrated 
OTC derivatives, market infrastructures, and the MiFID review 
4. 
Let me now briefly comment on something that could be considered the “plumbing” of the 
financial markets: namely, over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives and market infrastructure. The 
reform of OTC derivatives markets has been a key part of the work to enhance the financial 
system’s  resilience  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  Indeed,  the  limited  development  of 
financial  market  infrastructures,  weaknesses  in  bilateral  risk  management  and  the  lack  of 
transparency  regarding  counterparty  exposures  in  OTC  derivatives  markets  contributed  to 
the  financial  market  turbulence,  as  the  cases  of  Bear  Stearns,  Lehman  Brothers  and  AIG 
have  painfully  demonstrated.  These  cases  also 
the  potential  systemic 
repercussions of malfunctioning OTC derivatives markets, particularly in view of their large 
size and close linkages with the underlying cash markets.  
To enhance the functioning of OTC derivatives markets, the G20 agreed that standardised 
OTC derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms and 
cleared  through  central  counterparties  by  the  end  of  2012;  in  addition,  OTC  derivative 
contracts should be reported to trade repositories.  
I  see  two  particular  priorities  at  the  current  juncture.  First,  I  have  the  impression  that 
international discussions in recent months have focused heavily on the implementation of the 
mandatory  clearing  obligation  and  paid  much  less  attention  to  objectives  in  the  fields  of 
standardisation and trading. We should not forget that standardisation is a pre-condition for 
centralised  clearing.  Second,  as  the  EU  and  the  US  are  moving  to  finalise  the  technical 
details of their new legislative requirements for OTC derivatives, I believe that further efforts 
are necessary to ensure consistent requirements. To this end, it will be essential that both 
the final EU and US rules converge to fully reflect the substance of the updated principles for 
financial market infrastructures, which the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems 
and the International Organization of Securities Commissions will release next month. 
Let  me  briefly  touch  on  the  further  development  of  financial  market  infrastructures  for 
OTC derivatives,  focusing  on  the  role  of  central  clearing  counterparties  (CCPs)  and  trade 
repositories. The rationale for fostering the use of CCPs is that a CCP reduces systemic risk 
by  acting  as  counterparty  to  every  trade,  applying  multilateral  netting,  and  particularly 
stringent risk management practices. In this way, potential contagion risks in the case of a 
default of a CCP clearing member are minimised both for the CCP itself and for the financial 
system more broadly. On the other hand, trade repositories play a critical role in providing 
centralised data record services for OTC derivatives transactions regardless of their degree 
of  standardisation.  This  enables  a  comprehensive  overview  of  open  positions  and  the 
corresponding exposures arising from OTC derivatives transactions. 
There  is  a  longer-term  trend  towards  global  and  offshore  financial  market  infrastructures 
which is linked to the economies of scale inherent in network industries and intensified by the 
introduction of mandatory clearing for OTC derivatives. As a consequence, we are seeing a 
growing concentration of systemic risks in a limited number of global CCPs. Such risks have 
not yet been adequately addressed. In particular, cross-border oversight arrangements often 
do not exist or are insufficiently developed, which implies that foreign authorities do not have 
the appropriate information to assess possible risks to their jurisdictions and/or to take action 
to  reduce  them.  Furthermore,  procedures  and  loss-sharing  in  the  case  of  the  default  or 
resolution of global/offshore CCPs have not yet been developed. 
Let me also mention that, in parallel, an increasing number of jurisdictions are considering 
the  potential  adoption  of  location  policies  for  CCPs  predominantly  using  a  non-domestic 
currency. I would like reaffirm that as a rule, the core infrastructures for the euro should be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
located in the euro area. When they are not located in the euro area, they should comply with 
the CPSS-IOSCO principles, and also with central bank-relevant policies so as to preserve 
the integrity of the currency. Moreover, they should be subject to effective oversight by euro 
area  authorities.  There  can  and  should  be  no  automatic  granting  of  liquidity  to  offshore 
CCPs. 
Let me finally say a word on the revision of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 
–  the  MiFID  review.  The  ECB  fully  supports  the  European  Commission’s  proposals,  which 
mark  an  important  step  towards  strengthening  investor  protection  and  creating  a  sounder 
and  safer  financial  system  in  Europe.  The  EU  regulatory  framework  needed  a  revamp  to 
adequately take into account financial innovation and the latest technological developments, 
and to address the G20 commitments to tackle the less regulated and more opaque parts of 
the financial system. With regard to the specific measures that are being proposed, let me 
mention  a  number  of  key  issues.  First,  the  ECB  welcomes  the  upgrade  to  the  market 
structure framework, which will extend the scope to a new trading platform, i.e. the organised 
trading  facility  (OTF).  Second,  the  ECB  also  fully  supports  the  proposed  extension  of 
pre-  and  post-trade  transparency  requirements  beyond  equity  instruments,  to  include 
structured  products  and  derivatives.  When  properly  calibrated,  such  measures  would 
enhance  price  formation  and  support  the  evaluation  of  financial  instruments.  Third,  the 
proposals  to  increase  data  consolidation  are  also  crucial,  both  for  investors  and  the 
authorities. They would ensure efficient comparison of prices and trades across venues and 
facilitate the monitoring of market abuse by the supervisory authorities. Finally, as regards 
the  proposals  to  tackle  the  development  of  new  trading  strategies,  such  as  algorithmic 
trading  and  high-frequency  trading,  the  ECB  supports  these  amendments  insofar  as  they 
would enhance the efficient functioning and integrity of markets. 
Conclusion  
5. 
In my comments tonight, I have attempted to give a brief overview of some of the themes 
which I consider important for the creation of a stronger and more resilient financial sector.  
International coordination has reached unprecedented levels thanks to the distinguished role 
played  by  the  G20  and  the  FSB.  European  integration  has  made  giant  leaps  since  the 
Lamfalussy report of 2001 and the De Larosière report of 2009. But this is not enough. 
The  euro  area  is  an  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  an  “E-M-U”.  European  governments 
have strengthened the governance framework through the Six-Pack and the Fiscal Compact. 
Their  actions  to  address  fiscal  and  economic  imbalances  are  bearing  fruit.  They  should 
further enhance their efforts to boost the Single Market. So the “E” stands for “Economic”. 
The ECB has used conventional and non-conventional measures to support price stability. It 
is striving to restore the transmission channels of monetary policy and make sure that the 
impulse stemming from it is transmitted uniformly across the 17 economies of the euro area. 
So the “M”  stands for “Monetary”.  But the letter “F” – for financial – is missing: to operate 
smoothly  and  to  be  more  resilient  to  crises,  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  to 
become a true financial union.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
