Jens Weidmann: Containing the sovereign debt crisis – Germany's role 
and contribution 
Special address by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the High-
Level  Public-Private  Sector  Conference,  G-20  Agenda  under  the  Mexican  Chairmanship, 
Mexico City, 24 February 2012. 
 1. Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank Secretary José-Antonio Meade, Governor Agustín Carstens 
and  Managing  Director  Charles  Dallara  for  the  invitation  to  deliver  a  speech  to  such  a 
distinguished audience. 
It is the second time since 2003 that Mexico has hosted the G20. A lot has changed since 
then, however. Emerging market economies, including Mexico, have significantly increased 
their weight in the world economy. At the same time, the role and the standing of the G20 
have also changed appreciably. The G20’s upgrade among the global fora is partly due to 
the worst financial and economic crisis in decades, which hit the world economy in autumn 
2008. 
Although this crisis largely originated in the advanced economies, it may also have significant 
implications  for  emerging  market  economies.  For  example,  low  interest  rates  in  advanced 
economies  can  swell  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies,  while  distressed  banks 
may  curtail  their  cross-border  investment.  Moreover,  an  economic  slump  in  the  advanced 
economies squeezes emerging countries’ export chances. 
Mexico  has  assumed  the  G20  chairmanship  at  a  time  when  the  financial  crisis,  and  in 
particular  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  are  putting  a  severe  strain  on  global 
growth. Progress on the G20 agenda could contribute significantly to avoiding another global 
recession and to promoting sustainable global growth. I am very confident that the Mexican 
authorities will make this a successful presidency and I am looking forward to attending the 
G20 meetings during the Mexican chairmanship. 
I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  what  is  currently  still  the  most  severe  risk  for  global 
growth,  namely  the  euro-area  sovereign  debt  crisis.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  say 
something about the specifics of EMU – Europe’s economic and monetary union – and the 
role of the euro area’s major economic player Germany. 
Let  me  start  by  correcting  a  popular  misconception  about  Germany,  namely  the  mistaken 
view that Germany, while itself managing to dodge the flames of the current crisis, is now 
selfishly refusing to come to the aid of the stricken countries by acting as chief firefighter. 
Let us take a look at the facts. First, Germany is doing a great deal to help its partners. Thus 
the bulk of the containment measures rely heavily on Germany’s financial support and hence 
its economic strength and fiscal soundness. Second, Germany is acutely aware of the need 
to tackle the root causes and not just the symptoms of the crisis. This is why it is pressing 
strongly for institutional reforms of the EMU framework plus structural reforms and budgetary 
discipline in the member states. By advocating this approach, Germany is not trying to force 
its own economic philosophy on others, but rather is living up to its responsibility to ensure a 
stable and sustainable monetary union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The unique features driving the crisis – the specifics of EMU 
2. 
Why  is  it  that  the  euro  area  is  suffering  from  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  while  other  big 
economies are not? The answer to that question lies in the specific features of EMU, which 
are also the key to understanding the current problems of the euro area. Weighted by GDP, 
the euro area as a whole is less indebted than the United States, and even Greece is less 
indebted than Japan. So what are the specifics of EMU that explain the difference? 
The introduction of the euro eliminated exchange rate risks. This opened the way to welfare 
gains from stronger economic and financial integration. You pay with the same currency, no 
matter whether you are in Dublin, Helsinki, Lisbon or Rome. More importantly, the euro has 
proved to be a very stable currency – with a strong exchange rate and an annual inflation 
rate of about 2 % since its introduction.  
But while enjoying the upside of a common currency and low inflation, the euro-area member 
states  also  have  to  contend  with  the  downside  that  they  can  no  longer  offset  lost 
competitiveness by depreciating. Instead, they need to adjust in real terms. And “to adjust in 
real terms” is a very technical description of what is usually a very painful process involving 
lower  nominal  wage  growth  or  even  nominal  wage  cuts.  Another  implication  of  the  euro 
area’s single monetary policy is that the key interest rates are set for the currency bloc as a 
whole. If this one-size-fits-all monetary policy poses problems in a particular member state, it 
must  make  compensatory  adjustments  in  other  policy  fields.  Otherwise  macroeconomic 
divergences  may  arise.  Looming  credit  bubbles,  for  example,  have  to  be  curbed  by 
macroprudential measures or a more countercyclical fiscal policy.  
Unlike  the  centralised  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  economic  policy  remained 
decentralised  when  EMU  was  launched.  This, alongside  the  single  monetary  policy,  is  the 
key feature of EMU. Hence, even though member states are closely interlinked through the 
single market, trade and their financial systems, they nonetheless retain national autonomy 
over their fiscal policy and economic policy. 
This combination of a single centralised monetary policy and a plurality of decentralised fiscal 
policies harbours some potential risks. Some of them were foreseeable from the start. One 
risk  is  the  temptation  for  governments  to  overborrow  because  the  economic  costs  of 
excessive public debt, for example higher interest rates, can be more easily shifted to other 
member  states.  A  resulting  loosening  of  fiscal  discipline  in  individual  member  states  can 
endanger  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  This  potential  problem  can  be  greatly 
magnified by the possibility of shifting burdens between taxpayers of different member states 
via central bank balance sheets – without an explicit mandate from national legislators. This 
is  an  important  difference  compared  with  non-EMU  central  banks  that  have  used  their 
balance sheets as a policy instrument.  
The  forward-looking  institutional safeguards  put  in  place  by  the  monetary  union’s  founding 
fathers were laid down in the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). The 
Maastricht Treaty prohibits monetary financing and central bank lending to the public sector, 
stipulates a no-bail-out clause and spells out fiscal rules regarding deficit and debt ceilings. 
The  respective  excessive  deficit  procedures,  including  financial  sanctions,  are  specified  in 
the SGP. Moreover, it was expected that these formal checks would be reinforced by market 
pressure that would be sufficiently strong to discipline national governments. 
However, the markets apparently did not fully believe in the enforceability of the no-bail-out 
rule,  and  they  also  disregarded  the  lingering  risks  in  the  member  states.  Therefore,  the 
markets  did  not  properly  perform  their  expected  policing  function.  Furthermore,  the  SGP 
rules  were not  taken seriously  enough.  Even  Germany  ran  up  excessive  deficits  for  a  few 
years and, even worse, championed a reform of the SGP which ultimately further weakened 
the application of the fiscal rules. 
However, the EMU framework not only failed to avoid excessive deficits, it was also unable 
to prevent the build-up of macroeconomic imbalances within the euro area. In some member 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
states,  the  sharp  drop  in  interest  rates  after  joining  the  euro  was  not  used  to  increase 
productive  capacities  but  instead  was  mis-used  to  fuel  public  and  private  consumption  or 
domestic housing bubbles. The resulting increase in domestic inflation and wages eroded the 
competitiveness  of  the  countries  concerned  and  increased  their  dependence  on  capital 
imports.  Furthermore,  the  institutional  set-up  turned  a  blind  eye  to  increasing  risks  in  the 
banking systems of some member states – the latter problem, of course, was not unique to 
EMU. 
How the crisis started 
3. 
The lax application of the fiscal rules by several member states meant that they entered the 
financial crisis with their public finances in bad shape, including large debt levels and high 
structural deficits. Investors now started to pay greater attention to persistent current account 
deficits and financial sector instability, and so they began to question the sustainability of the 
respective countries’ public finances, focusing first and foremost on Greece. 
Germany,  by  contrast,  had  taken  a  different  path  prior  to  the  crisis.  Structural  reforms,  in 
particular of the labour market, moderate wage agreements, the transition to a more flexible 
application of collective bargaining legislation and a clean-up of firms’ balance sheets helped 
to  restore  the  competitiveness  of  German  companies.  Putting  this  development  into 
perspective,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  German  economy  had  lost  a  lot  of  its 
competitiveness following the reunification boom in the early 1990s. Consequently, Germany 
was regarded as the “sick man of Europe” during the first few years after the introduction of 
the euro, given its poor growth performance and continuously rising unemployment. 
The  task  of  implementing  the  reforms  and  regaining  competitiveness  entailed  significant 
political  and  social  costs.  However,  these  efforts,  supported  by  a  strong  expansion  in  the 
global  economy,  allowed  German  growth  to  rebound  after  2005.  The  country’s  strong 
economic  performance  helped  to  consolidate  public  finances.  In  2007,  Germany’s  general 
government budget was balanced, and unemployment had already fallen significantly. The 
German  economy’s  high  exposure  to  external  demand  made  it  vulnerable  to  the  global 
demand  shock  of  2008–09.  Nevertheless,  the  economy  recovered  very  quickly  from  what 
proved  to  be  the  worst  recession  in  post-war  history,  unemployment  is  still  falling  and 
employment  has  reached  a  post-unification  high.  Moreover,  the  negative  impact  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis on the German economy seems to be rather limited so far. The upswing 
has become less dependent on external demand, while domestic growth drivers have gained 
in importance. Thus, a key lesson that Germany has learned from the past decade is that 
ambitious structural reforms to tackle entrenched domestic problems may be costly at first, 
but ultimately they pay off. 
Although  the  German  economy  has  lost  momentum  over  the  past  few  months,  we  expect 
GDP growth to pick up soon. This expectation is, of course, predicated on the assumption 
that the sovereign debt crisis will be overcome step by step and will not further intensify. So 
what has to be done to overcome the crisis? 
Containing the crisis 
4. 
When  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  first  emerged  in  Greece  at  the  beginning  of  2010, 
policymakers reacted swiftly with fiscal rescue packages and unconventional monetary policy 
measures. Alas, nearly two years on, the crisis is still with us and has even intensified. It has 
now spilled over from Greece to other countries. With regard to Greece, some progress has 
been made during recent weeks. Let me say that I fundamentally welcome the fact that the 
euro-area finance ministers came to an agreement on Monday regarding a second financial 
assistance  programme  for  Greece.  In  order  to  achieve  a  turnaround  and  allow  further 
assistance, it is now essential for Greece to deliver on the promises that have been made. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Ultimately, Greece cannot be forced to comply with the programme. But it should be clear 
that no further disbursements will be warranted if Greece fails to keep its side of the bargain. 
A crucial requirement now is to prepare for the eventuality of a further escalation of the crisis 
by initiating appropriate ring-fencing measures. 
The  resilience  of  the  banking  system  is  to  be  increased  by  imposing  additional  capital 
buffers.  The  required  size  of  these  buffers  has  been  determined  through  a  stress  test 
conducted  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA).  It  is  now  up  to  the  banks,  where 
necessary  with  the  assistance  of  national  government  support  schemes,  to  meet  these 
requirements by the middle of the year.  
Policymakers have responded by devising comprehensive measures to make the euro area 
less vulnerable. These measures include strengthening the European rescue mechanisms. It 
has  been  decided  that  the  EFSF  and  the  ESM  will  have  a  combined  lending  capacity  of 
500 billion euros. In March, euro-area political leaders will assess whether it is necessary to 
increase  this  firepower  even  further.  Whatever  the  outcome  is,  a  disproportionately  large 
share of the financing of these rescue mechanisms is being and will continue to be borne by 
Germany  by  virtue  of  the  country’s  top  rating  and  the  high  degree  of  confidence  it  enjoys 
among investors. 
The  IMF  has  played  an  important  role  since  the  onset  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  –  by 
co-funding  assistance  programmes,  but  also  by  contributing  to  a  thorough  analysis  of  the 
root causes of the economic weaknesses in the programme countries. EU finance ministers 
committed  in  December  2011  to  providing  additional  resources  for  the  IMF  as  part  of  a 
broader  international  effort.  In  this  context  and  assuming  that  there  is  appropriate 
parliamentary support, the Deutsche Bundesbank, which manages the German contributions 
to  the  IMF,  has  pledged  a  new  bilateral  credit  line  of  41.5  billion  euros  to  go  to  the  IMF’s 
General Resources Account. Hence, these resources will be available to all IMF members. In 
order not to violate the legal framework of EMU, the resources provided to the Fund must 
have all the characteristics of a reserve instrument. In particular, the IMF must not become a 
vehicle for monetary financing of government deficits.  
Another issue that has been discussed in the context of ring-fencing is a stronger role for the 
Eurosystem  in  crisis  management.  However,  this  demand  ignores  the  fact  that  the 
Eurosystem  has  already  greatly  contributed  to  containing  the  crisis  via  its  various 
unconventional  monetary  measures.  This  has  already  stretched  central  banks’  mandate 
significantly, and going even further would undermine the credibility of monetary policy. I do 
not  need  to  tell  you  that  jeopardising  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  will  do  absolutely 
nothing to preserve the stability of the euro. 
This leads to a more general point. The crisis cannot be resolved solely by throwing money 
at it. While money can buy us time to tackle the crisis, it is imperative that we use that time in 
order to address its root causes. This approach is, by the way, fully in line with one of the 
priorities  defined  by  the  Mexican  G20  presidency:  “Economic  stabilization  and  structural 
reforms as foundations for growth and employment”. 
Regarding  the  situation  in  the  euro  area,  three  things  have  to  be  done.  First,  the  member 
states have to restore confidence through fiscal consolidation. This is unavoidable and, given 
the  dire  state  of  public  finances,  less  contractionary  than  is  often  assumed.  Conversely, 
criticising  the  German  authorities  for  not  using  their  alleged  “fiscal  space”  is  quite 
inappropriate. Since the spill-over effects of German fiscal policy on the peripheral countries 
of  the  euro  area  are  quite  limited,  the  benefits  would  be  much  smaller  than  the  harm  of 
compromising the consolidation course. 
Second,  some  member  states  have  to  boost  their  competitiveness  and  their  potential  for 
growth through structural reforms. In this regard, we have seen some promising signs during 
recent  weeks.  Third,  we  need  rules  ensuring  stricter  fiscal  discipline  in  the  future.  Some 
progress has been made with recent amendments to the SGP, the so called “six pack”, and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the fiscal compact. But given past experience, rigorous implementation of the new rules is 
crucial. Germany has set an example by introducing a national debt brake in 2009. It now 
has to set an example by actually sticking to these new rules. 
Finally, we have to further increase the resilience of the financial system. This is surely one 
of the global lessons we have learned from the financial crisis, but it is especially important in 
the context of the euro area, where contagion spread primarily through the financial system. 
Therefore, it is essential to ensure that agreed financial reforms are implemented rigorously, 
in  a  timely  manner  and  in  a  way  which  promotes  consistent  results.  We  must  not  lose 
momentum in completing the first round of financial regulatory reform since the start of the 
financial crisis, and I am glad that this is one of the priorities of the Mexican G20 presidency. 
It goes without saying, however, that financial regulatory reforms will – by their very nature – 
never be definitive or conclusive.  
5. Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  sum  up  the  main  points  of  my  speech.  I  talked  about  two 
peculiarities of EMU that contributed to the sovereign debt crisis – the most important one 
being the combination of a single monetary policy and national fiscal policies. 
I argued that higher “walls of money” can buy time, but that time must be used to tackle the 
roots of the crisis. This includes consolidation of public finances, structural reforms and better 
rules at the European level. Germany has been a stability anchor in containing the crisis by 
supporting  the  various  rescue  mechanisms,  but  the  conviction  that  tackling  the  structural 
causes of the crisis is both indispensable and holds out the promise of success has been the 
essence of the German position throughout the crisis. 
In  this  regard,  we  have  seen  some  progress  over  recent  months.  Nevertheless,  success 
depends  on  rigorous  implementation  of  the  agreed  measures  and  rules.  Personally,  I  am 
confident that, by following this course, we will eventually contain the crisis and that the euro 
will remain a stable currency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
