Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula: Bank of Zambia’s key policy initiatives 
Speech  by  Dr  Tukiya  Kankasa-Mabula,  Deputy  Governor  (Administration)  of  the  Bank  of 
Zambia,  at 
the  Bankers  Association  of  Zambia  Bankers  Annual  Ball,  Lusaka, 
14 September 2012. 
  Institutions 
The Chairperson, Bankers Association of Zambia, Mr Friday Ndhlovu,  
Managing Directors and Chief Executive Officers of Member Banks,  
Managing  Directors  and  Chief  Executive  Officers  of  Various 
& Associations,  
Management and Staff of Member Banks,  
Distinguished Invited Guests,  
Members of the Press,  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Good evening,  
Before  I  deliver  my  speech  this  evening,  I  would  like  us  to  observe  a  minute  of silence  in 
honour of the Late Mrs Margaret Ndhlovu, wife of Mr Friday Ndhlovu who passed on late last 
month. As the saying goes, behind every successful man, there is a woman. Our prayers and 
thoughts go out to the Ndhlovu family as they come to terms with the loss.  
Distinguished  invited  guests,  it  is  my  honour  and  privilege  to  officiate  at  this  year’s 
Bankers Annual Ball for the Bankers Association of Zambia. It is also my pleasure to warmly 
welcome Mr Friday Ndhlovu, the Managing Director of Investrust Bank Plc and the In-coming 
Chairperson  of  the  Association  who  is  taking  over  from  Ms  Charity  Lumpa  who  will  be 
assuming  a  new  role  within  the  Ecobank  Group  in  Lome,  Togo.  Join  me  in  wishing 
Mr Ndhlovu  well  in  his  new  role  and  I  have  every  confidence  that  he  will  perform  to 
distinction. I wish to take this opportunity to thank Ms Lumpa for her able stewardship of the 
Association and wish her well in her new appointment. I have every confidence that she will 
excel. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  banking  industry  plays  an  important  role  in  any  economy, 
particularly the role of intermediating funds between savers and borrowers. It also plays an 
equally  important  role  in  providing  payment  system  platform  where  economic  agents  can 
settle their transactions. 
You will also note that the performance of these functions also attracts numerous risks which 
have  potential  to  compromise  the  stability  and  the  efficient  operations  of  the  banking 
industry. The regulatory environment therefore requires adjusting appropriately in response 
to developments in the financial system. 
Chairperson, you will note that the Bank of Zambia has, in the most recent past, introduced 
a number of measures aimed at enhancing stability of the banking industry in Zambia as well 
as to enhance the transparency and efficiency in the allocation of resource in the economy. 
Allow me to briefly highlight some of the key policy initiatives that the Bank of Zambia has 
recently introduced:  
1) 
Reduction of statutory reserve ratios: in the fourth quarter of 2011, the Bank of 
Zambia  reduced  both  the  statutory  and  core  liquid  asset  ratios  by  3  percentage 
points to 5.0% and 6.0% respectively. The policy measure was intended to loosen 
liquidity  for  commercial  banks  to  enable  them  increase  their  lending  to  productive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2)  
3)  
4)  
5)  
sectors of the economy. The measure was also aimed at influencing the pricing of 
the loans especially in light of high lending rates prevailing in the economy; 
Increase  in  capital:  a  robust  banking  industry  is  indispensable  for  supporting 
investments in the economy. A lower capital base entails limited participation in the 
financing  of  investments  in  addition  to  increased  vulnerability  of  the  banking 
industry. From the last quarter of 2011, the banking sector saw significant regulatory 
reform as the capital thresholds for banks were increased. Local owned banks are 
now required to have a capital base of K104 billion whilst foreign owned banks are 
required to have a minimum capital base of K520 billion. The revised thresholds are 
aimed at ensuring that we have the best possible environment in which banks can 
carry out these key functions. As I stated earlier, banks are specialised institutions 
and they are fundamental to the working of the economy and linked to all parts of 
the financial system. But the consequence is that if banks fail, the external effects 
can have an adverse impact on the financial system and the economy. That is why 
banks are required to maintain a certain level of minimum capital. In this regard, the 
central bank provides oversight through prudential supervision.  
Therefore,  the  measures  to  revise  the  capital  adequacy  framework  for  Zambia 
enhances  the  resilience  of  the  sector  to  both  internal  and  external  shocks  by 
improving the quality and quantity of the capital available for commercial banks;  
Introduction of the policy rate: the policy rate was introduced in order to provide a 
benchmark rate for the banking industry on which pricing for lending products can 
be based. It also promotes transparency in the price discovery mechanisms in the 
banking sector while minimizing information asymmetry particularly that associated 
with the credit markets;  
Statutory  Instrument  No.  33  on  Bank  of  Zambia  currency  regulations:  This 
measure was introduced with a view to reinforcing the use of the Zambian Kwacha 
as the legal tender in the Republic of Zambia. The increased use of foreign currency 
cash  in  our  economy  has  implications  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy given that foreign currency cash is outside the control of the central 
bank; and  
Currency  rebasing:  Since  2006,  (except  in  2008  when  there  were  challenges 
arising  from  the  global  financial  crisis)  Zambia  has  enjoyed  positive  economic 
variables.  For  instance, overall  inflation  has  been  single  digit  and  the  country  has 
continued to record favourable balance of payments surplus. During the recent past, 
inflation has declined to single digit levels such that in December 2011 it closed at 
7.2%. This low level of inflation, coupled with favorable macroeconomic conditions, 
provided  an  opportune  time  to  rebase  the  Zambian  currency.  Given  the  improved 
economic  performance,  it  has  become  necessary  to  re-align  and  configure  our 
currency in line with macroeconomic fundamentals. The currency rebasing exercise 
will  have  implications  on  businesses  in  the  economy  including  changes  to 
accounting  software,  tax  aspects,  ATMs,  cash  registers,  etc.  The  success  of  the 
currency  rebasing  exercise  will  largely  depend  on  our  partnership  with  the 
commercial banks.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  will  note  all  these  measures  are  aimed  at  improving 
efficiency  conduct  of  business  in  our  economy  and  commercial  banks  have  a  very  crucial 
role to play in all these. The expectation is that all of you represented here will support the 
central  bank  to  ensure  that  collectively,  we  build  a  financial  sector  that  is  modern  and 
responsive to the needs of our economy.  
Chairperson, as a central bank, we will continue to foster an environment where dialogue 
between  all  key  stakeholders  can  be  promoted  both  at  individual  bank  level  as  well  as  at 
Industry level. Despite the policy changes embarked on, there remains a lot to be done in the 
areas  of  financial  inclusion,  financial  education  and  consumer  protection  in  the  banking 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
industry. In this regard, the Bank of Zambia has developed branchless banking frameworks 
and a national strategy for financial education in partnership with other stakeholders. As a 
regulator, we are committed to ensure an open and competitive banking environment. This 
is, in my view, the best way to allow banks to play their full role in the economy and ensure a 
fair deal for businesses and consumers.  
Recently,  we  have  signed  an  MOU  with  the  Competition  and  Consumer  Protection 
Commission  aimed  at  enhancing  the  competition  arrangements  in  the  banking  sector. We 
hope to strengthen capacity to tackle anti-competitive behaviour in the sector.  
I would therefore, like to encourage you to start viewing these areas as an intricate part of 
your overall business strategies in order to enable us as an industry to consolidate the gains 
so far achieved.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me acknowledge the commitments that the Bankers Association 
has  made  in  the  revised  Code  of  Banking  Practice  relating  to  the  provision  of  “No  Frills 
Account” to certain segments of our population. As the central bank we will be interested to 
receive information on how you are performing in this important area for financial inclusion. 
On our part, we have issued a “Practice Note” to assist commercial banks overcome some of 
the  Know  Your  Customer  challenges faced  with  when  dealing  with  some  segments  of  our 
society.  
Chairperson,  let  me  conclude  by  reiterating  the  important  role  that  a  healthy  and  stable 
financial  system  plays  in  an  economy.  This  objective  cannot  be  achieved  by  the  Bank  of 
Zambia  alone  but  through  collective  efforts  including  the  Government  and  yourselves.  My 
expectations  are  that  although  the  role  of  Chairperson  has  changed,  the  Association  will 
remain true and steadfast to its values and objectives. We look forward to continuing working 
with the Association on many issues that still require attention and on-going dialogue.  
I Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
