Dimitar Bogov: Promoting Macedonia’s cultural and historical values 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, at the opening of the exhibition titled “Wall Paintings from the Episcopal Basilica 
in Stobi” on the occasion of the International Museum Day, Skopje, 18 May 2012. 
 Honorable Minister Kancheska-Milevska,  
Your Excellency, Ambassador Wohlers,  
Distinguished guests,  
This  year  we  celebrate  the  twentieth  anniversary  of  the  monetary  independence  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  recalling  with  respect  the  period  of  creation  of  the  Macedonian 
Denar  and  the  processes  that  led  to  the  proclamation  of  the  monetary  sovereignty  of  our 
country on April 26, 1992. Undoubtedly, this is an opportunity when it is necessary to say that 
in  the  past  twenty  years,  the  main  carrier  of  these  processes  –  the  National  Bank  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  with  all  its  capacity  has  adequately  served  the  new  democratic 
society, as an institution that is responsible for maintaining the stability of the Macedonian 
national currency and its monetary and financial system.  
Besides its primary activity, in the past 10 years, our institution has sought to continuously 
and  systematically  contribute  to  the  preservation,  care  and  promotion  of  cultural  and 
historical values of Macedonia. As it is actually typical for most central banks in the world, 
through  the  work  of  its  museum,  the  National  Bank  has  gradually  established  itself  as  an 
important cultural treasury of the numismatic cultural legacy of civilizations that existed in this 
region,  thus  giving  its  contribution  to  the  enrichment  of  the  Macedonian  society  with 
permanent and irreplaceable values; those without which common knowledge is doomed to 
poverty,  without  which  we  would  not  be  able  to  recognize  and  understand  the  universal 
values  of  civilization  that  have  been  mounting  for  centuries  in  the  long  civilization  pace  of 
human existence.  
The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, together with the National Institution Stobi, 
have  decided  to  approach  the  Macedonian  public  exactly  on  May  18th  –  the  International 
Museum Day, jointly organizing this important exhibition, where for the first time an extremely 
valuable cultural heritage is presented to the public. It includes 19 unique fresco-fragments 
from the inner walls of the Old Episcopal basilica in Stobi, dating from the 4th century BC, 
which the history of art considers an exclusivity of paramount importance, given that this kind 
of  artistic  creation  is  not  present  in  the  wider  range  of  the  European  mainland. Within  the 
exhibition, the curators from the National Institution Stobi enabled us to closely look at the 
details of the mosaic floors that decorated this building. In addition, part of the exhibition are 
also  the  unique  fresco-details  that  adorned  the  baptistery,  which  is  located  next  to  the 
Basilica. The exclusively crafted marble container also belongs to the baptistery, as part of its 
internal  decoration,  which,  on  its  part,  includes  the  famous  mosaics  with  depictions  of 
peacocks. Those were the peacocks that the artist Biljana Unkovska used when designing 
the layout of the modern Macedonian banknotes of ten Denars.  
Speaking of the ancient town of Stobi, besides the fact that it is really a constant inspiration 
for  artistic  creation,  in  the  past  it  was  a  center  with  emphasized  monetary  production  that 
took place more than 18 centuries ago.  
This exhibition is even more significant because of the generous support of the US Embassy 
in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  which  throughout  the  past  years  has  enabled  professional 
protection of these invaluable paintings, thanks to which they can now be publicly exhibited.  
The National Bank is honored by the given trust to host this exhibition, which I hope that over 
the next month will be an intriguing cultural event for the general public. I also hope that with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the support of the Ministry of Culture and of the other institutions of culture in  Macedonia, 
also in the future we will have an opportunity to enrich the public life and the creative social 
pulse of the country’s cultural life.  
Expressing my sincere gratitude to the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Macedonia, the 
National  Institution  Stobi  and  the  Embassy  of  the  United  States  in  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, I invite His Excellency, the Ambassador of the United States, Paul Wohlers and 
the Minister of Culture of the Republic of Macedonia, Elizabeta Kancheska-Milevska to take 
the floor.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
