Linah K Mohohlo: Botswana’s Monetary Policy Statement for 2012 
Remarks by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the launch of the 
Monetary Policy Statement for 2012, Gaborone, 20 February 2012. 
 I welcome you to the launch of the Monetary Policy Statement for 2012, which is the 15th in 
a series since the inaugural launch in 1998. The Monetary Policy Statement and its mid-term 
review  are  of  central  importance  to  the  Bank,  as  they  are  a  vehicle  for  conveying  to 
stakeholders  all  pertinent  information  relating  to  the  formulation  and  implementation  of 
monetary policy.  
Those  familiar  with  the  contents  of  past  years’  Statements  will  recall  that  they  contain 
analysis of recent and prospective economic developments, here at home and abroad, which 
enable stakeholders to objectively assess the Bank’s policy stance and how such policy is 
derived  from  the  framework.  It  also  explains  the  manner  in  which  monetary  policy  is 
conducted.  This  information  helps  to  foster  policy  credibility;  it  also  helps  to  anchor  public 
expectations  of  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  maintaining  a  low,  predictable  and  sustainable 
level of inflation. Stakeholders then use the information on inflation expectations and other 
factors  in  their  saving  and  investment  decisions,  the  choices  which  are  indispensable  for 
sustainable  economic  growth.  Since  saving  and  investment  decisions  require  medium-  to 
long-term  perspectives  on  a  broad  range  of  economic  factors  that  include  inflation 
expectations, and the effect of anti-inflation monetary policy also takes a while, the inflation 
objectives are expected to be achieved over the medium–term horizon.  
For  this  morning’s  business,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  will  highlight  the  key 
elements  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  for  2012.  These  are:  the  monetary  policy 
framework and objectives; inflation trends; and the conduct of monetary policy in 2011. I will 
also outline the inflation outlook and the monetary policy stance for this year. The details are 
in the bound copies of the Monetary Policy Statement, which you will receive at the end of 
the proceedings. 
As a prelude to outlining the main contents of the Monetary Policy Statement, I believe it is 
essential to put it in perspective by briefly restating the key functions of the Bank. Although 
they are subject to periodic review, the statutory objectives remain unchanged. They include 
ensuring that commercial and other banks, which are under the regulatory and supervisory 
purview  of  the  Bank,  are  sound  and  well  managed.  After  all,  they  serve  as  conduits  for 
payments and transmission of monetary policy. It is also the Bank’s business to ensure that 
the payments system, a part of which is the effective management of the national currency, 
is efficient and secure. Capacity in this area is continuously enhanced to respond to broader 
issues  of  financial  stability,  which  have  become  important  in  the  current  environment  of 
heightened uncertainty over the health of the global financial system. The Bank also provides 
both banking services and the lender of last resort facility to commercial banks. Similarly, the 
Bank is banker to the Government, which it also serves as economic and financial advisor. 
Furthermore, much of the country’s financial assets is managed by the Bank in the form of 
foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  reserves  are  invested  in  international  financial  and  capital 
markets which, as we speak, are in turmoil due, largely, to the sovereign debt crisis in the 
Euro  area.  This  turbulence  is  compounded  by  the  consequent  downgrading  of  sovereign 
credit  ratings  of  a  number  of  industrial  countries  which,  hitherto,  enjoyed  high  investment 
grade ratings. Despite these developments, I wish to reassure you and other stakeholders 
that the management of reserves will continue to be guided by the Bank’s well established 
investment  policies  and  guidelines,  as  periodically  reviewed.  In  this  respect,  the  level  of 
reserves as of the end of January 2012 was approximately 60 billion Pula (or 8 billion USD), 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
rating  agencies,  Moody’s 
which  is  equivalent  to  18  months  of  imports,  an  improvement  over  last  year’s  15  months 
import cover.  
Speaking  of  sovereign  credit  ratings,  Botswana’s  ratings,  as  awarded  by  the  two  main 
international  sovereign  credit 
Investors  Service  and 
Standard & Poor’s, continue to be of the investment grade “A”, and compare favourably with 
those  of  other  countries  in  its  league.  I  hasten  to  add  that,  despite  this  good  standing, 
Botswana’s  credit  ratings  remain  vulnerable  to  the  vagaries  of  international  financial  and 
capital  markets  and  other  global  economic  factors  over  which  the  country  has  little  or  no 
control. On our part, however, it is very important to return to the erstwhile fiscal rectitude 
and sustainability, enhance productivity and expand the economic base, in order to withstand 
external shocks. 
Honoured Guests: 
I  now  turn  to  the  subject  of  Monetary  Policy,  and  wish  to  suggest  that  the  importance  of 
effectively  formulating  and  implementing  monetary  policy  is  well known  and  self-evident.  It 
goes without saying that a low, predictable and sustainable level of inflation contributes to the 
attainment  of  the  broader  national  objective  of  a  stable  and  sustained  economic  growth. 
Price stability also fosters international competitiveness of domestic producers by stabilising 
the  trade-weighted  exchange  rate  (also  known  as  the  real  effective  exchange  rate),  in 
conjunction with the crawling of the nominal trade-weighted exchange rate (also referred to 
as the nominal effective exchange rate). It is gratifying, therefore, that the Bank’s biannual 
Business  Expectations  Surveys  continue  to  indicate  broad-based  support  for  the  inflation 
objective and the exchange rate regime. 
In  pursuit  of  price  stability,  the  Bank  uses  interest  rates  and  open  market  operations  to 
influence  demand  and  supply  conditions  in  the  economy  and,  ultimately,  the  rate  of  price 
increases.  The  timing  and  size  of  any  interest  rate  change  is  derived  from  the  monetary 
policy framework, which incorporates an assessment of prospective domestic and external 
economic developments that influence price movements. On the basis of the framework, the 
Bank forecasts inflation in the medium-term; it is this inflation forecast which, in turn, informs 
the  monetary  policy  response.  In  this  case,  monetary  policy  is  adjusted  to  address  a 
sustained  deviation  of  the  medium-term  inflation  forecast  from  the  medium-term  inflation 
objective range. Even so, a change is undertaken when it is considered that the underlying 
inflationary factors can be influenced by monetary policy. 
It is the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank which considers these factors and decides 
on  the  direction  of  monetary  policy.  As  you  will  have  observed,  the  outcome  of  the 
Committee’s  deliberations  is  disseminated  through  the  media  to  stakeholders,  in  order  to 
help anchor inflation expectations and buttress policy credibility, which is critical in achieving 
long-term price stability. 
Let me now highlight the economic and financial developments of 2011, as background for 
the  policy  posture  of  the  period.  From  a  global  standpoint,  there  was  upward  pressure  on 
inflation  in  the  first  half  of  2011,  particularly  in  emerging  market  economies,  due  to  an 
increase in commodity prices, especially for oil and food products. The increase in the price 
of  oil  was  worsened  by  political  and  social  conflict  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa. 
However, inflation slowed down as the year came to an end, due to a slack in global demand 
and economic activity. 
The  trade-weighted  average  inflation  for  Botswana’s  trading  partner  countries  increased, 
from 2.8 percent in 2010 to 4.8 percent at the end of 2011. The SDR countries, which are the 
United Kingdom, United States of America, Japan and Euro area, experienced a significant 
increase  in  prices;  the  average  inflation  rose  from  1.8  percent  in  2010  to  2.9  percent  in 
December 2011. In South Africa, headline inflation increased markedly, from 3.5 percent in 
December 2010 to 6.1 percent by the end of 2011, slightly breaching the upper end of the 
medium-term target range of 3 – 6 percent. This was attributable, in large part, to an increase 
in the price of food. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
levels.  Furthermore, 
the  modest  public  service  salary 
As  anticipated  in  last  year’s  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  domestic  inflation  was  above  the 
medium-term objective range of 3 – 6 percent throughout 2011, due mainly to higher food 
prices.  Other  causes  of  rampant  inflation  included  the  increase  in  administered  prices  for 
fuel, public transport and electricity. Inflation then rose from 7.4 percent in December 2010 to 
8.5 percent in the first quarter of 2011, as a result of the increase in private school fees and 
petrol  prices.  After  easing  slightly  to  7.9  percent  in  June  2011  following  the  reduction  of 
telephone tariffs, inflation resumed its upward trend and reached 9.2 percent at the end of 
last year, in response to the upward adjustment of fuel prices and transport fares, as well as 
the  increase  in  the  cost  of  food,  health  services  and  household  durables.  All  measures  of 
inflation went up last year. When administered prices are excluded, inflation rose, although at 
a slower rate, from 7.1 percent in December 2010 to 7.5 percent by year-end; similarly, the 
trimmed  (16  percent)  mean  measure  of  core  inflation  increased  from  7.7  percent  to 
8.5 percent. 
The  effect  of  demand  on  inflation  was  limited  since  economic  activity  remained  below 
long-term 
increase  of 
September  2011  meant  that  household  demand  remained  constrained.  In  addition, 
government  expenditure  growth  was  similarly  tight  with  a  view  to  balancing  the  budget  by 
fiscal  year  2012/13,  the  objective  of  which  has  been  more  than  attained  in  view  of  the 
budgeted small surplus. Nevertheless, faster credit expansion helped to stabilise aggregate 
demand.  For  instance,  bank  lending  to  businesses  increased  by  41  percent  last  year, 
compared  to  only  11.3  percent  the  previous  year;  and  credit  to  households  rose  by 
15.8 percent in 2011, which is higher than the 12.5 percent growth rate of the previous year. 
Overall,  the  annual  growth  in  private  sector  credit  more  than  doubled  in  2011,  from 
11.9 percent to 26.4 percent. 
Besides  the  domestic  and  external  inflation  environment  of  2011,  monetary  policy  was 
conducted against the background of global economic instability and uncertainty, to which I 
referred earlier. Oil prices were volatile, the Euro area sovereign debt crisis worsened and 
this created turmoil in major financial markets, which brought about fears of renewed banking 
crisis. Most industrial economies experienced persistent high levels of unemployment which, 
together with fiscal restraint, constrained demand. Moreover, supply disruptions caused by 
the  earthquake  and  tsunami  in  Japan  in  March  2011  also  adversely  affected  global 
production. Overall, and despite higher output growth rates in emerging economies, global 
growth was dampened and the trend was economic slowdown in the second half of the year. 
Although global inflation went up in 2011, it did not present a medium-term threat to the need 
for monetary policy to address the slowing economic activity; neither did it present a threat to 
the need to address persistent high unemployment and idle capacity in major economies. As 
a  result,  most  developed  countries’  central  banks,  including  the  United  States  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  England,  maintained  low  policy  interest  rates  throughout 
2011.  This  was  complemented  by  other  measures  such  as  adding  liquidity  to  the  banking 
system,  which  is  referred  to  as  quantitative  easing.  Towards  the  end  of  the  year,  the 
European  Central  Bank  reversed  the  earlier  increase  in  interest  rates  and  also  introduced 
quantitative  easing,  in  an  effort  to  stabilise  financial  markets.  Similarly,  some  emerging 
market  economies  (notably  those  of  Brazil  and  China)  that  had  earlier  increased  interest 
rates also loosened monetary policy by year-end. India was the exception in this respect, as 
monetary policy was tightened. 
Here  at  home,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  was  guided  by  a  positive  medium-term 
inflation outlook that reflected a low level of domestic demand and benign external influence 
on inflation. In the circumstances, the Bank Rate was maintained at 9.5 percent in 2011. The 
commercial banks’ prime lending rate was also unchanged at 11 percent. 
However,  the  Bank  implemented  two  measures.  First,  the  primary  reserve  requirement  for 
commercial banks was increased from 6.5 percent to 10 percent with effect from July 2011, 
in order to reduce the amount of liquidity that is absorbed by Bank of Botswana Certificates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
that  would  contribute 
towards  economic  diversification; 
Second, four months later in November 2011, the maximum issuance of Bank of Botswana 
Certificates  to  absorb  excess  liquidity  was  limited  to  P10  billion.  The  reduction  of  Bank  of 
Botswana Certificates issuance is intended to encourage banks to actively seek and finance 
bankable  projects 
it  would 
undoubtedly also contribute to their bottom lines. 
Distinguished Guests: 
It follows that the outlook for domestic inflation is predicated on expectations of slower global 
output  growth.  Indeed  as  the  impact  of  the  Euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis  worsened,  the 
forecast for global output for 2012 was reduced from 3.8 percent to 3.3 percent. Furthermore, 
despite recent encouraging indicators, the pace of economic recovery in the US continues to 
be constrained by failure to agree on the necessary fiscal policy measures. 
In contrast, economic activity in emerging market economies is expected to remain buoyant, 
particularly in China and India, although these countries’ economies are also vulnerable to 
any major global economic slowdown. The forecast overall slow global economic expansion 
clouds  prospects  for  trade;  it  also  reduces  the  threat  of  inflation  in  emerging  market 
economies,  and  dampens  the  impact  of  an  increase  in  commodity  and  food  prices. 
Therefore,  although  there  are  underlying  inflation  pressures  in  emerging  market  countries 
due to relatively buoyant economic activity, overall global inflation is projected to decline from 
4.6 percent in 2011 to 3.4 percent in 2012. As a result, monetary policy is expected to be 
generally accommodative in these countries. 
With  respect  to  SDR  countries,  inflation  is  forecast  to  decline  from  2.9  percent  in  2011  to 
1.8 percent this year. In South Africa, headline inflation is projected to increase only slightly, 
from about 5 percent in 2011 to 5.8 percent. 
All in all, it is expected that the effect of external price developments on domestic inflation will 
be negligible. 
Given  that  the  Bank’s medium-term  inflation  objective  range  is  still 3  –  6  percent,  and  the 
forecast average inflation range for trading partner countries is 3 – 5 percent, it follows that 
the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  will  crawl  down  only  minimally  in  2012,  in  order  to 
stabilise  the  real  effective  exchange  rate.  This  will  continue  to  support  international 
competitiveness of domestic industries, as a contribution to economic diversification. 
Moderate output expansion is projected for the domestic economy, with non–mining output 
remaining below potential. Mining production is expected to be maintained at current levels, 
although  this  is  subject  to  sustained  global  demand.  There  are  expectations  that,  in  the 
course of the year, some new mining ventures could commence operations and, if that were 
to be the case, there would be a boost to total mining output. However, non-mining sector 
performance  could  be  weighed  down  by  the  limited  domestic  fiscal  stimulus,  as  nominal 
government expenditure is only budgeted to increase marginally (0.1 percent) in 2012/13 and 
nominal personal incomes will continue to be sluggish. This outlook was also reflected in the 
fall in business confidence indicated in the recent (September 2011) Business Expectations 
Survey.  
Although pressures on inflation arising from domestic demand are expected to be limited and 
the impact of foreign price developments are likely to be minimal this year, prices could go up 
due  to  an  increase  in  the  international  cost  of  food  that  would  exceed  current  projections. 
Inflation  may  also  rise  in  the  event  of  any  substantial  upward  adjustment  in  administered 
prices and government levies. In this respect, I wish to state the obvious, and that is, while 
the  reasons  for  increasing  utility  tariffs  are  understandable,  large  adjustments  increase 
inflation  which,  in  turn,  erodes  living  standards  and  well-being  of  households.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  service  providers  are  encouraged  to  make  every  effort  to  contain  costs  by 
enhancing efficiency, in order to minimise the adverse impact on consumers. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So far as the monetary policy stance for 2012 is concerned, domestic inflation is forecast to 
remain above the medium-term objective range in the short-term, as the impact of the recent 
cost increase tapers off gradually. However, it is anticipated that inflation will converge to the 
medium-term  objective  range  of  3  –  6  percent  in  the  second  half  of  2012,  due  to  the 
dampening  effect  of  underlying  domestic  and  international  economic  prospects.  Therefore, 
the prospects for a low, predictable and sustainable inflation in the medium-term will give rise 
to the conditions that would permit a counter-cyclical accommodative monetary policy, which 
would cushion the contractionary impact of restrained fiscal policy on economic activity.  
It should be stressed, however, that, in order to avoid an entrenchment of persistently high 
inflation, the Bank’s monetary policy stance will continue to be guided by the extent to which 
short-term price developments generate medium-term inflation expectations. More generally, 
and as expected, the Bank will respond in a timely manner to any sustained deviation of the 
medium-term 
inflation  objective  range  of 
3 – 6 percent, without undermining the much needed sustainable economic growth. 
Honourable  Minister  of  Finance  and  Development  Planning  and  your  Cabinet  Colleagues, 
Honourable  Members  of  Parliament,  Your  Excellencies  Members  of  the  Diplomatic  Corps, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, this concludes my submission of the Monetary Policy 
Statement for 2012. 
I thank you most sincerely for your attention.  
the  medium-term 
forecast 
inflation 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
