William C Dudley: The national and regional economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Buffalo-Niagara  Partnership,  Buffalo,  New  York, 
13 April 2012. 
 Good  morning,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  in  Buffalo  to  address  the  Buffalo-Niagara 
Partnership. It is always a pleasure to speak with the business community because of the 
leadership role you play in the economy of the region. I thank you all  for inviting me here 
today. 
I try to get out of my office in New York City as much as I can to get a sense of regional 
economic conditions across the second Federal Reserve District. I was last here in Buffalo in 
2010 and, more recently, I traveled to West Point and the Capital region and Long Island. 
These  visits  are  just  as  important  as  any  trip  I  might  take  to  Washington,  D.C.,  to  help 
formulate  monetary  policy,  or  to  Switzerland,  to  help  shape  international  bank  regulation. 
Each visit within the region helps me to deepen the relationships with the people I represent. 
I believe that the understanding of issues and concerns that I gain today will help ensure that 
the Fed’s policy decisions reflect the public interest. 
Today, I want to talk a bit about the Fed – what we do and why we do it. Then I’ll provide 
some thoughts about the economic outlook nationally and locally. After that, I’ll be happy to 
answer any questions you have about what the Fed does and why, and about the economic 
outlook. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. 
What the New York Fed does  
By way of introduction, I will briefly review what my colleagues and I do at the New York Fed 
on behalf of the Second District.  
I have the great fortune to serve as vice chair of the FOMC that meets eight times a year in 
Washington  to  set  interest  rates  and  make  other  decisions  about  monetary  policy.  The 
members  of  this  committee  all  strive  to  set  policy  to  advance  the  mandate  given  to  us  by 
Congress  to  promote  the  maximum  level  of  employment  consistent  with  price  stability. 
Sometimes  we  have  different  views  on  the  specific  policy  choice  at  hand,  and  you  should 
view  this  as  completely  appropriate:  these  are  hard  questions  –  particularly  during  difficult 
economic circumstances such as we face today. In fact, I think we make better decisions as 
a committee because we don’t all think alike. But we are united in our commitment to our 
dual mandate and in our belief that Fed independence is essential to the public interest. That 
independence  allows  us  to  make  tough  decisions  insulated  from  short-term  political 
pressures.  
At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region 
and  the  nation.  For  these  assessments,  we  consult  our  researchers  and  add  critical 
information that we learn from listening to our boards of directors, regional advisory councils 
and  community  leaders,  such  as  you  and  others  I’ll  meet  on  this  visit.  For  example,  last 
month members of our small business advisory council told us that for the first time in several 
years, employees were leaving for other jobs and that they would need to replace those who 
left  for  better  opportunities  elsewhere.  The  fact  that  some  people  with  jobs  felt  confident 
enough to seek and take other job opportunities was another signal to us that the job market 
may be improving – although, to be sure, we read such signals cautiously.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To help me gather more information about the region, yesterday, I had breakfast in Syracuse 
with business and community leaders at the Center for Economic Development. Then I met 
with the staff of PathStone, a community development organization, met faculty and students 
at  the  Maxwell  School  of  Syracuse  University  and  had  lunch  with  university  officials  who 
manage the tech transfer process. In the afternoon, we drove to Skaneateles Falls to tour 
Welch  Allyn,  a  manufacturer  of  medical  diagnostic  instruments.  Dr.  Julie  Shimer  is  the 
president  and  CEO.  Dr.  Shimer  was  also  recently  appointed  chair  of  the  Empire  State 
Development Corporation, and we  talked about challenges and opportunities for economic 
development in New York State.  
After this morning’s gathering, I will speak with staff of the Empire Justice Center, meet with 
Lt. Governor Bob Duffy, convene a meeting of our Upstate Advisory Board, whose members 
are  major  leaders  in  the  upstate  economy,  and  visit  the  Roswell  Park  Cancer  Institute  to 
learn  about  their  role  in  economic  development  in  western  New  York  and  in  the  broader 
world arena. 
My colleagues and I at the New York Fed continually track conditions in our District, and we 
have created a number of tools for that purpose. For example, my staff produces monthly 
indexes  of  economic  activity  for  New  York  City,  the  state  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey. 
These indexes are essentially measures of local output – similar to gross domestic product, 
or  GDP,  at  the  national  level.  These  measures  provide  a  more  complete  gauge  of  activity 
than the employment report, which is another important metric at the state level. We have 
also  constructed  a  consumer  credit  panel  to  track  local  household  credit  conditions  at  the 
county  and  even  the  zip  code  level,  including  the  amount  and  type  of  personal  debt  and 
whether payments are being made in a timely way. 
In addition, we conduct a periodic poll about the credit needs of small businesses, which are 
an  important  source  of  new  jobs.  We  are  just  launching  our  latest  poll  that  also  includes 
questions  about  the  skill  needs  of  small  businesses  and  whether  the  right  kinds  of  skilled 
labor  are  available.  Almost  900  regional  businesses  responded  to  our  last  poll,  some  of 
which  were from  this  region.  If  you,  as  a  representative  of  a  small  business,  would  like  to 
participate  in  our  current  poll,  please  pass  your  card  to  my  colleagues,  who  are  in  the 
audience, or see me after the speech and we will be glad to add you as a respondent. 
Results from prior polls stressed the problem of access to capital. In response we held two 
workshops  at  the  Bank  last  December.  In  the  first  workshop,  senior  officers  from  the 
Export-Import  Bank,  the  Small  Business  Administration  and  the  Department  of  Commerce 
described the various loan programs available to small businesses from their agencies, as 
well  as  programs  to  help  identify  markets.  The  second  workshop  reviewed  the  business 
plans of 40 small businesses and then matched them with potential lenders. We plan to hold 
a similar workshop in Upstate New York this year.  
As  you  know,  even  states  that  are  wealthier,  such  as  New  York,  have  large  pockets  of 
poverty. So, we target some of our work specifically to low- and moderate-income groups.  
We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates, although much 
remains  to  be  done.  We  have  provided  housing  advocates  with  the  latest  information  on 
mortgage  conditions,  via  mortgage  briefs,  roundtables,  presentations  and  newsletters.  We 
have  now  developed  an  interactive  online  tool  that  shows  monthly  delinquency  and 
foreclosure conditions, which we believe will aid the work of housing counselors and other 
parties  seeking  to  help  these  communities.  It  is  available  on  our  website  along  with  other 
data and information useful to policymakers, business people and the general public.  
We  use  our  website  to  share  what  we  learn  about  our  diverse  District,  and  you  will  find 
detailed information about the region at the site. I invite you to visit newyorkfed.org to explore 
our highly localized maps and information on small business, credit and housing conditions 
and even the latest job openings at the New York Fed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally,  and  crucially,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  are  working  with  our 
colleagues  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  at  other  agencies  to  help  put  the  nation’s  financial 
system  on  a  firmer  footing.  Our  supervisors  are  working  hard  to  ensure  that  our  District’s 
banks are operating safely and soundly. Although much has been done, we are not finished 
and are determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis 
business as usual – whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators 
like ourselves. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues busy. 
National economic conditions  
Now  I’d  like  to  turn  to  the  national  and  regional  economy.  The  incoming  data  on  the 
U.S. economy generally has been a bit more upbeat over the past few months, suggesting 
that the recovery may be finally establishing a somewhat firmer footing. Real GDP expanded 
at a 3.0 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2011, the fastest growth since the first 
half of 2010. The average monthly job gain was 212,000 in the first quarter of 2012, up from 
164,000 in the fourth quarter. Sales of light-weight motor vehicles were about 14 ½ million at 
an  annual  rate  in  the  first  quarter,  the  best  quarter  for  vehicle  sales  in  four  years.  Survey 
measures of business activity have rebounded from their dips in the middle of last year, and 
are now at levels that typically indicate solid overall growth. Even housing starts have firmed 
somewhat in the last few months, although they remain at depressed levels. 
While these developments are certainly encouraging, it is still too soon to conclude that we 
are  out  of  the  woods.  To  begin  with,  the  economic  data  looked  brighter  at  this  point  in 
2010 and again in 2011, only to fade later in those years. 
Moreover, the United States experienced unusually mild weather over the first quarter, with 
the number of heating degree days more than 20 percent below the average of the preceding 
five years, which may have pulled forward some economic activity and hiring.  
In this regard, the somewhat softer March labor market report that was released last Friday 
may reflect the earlier positive influence of the mild weather on job creation in January and 
February, although other less sanguine interpretations are also plausible. We thus will need 
to  see  more  data  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  the  March  data  represent  a  transitory 
weather-related setback.  
Regardless  of  the  importance  of  the  mild  winter  in  distorting  the  economic  data,  real 
economic activity has yet to be strong enough on a sustained basis to make a big dent in the 
overall amount of slack in the U.S. economy. While growth was stronger in the fourth quarter, 
most  of  it  was  due  to  inventory  accumulation.  Growth  of  final  sales  remained  quite  weak. 
Historically,  quarters  in  which  inventory  investment  makes  significant  growth  contributions 
are  typically  followed  by  quarters  in  which  that  growth  contribution  is  modest  or  even 
negative. That appears to be what is shaping up for the first quarter of this year.  
Based on available data, our current expectations are that real GDP will expand at around a 
2 ¼ percent annual rate during the first quarter of 2012. Even with the robust increase of light 
vehicle sales, overall consumer spending in the first quarter appears to be rising at a similar 
moderate rate. At the same time, real disposable income has been flat over the past three 
months, and the large increase of gasoline prices is likely further sapping consumers’ real 
purchasing power. And growth of business investment spending, which softened in the fourth 
quarter of 2011, may have been even a little softer in the first quarter of this year. 
To put the recent pace of growth into perspective, we believe that the economy’s long-run 
sustainable  growth  rate  –  what  economists  call  the  potential  growth  rate  –  is  around  a 
2¼ percent  annual  rate.  We  need  sustained  growth  above  that  rate  to  absorb  the  still 
substantial amount of unused productive capacity. Thus, our recent growth rates are barely 
keeping up with our potential.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Even though the unemployment rate has declined sharply from 9 percent last September to 
8.2 percent in March, it is still unacceptably high. In addition, many other measures of the 
labor  market  remain  weak.  The  labor  force  participation  rate,  the  percentage  of  people 
employed, and the total number of hours worked in the economy all dropped sharply during 
the recession and remain well below their pre-recession levels, even taking into account the 
impact of demographic shifts. Also, it appears that productivity growth has slumped recently. 
Although that means that a given amount of growth translates into bigger employment gains, 
it certainly is not an unmitigated positive development. 
Also, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the economy still faces significant headwinds and 
that  there  are  some  meaningful  downside  risks.  In  the  headwinds  department,  I  would 
include  the  run-up  in  gasoline  prices  mentioned  earlier  because  that  will  sap  purchasing 
power,  the  continued  impediments  to  a  strong  recovery  from  ongoing  weakness  in  the 
housing sector, and fiscal drag at the federal and state and local levels. In terms of downside 
risks, these include the risk that growth abroad disappoints and the risk of further disruptions 
to the supply of oil and higher oil prices.  
On the inflation front, the overall rate of increase of consumer prices, as measured by the 
12-month  change  of  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures,  slowed  to 
2.3 percent in February from a recent peak of 2.9 percent last September. Even though the 
recent  rise  of  gasoline  prices  mentioned  above  could  interrupt  this  pattern,  we  expect  this 
moderation of overall inflation to resume later this year.  
While the underlying core inflation rate, that strips out volatile food and energy prices, has 
been somewhat higher than expected a few months back, it appears that the annual rate of 
core  inflation1  has  peaked  and  we  expect  it  to  begin  to  decline  later  this  year.2  Finally, 
inflation  expectations,  which  play  an  important  role  in  the  inflation  process,  remain  well 
anchored.  By  this  I  mean  that  people  expect  that  the  rate  of  inflation  will  continue  to  be 
relatively low for some time to come. 
Regional Economic Conditions  
So  how  is  the  recovery  proceeding  in  the  state  and  the  region?  As  I  mentioned,  the  New 
York  Fed  produces  indexes  that  help  us  track  economic  activity  in  the  region.  Based  on 
these  measures,  the  economic  recovery  that  began  in  New  York  State  in  late  2009  has 
continued through early 2012, and even gained some momentum.  
Across  Upstate  New  York,  the  cycle  of  recession  and  recovery  has  been  much  less 
pronounced than in the nation, which means that the region has been more stable in recent 
years than many other places around the country. This has been particularly true in Buffalo, 
which  experienced  an  employment  decline  of  about  3½  percent  during  the  downturn  –  a 
significant  loss,  to  be  sure  –  but  well  below  the  over  6  percent  decline  that  occurred 
nationally. 
One reason why Upstate New York weathered the storm better than the nation as a whole is 
the  resiliency  of  its  housing  markets.  Like  much  of  Upstate  New  York,  Buffalo’s  housing 
market has proven to be more stable than many other parts of the country. In fact, since the 
peak  of  the  national  housing  market  in  early  2006,  home  prices  in  the  Buffalo  area  have 
increased by about 10 percent, compared with a decline of more than 30 percent nationally. 
As a result, the drop-off in economic activity that is connected, directly and indirectly, to the 
performance  of  the  housing  sector  has  not  been  as  severe  here  as  in  many  other  places 
around the country. 
                                                 
1  As measured by the 12-month change in core PCE deflator. 
2  See for instance, the behavior of the three- and six-month changes in the core PCE deflator. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This stability is underscored by our latest quarterly consumer credit panel data, which shows 
that  total  household  debt  burdens  have  remained  relatively  low  by  national  standards  and 
that mortgage delinquency rates are lower in the Buffalo area than in other parts of the state 
and nation. 
The recovery is proceeding in Buffalo, slowly but surely. So far, the region has gained back 
nearly 12,000 of the roughly 20,000 jobs it lost during the downturn. This is somewhat faster 
progress than the nation has made, although, in part, that’s because the downturn was less 
severe here. 
One particularly good bit of news is that for the first time in decades, manufacturing has been 
a source of job growth in the region, rather than decline, adding more than 3,000 jobs over 
the past few years. That’s nearly twice the pace of growth of the U.S. manufacturing sector. 
That said, it is somewhat worrying that the pace of the recovery locally has actually slowed in 
recent months just as the national recovery has started to gain some momentum. Despite 
this recent slowdown, I believe there are reasons to be optimistic about Buffalo’s longer-term 
outlook.  In  particular,  the  decades  long  economic  restructuring  that  has  occurred  in  the 
region has resulted in a more diversified economy. While the region still maintains a strong 
manufacturing presence, it is no longer the main source of jobs in the area. In its place, the 
health  and  education  sectors  have  emerged  as  important  sources  of  job  opportunity  and 
economic development potential. These sectors have provided stability to the region through 
the recession and recovery. 
The recent announcement of Governor Cuomo’s $1 billion economic development pledge to 
the  region  is  another  positive  development.  This  commitment  represents  a  tremendous 
opportunity  for  the  region  to  accelerate  the  economic  transformation  already  underway. 
Therefore, it is important for the community to think strategically about how best to use these 
funds to leverage the region’s existing strengths. 
Buffalo’s colleges and universities deserve special attention within this strategy. Not only do 
these institutions produce highly skilled labor, they also promote innovation by creating new 
knowledge and inventions through academic research and development. It can be especially 
beneficial  for  local  businesses  to  take  advantage  of  both  the  knowledge  created  and  the 
availability of research facilities at local colleges and universities. 
Partnerships  between  private  industry  and  higher-education  institutions  are  an  important 
ingredient  in  this  regard.  Going  forward,  I  believe  these  partnerships  will  become  more 
important than ever – particularly for places like Buffalo that continue to undergo economic 
restructuring. Fortunately, the region has a strong higher education sector in place.  
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  the  incoming  data  on  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  a  bit  more  upbeat  of  late, 
suggesting  that  the  recovery  may  be  getting  better  established.  But,  while  these 
developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we are out of the 
woods  in  terms  of  generating  a  strong,  sustainable  recovery.  On  the  inflation  front,  the 
year-over-year rate of consumer price inflation has slowed in recent months, and despite the 
recent rise of gasoline prices, we expect inflation to moderate further in 2012.  
Here in Buffalo, the economic restructuring has positioned the region’s health and education 
sector as a potentially solid base for longer-term growth.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
