Anand Sinha: Strengthening governance in Microfinance Institutions 
(MFIs) – some random thoughts 
Keynote address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry’s  (FICCI)  workshop  on 
“Strengthening  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs)  –  good  governance  and  strategic  people 
practices”, Mumbai, 23 April 2012. 
 Inputs provided by Ms  Deepali Pant Joshi, Mr C D Srinivasan, Mr A K  Misra, Ms Tuli Roy  and Mr Jayakumar 
Yarasi are gratefully acknowledged.  
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this  microfinance  workshop. 
Microfinance is currently at the centre of intense policy debate, especially, in the context of 
governance and regulatory oversight related issues. The current workshop which focuses the 
deliberations  on  governance  issues  in  microfinance  is,  therefore,  quite  timely  as  well  as 
contextually  relevant.  I  congratulate  the  organisers  on  their  choice  of  subject  for  this 
workshop and hope that the deliberations will help all of us in going forward. 
Microfinance, involving extension of small loans and other financial services to low income 
groups,  is  a  very  important  economic  conduit  designed  to  facilitate  financial  inclusion  and 
assist the poor to work their way out of poverty. It has the potential to fill the critical gap left 
by  formal  financial  institutions  in  providing  financial  services  to  low  income  groups. 
Mainstream institutions shied away from providing financial services to the poor considering 
them unviable owing to high costs involved in reaching out to the unbanked/under banked 
areas where there is not enough scale of operations due to low numbers and low value of 
transactions. Other reasons cited for such exclusion are, perceived high risk and inability of 
poor borrowers to provide physical collateral for raising loans. 
Microfinance became a leading and effective strategy for poverty alleviation with the potential 
for far-reaching impact in transforming the lives of poor people. It is argued that microfinance 
can  facilitate  the  achievement  of  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  as  well  as 
national policies that target poverty reduction, empowerment of women, assisting vulnerable 
groups,  and  improving  standards  of  living.  As  pointed  out  by  the  former  UN  Secretary 
General Kofi Annan during the launch of the International Year of Micro Credit (2005): 
“sustainable  access  to  microfinance  helps  alleviate  poverty  by  generating 
income,  creating  jobs,  allowing  children  to  go  to  school,  enabling  families  to 
obtain health care, and empowering people to make the choices that best serve 
their needs”. 
Although  microfinance  cannot  be  seen  as  a  panacea  for  poverty  reduction,  when  properly 
harnessed, it can make sustainable contributions through financial investment leading to the 
empowerment of people, which in turn promotes confidence and self-esteem, particularly for 
women. More importantly, the global experience with microfinance has shown that even poor 
are creditworthy. 
Studies  have  shown  that  microfinance  plays  three  critical  roles  in  development.  Firstly,  it 
enables the very poor households to meet their most basic needs and protect/hedge against 
risks. Secondly, concomitantly it is associated with improvements in households’ economic 
welfare. Thirdly, by supporting women’s economic participation it helps to empower women 
and promote gender equity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Microfinance and India 
I. 
Inclusive growth always received special emphasis in the Indian policy making. Government 
of India and the Reserve Bank of India have taken several initiatives to expand access to 
financial  systems  to  the  poor.  Some  of  the  salient  measures  are  nationalisation  of  banks, 
prescription  of  priority  sector  lending,  differential  interest  rate  schemes  for  the  weaker 
sections, development of credit institutions such as Regional Rural Banks, etc. 
Despite the policy efforts, gap remains in the availability of financial services in rural areas. 
The  dependence  of  the  rural  poor  on  money  lenders  continues,  especially  for  meeting 
emergent  requirements.  Such  dependence  is  more  pronounced  in  the  case  of  marginal 
farmers,  agricultural  labourers,  petty  traders  and  rural  artisans  belonging  to  socially  and 
economically backward classes and tribes whose capacity to save is too small. 
It is in this backdrop that microfinance emerged in India. The Self-Help Group (SHG)-Bank 
Linkage  Program  (SBLP)  which  was  launched  in  1992  on  a  pilot  basis  soon  grew 
significantly. As per the latest estimates, SHGs enable 97 million poor households’ access to 
sustainable financial services from the banking system and have an outstanding institutional 
credit exceeding Rs. 31,200 crore as at the end March 2011. SBLP is considered to be the 
fastest growing microfinance initiative in the world. The other model of microfinance, i.e. MFI 
model  comprising  of  various  entities,  such  as,  non-banking  financial  companies  (NBFCs), 
non-governmental  organisations  (NGOs),  trusts,  cooperatives,  etc.  has  also  been  growing 
significantly in the recent years. 
Microfinance- both SBLP and the MFI sector- has posted an impressive growth in the past 
few years with the combined client outreach increasing from about 4.8 crore1 in 2006–07 to 
8.6  crore  in  2009–10.  Loans  outstanding  to  SHGs  were  Rs.  28,038  crore  while  loans 
disbursed to MFIs by all agencies amounted to Rs. 13, 955 crore at the end March 2010. 
Recent developments in microfinance sector 
II. 
There has, however, been a sudden downturn in the prospects of the sector in the second 
half  of  2010-11  owing  to  reported  excesses  of  some  MFI  institutions  and  the  consequent 
legislative  response  by  a  state  government.  On  the  back  of  these  developments,  the  MFI 
segment has taken a severe beating with rising delinquency ratios and downgrades by rating 
agencies.  Lenders  have  turned  wary  leading  to  drying  up  of  funding  channels  seriously 
impinging  on  the  business.  It  is  reported  that  disbursements  by  MFIs  in  Andhra  Pradesh 
plummeted significantly in the second half of 2010–11. The recovery rates that were 99 per 
cent  reportedly  fell  to  a  meagre  10  per  cent,  leading  to  huge  NPAs  which  is  causing 
significant stress on the functioning of MFIs. While the loans given to MFIs during 2010–11 
declined  to  Rs.  8448.96  crore  from  Rs.  10,728.50  crore  in  2009–10,  the  amount  of 
outstanding loans reduced from Rs. 13,955. 75 crore in 2009–10 to Rs. 13,730.62 crore in 
2010–11. 
Many  analysts  attribute  the  current  crisis  to  the  irrational  exuberance  of  some  MFIs  who 
entered  the  segment  with  the  sole  emphasis  on  business  growth  and  bottom  lines.  They 
perhaps did not take due cognisance of the vulnerability of the borrowers and the potential 
socio-political ramifications their aggressive approach could possibly lead to. The competition 
among MFIs led to these institutions chasing the same set of borrowers, by free riding on 
SHGs and loading them with loans that borrowers, possibly, could not afford. It is reported 
that as at the end of March 2010, the number of loan accounts per poor household in Andhra 
Pradesh  was  on  an  average  more  than  10.  In  their  eagerness  to  grow  business,  the 
institutions had given a go by to the conventional wisdom and good practices such as due 
                                                 
1  1 crore = 10 millions 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
diligence in lending and ethical recovery practices. Over-indebtedness of the borrowers led 
to difficulties in repayments and the forced recoveries by some MFIs led to public uproar and 
the subsequent intervention by the state government. 
The  legislation  enacted  by  the  Andhra  Pradesh  Government  has  brought  the  customer 
protection  issues  to  the  centre  stage.  The  legislation  stipulated  mandatory  registration  of 
MFIs, disclosure of effective interest rate to the borrowers, ceilings on the interest rates and 
strict penalties for coercive recovery practices. One of the  fall outs of these developments 
has been the severe dent in the MFI business due to dwindling resources. 
Reserve Bank constituted a Committee (Chairman: Shri Y H Malegam) to study issues and 
issues  and  made 
concerns 
recommendations 
to  address 
the  significant 
recommendations are as under: 
i. 
the  MFI  sector.  The  Committee  examined 
the  present  concerns.  Some  of 
the 
in 
creation of a separate category of NBFCs operating in the microfinance sector to be 
designated as NBFC-MFIs.  
imposition of a margin cap and interest rate cap on individual loans;  
requirement of transparency in interest charges;  
lending by not more than two MFIs to individual borrowers;  
creation of one or more credit information bureaus;  
establishment of a proper system of grievance redressal procedure by MFIs;  
creation of one or more “social capital funds”;  
continuation of categorisation of bank loans to MFIs, complying with the regulation 
laid down for NBFC-MFIs, under the priority sector, etc.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
The recommendations of the Committee have brought out clarity in regulation of MFIs and 
led to the containment of the crisis without domino effect. Based on the recommendations of 
the  Malegam  Committee,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  issued  detailed  guidelines 
permitting categorisation as priority sector advance, of bank credit to certain eligible MFIs. 
Such eligibility is linked to core features of microfinance, such as, lending of small amounts 
to  borrowers  belonging  to  low  income  groups,  without  collaterals,  with  flexible  repayment 
schedules  and  with  particular  emphasis  on  measures  to  curb  over-indebtedness.  Margin 
caps  and  interest  rate  caps  have  also  been  stipulated  to  ensure  protection  of  borrowers. 
Subsequently, the Reserve Bank of India created a separate category of NBFCs dealing in 
microfinance  –  NBFC-MFI  and  issued  comprehensive  guidelines  covering,  inter  alia,  fair 
practices  in  lending  such  as  transparency  in  interest  rates,  non-coercive  methods  of 
recovery, measures to contain multiple lending and over-indebtedness. 
Government  of  India  has  come  out  with  The  Microfinance  Institutions  (Development  and 
Regulation) Bill, 2011 which, among other things, envisages the Reserve Bank of India as 
the  sole  regulator  of  microfinance  sector  covering  all  forms  of  MFIs  in  addition  to  
NBFC – MFIs which are presently being regulated by the Reserve Bank. The Bill has been 
circulated among various stakeholders for their views. 
Key lessons and the way forward 
III. 
Having  briefly  covered  the  background  to  the  current  state  of  affairs  let  me  now  focus  on 
some of the specific issues that need to be examined to address the current impasse. While 
a number of reasons have been attributed for the turmoil in the sector, such as, unjustified 
high rates of interest, lack of transparency in interest rate and other charges, multiple lending 
and  over-borrowing,  coercive  methods  of  recovery,  etc.  I  would  consider  the  governance 
deficit coupled with people risk, process risk and relationship risk as the more critical factors 
that have precipitated the turmoil and need to be addressed. MFIs need to seriously examine 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
their governance systems and align their practices with the overall objective of microfinance 
which is to facilitate financial inclusion and empower poor. 
Governance in MFIs 
Governance,  as  we  all  know,  is  essentially  about  doing  business  and  maximizing 
shareholders’ wealth legally, ethically and on a sustainable basis. Being fair and to be seen 
as  being  fair  to  all  the  stakeholders  without  discrimination  or  bias,  is  the  test  for  good 
governance. Governance system represents the value framework, the ethical framework, the 
moral  framework  as  also  the  legal  framework  under  which  business  decisions  are  taken. 
Governance  would  encompass  self  regulation  both  at  the  individual  entity  level  and  at 
industry level through the SRO mechanism. These two would form the first line of defence 
with  the  regulatory  framework  providing  the  backstop.  In  the  absence  of  effective  self 
regulation,  the  regulatory  framework  becomes  more  prescriptive  which  raises  costs  to 
regulators  and  supervisors  in  administering  the  regulatory  framework  and  also  increases 
compliance  costs  to  the  regulated  entities.  This  clearly  is  a  suboptimal  solution.  The 
considerable  intellectual  appeal  of  principles  based  regulation  which  had  committed 
proponents  is  a  case  in  point.  In  the  wake  of  the  subprime  crisis  of  2008,  it  has  yielded 
considerable  ground  to  the  proponents  of  rules  based  regulation.  Let  me  clarify  that 
principles  based  regulations  and  rules  based  regulations  are  not  binary  choices.  What 
distinguishes them is the less or more prescriptive regulations. 
Governance is based on the basic tenets of transparency and accountability. Transparency 
in  decision-making  provides  comfort  to  all  stake  holders  and  accountability  which  follows 
from  transparency  fixes  responsibilities  for  actions  taken  or  not  taken.  Together  they 
safeguard the interests of the stakeholders in the organisation. 
There were serious deficiencies observed in the governance framework of some of the MFIs. 
The  corporate  governance  issues  in  the  MFI  sector  were  exacerbated  by  some  of  the 
“for profit” MFIs, dominated and controlled by promoter shareholders which led to inadequate 
internal  checks  and  balances  over  executive  decision  making  and  conflict  of  interests  at 
various levels. Other undesirable practices such as connected lending, excessively generous 
compensation  practices  for  senior  management,  founders/  directors  and  failure  of  internal 
controls  leading  to  frauds  precipitated  the  crisis.  Some  of  the  MFIs  chased  high  growth 
trajectory at the expense of corporate best practices. The listing and trading of the shares of 
the  “for  profit”  MFIs  generated  a  set  of  incentives  which  attracted  capital  looking  for  high 
returns  whereas  the  capital  suited  for  catering  to  the  needs  of  the  poor  has  to  be  patient 
capital. This disconnect led to further worsening of the situation. What is more disturbing is 
that there were enough warning signals of trouble in making over an extended period of time 
but the MFIs, at least some of them, carried away by their immediate success, failed to pay 
heed. These events have been narrated by Dr. Y V Reddy, former Governor, Reserve Bank 
of India in an article titled “Microfinance Industry in India: Some thoughts” in Economic and 
Political Weekly (EPW) (October 8, 2011). Relating the events in Andhra Pradesh, he has 
stated that Government of Andhra Pradesh always had discomfort with the NBFC-MFIs and 
every  effort  was  made  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  introduce  a  voluntary  code  of 
conduct. Resolution in this regard was thought to have been achieved in 2007. In retrospect, 
Dr. Reddy says that perhaps the trust that Reserve Bank placed in the commitment of MFIs 
was  misplaced  and,  given  the  track  record,  the  Reserve  Bank  should  have  insisted  on 
enforceable regulation and not been content with an advisory role. Dr. Reddy’s observations 
lead to another very important tenet of corporate governance i.e. the need to pay attention to 
the  feedback  loops,  particularly  the  negative  feedback  loops  and  to  take  mid-course 
corrective actions. Those who fail to do so, end up paying a heavy price. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Inclusive finance vs. regulations2 
History is replete with examples that good intentions may not always lead to good outcomes. 
Intentions need to be adequately backed by sound framework of governance and regulation. 
This is demonstrated by the experience of sub-prime housing loans in US and microfinance 
in  India.  When  private  sector  emerged  in  microfinance,  regulation  responded  positively  by 
providing a supportive enabling environment: (a) lending by banks to MFIs for on lending was 
deemed  priority  sector;  (b)  banks  were  advised  to  lend  to  MFIs  without  a  cap  on  interest 
rates  and  (c)  group  guarantees  were  deemed  as  collateral  for  the  purposes  of  asset 
classification, prudential and provisioning norms. MFIs were expected to be carrying forward 
the  agenda  of  inclusion,  and  were  fully  aligned  with  the  banking  system.  MFIs,  however, 
enamoured by the fast growth and expanding balance sheets, shifted goals, strategies and 
practices. Dr. Reddy has observed in the same article that the assumption that the people 
working  in  MFIs  were  committed  to  a  value  framework  that  aims  at  profit-making  but  not 
profiteering or profit maximization, was not validated, going by the organisational structures 
and incentive frameworks as well as the lifestyles of senior managers. 
The MFI episode in India has, at least, two close parallels with the subprime crisis of 2008. 
First, the origin of the subprime crisis was about extending loans well beyond the borrowers’ 
capacity to pay and second, compensation practices were a major contributing factor to the 
crisis  as  these  practices  were  designed  to  enhance  risk  taking  and  create  value  for  share 
holders  but  not  to  protect  other  stakeholders.  Corrective  actions  are  being  taken  in  the 
context of regulatory reforms for banks thorough, Basel III guidelines and for MFIs through 
guidelines based on the Malegam Committee recommendations. 
Learning from the crisis, we need to build a regulatory framework which ensures a balance 
between flexibility to MFIs in their operations and regulations that ensure customer protection 
and  financial  health  of  the  MFIs.  In  the  long  run,  MFIs  also  will  be  benefited  by  such 
regulatory framework as it enables orderly growth and reduces uncertainty. The envisaged 
regulatory framework must put in place restrictions and safeguards with regard to minimum 
standards  of  governance,  management  and  customer  protection  as  well  as  the  financial 
health  of  MFIs.  Naturally,  robust  regulations  coupled  with  thorough  risk  based  onsite  and 
offsite  supervision  are  needed  to  foster  entrepreneurship  while  encouraging  inclusive  and 
sustainable economic growth, especially with reference to end users. This balance would be 
provided by the regulatory framework derived from the Malegam Committee Report and the 
SRO framework. 
Balancing the dual objectives – social and financial 
There is no denying the fact that self sufficiency and financial sustainability are the objectives 
that MFI could pursue. However, in the race to earn profits, the social objective should not be 
lost sight of. Mission drift, where the institution deviates from its original mission in pursuit of 
a conflicting unannounced mission, is a major risk the MFIs face. The Boards of MFIs will 
have to balance the objectives of various stakeholders, viz., the equity holders, the donors, 
the borrowers and the overall society. Strong corporate governance could play a critical role 
in balancing seemingly exclusive but potentially complimentary objectives from a long term 
perspective. 
The question of balance between profits and serving the financial services needs of the poor 
is certainly an issue for MFIs. It is often asked that if the MFIs moderate their pace of growth 
and shift their priorities more towards social objectives, would they be able to attract enough 
investors to provide capital to enable the MFIs to take their activities designed to help the 
poor  forward.  Similar  questions  have  arisen  in  the  context  of  substantially  enhanced 
                                                 
2  BIS Paper No. 62, January 2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
regulatory  framework  for  banks  under  Basel  III,  in  particular  the  much  higher  capital  and 
liquidity requirements. There is an apprehension that with much larger capital and liquidity 
requirements under Basel III to support similar level of activities, the Return on Equity (RoE) 
would go down appreciably and consequently banks may not be able to attract investors to 
provide  capital.  This  line  of  thinking  disregards  the  risk-return  trade-off  and  the  fact  that 
banks can raise their productivity and efficiency levels to protect their ROEs, at least partially. 
It is hoped that when investors see a much more stable and safer banking system they would 
be  willing  to  supply  capital  at  lower  returns.  Similarly,  MFIs,  which  align  their  business 
objectives with the requirements of the social segment they cater to, would be seen as stable 
and less risky and would certainly prove attractive to the investors than the ones that provide 
extraordinary  but  unstable  returns.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to 
Malegam Committee’s recommendation of “creation of one or more domestic social capital 
funds”. 
Customer protection and responsible finance 
Responsible  finance  is  the  most  important  lesson  from  the  current  episode.  Given  the 
vulnerability of their customers, MFIs need to be more mindful of their needs and capabilities. 
Chasing customers and sometimes, as it is alleged, poaching them from other segments of 
microfinance  and  loading  with  more  debt  would  lead  to  issues  such as  wrong  selection  of 
borrowers, over-indebtedness and eventually to delinquencies. 
MFIs, therefore, need to revisit their business model and ensure more responsible financing. 
This would require them to adopt approaches to select their borrowers with diligence, ensure 
that their lending is not leading to over-indebtedness and be more human and ethical in their 
recovery methods. 
Building enabling organisational climate 
There  is  a  strong  need  to  build  good  practices  within  the  institutions  and  encourage 
organisational  culture  which  values  customer  protection  and  well  being.  The  frontline  staff 
need  to  be  educated  about  the  organisational  values  and  social  mission  so  as  not  to  get 
swayed  by  the  short  term  performance  targets.  Further,  the  organisational  culture  should 
nurture values like honesty, respect, transparency etc. 
Self regulation 
Events in the last few years have indicated that the “for profit” model of microfinance, where 
there  is  a  heightened  emphasis  on  rapid  scale  and  high  profitability,  has  not  been  very 
successful in meeting their social objectives nor has such a model been sustainable. While 
regulatory  responses  are  being  put  in  place  to  address  the  current  impasse,  a  degree  of 
self-regulation  is  a  must  in  building  robust  and  efficient  microfinance  institutions  going 
forward. Self regulation would require putting in place a code of conduct that would allow for 
a reputation-building mechanism and adherence to best governance practices. 
Transparency 
With the customer base being largely from the low-income group whose financial knowledge 
and  sophistication  cannot  be  taken  for  granted,  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  MFIs  to  be 
transparent about  the  interest  charged  and  the total  cost  to  be  borne  by  the  customers.  It 
was reported that some MFIs not only charged excessive interest, but had also loaded many 
other  components  to  the  overall  cost.  MFIs  need  to  remind  themselves,  that  while  dealing 
with  vulnerable  sections  of  the  society,  the  argument  of  “caveat  emptor”  does  not  always 
hold good.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Credit information 
Absence of comprehensive credit information has been a handicap in the development of the 
sector.  The  multiplicity  of  financing  institutions  acting  independently  increases  the  level  of 
information asymmetry among them, which may lead to delays in sanction, double financing, 
etc.  The  building  up,  and  sharing,  of  credit  information  will  help  in  enhancing  synergies 
among  the  various  institutions  and  also  ensure  avoidance  of  multiple  financing  and 
consequent  over-indebtedness.  In  this  context,  let  me  add  that  as  per  Credit  Information 
Companies  (Regulation)  Act,  2005,  NBFCs,  as  credit  institutions,  are  required  to  be 
members of at least one Credit Information Company (CIC) (currently there are four CICs). 
What is important is that credit data regarding all the borrowers should be furnished to the 
concerned CIC accurately and timely and full use should be made of the database of CICs 
while extending credit, to guard against adverse selection and over indebtedness. 
Diversification 
It was observed that MFIs found a few geographies more profitable than others and against 
conventional wisdom which advocates diversification, ran in droves to the same geographies 
with  southern  region  showing  significant  concentration  of  SHGs  and  MFIs.  Excessive 
proliferation  of  entities  in  a  few  regions,  led  to  immense,  and,  sometimes,  unhealthy 
competition leading to perverse practices. It is now comforting to see that, learning from the 
recent  episode,  the  MFIs  are  reorganising  themselves  and  are  spreading  into,  hitherto, 
untapped  regions.  Diversification  helps  not  only  MFIs  in  withstanding  any  region  specific 
shocks but also help customers at large, by spreading the microfinance across the country. 
Improvising the business model – reducing costs 
Microfinance is a labour intensive sector involving significant delivery costs. While the entities 
could build these costs into their services and charge the customer, which many in fact did, 
the more efficient way of protecting or increasing one’s margins is reducing the operational 
costs  by  enhancing  efficiency  and  leveraging  technology.  MFIs  should  not  pass  on  their 
operational inefficiencies to clients in the form of prices that are far higher than they need to 
be. Considering the profile of the borrowers who are poor, to whom even a small increase in 
rates  could  make  a  lot  of  difference,  MFIs  should  strive  to  build  more  cost  effective  and 
efficient delivery models to serve their clientele better. 
Credit rating of MFIs 
The rating of MFIs assumes critical importance as MFIs are sourcing financing from banks 
and  other  institutions.  There  are  several  MFIs  in  the  country  and  their  rating  helps  the 
lenders  to  choose  the  right  one.  Further,  such  positive  discrimination  helps  the  better 
managed MFIs in reducing their borrowing costs and also acts as a dis-incentivising factor 
for not so well managed ones. 
Moving beyond finance 
The poorest sections of the poor require considerable handholding in terms of input supply, 
training, technical support, market linkages, etc. The formation and nurturing of such groups 
require not only providing of financial services but also institutional development services, all 
of  which  would  require  a  greater  role  for  the  MFIs.  In  order  to  achieve  its  full  potential  in 
empowering  the  poor,  microfinance  should  become  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  sector 
and MFIs need to play a larger developmental role. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Summing up 
IV. 
At a time when financial inclusion is at the center stage of the regulatory landscape, the last 
mile  connectivity  provided  by  the  MFIs  has  to  be  leveraged  upon,  to  include  the  hitherto 
financially  excluded.  Although  the  MFIs  are  facing  tough  times,  there  is  a  fair  degree  of 
opportunity  to  build  long-term  sustainable  business  around  microfinance.  Balancing  the 
interests  of  the  vulnerable  borrowers  as  also  the  microfinance  institutions;  effective 
regulations, well calibrated transition time and some breathing space to the institutions could 
help the microfinance sector to turn around, expand and help achieve inclusive growth. 
The  recent  episodes  in  the  MFI  sector  have  raised  certain  serious  concerns  on  the 
governance issues. MFIs should identify their unique role in the financial system and should 
put in place robust governance standards to balance the dual objectives of social utility and 
financial sustainability. 
I  am  sanguine  that  the  Workshop  would  deliberate  extensively  on  the  issues.  I  wish  the 
workshop all success. 
References 
Bank for International Settlements (2012), Financial sector regulation for growth, equity and 
stability, BIS Papers No. 62  
Hulme,  D  and  Mosley,  P  (1996),  Finance  Against  Poverty,  volumes  1  and  2,  London: 
Routledge 
Joshi, Deepali Pant, Microfinance for Macro change, Gyan Books 2011 
Key Principles for Microfinance (2004) – CGAP – Consultative Group to Assist the Poor 
Littlefield,  E.,  Hashemi,  S.  &  Morduch,  J.  (2003).  Is  Microfinance  an  Effective  Strategy  to 
the  Millennium  Development  Goals?  Focus  Note  no.  24.  Washington:  
Reach 
CGAP – Consultative Group to Assist the Poor. 
Moses,  J  S;  Rajesh,  Raj;  Prasad,  Gopal;  Kumar,  Neeraj  and  Kumar,  Navin,  (2012) 
Microfinance  in  India-  Progress  and  Problems  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development (NABRD), Status of Microfinance in India 2010–11  
Reddy,  Dr.  Y  V:  Microfinance  Industry  in  India:  Some  thoughts,  Economic  and  Political 
Weekly (2011) XLVI NO. 41 
Simanowitz,  A  and  Brody,  A  (2004),  Realising  the  potential  of  microfinance,  id21  insights, 
December, Issue -51 
Srinivasan, Microfinance India: State of the Sector Report 2011  
United Nations, Building Inclusive Financial Sectors to Achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals (International Year of Microcredit, United Nations, 2005) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
