Charles Bean: Quantitative easing and the economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
to the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, Glasgow, 21 February 2012. 
 Good evening! I doubt that many of you will be aware that the Bank of England was actually 
founded, in 1694, by a Scotsman named William Paterson. Our original purpose was to raise 
the funds to enable the King to finance his foreign military adventures. But Paterson soon 
parted company with his fellow directors, leaving the Bank the following year. 
Rather more of you may be aware that same William Paterson became the financial brains 
behind the Darien scheme, a project to establish a Scottish colony in Panama that could act 
as trading post between the Atlantic and the Pacific. Unfortunately, just about everything that 
could go wrong with the project did, resulting in not only the deaths of many of the colonists, 
but  also  substantial  financial  losses  for  the  many  Scottish  people  who  had  backed  the 
scheme.  According  to  historians,  the  Darien  disaster  and  its  financial  consequences 
contributed directly to the pressures leading to the 1707 Act of Union between England and 
Scotland. 
The  possible  dissolution  of  that  union  is,  of  course,  now  on  the  agenda.  Whether  or  not 
Scotland becomes an independent country once again is a matter for the Scottish people to 
decide. If the referendum should result in a vote in favour of an independent Scotland, the 
associated  monetary  arrangements  would  then  be  one  of  many  matters  needing  to  be 
settled. But the exact form of those arrangements would be for the Westminster and Scottish 
parliaments to decide, not the Bank of England. 
Until asked to do otherwise, the Bank will continue to use the powers delegated to us by the 
UK Parliament to try to deliver, to the best of our ability, monetary and financial stability for 
the  United  Kingdom  as  it  stands,  including  being  represented  here  through  our  Agency  in 
Scotland. In keeping with that, my remarks tonight will focus not on what may, or may not, 
happen to the UK’s monetary arrangements some years down the road, but rather on our 
more  immediate  economic  prospects  and  the  actions  that  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy 
Committee has taken to try to sustain the recovery. 
As you will be aware, last October the Monetary Policy Committee resumed its purchases of 
government  debt, 
the 
Bank of England – so-called quantitative easing. At our most recent policy meeting less than 
a fortnight ago, we voted to make a further £50 billion of purchases, which will take the total 
sum bought to £325 billion. To give you some  context, that represents about a fifth of the 
annual output of the United Kingdom and around a third of the total stock of UK government 
debt in issue. 
Why did we decide to inject further monetary stimulus into the economy? And how likely is it 
to be effective? We started quantitative easing in March 2009 in the aftermath of the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers, as the UK economy was undergoing its deepest post-war contraction. 
Bank Rate was almost as low as it could go and further stimulus was necessary to put a floor 
under demand and get the economy growing again. All told we bought £200 billion of gilts 
during that initial phase of quantitative easing. 
Quantitative  easing  essentially  involves  trading  one  liability  of  the  state  –  gilts  –  for 
another – monetary claims on the Bank of England. We aim to buy mainly from non-bank 
private financial institutions, such as pension funds and insurance companies, not from the 
issuance  of  additional 
financed  by 
claims  on 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
banks, as is sometimes erroneously claimed1. When we buy a gilt, we simply credit the bank 
account of the seller with an appropriate sum. If the seller were indifferent between holding 
the  gilt  and  holding  the  associated  bank  deposit,  that  is  where  things  would  stop.  But 
because  deposits  tend  to  yield  less  than  gilts  and  assets  such  as  corporate  bonds  and 
equities,  the  seller  is  likely  to  want  to  buy  some  other  asset  instead.  The  consequence  is 
upward  pressure  on  the  prices  of a  whole  range  of  assets,  including corporate  bonds  and 
equities. That increases the availability, and reduces the cost, of finance to corporates. It also 
boosts the value of people’s wealth, which should encourage more spending. 
As I noted a moment ago, we aim to acquire the gilts from institutions other than banks. But 
as a by-product of the purchase, banks will find that they have both more customer deposits 
and  an  increase  in  their  claims  on  us  (what  are  known  as  bank  reserves).  That  may 
encourage them to increase their lending, though in the particular circumstances prevailing 
during and after the financial crisis, we expected this effect to be quite weak. That is in line 
with the observed weakness in bank lending over the past three years. 
Our analysis of the first phase of quantitative easing suggests bond yields were around one 
percentage  point  lower  than  they  would  otherwise  have  been.  And  UK  equity  prices  rose 
50%  during  the  programme,  though  only  a  small  part  of  that  is  likely  to  be  down  to 
quantitative  easing.  That  made  it  cheaper  for  companies  to  access  finance  through  the 
capital markets and issuance was indeed strong during 2009. But the ultimate aim was to 
sustain demand. Though we cannot be sure what would have happened in the absence of 
our  asset  purchases,  our  internal work  suggests  that  the first  phase of  quantitative  easing 
boosted the level of activity by around 1½–2%. 
Having  finished  the  first  programme  of  purchases  in  early  2010,  why  then  did  we  deem  it 
necessary to restart the programme last October and extend it at our February meeting? 
During late 2009 and through 2010, a recovery of sorts appeared to be taking hold and, by 
the  beginning  of  last  year,  some  of  us  were  starting  to  think  that  the  time  to  begin 
withdrawing some of the monetary stimulus might be starting to draw near. As the year wore 
on, though, it became increasingly clear that the underlying growth rate was moderating. 
To begin with, that reflected a continuing squeeze on household real incomes, and thus on 
spending, resulting from the increase in the standard rate of VAT in January and the impact 
of higher energy and import prices. In fact, real household income declined a total of 2½% in 
the  two  years  after  output  troughed,  whereas  in  normal  conditions  it  might  have  been 
expected to rise about 5% in that time. But since last August, the deterioration also seems to 
have  reflected  heightened  concerns  about  the  prospects  for  the  euro  area.  That  was 
reflected in much tighter funding conditions for European banks, including those in the United 
Kingdom,  and  increased  caution  on  the  part  of  businesses  both  in  regards  to  hiring  and 
capital spending. Output is reported to have contracted by 0.2% in the final quarter, though 
some of the business surveys at the start of this year suggest that the economy may again 
be expanding. 
It was that deterioration in the outlook that led us to restart our asset purchases in October. 
Despite  the  recent  more  encouraging  signs,  we  continue  to  expect  underlying  growth  to 
remain  sluggish  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  (the  actual  data  are  likely  to  move  somewhat 
erratically because of the extra holiday associated with the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee). But 
inflation  has  been  falling  sharply,  down  from  its  peak  of  5.2%  in  September  to  3.6%  in 
January and is likely to continue declining as increases in energy prices a year ago drop out 
of the calculation. That means that the long-lasting squeeze on household real incomes is 
also starting to ease. In turn, that should facilitate a modest pickup in household spending; 
                                                 
1  Banks do act as intermediaries in the transactions, but it is the behaviour of the ultimate seller that matters for 
the economic impact. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  upbeat  retail  sales  figures  announced  at  the  end  of  last  week  may  be  a  sign  this  is 
already  starting  to  happen.  But  while  growth  should  gradually  strengthen,  the  continuing 
headwinds  from  the  unwinding  of  excessive  debt  and  the  Government’s  continuing  fiscal 
consolidation  mean  that  the  pace  of  recovery  is  likely  to  remain  moderate  by  historical 
standards.  
As a consequence, a margin of unused capacity and labour in the economy is likely to persist 
for  some  while  yet,  helping  to  ensure  that  domestically  generated  inflation  –  presently 
running around 1½%, depending on exactly how one chooses to measure it – should stay 
subdued.  Indeed,  in  the  absence  of  the  extra  £50  billion  of  gilt  purchases  announced  two 
weeks ago, we judged that inflation would be rather more likely than not to undershoot our 
2% target in the medium term. That was why we decided that it was necessary to do more. 
Moreover, the longer capacity lies idle, the more likely it is to be scrapped completely. And 
the longer people are out of work, the more likely they are to become disconnected from the 
labour  market  altogether.  So  there  is  an  added  incentive  to  getting  the  recovery  back  on 
track quickly.  
The  euro  area  represents  the  biggest  single  downside  risk  to  this  picture.  Greece  is  the 
country in the headlines right now, but several countries of the euro-area periphery face, in 
varying  degrees,  a  challenging  mixture  of  unsustainably  high  public  and/or  private 
indebtedness  and  weak  competitiveness.  Correcting  those  problems  requires:  fiscal 
consolidation; bank recapitalisation; and a rebalancing of demand towards net exports. The 
first  two  are  under  way,  but  the  third  is  harder  to  achieve  in  a  monetary  union  where  no 
exchange  rate  movement  is  possible  to  bring  about  the  necessary  improvement  in 
international competitiveness. At best, these countries face an extended period of very low 
growth  while  the  necessary  adjustments  take  place.  And  while  this  morning’s  agreement 
between the Greek government and the euro-area authorities is certainly welcome, there still 
remains a possibility that events could unfold in a disorderly and damaging fashion at some 
stage in the future. 
The  linkages  to  the  United  Kingdom  from  such  a  disorderly  outcome  would  be  threefold. 
First, and most obviously, almost half our exports go the euro area, so weak growth there 
has  a  rather  direct  spillover  on  to  us.  Second,  although  UK  banks’  exposures  to 
governments,  households  and  businesses 
the  affected  countries  are  generally 
manageable, they do have exposures to, and get finance from, euro-area banks which are 
more heavily exposed. A disorderly outcome in the euro area could then result in a tightening 
of the availability of funds to UK banks as a result of this interconnectedness and thus also in 
the credit extended to UK households and businesses. Third, a bad outcome would probably 
knock  confidence  and  lead  UK  households  and  businesses  to  hunker  down  and  postpone 
spending. 
There is little that the Monetary Policy Committee – or, indeed, the Government – can do to 
influence the outcome of events beyond our shores. In particular, it would make little sense 
to  set  the  level  of  asset  purchases  so  as  to  try  to  counteract  an  extreme  event  whose 
likelihood, timing and magnitude we have no realistic way of assessing.  
The  latest  extension  of  our  asset  purchase  programme  has  proved  controversial  in  some 
quarters.  Some  commentators  have  questioned  its  likely  effectiveness  in  stimulating 
demand. Others have focussed on the undesirable distributional consequences. 
As far as the effectiveness of the policy goes, the impact depends on what those who have 
sold  the  gilts  do  with  the  money  we  give  them  in  return,  and  how  banks,  businesses  and 
households  respond  to  the  resulting  movements  in  asset  prices  and  money  holdings.  It  is 
quite possible that the impact of a given quantum of purchases will be different at different 
times and be sensitive to the prevailing economic conditions. But that is also the case with 
changes in Bank Rate, where the effects can be equally uncertain. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Tracking  the  impact  of  the  new  round  of  purchases  is  also  harder  than  before.  Market 
participants  have  increasingly  come  to  anticipate  our  actions,  so  that  asset  prices  tend  to 
move ahead of our decisions. That makes it difficult to isolate the impact on asset prices of 
policy changes from the myriad of other things driving them. The fact that UK government 
bond yields have fallen about a quarter percentage point more than those in Germany and 
the United States since the late summer is, however, at least consistent with the effect we 
expected.  In  any  case,  so  far  we  have  seen  little  to  suggest  that  the  effect  on  nominal 
demand will be markedly at odds with that of our first round of purchases. But it is still rather 
early to draw firm conclusions one way or the other. 
Turning to the distributional consequences of the asset purchases, attention has focussed on 
the downward impact on annuity rates, which have fallen about a percentage point over the 
past  three  years  since  we  started  our  purchases.  That  means  someone2  with  a 
£100,000 pension  pot, who  could  have  expected  that  to  yield  an  annual  pension  of  a  little 
under £7,000 three years ago, would now get just under £6,000. That is a rather substantial 
income  loss.  But  it  is  only  part  of  the  story.  Those  pension  funds  will  typically  have  been 
invested  in  a  mix  of  bonds  and  equities,  with  perhaps  a  bit  of  cash  too.  The  rise  in  asset 
prices as a result of quantitative easing consequently also raises the value of the pension 
pot,  providing  an  offset  to  the  fall  in  annuity  rates3.  The  impact  of  quantitative  easing  on 
those approaching retirement is thus more complex than it seems at first blush. 
More  generally,  the  current  extended  period  of  rock-bottom  interest  rates  has  impacted 
heavily on those holding most of their savings in deposit or short-term savings accounts, who 
have seen negative real returns. Savers have every right to feel aggrieved at losing out; after 
all, they did nothing to cause the financial crisis. But neither did most of those in work, who 
have also seen a substantial squeeze in their real incomes. And unemployment, particularly 
among the young, has risen as output has fallen. This is all a reflection of the hit to output 
from  the  financial  crisis.  Output  is  still  some  4%  below  its  previous  peak  and  more  than 
10% below  where  it  would  have  been  if  the  economy  had  simply  continued  growing  at  its 
pre-crisis historical trend. There have been few winners over the past few years. 
In  a  deep  sense,  the  low  level  of  real  interest  rates  here  and  in  the  other  advanced 
economies is a reflection of the impact on the financial crisis. Heightened uncertainty and, for 
some  households,  a  desire  to  reduce  their  indebtedness  have  resulted  in  an  increased 
propensity  to  save.  And  the  same  heightened  uncertainty  has  reduced  the  appetite  of 
businesses to invest and encouraged them to build up cash buffers. Substantial dissaving by 
the public sector could offset that initially, but there are limits to how long the markets will 
allow high deficits to be sustained. Fiscal consolidation was unavoidable at some juncture. 
Given that, the stance of monetary policy needs to be loose in order to sustain demand. If we 
had chosen to run a substantially tighter monetary policy, then that would only have served 
to depress activity and raise unemployment even further. By slowing  growth, it would also 
make  the  task  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  de-leveraging  even  more  challenging.  And  by 
providing  a  gloomier  climate  for  business,  it  would  also  inhibit  investment  and  slow  the 
necessary re-balancing of our economy towards manufacturing and internationally tradable 
services.  
Treating  serious  medical  conditions  often  has  unwanted  side  effects.  But,  unpleasant  as 
those side effects sometimes are, treatment is invariably better than the alternative. So it is 
with  the  economic  medicine  of  low  interest  rates  and  quantitative  easing.  The  immediate 
consequences may be unpalatable, but the sooner we can get the economy on the mend, 
                                                 
2  For a single male, aged 65. 
3 
Indeed,  if  the  savings  were  held  in  bonds  of  a  maturity  structure  that  matched  the  likely  longevity  of  the 
individual, the two effects would cancel each other out. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  sooner  we  can  return  policy  to  more  normal  settings  and  the  better  it  will  be  for  all 
of us – savers, businesses and employees alike. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
