Patrick Honohan: Reflections on corporate restructuring in Ireland 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the Corporate 
Restructuring Summit, Dublin, 27 September 2012. 
 It would be an understatement to say that corporate restructuring is a topical issue for Ireland 
these  days,  though  it  is  worth  remembering  that  a  dynamic  economy  entails  a  continuous 
process of corporate restructuring and not just in bad times. In normal times firms adapt in 
part  through  internal  reorganisations,  including  product  and  process  innovation.  But  the 
individual  firm  does  not  always  have  what  it  takes  to  reinvent  itself  in  response  to  major 
changes in technology and competition, and then its survival is subject to takeover, merger, 
or,  in  the  case  it  is  unable  to  pay  its  debts  as  they  fall  due,  to  various  forms  of  asset  or 
liability restructuring.  
The need for corporate restructuring in Ireland today 
Right  now,  though,  an  extraordinarily  large  number  of  firms  in  Ireland  have  been 
experiencing financial distress typically as a result of the deep domestic and (less deep but 
equally  protracted)  international  downturn  in  demand,  or  because  of  their  unwise  property 
investments. An extended period of intensive corporate restructuring has begun. This is most 
conspicuous for the big property development companies, but there are many others.  
Much  of  this  restructuring  has  so  far  come  through  firm  exit  altogether.  CSO  surveys 
covering about half of the economy, and most of the non-agricultural business sector, throw 
some quantitative light on what’s been happening (Table 1). The number of firms counted by 
the CSO in the census of Industrial Enterprises fell from about 5600 to under 4800 between 
2008  and  2010,  the  worst  period  of  the  crisis  and  the  latest  for  which  data  is  available. 
Almost  no  subsector  was  spared.  This  proportionate  decline,  of  over  14%  in  numbers  of 
industrial firms, is not too far from the decline in aggregate employment in that sector (17%). 
The story is broadly similar in Construction and in Services, especially if one excludes the 
large number of very small firms in these sectors. Indeed, the number of construction firms 
employing more than 20 persons has almost halved, with their employment falling by almost 
two-thirds.  
Broadly speaking, the relatively small change in the average employment per firm seen in the 
data suggests that the downturn has not favoured large firms over small, and also that the 
employment decline has been driven more by firm closure than by partial lay-offs. 
Even  after  such  a  big  shakeout,  many  of  the  remaining  firms  are  in  a  weakened  financial 
condition,  and  may  need  balance  sheet  as  well  as  organisational  restructuring  in  order  to 
survive  and  prosper.  Recent  research1  at  the  Central  Bank  has  confirmed  that  stressed 
balance sheets are clear early warning signs of subsequent loan default. But the research 
also indicates that some well-run firms can ride these problems out, notably if they are being 
run by an experienced owner that has been with the firm through other ups and downs.  
Many  balance  sheets  are  stressed  because  of  unwise  property  investments  made  on  the 
side of a viable non-property business. Restructuring these balance sheets without losing the 
true  value  of  the  resources,  human,  technological  and  physical,  that  are  now  engaged  in 
each  firm’s  core  business,  is  a  key  challenge  for  corporate  restructuring  in  Ireland  today. 
Overall, this is a challenge that will absorb the efforts of banks, law firms, and – that most 
elusive of professions, well-represented here today – workout specialists. 
                                                
1  Cf.  Fergal  McCann  and  Tara  McIndoe-Calder.  “Determinants  of  SME  Loan  Default:  The  Importance  of 
Borrower-Level Heterogeneity,” Central Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper 6RT12, September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  modern  economy  is  driven  by  firms:  they  generate  the  bulk  of  employment,  and  the 
output that supports the wages and salaries, as well as feeding directly and indirectly into the 
tax revenue needed to support the social and economic infrastructure that underpins all of 
economic activity. Healthy firms are a prerequisite for a growing economy that creates jobs. 
Too many of even the surviving Irish firms have not yet recovered from the crash and need 
restructuring. 
Corporate failures in the last big downturn in Ireland 
Restructuring  of  distressed  companies  is  not  a  new  phenomenon  in  Ireland  or  anywhere 
else.  Reflecting  on  Ireland’s  experience  with  corporate  financial  distress  over  the  years, 
many resonant names come to mind. Companies fail in good times as well as bad times, but 
it  is  the  downturns  that see  the  vast  bulk  of  corporate restructuring  business. The  last  big 
downturn in Ireland was in the 1980s. And I well remember some of the big names that got 
into trouble in those days and were either helped or not helped by the Government of the 
day.  
Take  Irish  Shipping,  for  example,  which  got  caught  up  in  over-ambitious  expansion  and 
over-indebtedness  as  it  built  a  large  fleet  of  leased  vessels  well  beyond  that  company’s 
traditional goal, which aimed at controlling sufficient tonnage to avoid Ireland having to rely 
on foreign companies to deliver essential supplies in time of war. Though the deficiency of 
Irish Shipping – probably well under €0.5 billion in today’s money – may seem dwarfed by 
the  banking  losses  of recent  years,  it  was  too  much for  the Government  to  take  on (even 
though it owned the firm) and Irish Shipping was liquidated.  
Other  high  profile  cases  of  the  1980s,  such  as  Dublin  Gas,  Irish  Steel,  and  the  two  big 
general  insurance  companies  ICI  and  PMPA,  saw  public  money  poured  in  to  protect  what 
were seen as essential services.  
The 1990s saw the even larger failures of the meat concern Goodman International and of 
the aircraft leasing company GPA. The latter was a huge global operation, owning hundreds 
of  aircraft  and  exploiting  a  taxation  arbitrage  as  well  as  know-how  about  the  demand  and 
supply conditions in the aviation industry. But it became overstretched and over-indebted and 
was  unable  to  raise  the  equity  capital  which  would  have  allowed  it  to  ride  out  a  cyclical 
downturn: it was dismembered and mainly sold to a US company. 
Some  of  these  large  failures  reflected  insufficiently  controlled  over-expansion;  others  a 
process  of  senescence  leaving  the  company  prone  to  bankruptcy  as  soon  as  the  next 
economic downturn came along. In each case, it generally fell to the bankers to pull the plug. 
It  is  usually  they  who  have  to  refuse  further  accommodation,  to  stop  the  drain  of 
unrecoverable resources.  
Interestingly,  in  several  of  the  large  historic  cases  mentioned,  Irish  banks  did  not  find 
themselves as heavily exposed as one might have expected. Perhaps the Irish banks had a 
closer  view  and  a  better  understanding  of  the  potential  risks  back  then,  or  perhaps  there 
were other reasons, but other creditors, including banks abroad, seem to have absorbed or 
been exposed to the largest losses in several of these failures. Perhaps that experience was 
one  of  the  ingredients  contributing  to  embolden  the  Irish  banks  to  feel  invulnerable  to 
downturns. Perhaps one day we will fully understand just how fundamental decision-making 
in the banks (during the property bubble) ended up so insulated from adequate attention to 
basic risk-controls – and indeed in the end from common sense! 
Optimal restructuring 
When  restructuring  works  well,  the  assets  of the  failing firm,  along  with  the  human  capital 
embodied  in  its  employees,  will  find  a  good  alternative  use.  Receivers  and  liquidators  will 
certainly have worked to get a good price for the physical assets. Aircraft and ships owned 
by GPA and Irish Shipping may have been laid-up for a while, but most found employment 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
later. Employees did not always fare as well. The collapses often happened during periods of 
weak global activity associated with levels of unemployment at home and abroad that make it 
hard for displaced workers to get a job. The plight of the misfortunate former Irish Shipping 
workers has rightly been highlighted.  
There  are  inherent  conflicts  of  interest  between  different  stakeholders  in  a  restructuring 
though,  and  not  all  work-outs  do  contribute  to  overall  economic  efficiency.  Indeed, 
sometimes  key  protagonists  may  be  aiming  to  build  a  monopoly  or  attempting  aggressive 
risk-shifting.  That’s  why  public  policy,  for  example,  competition  policy,  or  mergers  and 
monopolies policy, may need to be activated.  
In  the  past,  Governments  have  sometimes  got  involved  more  directly.  For  example,  when 
Irish  Steel  looked  like  closing,  the  prospect  of  so  many  workers  being  displaced  into  the 
depressed  labour  market  conditions  of  the  mid-1980s,  perhaps  to  remain  on  the  dole  for 
years, weighed with the Government of the time in its decision to provide funds to keep that 
firm going for some years more by subsidising its activities. 
But a greater awareness of the opportunity costs of Government rescues of companies has 
reduced their frequency over the years. Propping up a doomed company is not always good 
even for those who seem to benefit. Few now bemoan the demise of the Irish car assembly 
business. Indeed, a decade after that business collapsed following the Anglo Irish free trade 
agreement, manufacturers of car parts for export employed more people than the assembly 
industry did in re-assembling CKD (completely knocked down) car kits. 
Making sure it’s done well – avoiding delay and dealing with owners 
Faced  with  cleaning  up  the  post-crisis  mess,  procrastination  is  an  ever-present  cancer. 
Hoping something will turn up is a natural reaction when the alternative is facing up to the 
inevitable and taking steps that crystallize losses and directly affect the stakeholders of firms 
including the employees and trade creditors. But the hidden consequences of procrastination 
impose costs elsewhere in the economy – costs that destroy even more jobs elsewhere. That 
was  the  experience  of  Japan  in  the  1990s,  and  Ireland  can’t  afford  to  suffer  a  similar 
protracted  delay.  An  unhealthy  firm  balance  sheet  means  that  access  is  denied  to  new 
funding that can enable expansion, upgrading or innovative investment that could generate 
output  and  employment  growth.  Indeed,  especially  in  the  current  crisis  which  is  driven  by 
balance  sheet  problems  more  than  operating  account  problems,  delaying  the  financial 
restructuring is likely to threaten jobs in the distressed company itself, as well as imposing 
indirect costs on those dependent on other companies.  
Owners will resist restructuring, especially when it means that they stand to lose control over 
some or all of the business. They have of course a large financial, and not seldom emotional, 
interest  in  retaining  their  position  and  may  also  think  that  only  they  have  the  expertise  to 
make the most of the assets of the company. In some instances, creditors will agree with this 
proposition.  In  his  book,2  Professor  Cahill  suggests  that  the  lending  banks  (most  of  them 
foreign)  may  have  found  it  a  “bitter  pill”  to  retain  the  CEO  of  Goodman  International  in 
executive  control  and  with  a  sizeable  equity  stake  in  the  restructured  company.  Other 
high-profile cases saw the more conventional presumption that the old shareholders and top 
management  will  go.  That  has  been  the  basic  modus  operandi  of  the  Government  in  the 
current banking crisis as far as the banks are concerned. In the case of NAMA, dealing as 
they are with a huge number of property-owners and developers, the modus operandi to date 
appears to reflect a kind of extended triage of their borrowers, with some being kept on, and 
others eventually not.  
                                                
2 
In refreshing my memory on these cases, I have found Edward Cahill’s Corporate Financial Crisis in Ireland 
(Dublin: Gill and Macmillan, 1997) of great assistance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Asset management companies or in-house operation of the banks? 
Some may find irony in the fact the banks are among the main actors in driving restructuring. 
After  all,  they  themselves  have  experienced  some  of  the  most  far-reaching  balance  sheet 
restructuring, with their shareholders wiped-out and subordinated debt-holders also nursing 
losses,  and  central  bank  lending  filling  the  hole  left  by  other  departing  creditors.  That  job 
losses  in  the  banking  sector  have  not  to  date  been  as  bad  as  the  economy  on  average 
reflects  the  Government’s  decision  to  step  in  and  keep  the  operations  of  the  banks  going 
because of the services they provided.  
(Incurring by far the biggest ever costs seen in corporate restructuring, the Government also 
tried to avoid a wider financial instability as well as the loss of credit standing that would have 
accompanied  losses  hitting  depositors  and  other  creditors,  but  that  story,  which  began 
exactly four years ago today, has been the main theme on many other occasions and so I 
will not dwell on it here).  
Anyway,  despite  all  of  this,  the  banks  have  also  had  to  change  gear  and  become  heavily 
involved in loan recovery and the associated task of balance sheet restructuring of many of 
their distressed corporate (and individual) customers.  
But can one improve on having the banks as the engineers of restructuring? This question 
was  widely  discussed  around  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  as  researchers  and  practitioners 
tried to draw lessons applicable to the East Asia crisis (which hit half a dozen rapidly growing 
countries  in  1997–8  and  left  a  debris  of  corporate  insolvencies),  and  from  the  earlier 
experience of banking crises in Japan, Scandinavia and the United States, as well as some 
other  developing  countries  cases.  The  broad  conclusion  from  this  debate3  was  that 
centralised asset management companies, as in Sweden and with the US Resolution Trust 
Corporation, can work well where what needs to be restructured is mainly a class of property 
companies.  This  is  because  the  main  assets  of  the  companies  are  relatively  easily 
transferred and do not depend on a specialised production chain, patents, firm-specific know 
how  and  so  on.  To  overstate  somewhat,  the  value  of  real  estate  may,  especially  in  a 
downturn, be pretty much independent of who  manages it. In a rising market, the Swedes 
managed to do well in realizing their property portfolio over time. The international literature 
also  warns,  however,  that  large  state-owned  AMCs  can  become  vulnerable  to  improper 
political  pressure,  especially  where  large  and  prominent  firms  have  become  bankrupt. 
Fortunately  there  is  no  evidence  of  such  pressure  occurring  in  respect  of  NAMA  in  the 
current  Irish  crisis,  and  indeed  the  legislation  setting  up  NAMA  has  built  in  protections 
against such pressures.  
On  the  other  hand,  non-property  related  distress  may  (according  to  the  international 
research) best be managed by the banks themselves. Specific company know-how can help 
in devising the best solutions for maximising the value of the firm’s assets – provided that the 
restructuring  process  can  be  insulated  from  the  denial  and  over-optimism  that  may  have 
contributed to poor loan underwriting in the first place. The banks in turn need to be provided 
with  sufficient  capital  to  allow  them  to  fearlessly  accept  and  crystallise  the  unavoidable 
loan-losses, sufficient liquidity to be able to provide further financing to set the restructured 
firm  back  onto  a  healthy  growth  path,  and  eventually  move  it  out  of  the  limbo  of  financial 
distress. As against all of this, it has to be acknowledged that few bank staff startout with the 
skill-set needed to implement corporate restructuring: it is a very different business to loan 
underwriting.  And  a  bank  which  diverts  many  of  its  most  effective  staff  into  such  activities 
may not be so effective in fostering new lending relationships. 
                                                
3  Cf.,  for  example,  Marinela  E.  Dado  and  Daniela  Klingebiel,  “Decentralized  Creditor-Led  Corporate 
Restructuring: Cross-Country Experience.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2901, October 2002. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ireland’s institutional arrangements for dealing with the situation to date do seem to mirror 
this international consensus about the most appropriate institutional arrangements: NAMA for 
the big property loans, the banks for the remaining bad loans, and massive recapitalisation 
of, and extensive liquidity provision to, the banks. The differences are ones of scale rather 
than design. In particular, the losses destabilised the finances of the State, limiting its ability 
to react.  
There have been suggestions that further blocks of banking assets could be moved off the 
balance sheet of the main banks. Certainly the banks have large blocks of hard-to-value and 
hard-to-sell assets on their balance sheets which are a drag on the investability of the banks 
because of the tail-risk of further losses that they embody and because they contribute to the 
over-scaling of the banks.  
In practical terms, though, the management of numerous SME assets is a task for a large 
and decentralised operation. The operational risk of transferring this task to another agency 
would be very considerable. Even if ultimate ownership of the loan assets might possibly be 
shifted at some point in order to improve the balance sheets of the banks and hence their 
standing in wholesale markets, I foresee that they would in practice continue to manage most 
of the restructurings. 
One of the recommendations of the literature is that the private sector should be involved as 
much  as  practical  in  the  restructuring  process.  Private  sector  restructuring  specialists  can 
have  the  high-powered  incentives  to  find  quick  and  profitable  solutions.  Of  course  the 
process is costly. Private-equity firms will buy distressed assets only at a discount to what 
they  think  they  can  achieve  when  restructured  and  resold.  Their  time  horizon  is  relatively 
short and their return thresholds high. Where it is a question of cleaning up a privately-owned 
bank,  these  costs  simply  imply  a  transfer  within  the  private  sector.  But  if  the  private 
shareholders have already been wiped-out, it is the State that will bear the costs. Its decision 
on  these  matters must therefore  balance  the  prospect  of  a  more  effective  restructuring  by 
private firms against the costs that this will impose. Private sector solutions have not been 
neglected  in  the  Irish  case.  To  date  there  has  been  by  considerable  deleveraging  of  the 
banks to the private sector: asset sales totalling €32 billion in the past three years – most of 
them abroad.  
Finding grand solutions that improve the situation is thus not easy. But that is not a reason 
for  delay.  On  the  contrary,  every  month  that  passes  for  an  un-restructured  distressed 
corporate is an energy-sapping lost opportunity for recovery. Urged by the Central Bank as 
regulator, the banks have been building their internal capacities through hiring, training and 
education, to deal with the situation. There is now an improved understanding of how best to 
deal with the numerous cases of distressed SME borrowers. This includes such matters as 
collecting adequate borrower information: adopting a realistic approach to post-restructuring 
viability  calculations;  ensuring 
in  accordance  with  concrete 
implementation  guidelines;  quantified  tracking  of  the  progress  in  processing  cases  and, 
procedures  for  quality  assurance.  Yet  the  banks  know  they  have  not  made  sufficient 
progress  in  turning  that  understanding  into  a  robust  mechanism  at  scale  for  delivering  an 
adequate stream of realistic and viable restructurings.  
It’s often not just a question of financial (balance sheet) restructuring, but also the need for 
operational restructuring, which is something which generally goes well beyond the skill-set 
of the traditional lender. Often there is a personal guarantee involved, so the owners will not 
be fully off the hook: the new personal insolvency legislation should provide a backstop for 
that element. Thousands of cases need to be dealt with decisively in such a manner. This is 
truly a daunting organisational challenge for the banks, but one to which, encouraged and 
pressed  by  the  Central  Bank,  they  are  now  stepping  up.  But,  as  I  am  sure  they  will 
themselves  acknowledge,  there  is  much  work  to  be  done  and  progress  to  date  has  been 
painfully slow. 
time-bound  execution 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Given  the  large  number  of  firms  still  under  pressure,  implementation  of  an  effective  and 
speedy  but  surgical  approach  to  corporate  restructuring  could  have  a  big  impact.  By 
reinvigorating  the  Irish  business  sector,  it  would  ultimately  help  boost  economy-wide 
employment. Requiring unusual and scarce skills and judgment, this is a task which urgently 
deserves heightened attention.  
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
