Hirohide Yamaguchi: Path toward overcoming deflation and pursuit of 
monetary easing 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Hiroshima, 25 July 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me an opportunity to exchange views with administrative and business 
leaders in Hiroshima. And I express my gratitude to everyone for your cooperation in various 
business operations of the Bank of Japan’s Hiroshima Branch. 
Today, before exchanging views with you, I will first talk about the developments in overseas 
economies,  including  the  European  debt  problem,  followed  by  a  short-term  outlook  and 
medium-  to  long-term  challenges  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with,  while  focusing  on  the 
recent developments in domestic demand. Finally, I will talk about the recent monetary policy 
conduct of the Bank of Japan. 
I.  
Developments in overseas economies: future recovery that stands back to 
back with a big risk 
Let  me  start  with  the  developments  in  overseas  economies.  While  the  economies  were 
recovering  after  around  mid-2009  from  the  Lehman  shock  in  autumn  2008,  the  pace  of 
recovery has somewhat slowed after the second half of 2011 and they still have not gotten 
out of a deceleration phase. 
By  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  moderately  recovering,  partly  supported  by 
accommodative  financial  conditions.  While  there  are  cautious  views  in  the  market  on  the 
outlook for the U.S. economy as the growth in the number of workers has been slowing since 
early  spring,  private  consumption  has  been  increasing  moderately  and  home  sales,  which 
remained low for a long time, have been showing signs of a pick-up. That suggests that the 
household  sector’s  debt  burden,  which  weighed  on  the  economy  after  the  Lehman  shock, 
has been gradually easing. It is also expected that a decline in gasoline prices since early 
spring will increase households’ real purchasing power and underpin an increase in private 
consumption. Therefore, while the pace of growth might not accelerate markedly, it is likely 
that a moderate recovery will basically continue without interruption. 
The  European  economy  as  a  whole  has  been  stagnant,  due  partly  to  the  European  debt 
problem, which I will talk about later, and will continue to be in a severe situation for the time 
being. 
In  the  meantime,  in  China,  the  economic  slowdown  has  been  still  continuing.  The 
year-on-year growth rate of real GDP was on a downtrend after it peaked at the beginning of 
2010 at 12 percent, and fell below 8 percent in April–June 2012. Such developments were 
partly  due  to  a  tightening  policy  implemented  by  the  Chinese  policy  authorities,  who  were 
concerned over an acceleration of inflation and a surge in asset prices. Such policy has had 
an impact to some extent and the inflation rate, which was over 6 percent a year ago, has 
fallen  to  about  2.0–2.5  percent.  A  decline  in  the  inflation  rate  increases  households’  real 
purchasing  power  and  encourages  spending.  In  view  of  stable  general  prices  and  asset 
prices, the Chinese authorities have started to implement full-fledged economic stimulus both 
on the financial and fiscal fronts by reducing the policy rate for two consecutive months in 
June  and  July  and  deciding  to  make  fiscal  support  to  promote  consumption,  including 
energy-saving home appliances. While attention should be paid to the weakness in exports 
to  Europe,  which  accounts  for  about  20  percent  of  China’s  total  exports,  the  Chinese 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economy is likely to return to the moderate recovery path mainly led by domestic demand in 
the not too distant future. 
Consequently, as for the outlook, overseas economies are likely to gradually escape from the 
current  deceleration  phase  and  gradually  increase  their  growth  rates  with  a  moderate 
recovery  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  a  pick-up  in  the  Chinese  economy  as  a  driving  force. 
However,  there  remains  high  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  overseas  economies, 
including the United States and China. In a way, a situation, in which a baseline scenario for 
economic  recovery  and  a  risk  scenario  have  been  standing  back  to  back,  has  been 
continuing. Among others, the development in the European debt problem, which I will talk 
about next, is a risk factor that warrants most attention. 
The European debt problem: still a bumpy road ahead 
II.  
Let  me  now  take  some  time  to  talk  about  the  European  debt  problem.  The  trigger  for  the 
problem  was  the  revelation  of  a  massive  hidden  fiscal  deficit  of  Greece  in  October  2009. 
Subsequently,  concern  over  fiscal  conditions  spread  to  Portugal  and  Ireland,  and,  in  the 
second half of 2011, further to southern European large countries, Spain and Italy. 
In Spain, as a housing bubble burst triggered by the Lehman shock, an injection of massive 
fiscal funds became necessary for the disposal of financial institutions’ nonperforming loans 
and for economic stimulus, despite a decline in tax revenue. As a result, in recent several 
years, fiscal conditions have deteriorated rapidly. In Italy, fiscal deficit has become chronic as 
the  government  has  been  supplementing  a  decline  in  domestic  industries’  external 
competitiveness  with  fiscal  support.  Against  such  a  backdrop,  with  a  bloat  of  government 
debt outstanding, the market has been concerned over weakening of the economy’s growth 
potential. 
Deterioration  in  fiscal  conditions  raises  suspicion  of  the  country’s  government  bonds  not 
being redeemed as promised, which leads to a decline in the government bond prices or, in 
other words, a rise in the government bond yields. In Greece, the government had not been 
able to raise funds on its own to redeem government bonds, and, after last December, yields 
on  Greek government  bonds  once  rose  to  a  level  more than  35  percent.  Subsequently,  in 
order to reduce the heavy fiscal burden itself, Greece was faced with a situation in February 
to request private investors to forgive part of their claims. Government bond yields in Spain 
and Italy have been unstable since the second half of 2011, and, in particular, those of Spain 
have recently risen to a level above 7 percent and hit a record high since the introduction of 
the euro. 
As government bond yields of those countries, which were called peripheral countries, have 
risen substantially, namely, their prices have fallen sharply, assets of financial institutions in 
Europe that held a large amount of those government bonds have deteriorated significantly. 
Consequently, some financial institutions in Europe have lost market confidence and faced 
with an increase in funding costs or difficulties in funding themselves. Financial institutions 
that are struggling with funding become cautious in providing loans to firms, which will exert 
downward  pressure  on  the  real  economy.  A  stagnant  real  economy  will  induce  a  vicious 
cycle  by  further  worsening  fiscal  conditions,  which  will  again  adversely  affect  financial 
institutions’  management  through  destabilizing  developments  in  the  yields  of  government 
bonds.  It  has  become  a  big  problem  that  such  an  adverse  feedback  loop  among  fiscal 
conditions, the financial system, and the real economy has been at work. 
Therefore,  what  is  necessary  for  the  moment  is  to  cut  off  the  adverse  feedback  loop.  At 
present, a focus has been on rehabilitation of Spanish financial institutions that shoulder a 
large amount of nonperforming loans, and, in June, the Euro members decided to provide 
financial  support  in  the  maximum  amount  of  100  billion  euros.  Since  December  2011,  the 
European Central Bank has been providing the financial market with three-year loans, which 
are an extraordinarily long-term fund provisioning by a central bank. Reflecting such a stance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of the authorities, short-term money markets, in which financial institutions exchange funds 
with  each  other,  have  regained  stability  to  some  extent  compared  with  around  the  end  of 
2011, when there was an elevated sense of crisis.  
While those responses are essential as a first aid to stem the adverse feedback loop, it will 
not be a fundamental solution of the European debt problem. If one goes back to the cause 
of  the  problem  in  the  peripheral  countries,  it  is  necessary  for  those  countries  to  carry  out 
drastic fiscal consolidation as well as economic structural reform toward strengthening their 
medium- to long-term growth potential. Europe as a whole is also faced with a challenge that, 
while using a single currency “euro,” stability of the economies and financial systems can be 
achieved  with each country’s fiscal policy and bank supervision remaining separate. While 
this might be a somewhat crude analogy, you might be able to understand the difficulty of the 
problem  if  you  imagine  a  situation  in  which  each  local  government  totally  independently 
carries out fiscal policy and bank supervision in Japan where the same currency yen is used. 
Having  said  that,  the  problem  is  an  essentially  fundamental  one  of  how  to  draw  a  future 
picture of political, economic, and social integration in Europe. Given the size and complexity 
of  the  problem  and  difficulty  in  each  country’s  political  decision  making,  we  have  to  be 
prepared that it will take some time. 
On  the  other  hand,  markets  request  conclusions  in  haste.  They  will  not  wait.  While  such 
difference in time frames has been leading to jittery responses by the markets, at the same 
time it might bring forward the solution of the European debt problem. The policy authorities 
are aware that tepid measures, if announced, will immediately induce disappointment in the 
markets and will be pressed for further measures. The international community that will be 
affected substantially by the European debt problem has been increasingly keeping a close 
eye,  and  Japan  and  many  other  countries  have  been  requesting  a  swift  solution  of  the 
problem  at  international  conferences  and  other  opportunities.  Above  all,  through  past 
discussions, the common recognition of not to let the euro fall apart has nurtured in Europe 
as a whole. Given such a situation, while the path is still rough, I hope that there might be 
progress toward the solution of the European debt problem in the not so distant future. 
III.  
Fiscal problem and long-term interest rates: importance of efforts toward 
fiscal consolidation 
I  have  so  far  talked  about  the  European  debt  problem.  In  relation  to  the  problem,  let  me 
touch  on  Japan’s  fiscal  condition  and  the  recent  developments  in  long-term  interest  rates 
before moving on to Japan’s economic developments. 
The  ratio  of  gross  government  debt  outstanding  to  GDP  in  Japan  is  now  exceeding 
200 percent. That is extremely high internationally and exceeds that of even Greece, which is 
130  percent.  Seizing  that  point,  some  people  voice  concern  that,  as  things  stand,  Japan 
might  tumble  into  trouble  like  Greece.  However,  in  reality,  Japanese  government  bonds 
(JGBs) have been issued smoothly and their yields have been stable at extremely low levels.  
As a reason for that, it has been frequently said that, in Japan, households and firms have 
ample savings, and thus there is no need to worry, for now, about lack of money to purchase 
JGBs. To be sure, that is a factor supporting a smooth issuance of JGBs. But if a situation 
arises in which prices of JGBs decline significantly or people worry about repayment of the 
principal,  nobody  will  be  willing  to  purchase  JGBs  even  though  the  Japanese  public  has 
ample  savings  at  present.  To  begin  with,  amid  rapid  progress  in  the  demographic  vortex, 
there is no guarantee that such ample savings will last, and thus discussions that rely on the 
continued existence of ample savings might not necessarily be appropriate. 
Then, why have JGBs been issued smoothly? I believe that it is because there is confidence 
in  Japan’s  future  policy  conduct.  Namely,  despite  deterioration  in  fiscal  balance,  market 
participants believe that “the Japanese have the will and ability to eventually address fiscal 
consolidation.”  In  fact,  such  efforts  are  steadily  underway.  That  is  the  critical  difference 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
between Japan and Greece. As efforts to ensure fiscal sustainability have been progressing, 
in my view the public also believes that monetary policy has been conducted toward fulfilling 
the intended purpose of achieving sustainable economic growth with price stability. Namely, 
the  public  believes  that  the  Bank’s  money  will  not  be  used  for  facilitating  government 
financing. 
Worldwide,  since  the  Lehman  shock, global  investors  have  increasingly  become more risk 
averse  than  before,  and  that  has  also  caused  Japanese  government  bonds’  prices  to  rise 
and yields to fall. Credibility of securitized products in the United States, which used to be 
considered  as  safe  assets  with  little  risk,  and  government  bonds  in  peripheral  European 
countries,  has  declined  and  the  supply  of  financial  assets,  internationally,  that  can  meet 
investors’  propensity  for  safety  has  declined  substantially.  Against  such  a  backdrop, 
investors  worldwide  have  channeled  funds  into  the  Japanese  government  bond  market  in 
pursuit  of  limited  safe  assets,  having  led  to  a  recent  rise  in  government  bond  prices.  One 
major reason for the persistent yen appreciation seen in recent several years has been such 
flow of funds. 
As mentioned earlier, the source of credibility in JGBs is the confidence in Japan’s fiscal and 
monetary policy. As Japan’s government debt outstanding is extremely high to begin with, if 
Japan’s fiscal discipline is questioned, being triggered by some cue, credibility of government 
bonds  could  decline  and  long-term  interest  rates  could  rise.  To  avoid  such  a  situation,  I 
recognize  that  the  policy  authorities  have  always  been  required  to make  sincere  efforts  to 
maintain market confidence and, based on those efforts to achieve fiscal consolidation itself. 
IV.  
Short-term outlook for Japan’s economy: moderate recovery and associated 
uncertainty 
Now I will move onto the state of Japan’s economy. After experiencing a plunge caused by 
the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  in  March  2011,  Japan’s  economy  recovered  toward  the 
summer much earlier than initially anticipated thanks to the efforts by firms and the public. 
Since early autumn 2011, economic activity has been more or less flat, reflecting the effects 
of a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen as well as the flooding 
in Thailand, but has recently started to gradually pick up again. 
An  assessment  of  recent  developments  will  be,  in  short,  that  domestic  demand  has  been 
somewhat  stronger  than  expected  and  external  demand  somewhat  weaker.  As  overseas 
economies  have  yet  to  get  out  of  a  deceleration  phase,  Japan’s  exports  have  also  been 
slightly lagging expectations.  
On the other hand, domestic demand has been somewhat stronger than expected. The first 
reason for that is an increase in reconstruction-related demand, which includes an increase 
in  public  investment  and  demand  for  repair  and  rebuild  of  disaster-stricken  facilities  and 
houses, as well as a recovery in demand that had been restrained due to the effects of the 
disaster, namely, manifestation of pent-up demand. Investments in strengthening earthquake 
resistance  and  the  purchase  of  disaster  prevention  goods  and  energy  saving  products, 
triggered by the earthquake, can also be considered as reconstruction-related demand in a 
broad  sense.  Policy  support,  including  subsidies  for  eco-friendly  cars,  has  also  been 
effective. An improvement in business sentiment due to a recovery in corporate profits, and 
ensuing  cease  of  decline  in  wages  and  income,  seem  to  have  exerted  positive  effects  on 
recent investment and consumption. In addition, there has recently been a marked increase 
in consumption of the baby-boom generation and other elderly people. With some reflection, 
a grave trial for Japan’s economy, including progress in aging and the earthquake disaster, 
has  also  brought  a  substantial  change  in  firms’  and  households’  behavior.  And  that  is 
becoming new buds for new demand. Let me explain that later in detail. 
As  for  the  outlook,  the  Bank  assumes  that  the  firm  domestic  demand  will  support  the 
moderate recovery of Japan’s economy. However, there is a possibility that the budget for 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the subsidies for eco-friendly cars will run out as early as this summer, and pent-up demand 
will gradually subside. Against such a backdrop, in order to ensure the positive developments 
in the economy as a whole, it is necessary that exports steadily gain momentum while firm 
domestic demand is supporting the economy. 
Taking account of those points, the Bank recently published its latest economic outlook for 
the  next  two  years.  The  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2012  was  projected  to  be  slightly 
above 2 percent due to firm domestic demand. The growth rate for fiscal 2013 was projected 
to  maintain  1.5  to  2  percent  because,  while  reconstruction-related  demand  will  gradually 
subside, exports will start to recover as overseas economies pick up.  
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) of all 
items but volatile food is currently about 0 percent. The rate of change is projected to remain 
at around 0 percent for the time being, and gradually rise to a range of above 0.5 percent 
and less than 1 percent toward fiscal 2013, as the economy returns to a recovery path and 
the aggregate supply and demand balance improves. The Bank’s goal for the time being of 
1 percent will be achieved in the not so distant future from fiscal 2014 onward. From a longer 
term perspective, Japan’s economy is expected to return to the moderate recovery path with 
price  stability.  However,  such  an  outlook  is  associated  with  various  uncertainties.  In 
particular,  the  effects  of  developments  in  the  European  debt  problem  and  fluctuations  in 
foreign exchange rates on Japan’s economy continue to warrant close attention. In addition, 
even if economic activity and prices develop as projected, it will be fiscal 2014 onward that 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  reaches  1  percent,  and  thus  still  some  time  is 
needed to overcome deflation. 
V.  
Medium- to long-term challenges to Japan’s economy: nascent bud for growth 
I  have  so  far  explained  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy.  From  now  on,  let  me  consider 
medium- to long-term challenges Japan’s economy is faced with. Japan’s economic growth 
rate has been on a downtrend amid unprecedented rapid progress in aging. Therefore, there 
is  an  aspect  that  firms’  and  households’  growth  expectations,  in  other  words,  spending 
appetite  has  been  restrained,  and  that  induced  a  chronic  demand  shortage.  In  order  to 
overcome  deflation,  it  is  necessary  not  only  to  achieve  short-term  economic  recovery  but 
also to strengthen medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s economy and remove 
structural downward pressure on demand. 
At individual firms’ level, there are not a few initiatives to strengthen their own growth. While 
the earthquake disaster and the nuclear accident were big challenges for Japan, those at the 
same time changed the public recognition of energy and environment. Changes always bring 
business  opportunities  to  firms.  Recently,  in  addition  to  next  generation  cars  that  have 
superior environmental designs, renewable energy supply and “smartization-related” projects 
have  gradually  started  to  take  the  form  of  a  full-scale  business.  Growth  in  those  areas  is 
expected  to  have  large  spillover  effects  on  firms,  including  small  firms,  which  provide 
cutting-edge materials and nanotechnology.  
The challenge of rapid aging Japan’s economy is faced with could, from firms’ perspective, 
provide a new business opportunity. The elderly, who are 60 or over, account for more than 
40  percent  of  private  consumption,  and,  among  them,  the  baby-boomer  generation  has  a 
remarkably  higher  propensity  to  consume  than  the  previous  and  next  generations.  Such 
elderly  people  vary  from  individual  to  individual  in  financial  resources,  life  styles,  health 
conditions,  and  hobbies,  and  are  with  diverse  values.  There  are  many  promising  areas, 
ranging from travel and leisure, medicine and nursing care, and construction of houses and 
cities  that  correspond  to  the  aging  society.  In  fact,  in  the  Tankan  survey  released  at  the 
beginning  of  July,  business  sentiment  of  industries,  including  accommodation,  eating,  and 
drinking services, improved substantially, and that was partly attributable to the fact that an 
improvement in the quality of services for the elderly has turned out be successful. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
As  explained,  the  recent  firm  domestic  demand  seems  to  reflect  the  fact  firms  have  been 
positively  tackling  challenges  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with,  including  aging  and  energy 
constraints,  and tapping  new  demand.  If  that  is  the  case, the  current  strength  in  domestic 
demand might not only be a recovery factor in the economy for the time being, but also the 
start of a larger wave that will lead to future strengthening of potential growth, and have the 
possibility  to  serve  as  a  trigger  to  solve  the  medium-  to  long-term  challenges  Japan’s 
economy is faced with. In the periods ahead, it is necessary to carefully nurture such buds 
for growth.  
Growth-fostering  areas  are  not  exclusive  to  Japan.  Aging  and  energy  constraints  are 
problems that other Asian countries have to face in the near future. In China, it is said that 
the working-age population will start to decline as early as around 2015, and the number of 
elderly people, who are 60 or over, will reach 300 million. It would be a waste not to utilize 
know-how  accumulated  at  home  in  the  neighboring  giant  market.  A  decline  in  the 
working-age population might, in the near future, accelerate China’s investment in resource 
conservation,  and  that  area  could  be  a  new  business  field  for  the  Japanese  machinery 
industry. In a grand trend of increasing infrastructure demand and transition to low carbon 
society,  needs  for  Japan’s  cutting-edge  energy  technology  will  gradually  increase  in  the 
future.  
Strengthening growth potential of Japan’s economy will become possible through, above all, 
efforts  of  firms  that  have  a  great  deal  of  fighting  spirit.  Of  course,  to  that  end,  financial 
institutions’ support on the financial front will be necessary and, to the extent of preparing an 
environment that facilitates such challenges, the role of the government will be important. If 
private firms, financial institutions, and the policy authorities continue their efforts in line with 
their respective  roles,  it might  be  possible  to  successfully  nurture  nascent  buds for growth 
and let them fully bloom. 
VI.  
Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy: pursuing monetary easing and 
supporting strengthening growth potential 
Finally, let me talk about the Bank’s recent monetary policy conduct. 
The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation  and  returning  to  the  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  Based  on  that 
recognition,  in  February  the  Bank  clarified  its  monetary  policy  stance  toward  overcoming 
deflation. Specifically, the Bank clearly stated that it will continue pursuing powerful monetary 
easing with the aim of achieving the goal of 1 percent inflation in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of increase in the CPI until it judges the 1 percent goal to be in sight. 
To  actually  pursue  monetary  easing,  the  Bank  has  been  implementing  a  program  to 
purchase financial assets called “the Asset Purchase Program.” It is a measure to encourage 
a  decline  in  longer  term  interest  rates  and  risk  premiums  through  purchasing  government 
bonds and a wide range of financial assets from the market, and lead to a decline in firms’ 
funding costs. The Bank expanded the total amount of the Program in February and April so 
that the amount outstanding of the Program will reach about 70 trillion yen by the end of June 
2013. The current amount outstanding of the Program is 53 trillion yen. We are now in the 
process of increasing the amount outstanding of the Program toward 70 trillion yen and the 
effects  of  monetary  easing  will  strengthen  in  a  continuous  manner  day  after  day  as  the 
process continues. 
In retrospect, the Bank’s monetary policy stance since the Lehman shock has been changing 
according to the state of Japan’s economy. Initially, inclusive of the Lehman shock and the 
subsequent  earthquake  disaster,  the  policy  stance  was  geared  toward  mitigating  repeated 
downward  pressure  on  economic  activity  and  underpinning  the  economy.  Afterwards, 
Japan’s economy gradually escaped from such shocks and reached a situation in which an 
outlook  of  returning  to  the  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability  can  be  shown.  The 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reason the Bank strengthened monetary easing in February and April nevertheless was to, 
together with the cumulative effects of past monetary easing, further ensure the outlook to 
materialize. At present, while daily purchasing assets under the increased total amount of the 
Program, the Bank is deliberately examining the effects of monetary easing as well as the 
outlook and risks for economic activity and prices. Of course, due to some shocks, when the 
outlook turns  out to  be weaker  than  expected  or  the risk  associated  with  it  intensifies,  the 
Bank  will  not  hesitate  to  implement  additional  monetary  easing.  The  Bank  will  continue  to 
strive for proper monetary policy conduct. 
As I mentioned earlier, to overcome deflation, in addition to the measures I have mentioned, 
efforts to strengthen growth potential by private firms, financial institutions, and also by the 
policy  authorities  will  be  necessary.  In  that  regard,  the  Bank  has  been  implementing  a 
“fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth,” a 
measure extraordinary for a central bank. It is a measure for the Bank to provide financial 
institutions making investments and loans that contribute to Japan’s economic growth  with 
long-term and low interest rate funds. The measure was introduced two years ago, expanded 
sequentially, and, in March 2012, small-lot investments and loans less than 10 million yen, 
which used to be not eligible, were made eligible for the Bank’s support. In addition, the Bank 
decided  to  provide  U.S.  dollar  loans  for  financial  institutions’  investments  and  loans 
denominated  in  foreign  currencies.  As  a  result,  at  present,  the  total  size  of  the  measure 
stands at 5.5 trillion yen. As part of it, the first fund provisioning for small-lot investments and 
loans  was  made  last  month,  in  an  amount  of  3  billion  yen  for  nine  financial  institutions. 
Utilizing the measure, financial institutions have been making loans and investments to back 
up growth in firms in wide-ranging areas, such as medicine and nursing care, environment 
and  energy,  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries, and  tourism.  Not  a few  financial  institutions 
made  investments  and  loans  to  support  opening  of  new  businesses.  Although  the  fund 
provided  was  yet  small as  it  was  the first  time, the  Bank  intends to contribute  to  nurturing 
new  buds  for  the  growth  of  Japan’s  economy.  The  Bank  strongly  anticipates  that,  such 
measure  being  a  catalyst,  the  private  sector’s  efforts  to  strengthen  growth  potential  will 
further expand both in terms of region and industry. 
Concluding Remarks 
As time is running out, let me conclude my speech today while touching on the economy of 
Hiroshima Prefecture.  
Hiroshima  Prefecture  is  one  of  the  major  industrial  prefectures  in  Western  Japan,  with  a 
variety  of  industries  located,  including  automobile,  machinery,  and  steel.  Also  in  recent 
periods, firms’ high technical expertise has been fully displayed as seen in the development 
of  a  next  generation  engine  that  has  a  superior  environmental  design.  In  addition,  many 
firms, including those in nonmanufacturing such as logistics and men’s apparel, have been 
actively  expanding  businesses  overseas,  mainly  in  Asia.  Furthermore,  this  region  has 
tourism resources with two  world heritage sites and rich natural surroundings as well as a 
worldwide high recognition as a cosmopolitan area, and, in fact, Hiroshima city and Miyajima 
have  recently  received  a  record  high  number  of  tourists. The  local  administration  has  also 
been actively supporting the private sector’s positive efforts. I have heard that, to promote 
innovation in local firms, Hiroshima Prefecture was the first local government to establish a 
wholly government-owned operating company to manage a regional support fund, and the 
first firm to invest in was decided in April. The firm aims at becoming an international leader 
in a niche business area through the development of a unique non-contact inspection system 
that could be applied to smartphone displays. On the financial front, through efforts, including 
increasing  the  number  of  staff  in  the  consulting  section  or  actively  holding  meetings  for 
business matching, local financial institutions have been supporting local firms’ growth and 
launch of new businesses. Several financial institutions have been participating in the Bank’s 
“fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
In order to further encourage positive efforts of local firms, we appreciate it if you could utilize 
the measure effectively. 
The Bank expects you to make efforts to meet challenges ahead and will continue to provide 
utmost support as a central bank. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
