Grant Spencer: Prudential lessons from the Global Financial Crisis 
Presentation by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 
to the Financial Institutions of NZ 2012 Remuneration Forum, Auckland, 3 May 2012. 
 New Zealand has a small open economy and a financial system that is well integrated into 
the international financial system. So, not surprisingly, New Zealand was heavily affected by 
the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the global recession that followed.  
In the real economy, our export prices tumbled and GDP growth remained negative or flat 
through  most  of  2008  –2009.  In  the  banking  system,  while  we  saw  no  failures,  the  banks 
were unable to access funding from the international markets for a number of months. This 
was alleviated through Reserve Bank liquidity support and government guarantees. 
In the non-bank sector of course, we saw a string of finance company failures. These were 
related more to the domestic property sector downturn and weak internal governance than 
international developments. However, increasing investor caution and competition for funding 
in the wake of the GFC did increase the funding pressures on finance companies. 
The  GFC  has  taught  us  many  lessons  and  it  will  continue  to  do  so  as  we  witness  the 
follow-on effects of the original shock.  
Today  I  want  to  talk  about  three  key  lessons  from  the  GFC  that  I  regard  as  the  most 
important for prudential policy in New Zealand. Indeed I believe they are very relevant for all 
countries with well developed banking systems. The three lessons are: 
1. 
The  contagion  effects  of  a  crisis  can  be  heavily  amplified  by  the  contraction  of 
liquidity in funding and asset markets. 
The credit cycle is a major driver of risk in the financial system – the seeds of crises 
are often sewn in the credit booms that precede them. 
Large  bank  failures  can  have  devastating  effects  on  both  financial  systems  and 
government  finances.  Governments  must  find  ways  of  protecting  the  financial 
system from bank failures without having to resort to bail-outs.  
2. 
3. 
I will look at these three lessons in turn, considering the broad international responses we 
have seen, and looking specifically at what we are doing here in New Zealand. 
The net result of all this is a raft of changes aimed at strengthening our existing prudential 
regime for banks, which we believe will enhance the soundness of New Zealand’s financial 
system going forward. 
Heightened contagion and liquidity risk 
1. 
In  the  GFC,  the  first  round  of  credit  losses  was  seen  in  institutions  holding  US  sub-prime 
mortgage investments. However, the uncertainty around who actually held such investments 
led to a sharp contraction of liquidity in a much wider range of markets. This loss of global 
liquidity had adverse consequences that were much greater than the initial sub-prime losses. 
Many financial institutions were simply unable to refinance maturing debt in markets that had 
frozen.  
In  many  cases,  liquidity  problems  translated  into  solvency  problems  when  banks  had  to 
revalue  assets  on  the  basis  of  very  thin  and  distorted  market  trading.  The  consequent 
amplification of contagion effects was greater than expected by regulators and banks alike. 
The primary response to the heightened vulnerability of the international banking system has 
been a concerted strengthening of prudential capital and liquidity standards under the banner 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of “Basel III”. The new framework was released by the Basel Committee in late 2010 and is 
currently  being  implemented  by  banking  authorities  internationally.  While  some  countries, 
such as Australia and New Zealand, are moving faster than others, the new Basel III capital 
standards are expected to be widely adopted over the coming few years. 
On  the  capital  side,  the  emphasis  has  been  on  increasing  the  loss  absorbency  of  bank 
balance sheets by raising the quality and quantity of capital (Figure 1) 
Figure 1 
Basel III versus Basel II capital requirements 
(percent of risk weighted assets) 
 Source: RBNZ 
The Basel III standards for increased liquidity buffers are being less uniformly adopted than 
the  new  capital  standards.  This  is  perhaps  not  surprising  given  this  is  the  first  attempt  at 
cross  border  coordination  of  bank  liquidity  requirements.  It  also  reflects  significant  country 
differences in the liquidity of sovereign debt markets – the liquid asset of choice by the Basel 
Committee – and in approaches to liquidity provision by Central Banks.  
In New Zealand, as in many other countries, the GFC revealed liquidity risks that were much 
greater than the Reserve Bank or the banks had expected. At the height of the crisis, in late 
2008/early  2009,  the  liquidity  shortfall  was  met  through  special  liquidity  facilities  at  the 
Reserve  Bank  and  additional  parent  bank  funding  as  well  as  Government  guarantees  on 
bank deposits and debt securities.  
In order to ensure greater bank self reliance going forward, the Reserve Bank introduced a 
prudential  liquidity  policy  in  April  2010.  The  policy  includes  minimum  liquid  asset 
requirements and, perhaps more importantly, a minimum core funding ratio (CFR) (Figure 2). 
This  requires  a  minimum  proportion  of  total  lending  to  be  funded  by  more  stable  “core 
funding” instruments, ie retail deposits and long term borrowing (over one year).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The banks’ core funding ratios had reached very low levels in the period leading up to the 
GFC. After the crisis, banks realised they needed to strengthen their core funding and were 
also encouraged to do so by the rating agencies. The new CFR policy reinforces this trend 
and  will  ensure  that  strong  funding  buffers  are  maintained  in  the  future,  including  through 
periods of greater risk appetite. 
The  CFR  is  currently  set  at  70%.  Last  November,  due  to  difficult  international  market 
conditions, the Reserve Bank deferred a planned further increase in the CFR to 75% which 
had been scheduled for June 2012. We are confirming today our intention to increase the 
CFR to 75% on 1 January 2013. 
Figure 2 
Core funding ratio of NZ banks 
(percent of loans and advances) 
 for 
large  global  “systemically 
Source: RBNZ 
The heightened awareness of contagion and liquidity risks has led to a range of other policy 
responses  in  addition  to  the  strengthening  of  capital  and  liquidity  buffers.  Such  measures 
include  extra  safety  requirements 
financial 
institutions”  (SIFI’s),  and  changes  to  the  “wiring”  of  the  financial  system  in  an  attempt  to 
reduce contagion risks.  
Examples of such measures include the “Volcker rule” in the US, which is aimed at isolating 
the  risks  from  proprietary  trading,  and  the  Vickers  recommendations  in  the  UK,  which 
propose to separate retail banking from investment banking. The challenge for such policies 
is  to  achieve  a  sustained  reduction  in  financial  system  risk  rather  than  simply  distorting 
market behaviour. 
Some countries have also adopted measures intended to restrict executive remuneration in 
banking.  This  has  occurred  mainly  in  countries  such  as  the  UK  and  US  where  bail-outs 
resulted in the Government becoming a major bank shareholder. In Australia, APRA has not 
important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
imposed direct controls, but has set down guiding principles for executive remuneration and 
incentive schemes.  
Countering the credit cycle 
2. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  severity  of  the  GFC  was  aggravated  by  the  sustained  boom  in 
asset prices and credit that preceded it. An important contributing factor to the boom was the 
persistently easy global monetary condition over this period.  
A further contributing factor was the tendency for prudential policies to be pro-cyclical. For 
example,  new  provisioning  rules  brought  in  by  IASB  in  the  early  2000’s,  prevented  banks 
from  taking  a  “through  the  cycle”  approach  to  loss  provisioning.  Also,  many  banks  had 
adopted  capital  models  that  tended  to  reduce  the  capital  backing  of  loans  when  markets 
were strong and increase capital backing when markets were weak.  
In  this  sense,  the  existing  prudential  framework  failed  to  take  account  of  the  growing 
systemic  risk  arising  from  the  sustained  boom  in  credit  and  asset  prices  that  occurred 
between 2002 and 2007. The lesson was clear: prudential policy should take more account 
of macro-financial risks as well as the micro-financial risks specific to individual banks. 
In response to this lesson, macro-prudential policy has become an active new area of policy 
development  internationally.  In  the  Basel  III  regime,  the  important  new  macro-prudential 
element  is  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  (CCB):  an  additional  capital  requirement  that 
local supervisors may apply when credit is booming, and remove when the cycle is turning 
down  (Figure  3).  A  range  of  other  instruments  are  also  being  developed  and  applied  in 
various countries under the general heading of “macro-prudential” policies. 
In  broad  terms  macro-prudential  policies  are  aimed  at  reducing  financial  system  risk  by 
introducing  additional  safeguards,  such  as  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  or  collateral 
requirements that vary with the macro-credit cycle. Such policies will also tend to have the 
effect of either: 1) dampening the credit cycle; or 2) dampening international capital flows and 
hence  exchange  rate  pressures.  For  those  reasons,  macro-prudential  policies  might  be 
expected to play a useful secondary role in helping to stabilise the macro-economy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 3  
Countercyclical capital buffer 
(Credit-to-GDP ratio, deviation from trend) 
 Source: RBNZ 
The Counter Cyclical capital Buffer  
The Core Funding Ratio  
Adjustments to sectoral risk weights2 
Limits on Loan to Value Ratios (LVR’s) 
At the Reserve Bank we have been doing a lot of thinking about potential macro-prudential 
policy instruments and how they might be used1. The four instruments we currently consider 
viable candidates are: 
 
 
 
 
The  Reserve  Bank  already  has  powers  under  the  Reserve  Bank  Act  to  modify  prudential 
instruments with the objective of financial system stability and efficiency. However, this is a 
new approach to prudential policy and as such we are developing, along with Treasury, an 
explicit macro-prudential governance framework to be agreed with the Minister of Finance as 
a  basis  for policy  decisions  going  forward.  We  expect  that  the  Reserve  Bank  will take  the 
lead role in implementing macro-prudential policy, subject to consultation with Government. 
                                                 
1  See  Reserve  Bank  Financial  Stability  Reports;  Bollard  (2011)  “Where  we  are  going  with  macro  and  micro-
prudential  policies  in  New  Zealand”,  Speech  to  the  Basel  III  Conference,  Sydney;  Ha  &  Hodgetts  (2011) 
“Macro-prudential instruments for New Zealand: A preliminary assessment”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
workshop  on  Macro-prudential  policy;  Spencer  (2010),”The  Reserve  Bank  and  macro-financial  stability”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand bulletin 73(2). 
2  As used to calculate Risk Weighted Assets under the Basel capital adequacy regime 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  natural  question  arises:  how  will  macro-prudential  policy  interact  with  the  Reserve 
Bank’s independent monetary policy mandate?  
The  first  point  to  make  is  that  macro-prudential  policy  will  have  an  important  influence  on 
monetary policy, in a similar way to fiscal policy, for example. Thus if macro-prudential policy 
is acting to dampen aggregate credit and demand, there should be less work for monetary 
policy to do (Figure 4).  
Because  of  this  potential  assistance  from  macro-prudential  policy,  there  may  well  be 
situations where monetary policy seeks the support of macro-prudential policy, just as it may 
seek the support of fiscal policy (section 10 of RBNZ Act). But macro-prudential can only be 
used  to  assist  monetary  policy  if  it  is  also  consistent  with  its  primary  financial  stability 
objective. 
 Essential monetary and macro-prudential policy interactions 
Figure 4 
 Source: RBNZ 
An important point to note here is that, like fiscal policy, macro-prudential policy is likely to be 
on  a  slower  time  schedule  than  monetary  policy.  Changes  in  the  counter-cyclical  capital 
buffer, for example, will require six to twelve months notice for the banks to comply. Thus, 
while  we  will  try  to  ensure  that  macro-prudential  policy  is  consistent  with  monetary  policy 
objectives,  these  policy  settings  are  less  amenable  to  fine  tuning.  In  that  sense, 
macro-prudential  policy  is  likely  to  be  taken  as  a  background  “given”  when  it  comes  to 
making short term monetary policy decisions. 
The  final  point  I  must  emphasise  is  that  macro-prudential  policy  cannot  replace  monetary 
policy.  While  macro-prudential  can  hopefully  assist  monetary  policy,  it  will  never  be  as 
powerful or as flexible an instrument as the Official Cash Rate (OCR).  
Further  experience  will 
the  various 
macro-prudential instruments. However, the experience from other countries (for example in 
Asia) suggests that macro-prudential is unlikely to fundamentally alter the economic tradeoffs 
faced by monetary policy. That is to say: monetary policy will still face difficult choices!  
inform  us  better  on 
the  different 
impacts  of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Stronger failure resolution mechanisms 
3. 
During  the  GFC,  many  failing  banks  were  bailed  out  by  governments  who  feared  the 
systemic consequences of large scale creditor losses. There were some exceptions: in cases 
such as Bear Stearns a private sector “white knight” was found3; in the case of some medium 
sized banks the FDIC resolution regime could be implemented (eg Washington Mutual); in 
the case of the Icelandic banks losses were imposed on both domestic and foreign creditors; 
and of course Lehman Brothers was allowed to fail under normal commercial process.  
While  there  were  glimpses  of  what  could  be  achieved  through  effective  failure  resolution 
mechanisms, the widespread fallout from the Lehman collapse tended to reinforce the “too 
big to fail” consensus.  
Probably the most costly case of bank bail-outs occurred in Ireland where the government is 
estimated to have spent close to 30% of GDP on bank recapitalisations between 2008 and 
2010.  The  burden  this placed  on  the  Irish  taxpayer  contributed  to  the  downfall  of  the  Irish 
government and the need for an IMF-led rescue package.  
The lesson was clear: country authorities need better options for dealing with bank failures 
than having the binary choice of either a full taxpayer bailout or an unconstrained liquidation. 
Many countries have responded by introducing stronger powers for their banking authorities, 
new mechanisms for absorbing losses ahead of default and more systematic procedures for 
resolving  actual  failures.  Canada,  the  UK  and  the  US  are  good  examples.  A  range  of 
approaches have been taken. New tools such as “living wills” and “bail-in bonds” are being 
used to enhance the likelihood of an ailing bank’s survival.  
Statutory  management  powers are being strengthened and new resolution structures such 
as  bridge  banks  are  being  established  to  facilitate  the  orderly  resolution  of  failing  banks 
without recourse to government funds.  
The  key  international  forum  on  these  matters,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  set 
clear  guidelines  on  how  failure  resolution  regimes  should  be  structured.  In  particular 
FSB recommends:  
“The resolution plan should facilitate the effective use of the resolution authority’s 
powers with the aim of making feasible the resolution of any firm without severe 
systemic  disruption  and  without  exposing  taxpayers  to  loss  while  protecting 
systemically important functions. It should serve as a guide to the authorities for 
achieving  an  orderly  resolution,  in  the  event  that  recovery  measures  are  not 
feasible or have proven ineffective.” 
(From  FSB,  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial 
Institutions, Annex III, October 2011)  
In New Zealand, while we already have quite strong failure management powers within the 
Reserve Bank Act. We know that the failure of any of our large systemic institutions would 
require close official involvement. Our main response to this third lesson from the GFC has 
been  to  enhance  our  existing  failure  management  framework  by  including  a  resolution 
structure called “Open Bank Resolution” (OBR). 
The OBR framework requires banks to structure their systems so that, in the case of a failure 
where losses exceed a bank’s available capital reserves, the excess losses can quickly be 
allocated across depositors and other creditors. The intention here is to allow a bank failure 
to  be  resolved  quickly,  say  over  a  weekend,  with  depositors  having  access  to  their 
diminished,  but  guaranteed  balances  on  Monday  morning.  The  bank  (under  statutory 
                                                 
3  Albeit with the Federal Reserve taking a significant amount of risk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
management) and its customers would be free to participate in the payments system from 
the re-opening, thus minimising any systemic impact of the failure. 
The Reserve Bank has been developing the OBR policy over a number of years; the GFC 
experience  provided  the  final  prompt  to  make  it  operational.  The  policy  can  be  seen  as  a 
complement rather than a substitute for the various “recovery plan” tools such as living wills 
and loss-absorbing debt instruments.  
OBR  is  also  fully  consistent  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  local  incorporation  and  outsourcing 
policies that were introduced in the early 2000s to help protect New Zealand’s largely foreign 
owned financial system from shocks to parent institutions.  
It  must  be  emphasised  however  that  OBR  is  just  one  tool  in  the  resolution  toolbox.  The 
government may or may not implement OBR when dealing with a bank failure; the choice will 
depend  on  a  number  of  factors.  But  it  is  important  for  government  to  have  this  option 
available.  OBR  gives  the  government  a  realistic  alternative  to  the  costly  bail-out  option 
should a large bank get into difficulties. The policy also serves as a reminder to investors that 
there  are  no  guaranteed  institutions,  thus  helping  to  limit  moral  hazard  in  the  financial 
system. 
Conclusion 
The GFC continues to teach us many lessons. Today I have focussed on three key lessons 
for prudential regulation that I believe are relevant for New Zealand and indeed all countries 
with developed banking systems.  
The  first  is  that  financial  institutions  are  more  vulnerable  than  we  previously  thought  to 
network  contagion  effects  which  can  be  heavily  amplified  by  the  evaporation  of  market 
liquidity.  
In response, we have “upped the game” on liquidity requirements for banks, and are doing 
the same with capital under the “Basel III” capital adequacy framework. 
Second, we need to be more active in offsetting the build up of macro-financial risks. We are 
developing macro-prudential policy tools for this purpose which will dovetail with our existing 
micro prudential framework. Such tools will not prevent credit cycles in the future, but should 
reduce the risk associated with them.  
The macro-prudential policy will be focused primarily on financial system stability. However, 
by  its  nature,  is  likely  to  lend  support  to  monetary  policy.  In  this  regard,  macro-prudential 
policy should also “keep an eye” on monetary policy objectives.  
Third,  and  finally,  while we  can  reduce  the likelihood  of  bank  failures, we  also  need  to  be 
better prepared for the rare event of a large bank failure. The OBR option will help to protect 
both the financial system and the government accounts from a large bank failure. 
Learning  these  lessons  and  improving  our  prudential  policy  framework  will  make  us  better 
equipped to withstand the effects of future financial shocks. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
