Kerstin af Jochnick: A springboard for the monetary policy meeting in 
September 
Speech by Ms Kerstin af Jochnick, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting 
at Danske Bank, Stockholm, 21 August 2012. 
 It has become something of a tradition for us members of the Executive Board of the Riksbank to 
hold a speech at the end of August about the current economic situation and developments during 
the  summer.  I  think  that  this  is  a  tradition  worth  upholding.  True,  not  many  people  here  today 
manage to completely cut themselves off from world events during their holidays. We still manage 
to maintain a watchful eye on the inflow of news and statistics. However, although I believe that 
many of us follow  the  economic news coverage during the summer months,  it may  be useful  to 
have a round-up of what has happened. It provides an overview and can act as a “springboard” for 
starting work in the autumn. 
A  natural  starting  point  for  me  is  the  assessment  of  economic  developments  described  by  the 
Riksbank in the Monetary Policy Report published in early July. I therefore intend to run through 
this assessment briefly and comment on my own thoughts at the meeting in July. I shall then try to 
summarise  developments since  then. Of course, this concerns to a  large extent the crisis  in  the 
euro  area,  although some  interesting  statistics  have  also  been  received. I  will  also  mention  the 
on-going discussion on Libor and Stibor as this has been a major news item during the summer. 
I have chosen to call this a “springboard” for the monetary policy meeting in September. This is not 
intended to direct one’s thoughts to sporting achievements, which can easily happen, given that the 
Olympics are still fresh in our minds.  What I mean to indicate is that this is a status report on which 
to base the start-up of a new process, which for the Riksbank is a process that will lead to a new 
joint  economic  assessment.  I  will  not  be  presenting this  type  of  assessment  today.  This  will  be 
released in connection with the next monetary policy meeting on 5 September. 
The assessment in the July Monetary Policy Report 
Great uncertainty over future developments 
Perhaps the most difficult question we had to deal with at the most recent monetary policy meeting 
was  how  an  unexpectedly  strong  outcome  in  Sweden  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  should  be 
viewed  in  relation  to  increased  concerns  over  poorer  developments  in  the  euro  area. When  we 
Executive Board members gathered in July, concerns on the financial markets regarding the crisis 
in  the  euro  area  had  increased  and  the  prospects  for  growth  in  Sweden  had  thus  deteriorated. 
There was considerable uncertainty over future developments. Work was underway on resolving 
the  problems  in  the  euro  area.  But  it  was  also  clear  that  much  remained  to  be  done  before 
sustainable solutions could be implemented. 
Risks in the euro area – focus on Greece and Spain 
The  concern  on  the  financial  markets  stemmed  of  course  from  the  public  finance  situation  and 
problems in the banking sector in the euro area. Concerns increased during the spring, mainly due 
to developments in Greece and Spain. The situation following the parliamentary election in Greece 
in May fuelled speculations of an EMU exit. After a new election in mid-June, the political parties 
that  support  the  savings  programme managed to  form  a  new  government. However,  it  was  still 
uncertain whether the new government would be able to implement adequate measures. 
At the same time,  Spain  continued to have problems  with its  public finances  and yields  on their 
government bonds rose. The problems in the Spanish banking sector also became more acute. In 
June,  the  Eurogroup promised  to  provide loans  of  up  to  EUR  100  billion  to  enable the  Spanish 
banks  to  increase  their  capital  adequacy,  and  the  Spanish  government  formally  applied  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
assistance.  Increased concern over the situation in Spain also meant that Italy and the country’s 
large sovereign debt attracted greater attention. 
At the end of June, just before our monetary policy meeting, the European Council decided on a 
number of measures to stabilise the situation in the euro area in the short term. The focus was on 
how the EFSF funding programme and later the ESM can be used. For instance, the possibility was 
created  to  use  the  mechanism  to  recapitalise  a  banking  system  directly,  without  burdening  the 
country’s national debt. In this way, the link between the banks’ and the country’s credit rating can 
be  broken. When we met  to  decide on  the repo rate  on  3  July, it  was uncertain what effect the 
measures would have and whether they were sufficient. 
Crisis management but persisting concern 
Personally, I found it difficult to evaluate the European Council’s agreement and the other decisions 
taken during the spring to improve the situation in the euro area. As I noted at the monetary policy 
meeting,  it  is  necessary  to  assess  what  is  going  on  from  both  a  short-term  and  a  long-term 
perspective. In the short term, we need measures that will quickly lift the euro area out of the acute 
crisis, so that credible solutions can be implemented to deal with the problems in Greece and Spain 
and to limit the contagion effects. Long-term measures are also needed to make the countries less 
vulnerable to  future  crises.  Confidence  in  the  euro  and  in  the  monetary union  also  needs  to  be 
boosted. This probably requires greater collaboration within the euro area on fiscal policy as well as 
banking supervision and the management of banks in distress, and such solutions take time. 
Although the risk of a much weaker development in the euro area had increased during the spring, 
we  Executive  Board  members  thought  it  was  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  crisis  in  southern 
Europe would be managed so that the acute phase gradually faded and sustainable solutions were 
eventually implemented. The forecasts presented in the Monetary Policy Report were thus made 
under this assumption. But we also pointed out that there were major challenges ahead and that 
further  measures  would  need  to  be  taken  by  governments  and  central  banks.  Correcting  large 
sovereign  debts,  problems  in  the  banking  sector  and  weak  competitiveness  all  takes  time.  We 
therefore also  made  the  assessment  that  the  unease and  uncertainty over  developments  in  the 
euro area would remain and would not begin to fade until 2013. 
Strong start to the year, but unease in Europe casts a shadow over the Swedish economy 
While  the  unease  in  southern  Europe  was  building  during  the  spring,  we  also  noted  that  the 
Swedish economy had started the year stronger than expected. Consumption and investment had 
increased  relatively  strongly,  while  unemployment  had  been  lower  than  expected.  But  our 
assessment was nevertheless that the effects of the increased financial unease abroad during the 
spring would have a dampening effect on the Swedish economy during the coming period. 
One of the reasons for this was weaker demand from abroad. Our assessment was that demand on 
Swedish export markets would only increase by around 1.5 per cent this year, mainly due to weak 
developments in the euro area. Another reason why we envisaged a slowdown in economic activity 
in  Sweden  was  that  the  increased  financial  unease  would  reduce  sentiment  among  Swedish 
households and companies and in this way have a negative effect on consumption and investment. 
However, at the same time, our assessment was that the slowdown in economic activity would be 
alleviated  by  the  fact  that  the  Swedish  is  competitive,  has  sound  public  finances  and  resilient 
banks. 
Our  forecast  was  that  GDP  growth  in  Sweden  would  be  weak  for  some  time  to  come  and  that 
unemployment  would  increase  somewhat.  As  the  unease  in  the  euro  area  subsides  next  year, 
economic  activity  will  strengthen,  unemployment  will  decline  again  and  resource  utilisation  will 
increase. Inflation will rise at the same time, after being held back by a low cost pressure and a 
stronger krona since the financial crisis 2008–2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Repo rate remains low to stimulate the economy 
With regard to monetary policy, our assessment was that it needs to be expansionary to support 
economic  activity  and  give  an  inflation  rate  in  line  with  the  target  of  2  per  cent.  We  therefore 
decided to hold the repo rate at 1.5 per cent and assessed that it needs to remain at roughly this 
low level for just over a year, and should then be raised gradually. The deterioration in international 
economic prospects meant that we revised down the repo-rate path somewhat, in relation to the 
assessment made in April. 
Personally, I thought that an unchanged repo rate gave a better balanced monetary policy in July 
than a cut would have done. Monetary policy was already expansionary, and our forecast was that 
inflation would attain the target of 2 per cent and that the real economy would reach sustainable 
levels within the forecast period. I also believe that there are risks in having low interest rates over 
a long period of time – risks that unsustainable behaviours and imbalances will arise in connection 
with the build-up of debt. Such risks also need to be considered in our assessments, while we try to 
ensure that we attain the inflation target and stabilise the real economy. 
Having said this, we also emphasised in July that there was considerable uncertainty over future 
developments.  As  I  mentioned  before, we  assumed  in  our  assessment  that the  problems  in  the 
euro area would be managed in such a way that a deeper crisis could be avoided. If the financial 
unease were to escalate, the situation for monetary policy would of course be quite different and 
policy would probably need to be even more expansionary. However, if credible measures were put 
in place, confidence could also return sooner than expected, which could increase demand in the 
Swedish economy. This might justify a higher repo-rate path. 
Developments during the summer 
So, what has happened since the July monetary policy meeting? To begin with, we can note that 
the  storm  clouds  are  still  hovering  over  Europe.  A  number  of  important  questions  are  currently 
being investigated and suggestions or announcements within various areas have been promised by 
September. 
After the European Council’s meeting at the end of June, the sentiment on the financial markets 
was characterised by uncertainty over the details in the measures the Council announced and the 
yields on Spanish and Italian government bonds remained high. The uncertainty concerned how to 
implement and design a joint banking supervision in the euro area, something that is a very large 
step for the member states. Joint banking supervision is, according to the agreement reached at 
the  meeting,  a  necessary  condition  for  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  ESM,  to  be  able  to 
recapitalise  banks  directly.  The  uncertainty  was  fuelled  by  the  criticism  of  another  agreement 
reached at the meeting that the European relief funds should be able to buy government bonds to 
hold back countries’ interest costs. 
More details on the loan to the Spanish banking sector 
More details of the loan of up to EUR 100 billion to the Spanish banking sector were released after 
the  meeting  of  the  Eurogroup  finance  ministers  in  July.  A  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with 
Spain states, for instance, that the exact size of the loan will be determined after a revision of the 
Spanish  banking  sector during the  second half  of  September. However, EUR  30  billion  is  to  be 
made available this summer as a preliminary bailout for urgent measures.  
Once the joint banking supervision facility in the euro area has been established, the idea is that 
the  ESM  will  take  over  from  the  EFSF  and  the  loan  can  be  channelled  directly  to  the  Spanish 
banks. This will break the links between the crisis banks’ finances and the Spanish government’s 
finances. The European Commission has signalled that a proposal regarding banking supervision 
will be announced in early September. One condition for the ESM to be able to take over the loan 
is, of course, that the mechanism is actually activated. This requires approval from countries that 
together account for 90 per cent of the capital paid into the mechanism. At present, approval is yet 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to  be  given  by  Germany  –  which  is  awaiting  a  verdict  from  its  constitutional  court  in 
mid-September. 
The Memorandum of Understanding regarding support to the Spanish banks makes it clear that the 
Spanish  government  is  expected  to  carry  on  with  its  work  on  reducing  its  budget  deficit  to  just 
below 3 per cent. The time limit they have been given to reach this has been extended by one year 
to  2014.  Spain  has  given  an  account of  its  budget plans  and  the  savings  to  be  implemented  to 
reach the target. During the summer the IMF has also given strong support to Spain’s efforts. 
Concern over the situation in Spain and Italy 
The  market’s  reactions  to  the  agreement  on  banking  support  to  Spain  can  be  described  as 
cautiously positive. But during the second half of July, concerns increased again when reports were 
received of the weak finances in Spanish regions. This contributed to new speculations regarding 
whether the loan to the Spanish banks is sufficient, or whether it will be necessary to implement a 
full-scale support package for Spain. Yields on Spanish government bonds with both short and long 
maturities rose to new heights. Italy was also affected by the unease. At the same time, yields on 
German and French government bonds remained at extremely low levels. 
The  problematic  situation  on  the  bonds  markets  was  discussed  by  the  European Central  Bank, 
ECB, at the beginning of August. After the meeting, ECB Chairman Mario Draghi made it clear that 
countries needing acute assistance should first turn to the EFSF/ESM and accept support under 
the terms they stipulate. After interventions might be undertaken by the ECB, within its mandate for 
price stability, and the ECB will investigate potential measures. It was already clear that potential 
bond purchases by the ECB would focus on bonds with shorter maturities. 
Expectations were fairly high prior to the ECB meeting, and Spanish and Italian bond yields had 
fallen  during  the  days  before  the  meeting.  When  the  ECB  did  not  announce  any  immediate 
measures,  yields  rose  quite  strongly  at  first.  They  have  since  fallen  somewhat  again,  primarily 
yields on government bonds with shorter maturities. After this the meeting, market focus has been 
transferred to the governments in Spain and Italy, to their attitudes to seeking assistance from the 
EFSF and to the conditions to which the countries would then be subjected. 
Assessment of Greece’s savings measures in September 
Greece, Ireland and Portugal already have relief programmes set up and at the end of June Cyprus 
also  applied  for  assistance.  Representatives  of  the  IMF,  the  European  Commission  and 
the ECB – the so-called troika – visited Greece during the summer to inspect whether Greece had 
made sufficient progress in its savings measures to meet the requirements for the next payment in 
the programme. The goal is a savings package of EUR 11.5 billion, which is to be implemented in 
2013 and 2014. The troika has announced that it will conclude its inspection of Greece’s progress 
in September. It appears that Greek funding until the next payment will  be secured through new 
issues of treasury bills. 
The importance of reliable reference rates 
Crisis management in the euro area has of course been a fairly central issue during the summer. 
Another  news  item  that  has  attracted  a  lot  of  attention  is  the  revelation  of  manipulation  of  the 
international interbank rate, Libor. Confidence in international banks received a further blow when it 
was revealed that several banks had been involved in providing incorrect interest rate data as a 
basis  for  calculating  the  daily  Libor.  As  Libor  is  a  reference rate  that  is  used  globally  for  large 
volumes of contracts, it is quite inacceptable that individual banks should casually report incorrect 
figures. 
The  Riksbank  has  long  followed  developments  concerning  the  corresponding  reference  rate  in 
Sweden, known as Stibor. We are currently carrying out our own investigation into how Stibor is 
determined and we also have an on-going dialogue with the Swedish banks on how they need to 
strengthen governance  and  increase transparency with  regard to  Stibor.  I  assume  that  Swedish 
banks will take heed of what has happened with Libor and help reinforce confidence in Stibor. It is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
possible  that we may  need to  wait and see  what happens with  Libor  before  we  can  establish  a 
better model for Stibor, but meanwhile Swedish banks should make it clear to the market and the 
general public how Stibor is set on a daily basis and what controls and checks exist in the current 
organisational framework. The Riksbank’s investigation is not yet complete, but will  be presented 
during the autumn. 
Weak developments in Europe and some uncertainty over the strength of the US recovery 
If we move on to the economic statistics released during the summer, they have mostly concerned 
developments during the second quarter, that is, up to the end of June. However, there have also 
been some indicators for the third quarter. To summarise, one can say that developments abroad 
have largely been in line with the assessments we made in July. Possibly, the outcome has been 
slightly weaker than we expected. 
The most recent labour market statistics show that unemployment in the euro area remained at an 
all-time high in June. Spain and Greece were hardest hit, with an unemployment rate exceeding 
20 per cent. At the same time, inflation has remained high. A week ago, preliminary GDP figures for 
the second quarter were published. They showed that GDP in the euro area fell in relation to the 
first quarter. Statistics for developments in July pointed to a continued weak outcome in the euro 
area in the coming period. Our forecast in July was that GDP will fall somewhat this year and then 
rise again in 2013. The statistics released so far support the impression that GDP will decline this 
year. 
In  the  United  Kingdom,  preliminary  calculations  show  that  GDP  fell  during  the  second  quarter, 
compared with the first,  which means  that GDP  has  fallen  three  quarters in  a  row. At  the same 
time, inflation in June and July was at its lowest level in more than two years. 
The new statistics from the United States have probably increased uncertainty over the strength of 
the  recovery  in  the  US  economy.  Preliminary  figures  show  that  GDP  increased  in  the  second 
quarter by 1.5 per cent, calculated as an annual rate, compared with the first quarter of this year. 
This means that growth slowed down by half a percentage point compared with the first quarter. 
The  slowdown  was  unexpected,  although  our  forecast  in  July  pointed  to  modest  growth  in  the 
US economy  in  the  coming  period.  Indicators  for  the  third  quarter  are  rather  mixed  so  far.  For 
example, unemployment increased somewhat in July, but at the same time employment increased 
at  a  relatively  strong  rate.  Consumption  was  weak  in  the  second  quarter,  and  sales  of  motor 
vehicles  fell  in  July. However, the situation on the housing market appears to  be  improving.  For 
instance, some indicators point to a continued rise in housing prices. 
Unexpectedly strong second quarter in Sweden 
While  developments  abroad  have  been  weak,  the  Swedish  economy  has  continued  to  be 
surprisingly strong during the summer. At the end of July, a first preliminary compilation of National 
Accounts  figures 
for  the  second  quarter  was  released.  This  showed  that  GDP,  when 
seasonally-adjusted,  increased by 1.4 per cent compared with the first quarter, corresponding to 
5.7 per cent when calculated as an annual rate. This was a much stronger figure than we and other 
forecasters were expecting. It was primarily a stronger growth in investments in stock, and to some 
extent exports, that came as a surprise. 
The labour force survey statistics show that the number of persons employed continued to rise in 
June,  both  in  relation  to  the  corresponding  period  last  year  and  compared  with  May  this  year, 
seasonally adjusted. Unemployment adjusted for seasonal effects was 7.5 per cent. The inflation 
rate  in  June  and  July  remained  low,  which  was  expected.  In  July,  CPI  inflation  increased  by 
0.7 per cent compared with July last year, and CPIF inflation increased by 0.8 per cent. This was 
completely in line with our forecasts and with market expectations. 
Information on developments in the real economy during the third quarter is so far limited to the 
business and consumer tendency surveys for July and to the purchasing managers’ index for July. 
The National Institute of Economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Research’s economic  tendency survey fell  in  July  and  is  at  a  level  indicating  that  growth in  the 
economy is weaker than normal. The confidence indicator for households did rise compared with 
June,  and  then  to  a  level  just  above  the  historical  average.  Another  bright  spot  was  that  the 
indicator for the manufacturing industry rose. This is in line with the indications from thepurchasing 
managers’  index  for  the  manufacturing  industry,  which  also  rose  in  July.  However,  one  must 
exercise caution in drawing conclusions on the basis of changes in individual months. 
Appreciation of the krona during the summer 
Another significant factor this summer has been the large appreciation of the krona in relation to the 
euro.  This, together with the fact that the krona has increased in value against other currencies, 
too, means that it has appreciated in trade-weighted terms this summer. Our forecast in July was 
that the krona would strengthen, given the relatively good economic developments in Sweden and 
given our robust public finances. However, the krona has strengthened more during the summer 
than we were expecting. It remains to be seen how much of the strengthening is perceived to be 
permanent. This will to a large extent determine the impact on inflation. The unease on the financial 
markets  has  entailed  large  fluctuations  in  the  currency markets and  we  know  that  changes can 
happen suddenly. 
Next decision on 5 September 
What I have said today is, as I mentioned initially, an attempt to summarise what has happened in 
the economic sphere during the summer. At the Riksbank we are busy working on new analyses 
and forecasts on which to base the next repo-rate decision on 5 September. Of course, a lot can 
happen before  that,  and  we  will  not  be  making  an  overall  economic  assessment  until  then.  But 
without getting ahead of ourselves, one can note that so far developments abroad may have been 
slightly weaker than expected, while developments in Sweden have been unexpectedly strong, at 
least  during  the  second quarter.  The krona  has  strengthened more  during the  summer  than  we 
were expecting in July. There is still unease over the situation in Europe. What we now have to 
consider  is  how  these factors should  be  balanced  against  one  another.  Our conclusions  on  this 
matter will be presented at the beginning of September. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
