Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Hyogo, 22 March 2012. 
I. 
Recent financial and economic developments 
 Japan’s economy 
A. 
I will first provide a brief overview of Japan’s economy. Through summer 2011, the economy 
picked up rapidly after the sharp decline following the Great East Japan Earthquake. While 
domestic demand such as private consumption since then has been firm, economic activity 
as a whole has been more or less flat, reflecting the decline in overseas demand mainly due 
to the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen, both triggered by 
the  European  debt  problem  and  other  factors.  Although  there  remains  considerable 
uncertainty  regarding  the  outlook,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  return  to  a  moderate 
recovery path in the first half of fiscal 2012 as the pace of recovery in overseas economies 
picks  up,  led  by  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  as  reconstruction-
related demand after the earthquake gradually strengthens. 
In  what  follows,  I  will  review  the  situation  after  the  Lehman  shock  –  the  financial  crisis 
following the September 2008 failure of Lehman Brothers – which is the starting point of the 
current recovery phase of Japan’s economy and also an underlying cause of the European 
debt  crisis,  and  talk  about  developments  thereafter.  I  will  also  talk  about  the  uncertainty 
surrounding the current state of Japan’s economy. 
From the Lehman shock to the March 2011 earthquake 
B. 
The  global  economy  contracted  rapidly  and  severely  in  the  wake  of  the  Lehman  shock. 
Economic conditions deteriorated sharply not only in the  United States and Europe, which 
were the epicenter of the financial crisis, but also in Japan as well as emerging economies 
especially in Asia due to the fall in U.S. and European demand. Real GDP in Japan recorded 
a decline of more than 10 percent on an annualized basis – a larger drop than that in the 
United States – for two consecutive quarters from the October-December quarter of 2008. 
Subsequently,  Japan’s  economy  picked  up  rapidly  after  leveling  out  around  spring  2009, 
owing to the progress in global inventory restocking, the expansion of fiscal spending, and 
substantial monetary easing. In 2010, the pace of recovery slowed temporarily from summer 
through autumn, but the recovery trend remained intact until early 2011. 
Current conditions and outlook 
C. 
The Great East Japan Earthquake struck in March 2011, and Japan’s economy once again 
came under strong downward pressure. Many facilities were damaged by the disaster, and 
the production and distribution of manufactured goods came to a standstill. In contrast with 
the  so-called  “evaporation  of  demand”  seen  after  the  Lehman  shock,  this  time  it  was 
constraints  in  supply  that  severely  affected  the  economy:  industrial  production  for 
March 2011 fell by 15.5 percent on a month-on-month basis, the largest one-month drop on 
record.  In  this  situation,  business  and  household  sentiment  deteriorated,  and  spending 
declined. As a result of strenuous efforts by the parties concerned, supply chain disruptions 
were subsequently speedily resolved and economic activity picked up at a pace faster than 
widely expected immediately after the earthquake. Production and exports almost recovered 
to their pre-quake levels in summer 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Just  when  some  positive  signs  were  on  the  horizon,  Japan’s  economy  encountered  new 
challenges, namely, the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen, 
both stemming from the European debt problem. Together with the effects of the flooding in 
Thailand, the developments led to a gradual slowdown in the pace of increase in exports and 
production, and both exports and production have been more or less flat recently. Domestic 
demand, on the other hand, has been firm mainly due to reconstruction-related demand after 
the earthquake. Private consumption has firmed up in part because of a recovery in demand, 
which had been temporarily subdued mainly reflecting the disaster, and because of a surge 
in  new  car  sales  due  to  the  boost  provided  by  government  subsidies.  Business  fixed 
investment for now continues to be on a moderate increasing trend, aided by the fact that 
full-fledged  rebuilding  efforts  such  as  efforts  to  restore  and  reconstruct  disaster-stricken 
facilities as well as efforts to strengthen the earthquake resistance of existing structures are 
now  getting  underway,  although  some  exporting  firms  that  have  greatly  revised  their  profit 
forecasts downward  might restrain their investment in the future. Public investment is also 
expected to gradually expand with the implementation of large-scale rebuilding projects now 
getting underway, given that local governments in disaster areas have been making progress 
in the development of reconstruction plans. Although there remains considerable uncertainty 
regarding the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path in 
the first half of fiscal 2012 as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picks up, led by 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and as reconstruction-related demand after 
the earthquake gradually strengthens. According to the Bank of Japan’s forecasts released in 
January 2012, the real GDP growth rate is projected to be 2.0 percent for fiscal 2012 and 
1.6 percent for fiscal 2013. 
Overseas economies 
D. 
Since summer 2011, the European debt problem has been weighing on the global economy. 
Concerns  over  fiscal  sustainability  spread  from  countries  like  Greece  to  Italy  and  Spain, 
which are the third and fourth largest economies in terms of GDP, respectively, in the euro 
area.  As  a  result,  the  European  debt  problem  worsened.  Yields  on  10-year  Italian 
government  bonds  at  one  time  spiked  to  more  than  7  percent.  This  led  to  intensified 
concerns over the financial health of European financial institutions holding large amounts of 
these  bonds.  These  institutions,  for  their  part,  tightened  their  lending  stance  because  of 
liquidity concerns, which in turn affected economic activity. 
Since the end of 2011, however, concerns over European financial institutions’ liquidity have 
been receding thanks to the implementation of 36-month longer-term refinancing operations 
with full allotment by the European Central Bank (ECB) and to the lowering of interest rates 
on  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  decided  on  in  coordinated  action  by  the  six 
major central banks, including the Bank of Japan. More recently, the second bailout package 
for Greece, totaling 130 billion euros, was approved by the European Union (EU) member 
states and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), allowing Greece to stave off a disorderly 
default.  However,  the  situation  still  entails  numerous  uncertainties,  and  the  fundamental 
issues underlying the European debt problem have not been resolved. 
Under  these  circumstances,  overseas  economies  still  have  not  emerged  from  the 
deceleration phase. Looking at the average growth rate of overseas economies weighted by 
the value of Japan’s exports, overseas economies grew quite rapidly at a rate of 6.8 percent 
on a year-on-year basis in 2010 during the recovery following the Lehman shock, and at a 
rate of 6.5 percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis in the January-March quarter 
of 2011. However, growth declined to less than 4.0 percent in the July-September quarter of 
2011 and recorded only 0.9 percent in the October-December quarter. 
Regarding  European  economies,  since  the  second  half  of  2011,  fiscal  austerity  measures 
and  financial  institutions’  tightening  of  their  lending  stance  have  dampened  business  and 
household sentiment. Economic activity in some European countries is increasingly sluggish 
because the countries have fallen into a vicious cycle, in which the deterioration in economic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activity leads to a further worsening of the financial conditions of governments and financial 
institutions. There have been some signs of recovery recently, such as an improvement in 
economic sentiment in Germany. However, as the impact of fiscal austerity persists, some 
more time is needed before a positive cycle takes hold in European economies as a whole. 
In the United States, from summer to autumn 2011, economic sentiment deteriorated due to 
strains  in  global  financial  markets  and  fiscal  problems.  Reflecting  the  accommodative 
financial  environment,  stock  prices  recently  reached  their  highest  levels  since  the  Lehman 
shock. Private consumption has also been firm due to an improvement in the employment 
situation. However, with pressure from household balance-sheet adjustments persisting, the 
recovery of the economy as a whole has generally been moderate. As for the outlook, the 
pace  of  recovery  is  likely  to  remain  moderate  because,  in  addition  to  these  balance-sheet 
adjustments, fiscal problems will also likely persist. 
Meanwhile,  the  pace  of  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  has 
moderated  somewhat  mainly  due  to  the  slowdown  in  European  economies.  Nevertheless, 
these economies maintain relatively high growth overall spurred by robust domestic demand. 
The Chinese economy has been enjoying high growth, although – at a rate of 9.2 percent for 
2011 – growth was slower than the previous year due to the slowdown in exports and real 
estate investment, among other things. Private-sector forecasts expect growth to decelerate 
further in 2012 to around 8.5 percent. Although growth may decelerate as China makes the 
transition to more stable growth, there remains considerable room for further expansion in 
domestic  demand  because  of  structural  factors  such  as  the  rise  in  income  levels  and 
urbanization,  so  that  China  can  be expected  to  continue  to  achieve  relatively  high  growth. 
The pace of economic growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries slowed in the second 
half of 2011 due to the rise in inflation, the decline in exports to advanced countries, and the 
effects of the flooding in Thailand. As for the outlook, however, the reconstruction efforts from 
the  flood  damage  as  well  as  the  accommodative  financial  environment  are  expected  to 
underpin  economic  activity.  Moreover,  looking  at  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies  as  a  whole,  inflation  has  been  declining  gradually  and  the  accompanying 
recovery in  real purchasing power is expected to underpin consumption. Hence, growth in 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  is  likely  to  continue  to  spearhead  global 
economic growth. 
 Uncertainty surrounding the outlook 
E. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank’s  main  scenario  is  that  Japan’s  economy  will  return  to  a 
moderate  recovery  path  in  the  first  half  of  fiscal  2012.  However,  there  is  a  considerable 
degree  of  uncertainty  exerting  downward  pressure  on  the  economy.  Here,  I  would  like  to 
discuss  three  risks  that  will  significantly  affect  economic  activity:  developments  in  the 
European  debt  situation;  the  possibility  of  a  surge  in  crude  oil  prices  resulting  from 
heightened  geopolitical  risks  involving  Iran;  and  uncertainty  over  the  supply  and  demand 
balance of electricity in the coming summer. 
The  most  serious  risk  concerns  future  developments  in  the  European  debt  problem.  The 
bailout package for Greece has somewhat eased the tension surrounding the problem, but 
this  does  not  eliminate  the  possibility  of  another  worsening  of  the  situation  in  the  future, 
which could in turn cause turmoil in global financial markets and a sharp drop in trade. Thus, 
it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  the  so-called  “tail  risk”  –  that  is,  a  risk  which  has  a  low 
probability but could have a large impact if it materializes. One of the fundamental causes of 
the European debt problem is that under the single currency system, growing disparities in 
fiscal  conditions  and  competitiveness  among  the  euro  area  member  states  cannot  be 
corrected through the foreign exchange mechanism, resulting in the accumulation of current 
account imbalances. As a result of adopting the single currency system, Greece and other 
peripheral  countries  were  able  to  borrow  funds  at  interest  rates  below  what  their  real 
economic  strength  warranted,  leading  to  increased  spending  both  in  the  private  and  the 
public  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  highly  competitive  core  countries,  such  as  Germany, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
expanded  their  exports  to  these  peripheral  countries,  resulting  in  swelling  current  account 
deficits in these countries. Greece depended on overseas investors to purchase 70 percent 
of its government securities and was unable to rein in the increase in fiscal deficits after the 
Lehman shock. Against this background, overseas investors adopted a cautious investment 
stance,  giving  immediate  rise  to  concerns  over  peripheral  countries’  ability  to  raise  funds. 
Although the second bailout package for Greece has recently been approved, it is unclear 
whether the country can succeed in implementing the fiscal austerity measures it promised 
the international community, given the domestic situation. At the same time, there has been 
some progress in the moves to strengthen fiscal discipline within the euro area, as evidenced 
by the fact that most of the EU member states have signed the new “fiscal compact.” Yet, it is 
still  uncertain  whether  individual  countries  will  be  able  to  steadily  correct  the  imbalances 
through  fiscal  reforms  and  increases  in  their  competitiveness.  Moreover,  initiatives  to 
address the crisis, such as the establishment of the European Stability Mechanism and the 
enhancement  of  other  “firewalls”  for  containing  market  turmoil,  are  still  in  progress.  Thus, 
uncertainty regarding the outlook has not been resolved. 
Moreover, there are heightened geopolitical risks relating to Iran. Crude oil prices have been 
rising recently, reflecting the situation in the Middle East. If the situation intensifies and crude 
oil prices surge, this could further decelerate the global economy and also exert downward 
pressure  on  Japan’s  economy  through  a  deterioration  of  the  trade  balance  and  corporate 
profits. 
A domestic risk concerns the uncertainty over the supply and demand balance of electricity 
in the coming summer of 2012. If operations at all nuclear power plants in Japan were to be 
suspended at that time, the supply capacity for electricity could fall short of the demand at 
summer peak times, which would have a negative impact on economic activity. There is a 
possibility  that  the  increase  in  imports  of  crude  oil  and  liquefied  natural  gas  (LNG),  amid 
relatively  high  crude  oil  prices,  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  Japan’s  net  exports. 
Attention should also be paid to the possible effects of a rise in electricity costs on corporate 
profits.  For  example,  in  addition  to  the  regular  adjustments  in  electricity  charges  reflecting 
fluctuations in fuel costs, a rise in electricity costs due to the increase in the weight of thermal 
power generation could be passed through to firms. 
Recent price developments 
II. 
Next, I will talk about price developments. International commodity prices began to rise from 
around spring 2009 mainly due to  growth in emerging economies, but softened somewhat 
from summer 2011, reflecting the slowdown in the global economy. Most recently, however, 
commodity  prices  have  begun  to  increase  again  against  the  backdrop  of  heightened 
geopolitical  risk  surrounding  Iran.  In  this  situation,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) gradually decelerated for several months, but 
this  trend  came  to  a  halt  in  February  2012  reflecting  the  recent  rise  in  international 
commodity prices. Going forward, the CGPI is expected to move slightly upward. 
Next, turning to the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food, the year-on-year 
rate of decline slowed from around 2009 thanks to the improvement in the aggregate supply 
and  demand  balance,  and  since  summer  2011  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  has  been 
around 0 percent. It is expected to stay at this level for the time being. Thereafter, assuming 
that medium- to long-term inflation expectations remain stable, the rate of change is likely to 
gradually turn positive as the negative output gap narrows. In its forecast released in January 
2012, the Bank projected the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food) to be 0.1 percent for fiscal 2012 and 0.5 percent for fiscal 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
III. 
Medium- to long-term challenges for Japan’s economy 
Background to the protracted decline in prices 
A. 
Let  me  talk  about  the  background  to  the  current  deflationary  situation  in  Japan.  Japan’s 
economic  growth  rate  has  been  on  a  long-term  downward  trend:  the  average  annual  rate 
declined from 4.4 percent in the 1980s to 1.5 percent in the 1990s, and then to 0.6 percent in 
the  2000s  reflecting  in  part  the  impact  of  the  Lehman  shock.  In  this  situation,  consumer 
prices  also  continued  to  decline.  Such  price  developments  are  attributable  to  a  protracted 
negative  output  gap.  Specifically,  in  addition  to  cyclical  factors  such  as  the  decline  in 
overseas demand, structural weakness in domestic demand brought about by demographic 
developments in Japan has resulted in a protracted shortage of demand relative to supply in 
the  economy  as  a  whole.  Japan’s  population  is  aging  faster  than  that  of  any  other  of  the 
advanced countries, and its working-age population (defined as those aged between 15 and 
64)  has  begun  to  decrease.  The  pace  of  population  decline  is  likely  to  accelerate  in  the 
future.  The  National  Institute  of  Population  and  Social  Security  Research  forecasts  that 
Japan’s working-age population will decline to 44.18 million in 2060, which is roughly half of 
the peak of 87.27 million in 1995. 
Toward achieving sustainable growth 
B. 
For  Japan’s  economy  to  achieve  sustainable  growth  despite  the  structural  downward 
pressure I just mentioned, it is essential to increase the economy’s growth potential and raise 
growth expectations. To this end, it is necessary to (1) create new demand and boost the 
domestic labor force as much as possible even at a time when the working-age population is 
shrinking, and (2) raise productivity in industries with significant potential for job creation. 
On the first point, in order to create new demand and boost the labor force, it is necessary to 
not  only  tap  potential  consumer  needs  that  arise  as  the  population  ages  but  also  develop 
highly creative markets linked to social innovations in the areas of medicine, healthcare, and 
new energy sources. To capture growing global demand, particularly in emerging economies, 
it  is  important  to  both  make  efforts  to  increase  exports  and  shift  to  business  models  that 
focus  on  local  production  for  local  consumption  and  the  international  division  of  labor  and 
thereby increase revenues from overseas. However, a key point in this context is that if the 
shift to overseas production occurs gradually, this will allow domestic workers to transfer to 
other growing sectors of the economy, and therefore maintain employment levels in Japan; 
on the other hand, if the shift to overseas production takes place rapidly as a result of the 
appreciation of the yen or other factors, it will lead to a decline in domestic employment and 
thus be detrimental to the economy. Moreover, with the working-age population decreasing, 
in  order  to  boost  the  labor  force  –  which  in  turn  can  sustain  the  newly  created  domestic 
demand  –  it  is  important  to  increase  labor  market  flexibility  to  allow  workers  to  change 
industries more easily and to boost labor market participation of the elderly and of women 
who wish to work but are not currently working. 
The second requirement for increasing the growth potential of the economy, as mentioned 
earlier,  is  to  improve  productivity  in  industries  with  significant  potential  for  job  creation. 
Economic growth comes from increases in three factors: the number of workers, the number 
of  hours  worked,  and  labor  productivity.  Therefore,  in  order  to  strengthen  Japan’s  growth 
potential,  labor  productivity  must  be  improved  along  with  efforts  to  boost  the  labor  force. 
During the two decades from 1990, the average annual rate of increase in labor productivity 
stagnated at around 1 percent. This is attributable to the shift of workers to service industries, 
where  labor  productivity  growth  is  slow.  According  to  a  report  by  the  Japan  Productivity 
Center, while labor productivity in manufacturing industries grew at a relatively high average 
pace of 2.5 percent a year during the two decades, that in service industries – which have 
significant potential for job creation – grew by only around 1.0 percent a year. At the same 
time, Japan’s labor market structure changed, with the number of workers in manufacturing 
industries falling since the mid-1990s, while that in service industries has been rising, so that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
service industries now account for 30 percent of workers in all industries. In particular, along 
with the aging of the population, there has been a notable increase in demand for services 
for the elderly, such as in the areas of healthcare and nursing care. This trend is expected to 
continue.  Therefore,  the  key  to  enhancing  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  lies  in 
improving labor productivity in service industries by, for example, offering unique and high-
value-added  services.  This  should  be  combined  with  efforts  to  increase  employment  by 
further tapping potential demand and improving labor productivity to create a virtuous cycle. 
Based on considerations such as these, the Japanese government has formulated a growth 
strategy  and  has  actively  been  taking  related  measures.  Recognizing  the  importance  of 
strengthening Japan’s growth potential, the Bank introduced the fund-provisioning measure 
to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth in June 2010 and has since 
enhanced  the  measure.  I  will  elaborate  on  this  later  when  I  explain  the  Bank’s  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  Together  with  the  strenuous  efforts  undertaken  by  firms,  the  support 
provided by the Bank from the financial side, including the provision of funds to areas with 
growth  potential,  can  help  us  to  overcome  deflation.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  it  is  also 
necessary for the government to create the right environment. With this in mind, the Bank will 
continue  exerting  itself  in  its  role  together  with  firms,  financial  institutions,  and  the 
government. 
Efforts to ensure fiscal sustainability 
C. 
Alongside strengthening Japan’s growth potential, a key issue that needs to be addressed is 
ensuring  the  sustainability  of  the  public  finances.  Japan’s  government  debt  outstanding 
exceeds  200  percent  of  nominal  GDP,  which  is  the  highest  level  among  advanced 
economies. Nevertheless, yields on government bonds remain stable at low levels. This is 
often explained by the fact that Japan has a current account surplus and a large portion of 
government bonds are held by domestic investors. It should be noted, however, that, as the 
European  debt  crisis  shows,  once  market  participants  start  doubting  the  government’s 
determination to work toward fiscal sustainability, the situation could change in a nonlinear 
fashion. Given that social security spending will continue to exert upward pressure on fiscal 
expenditure,  it  is  necessary  to  push  ahead  with  structural  reform  of  the  public  finances  in 
terms  of  both  expenditure  and  revenue  while  the  public  still  has  confidence  in  fiscal 
discipline. 
IV. 
Monetary policy 
The conduct of monetary policy 
A. 
I would now like to turn to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. The Bank recognizes that 
Japan’s economy is faced with the extremely important challenge of emerging from deflation 
and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Based on this recognition, the 
Bank has been consistently making contributions as the central bank, using a three-pronged 
approach  consisting  of  (1)  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  under  the  comprehensive 
monetary easing policy, (2) ensuring stability in financial markets, and (3) providing support 
to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
Pursuit of powerful monetary easing 
1. 
With a view to pursuing powerful monetary easing, the Bank decided to take the following 
three actions at the Monetary Policy Meeting held in February. 
Introduction of “the price stability goal in the medium to long term” 
a. 
First, the Bank has decided to introduce “the price stability goal in the medium to long term” 
as the inflation rate it judges to be consistent with price stability sustainable over the medium 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to long term. The previously released “understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” 
showed the range of inflation rates that each of the nine Policy Board members understood 
as price stability from a medium- to long-term viewpoint, while “the price stability goal in the 
medium to long term” represents a clear judgment by the Bank. Specifically, the Bank judges 
“the price stability goal in the medium to long term” to be within a positive range of 2 percent 
or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI and, more specifically, sets a 
goal of 1 percent for the time being. 
b. 
Clarification of the determination to pursue monetary easing through policy duration 
effects 
Second, the Bank has clarified its determination to pursue monetary easing through policy 
duration effects that are generated by “the price stability goal in the medium to long term” it 
introduced. Specifically, the Bank states that for the time being, it will aim to achieve the goal 
of  1  percent  inflation  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  through  the 
pursuit  of  powerful  monetary  easing,  conducting  its  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  and 
implementing  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  (hereafter  the  Program)  mainly  through  the 
purchase of financial assets. The Bank will continue with this powerful easing until it judges 
the 1 percent goal to be in sight. 
Some might think that 1 percent inflation, which the Bank has set as the goal for the time 
being, is too low. In this regard, when formulating “the price stability goal in the medium to 
long term,” the Bank took three aspects into consideration: (1) the measurement bias in the 
CPI; (2) the need for a safety margin that acts as a buffer against the risk of a vicious cycle of 
deflation and stagnation; and (3) households’ and firms’ perception of price developments. 
Regarding the perception of price developments, it needs to be noted that even before the 
fall into deflation, inflation in Japan was consistently lower than in other major economies. 
Therefore, if the inflation rate the Bank aims to achieve were to diverge from this historical 
experience, this might in fact considerably increase uncertainty among households and firms. 
The Bank thus considers the current goal of 1 percent inflation to be appropriate. 
As a separate issue from developments in consumer prices, if a rise in asset prices creates a 
bubble, this could in turn substantially undermine stability in economic activity and prices in 
the long run. Therefore, the Bank has set the condition for the pursuit of powerful monetary 
easing that it identifies no significant risk to the sustainability of economic growth, such as 
from the accumulation of financial imbalances. 
Expansion of the Asset Purchase Program 
c. 
Third,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  purchase  another  10  trillion  yen  worth  of  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) under the Program, increasing the total size of the Program from 
about 55 trillion yen to about 65 trillion yen. 
The  Program  was  instituted  in  October  2010  to  further  enhance  monetary  easing  by 
encouraging a decline in longer-term interest rates and various risk premiums in a situation 
where there was little room for a further decline in short-term interest rates. The Bank has 
established the Program on its balance sheet, through which it conducts the fixed-rate funds-
supplying  operation  and  the  purchasing  of  various  financial  assets  –  namely,  government 
securities,  commercial  paper  (CP),  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and 
Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
The  aim  of  expanding  the  Program  at  this  particular  time,  with  uncertainty  surrounding 
economic  developments  both  at  home  and  abroad  continuing  to  be  high,  was  to  provide 
further support for recent positive developments from the financial side and to better ensure 
that  the  economy  returns  to  a  moderate  recovery  path.  As  a  result  of  the  increased  JGB 
purchases under the Program, the Bank will be purchasing, together with regular purchases 
to meet a trend increase in banknote demand, a large amount of JGBs until the end of 2012 
at the pace of 3.3 trillion yen per month, or about 40 trillion yen for the year. The purpose of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
this significant scale of JGB purchases is to achieve sustainable growth with price stability 
and, needless to say, not to finance government debt. 
Measures to ensure financial market stability 
2. 
The Bank has also been doing its utmost to ensure financial market stability by making use 
of various funds-supplying operations. When strains in financial markets heighten as seen in 
the case of the Lehman shock and the worsening of the European debt problem, financial 
institutions’ funding conditions deteriorate, leading to a tightening of their lending attitudes. 
To prevent this from happening, immediately after the earthquake in March 2011 the Bank 
provided  ample  funds  on  an  unprecedented  scale,  exceeding  the  amount  provided 
immediately following the Lehman shock. Moreover, in response to the emergence of strains 
in  U.S.  dollar  short-term  funding  markets,  the  Bank  re-established  U.S.  dollar  funds-
supplying  operations  in  May  2010.  It  lowered  interest  rates  on  the  operations  as  part  of 
coordinated measures among six major central banks at the end of November 2011, when 
the European debt problem worsened. At the same time, the central banks also agreed to 
establish  bilateral  liquidity  swap  arrangements  enabling  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  any  of 
their currencies in addition to the already available U.S. dollar. 
Measures to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth 
3. 
As  I  briefly  mentioned  earlier,  in  June  2010  the  Bank  introduced  the  fund-provisioning 
measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  for  the  purpose  of 
providing support, from the financial side, for the critical challenge of enhancing the growth 
potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  Through  the  measure,  the  Bank  supplies  funds  at  a  low 
interest rate of 0.1 percent for, if rolled over, up to four years to private financial institutions in 
accordance  with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment  to  strengthen  the 
foundations  for  economic  growth.  The  Bank  has  provided  18  examples,  including 
“environment  and  energy  business,”  “medical,  nursing  care,  and  other  health-related 
business,”  and  “tourism  business,”  of  areas  for  which  financial  institutions’  lending  or 
investment would be funded by the measure. It should be noted that a large amount of funds 
has  been  invested  in  the  area  categorized  as  “others,”  such  as  lending  or  investment  to 
support local industries. The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank under the 
main rules for the measure has reached the initial ceiling of 3 trillion yen. Moreover, a wide 
range of financial institutions have been actively making a number of efforts targeting their 
specific customer base or the region they serve, such as establishing new dedicated funds 
that  will  support  economic  growth,  so  that  the  amount  of  financial  institutions’  lending  and 
investment greatly exceeds the amount of loans disbursed by the Bank. Therefore, it could 
be  said  that  the  measure  has  played  its  intended  role  as  a  catalyst  in  prompting  financial 
institutions to develop their own initiatives to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
In  June  2011,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  lending  arrangement  of  500  billion  yen  for  the 
measure, through which it extends loans to financial institutions for their equity investments 
and  asset-based  lending  (ABL).  The  loans  for  ABL  allow  financial  institutions  to  use  their 
expertise  to  identify  and  lend  to  potential  growth  firms  without  conventional  collateral  or 
guarantees. The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank under this arrangement 
is 89.1 billion yen as of March 2012. Although this is not a particularly large amount, the new 
arrangement  has  been  producing  some  positive  effects  in  terms  of  providing  support  for 
financial institutions’ new initiatives. 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  March  12  and  13,  2012,  the  Bank  decided  to 
enhance  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic growth by introducing new lending arrangements and increasing the total amount 
of loans available through the measure from 3.5 trillion yen to 5.5 trillion yen. The decision 
was  made  with  a  view  to  underpinning  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic 
growth  and  encouraging  a  wider  range  of  investments  and  loans  that  serve  this  purpose. 
Here are the specifics. First, the Bank decided to extend the deadline for applications for new 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
loans by two years to March 31, 2014. Second, the Bank decided to introduce a new lending 
arrangement of 500 billion yen for small-lot investments and loans of 1 million yen or more 
but less than 10 million yen, in response to requests by relatively small financial institutions. 
Third, the Bank decided to increase the 3 trillion yen ceiling for the outstanding balance of 
loans  under  the  main  rules  by  500  billion  yen  for  the  purpose  of  providing  support  to 
initiatives  by  financial  institutions  that  started  to  participate  in  the  measure  at  a  later  time. 
And fourth, the Bank decided to introduce a new lending arrangement of 1 trillion yen that will 
use  its  U.S.  dollar  reserves  in  order  to  support,  through  the  provision  of  foreign  currency 
liquidity, financial institutions’ own initiatives to help firms capture increasing global demand 
and thereby enhance their growth potential. The details of the arrangement will be examined 
at the next Monetary Policy Meeting, to be held in April 2012. 
The Bank’s measures following the Great East Japan Earthquake 
B. 
It  has  been  about  one  year  since  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  which  hit  Japan  on 
March 11, 2011. I would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere condolences to all 
those who have suffered from the disaster. Let me explain the Bank’s measures following the 
earthquake. Since immediately after the earthquake, the Bank has swiftly taken a range of 
measures, such as the provision of ample liquidity and the further enhancement of monetary 
easing,  focusing  on  three  major  aspects:  maintaining  the  functioning  of  financial  and 
settlement systems, ensuring the stability of financial markets, and supporting the economy. 
On March 14, 2011, the first business day after the disaster, the Bank increased the amount 
of the Program, mainly of the purchases of risk assets, by about 5 trillion yen, and thereby 
prevented any deterioration in business sentiment from adversely affecting economic activity. 
In  April,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  a  funds-supplying  operation  that  supplies  financial 
institutions in disaster areas with longer-term funds in order to provide support to their initial 
response efforts to meet demand for funds for restoration and rebuilding. It also decided to 
broaden the range of eligible collateral for money market operations. 
So  far,  loans  of  about  500  billion  yen  of  the  total  amount  of  1  trillion  yen  for  this  funds-
supplying  operation  have  been  disbursed.  The  reason  that  financial  institutions  in  disaster 
areas  have  made  relatively  little  use  of  loans  under  this  operation  is  that  their  funding 
conditions have generally been favorable. Nevertheless, it can be said that the operation has 
been effective in that it has provided a safety net to help these institutions with their efforts to 
meet  demand  for  funds  for  restoration  and  rebuilding.  Given  that  full-fledged  rebuilding 
efforts are now getting under way, and taking into account requests from financial institutions 
in disaster areas, the Bank decided to extend the deadline for new applications for loans by 
one year to April 30, 2013 at last week’s Monetary Policy Meeting on March 12 and 13, 2012. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
