Andreas Dombret: Macroprudential surveillance and statistical 
challenges 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Sixth ECB Statistics Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 17 April 2012. 
1 
Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you tonight. Many of the statistical challenges that are 
related to macroprudential surveillance have already been  addressed this afternoon. Allow 
me to offer some thoughts from the point of view of a macroprudential practitioner, who is 
also involved in statistics. 
It  is  a  crucial  aspect  of  macroprudential  surveillance,  as  we  see  it  in  Europe,  that  the 
macrofinancial analysts receive all the information relevant for them to do their job. From my 
point of view, four aspects stand out: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Data requests must be analytically driven.  
Micro and macro-views should be reconcilable.  
Single entity and consolidated data are equally important.  
The Data gaps issue needs to stay on top of the agenda.  
The significance of macroprudential surveillance 
2 
There  is,  more  than  ever,  a  strong  case  for  mutual  understanding  and  close  ex  ante 
coordination,  because  in  recent  years  we  have  witnessed  nothing  less  than  a  significant 
change in the paradigm of macroprudential surveillance. Three steps can be distinguished. 
As a first step, in spring of 2009, an international reform agenda has been agreed upon, and 
the Financial Stability Board has been assigned a key function. 
Then, at the beginning of 2011, the European Systemic Risk Board has taken up its work. 
And,  as  a  last  step,  we  are  in  the  process  of  national  macroprudential  mandates  being 
drafted in several European countries. Actually, at the end of last year, the ESRB released 
an explicit recommendation on the macro-prudential mandate of national authorities. 
Macroprudential  surveillance,  at  the  European  level,  can  be  characterized  by  a  three-
pronged approach. 
– 
Firstly: A legal mandate exists for safeguarding financial stability. Europe is setting 
standards with respect to macroprudential policy.  
Secondly:  Macroprudential  surveillance  pursues  an 
to 
surveillance.  This  means  that  macrofinancial  analysts  are  entitled  to  receive  the 
totality of relevant information in order to be able to deliver early warnings and clear 
recommendations. Meanwhile, all operative, microprudential instruments remain in 
the hands of the relevant supervisory agencies.  
Thirdly: Central banks are to take on additional responsibilities.  
– 
The draft of an act to strengthen German financial supervision that was released just a few 
days ago follows exactly along these lines.  
indirect  approach 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
However,  the  indirect  approach,  which  is  a  crucial  element  in  the  European  concept  of 
macroprucential  surveillance,  is  far  from  being  completely  implemented.  It  remains  an 
important challenge to find a system of rules and procedures for applying macroprudential 
instruments to address country-specific or sectoral risks. It is important to reconcile the goal 
of  completing  a  Single  Market 
for  sufficient 
macroprudential flexibility.  
Moreover, formidable challenges refer to the acquisition of what I have called the totality of 
relevant  information.  It  is  against  this  very  background  that  statistics  enter  the  stage. 
Statistics,  together  with  IT,  are  probably  the  most  important  means  for  macrofinancial 
analysts to meet their information needs.  
financial  services  with 
the  need 
for 
Conceptual challenges 
3  
The G20 Data Gaps Initiative aims at both strengthening existing statistics and at developing 
new ones. As regards the development of new statistics, the task is quite challenging. Take, 
for  instance,  the  initiatives  on  enhancing  information  on  financial  linkages,  on  mapping 
exposure  and  funding  patterns  or  on  identifying  the  activities  of  non-bank  financial 
institutions, just to mention a few. Off-the-rack blueprints on how to proceed do not exist. The 
legal framework for data collection needs to be broadened in some countries. Confidentiality 
issues will have to be addressed. And, last but not least, analytical guidance is necessary for 
the collection of data and for prioritization and coordination of statistical activities. 
Data requirements need to be based on sound arguments 
3.1  
Any  request  for  statistical  data  should  be  analytically  driven.  To  be  provocative:  “Do  you 
really need the data that we do not have?” This means that the goal of any research must be 
clearly  defined,  and  that  at  least  some  preliminary  ideas  of  how  to  proceed  must  be 
developed  in  advance.  It  is  a  prerequisite  for  statisticians  to  set  priorities  when  employing 
their  resources  in  their  search  for  data  that  is  fit  for  purpose.  For  the  macro-prudential 
analyst,  though,  it  is  often  the  other  way  around:  developing  good  ideas  needs  having  at 
least  some  stylized  facts  before  theorizing.  This  is  a  prerequisite  for  macro-prudential 
analysts.  
However, it has to be recognized that financial stability cannot be defined bluntly. To give an 
example: The measurement of financial distress requires a broad and open concept having 
many  dimensions  which  evolve  over  time.  What  is  necessary,  therefore,  is  an  iterative 
approach that addresses individual aspects of financial stability step by step and tackles the 
subject from a number of different directions.  
Marrying micro and macro data 
3.2  
Macroprudential surveillance has a lot to do with gaining a bird’s eye view of the individual 
market players and their interlinkages. Consequently, what the analysts need is an approach 
that appropriately integrates micro and macro data.  
This observation presents a case for a more in-depth use of statistical micro data. To give an 
example: When we look at the balance sheet of a bank as reported to statistics, we know 
that it is precisely this data that is used to derive national and euro-zone money and credit 
aggregates,  financial  accounts  referring  to  the  banking  sector,  external  positions,  BIS 
locational banking statistics and so forth. This guarantees a high degree of consistency for 
analytical  purposes.  Not  least  for  this  reason,  statisticians  have  begun  to  put  additional 
emphasis not only on the provision of aggregates but also more and more on the provision of 
granular data that can likewise be used for micro and macro analysis. A case in point is the 
ESCB’s  well  established  Centralised  Securities  Database  and  the  new  ESCB  project  of  a 
Securities Holdings Statistics Database.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Reconciling single entity and consolidated data 
3.3  
If macroprudential analysts are to rely more heavily on statistical micro data, statisticians will 
have to adopt a two-way approach. They will have to provide data on a single-entity as well 
as on a consolidated basis. Both approaches are necessary to get the full picture.  
Ideally,  the  analysis  of  consolidated  data  would  be  compatible  with  single  entity  analysis. 
This would enable us to take a look from the corporate perspective while keeping in focus the 
interrelationship between branches and subsidiaries. It is up to the statisticians to develop 
viable solutions.  
Filling important data gaps 
4  
As to the issue of data gaps, there are two areas which both from a statistical and from an 
analytical point of view appear particularly challenging. These are the scarcity of data on the 
shadow banking system and the unsatisfactory progress being made in building a broader 
database on the insurance sector. 
Shadow banking system  
4.1  
Credit  intermediation  via  shadow  banking  has  been  producing  serious  financial  distress, 
which contributed to the crises and which continues to be a risk factor for the stability of the 
financial system. Moreover, risks for the financial system tend to be systematically stemming 
from  this  sector,  making  its  macroprudential  analysis  very  important  but  difficult  to  handle, 
statistically  as  well  as  conceptually.  This  situation  presents  extraordinary  challenges  for 
supervisory and regulatory authorities as highlighted in a FSB report to the G20 in October of 
last  year,  and,  only  recently,  in  the  European  Commission’s  Green  Paper  on  Shadow 
Banking. The immanent concern with shadow banking is thus its lack of transparency. What 
are our options for the territory of shadow banking to be charted?  
Shadow  banking  involves  entities  and  activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system,  and 
statistical  data  collection  in  many  parts  is  still  quite  sketchy.  Obviously,  there  is  an  urgent 
need for central banks to be given an extended mandate for the collection of data not only 
from banks but also from non-bank financial institutions.  
What  can  be  done  in  the  short  term?  As  you  know,  there  are  two  standard  prescriptions 
frequently recommended as an initial remedy. The first of these is an extended analysis of 
flow  of  funds  data.  The  second  is  an  evaluation  of  counterparty  information  from  balance 
sheet statistics. As regards the flow of funds, these transmit an idea of the main structures of 
the  financial  system:  no  more,  but  no  less.  Building  on  this  feature,  the  G20  Data  Gaps 
Initiative suggests that flow of funds information be amended by detailed sectoral accounts in 
the form of “from-whom-to-whom” tables, and, in fact, the IMF has already presented a pilot 
by  submitting  a  standardized  report  form,  based  on  what  they  call  the  “Balance  Sheet 
Approach”. A similar project is under way in the ESCB with promising results. Nevertheless, 
the critical point is that our basic statistics on financial institutions outside the regular banking 
system be improved. 
As  regards  counterparty  information  from  balance  sheets,  these  allow  the  mapping  of 
exposures  between  the  reporting  institutions  and  financial  entities  elsewhere.  In  order  to 
shed more light on shadow banking activities, a more disaggregated sectoral breakdown is 
needed. Initiatives have been launched, for instance, in the context of the BIS Consolidated 
Banking  Statistics,  where  we  will  see  positions  vis-à-vis  “other  financial  institutions”  being 
broken out separately. There also exists a considerably more ambitious attempt at collecting 
detailed counterparty data in some other BIS surveys, notably the OTC Derivatives Statistics, 
where you can find data on credit default swaps broken down, among others, into positions 
vis-à-vis  insurance  firms,  SPVs-  and  hedge  funds.  The  problem  here  is  that  operational 
definitions − say, for hedge funds − have proven to be difficult to agree on, and, therefore, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the issue of classification has been left to the discretion of reporters. This is far from being an 
optimal solution. The Bundesbank therefore is calling for the development of an international 
business register.  
Insurance sector 
4.2  
Insurance  companies  are  in  the  focus  of  macroprudential  surveillance  because  of  their 
function as risk brokers and their role as financial intermediaries. However, there is a striking 
contrast  between  the  economic  and  financial  relevance  of  insurance  companies  and  the 
relatively  scarce  amount  of  statistical  data  at  hand.  This  has  prompted  the  Eurosystem  to 
launch an initiative geared to setting up new statistics on insurance companies and pension 
funds at the European level. Actually, initial sets of data have been produced, but, as many 
central  banks  lack  their  own  data  collection  systems  for  insurance  data,  much  of  the 
information  has  to  be  imported,  on  an  aggregated  basis,  from  supervisory  sources.  This 
necessitates  the  data  having  to  be  heavily  supported,  for  analytical  purposes,  by  in-house 
estimates.  But,  to  be  clear  on  this  point:  Statisticians  have  to  abstain  from  becoming 
“nowcasters” or “forecasters”.  
Even after the implementation of Solvency II blind spots will continue to exist. For instance, 
there will be no new data on pension funds. Moreover, data timeliness and data frequency 
will  have  to  be  significantly  improved.  This  means  that  there  is  still  need  for  an  additional 
ECB regulation on insurance statistics.  
A strong case for statistical cooperation 
5  
The  days  when  statistics  was  just  about  number  crunching  clearly  are  history.  I  regard  a 
statistician as someone who is confident of his skills, well trained in economic analysis, and 
closely  integrated  in  an  institutional  network  ruled  by  proven,  time-honored  principles. 
Moreover,  a  cooperative  spirit  is  called  for,  paired  with  a  sense  of  accountability  and 
responsibility. And these are the same construction principles to be followed when it comes 
to building stable bridges between the various statistical fora and systems. Seen against the 
background of the current debate on the future of the Committee on Monetary, Financial and 
Balance  of  Payments  statistics  (CMFB),  let  me  express  my  hope  that  everyone  in  Europe 
fully appreciates the high value of good partnership. In that respect, the CMFB is not only a 
body, but rather a concept. I am sure that no one in Europe would understand why it should 
be a good idea to abolish the CMFB, especially in times like these, when a strengthening of 
its role is absolutely necessary. 
Concluding remarks 
6  
Let me summarize my main messages: 
 
Europe  is  setting  standards  with  respect  to  macroprudential  policy.  Germany  is 
about to implement national macroprudential oversight.  
Macro analysts are entitled to receive all relevant information in order to be able to 
deliver early warnings and clear recommendations.  
Statistics  are  the  most  important  means  for  macrofinancial  analysts  to  meet  their 
information needs.  
Micro and macro data should be happily married.  
A  two-eyed  approach  is  needed:  Single  entity  and  consolidated  data  are  equally 
important.  
Enlightening  the  shadow  banking  system  and  the  insurance  sector  requires  our 
special attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
    4 
  There  is  no  alternative  to  good  partnership,  between  statistical  institutions  and 
systems.  
Politicians should back our work.  
 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  there  can  be  no  question  that  macroprudential  surveillance  is 
dependent  on  a  solid  statistical  groundwork.  On  the  basis  of  the  discussed  prerequisites, 
priorities  and  principles,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  master  the  future  of  macroprudential 
statistics. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
