Ignazio Visco: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy 
Concluding  remarks  by  Dr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Ordinary 
Meeting of Shareholders 2011 – 118th Financial Year, Bank of Italy, Rome, 31 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I take the floor at this meeting for the first time in trying days for our country and for Europe. 
Days in which we must all – government, institutions and individuals – perform our roles with 
care, to the best of our ability, because only if everyone does their duty can a solution be 
found to the crisis we are experiencing. This is the spirit in which the consequences of the 
grave and tragic earthquake that has hit the region of Emilia must be tackled. As on similar 
occasions in the past, the Bank will not fail to provide assistance.  
The Concluding Remarks bring to a close the Bank of Italy’s Report, which every year covers 
the  international  and  Italian  economy  and  our  own  activities;  in  it  we  have  deployed  our 
analytical skills. Referring to the Report, I shall give an account, in particular, of the activities 
specifically entrusted to us: to contribute to drafting and implementing the common monetary 
policy, financial regulation and supervision. 
On 1 November last year Mario Draghi took up the post of President of the European Central 
Bank. He had been appointed Governor of the Bank of Italy by decree of the President of 
Italy Carlo Azeglio Ciampi at the end of 2005, at the culmination of a difficult period in the 
history of the Bank and of our financial system. During these years, his efforts, including in 
the demanding role of Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, brought prestige to our own 
institution  and  strengthened  its  reputation  both  in  Italy  and  abroad.  His  direction  was 
essential for the formulation of European monetary policy, for our supervisory action and for 
the  modernization  of  the  Bank’s  organization  and  method  of  operation.  The  Board  of 
Directors  has  appointed  him  Honorary  Governor.  The  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  country  owe 
much to him. 
One of his first acts, in 2006, was to propose Fabrizio Saccomanni for the position of Director 
General.  In  that  role  Fabrizio  supported  him  with  his  intelligence  and  his  wide  experience, 
participating in person in every major undertaking of the Bank, starting with the logistical and 
organizational  reform  of  the  head  office  and  branch  network.  I  wish  to  thank  him  for  the 
invaluable contribution he has continued to make in recent months in running the Bank. The 
challenges  we  now  face,  and  will  continue  to  face  together,  are  very  demanding.  We  will 
devote all our abilities, our utmost efforts, to overcoming them in the interest of the Bank and 
of the country. 
In January, Salvatore Rossi, formerly Secretary General and before that Managing Director 
for Economic Research and International Relations, was appointed Deputy Director General, 
joining  Giovanni  Carosio  and  Anna  Maria  Tarantola  on  the  Bank’s  Governing  Board.  Our 
diverse experience, knowledge and aptitude contribute to the collegial nature of our activity. 
The  Bank’s  balance  sheet  shows  total  assets  of  €539  billion  at  the  end  of  last  year, 
60 per cent  more  than  the  year  before,  partly  as  a  consequence  of  the  unconventional 
Eurosystem  monetary  policy  operations  we  carried  out.  Thanks  to  the  containment  of 
operating  costs,  gross  profit  rose  to  €3.6  billion:  €1.4  billion  of  this  was  transferred  to  the 
provision  for  general  risks;  €1.1  billion  was  paid  in  taxes;  the  Board  of  Directors  allocated 
40 per  cent  of  the  remaining  €1.1  billion  of  net  profit  to  the  ordinary  and  extraordinary 
reserves and 60 per cent to the State. 
For  a  long  time  we  have  been  working  to  improve  the  Bank’s  organization,  simplifying 
procedures, rules and work methods and making use of technological innovations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In 2011, a new strategic planning system, with a three-year time horizon, was put into effect. 
Our  priority  objectives  are  more  effective  internal  and  external  communication,  closer 
integration  between  operations  management  and  information  technology,  and  social 
responsibility. Specific action plans establish the timing of programmed interventions. 
The reorganization of the head office continued last year as well. A coordinating unit was set 
up  to  reinforce  the  Bank’s  action  in  the  field  of  financial  stability.  A  new  unit  was  formed 
within the Supervision Area, devoted to promoting the financial education of the public. The 
areas  dealing  with  currency  circulation,  accounting  and  expenditure  control  have  been 
re-examined. 
Together  with  the  trade  unions  we  have  initiated  a  complex  process  of  reform  of  staff 
positions,  recruitment  methods,  personnel  evaluation  and  career  advancement,  and 
compensation. Our aim is to move beyond a formal structure centred on roles and grades 
which, in a world of a radically new production and labour environment, no longer assigns 
proper value to human capital, specialist skills, tasks performed. I hope that discussions with 
staff  representatives  will  be  frank  and  constructive.  The  women  and  men  who  work  in  the 
Bank  at  every  level  and  in  every  field  are  its  lifeblood  and  its  strength;  it  is  to  them  that  I 
express my deepest and most sincere appreciation and that of the Governing Board and the 
Board of Directors.  
The economy and monetary policy  
Since  last  summer  Europe  and  Italy  have  been  in  the  throes  of  an  exceptionally  serious 
crisis. After the worst effects of the financial crisis that had broken out in the United States 
four years before had been reined in with much effort, and financial assistance programmes 
had been drawn up for the euro-area countries in greatest difficulty with their public finances, 
banking systems and external accounts, for a year now new tensions have been present in 
the sovereign debt market. They were triggered not only by the deteriorating outlook for the 
global  economy  but  also  by  the  worsening  of  Greece’s  financial  situation  and  the  fears 
caused  by  the  announcement  of  the  involvement  of  the  private  sector  in  reducing  the 
country’s public debt. The tensions spread to the financial and banking markets of the euro 
area and had a direct impact on Italy and Spain. 
Sudden  variations  in  private  capital  flows  aggravated  the  payments  imbalances  of  some 
European  countries.  The  recovery  in  output  was  slowed  down  or  reversed.  Individual 
countries’  weaknesses  have  been  underscored:  in  Italy,  slow  growth  and  the  high  public 
debt. The incomplete construction of the Union’s institutions weighs heavily on the market’s 
judgement. 
In  Italy  the  yield  on  ten-year  government  securities  jumped  from  4.8  per  cent  in  June  to 
7.3 per cent in November; the spread over German sovereign bonds reached 5.5 percentage 
points. The conditions for rolling over maturing debt in the winter months risked becoming 
prohibitive. Banks’  wholesale  funding  channels dried  up:  towards  the  end  of  the  year  their 
bond issues on international markets almost came to a halt. The tensions were reflected in 
the cost of funds and in the availability of credit. The flow of loans to firms slowed and turned 
negative in December. There was a serious and real risk of a large, persistent contraction in 
bank lending. 
The crisis was tackled on three fronts. The authorities of the most exposed countries made 
substantial  corrections  to  their  public  finances  and  prepared  structural  reforms  to  foster 
growth, interacting with the European authorities; in Italy the actions initiated in the summer 
were completed and reinforced by the new Government. In the European Union the reform of 
governance was speeded up, the instruments for providing financial support to countries in 
difficulty  were  reinforced  and  banks  were  required  to  strengthen  their  capital  bases.  The 
Eurosystem intervened with very-large-scale extraordinary monetary measures. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Notwithstanding  some  hesitation  in  carrying  out  interventions  and  defects  in  the  sequence 
and effectiveness of decisions at European level, the loss of confidence was halted. In Italy 
the measures adopted in the autumn made a decisive contribution; the yields on government 
securities came down, by 220 basis points between the end of December and the middle of 
March. 
The tensions on the sovereign debt market have intensified again in the last few weeks, with 
the  spread  of  new  fears  about  the  strength  of  the  growth  of  the  world  economy  and  the 
possible  emergence  of a  negative  spiral  between  low  growth,  deteriorating  public  finances 
and problems with banking systems. The uncertainty about Greece after the general election 
has further strengthened the tensions. The spread between ten-year BTPs and Bunds is now 
back above 450 basis points. This has been due in part to the fall in German interest rates, 
which have been driven down by the search for safe haven assets. At the centre of the crisis 
there are now growing doubts among international investors about governments’ cohesion in 
guiding the reform of European governance and even their ability to ensure the survival of 
the monetary union. 
The economic situation has been deteriorating for a year. In Italy industrial production, which 
in the second quarter had with difficulty recovered less than half of the 25 percentage points 
lost in the recession of 2009, has fallen by 5 per cent since then. GDP has fallen for three 
consecutive  quarters  since  last  summer,  contracting  by  a  total  of  about  1.5  per  cent. 
Unemployment has increased, rising from just over 8 per cent last July to nearly 10 per cent 
in March, and among young people under the age of 25 from 28 to 36 per cent. 
According to consensus forecasts, over the next two years as a whole the GDP of the euro 
area  will  barely  grow.  For  Italy  2012  will  inevitably  be  a  year  of  recession,  owing  to  the 
financial  uncertainty  and  the  drastic,  but  indispensable,  measures  to  adjust  the  public 
finances. In scenarios that are not excessively unfavourable, the fall in GDP can be kept to 
about 1.5 per cent; an upturn could begin towards the end of the year and its likelihood will 
increase the more effective are the structural interventions to improve the use of public and 
private  resources  and  the  clearer  and  more  determined  is  the  cohesion  shown  by  the 
European Union. 
Starting  during  the  summer,  the  tensions  in  the  sovereign  debt  market  spread  rapidly  to 
banking  systems.  They  were  aggravated,  with  procyclical  effects,  by  rating  agencies’ 
successive  downgrades  of  the  credit  ratings  of  both  sovereign  borrowers  and  banks.  The 
segmentation of the interbank market along national lines became more pronounced, with a 
sharp rise in the spreads between the overnight rates on the Italian and Spanish markets and 
the euro-area average. 
Italian banks and those of other countries recorded a substantial reduction in their wholesale 
fundraising. In the last five months of 2011 the former’s net fundraising from non-residents, 
on foreign interbank markets and by way of bond issues, shrank by more than €100 billion. 
Investors  feared  that  a  contraction  in  fundraising,  together  with  a  possible  lack  of  eligible 
collateral  for  Eurosystem  refinancing,  could  trigger  a  systemic  crisis.  The  tensions  were 
intensified  by  the  large  volume  of  bonds  maturing  on  international  markets  in  2012, 
amounting to nearly €450 billion for the euro area and €75 billion for Italian banks. The single 
monetary policy was in danger of not being transmitted uniformly; financial stability was at 
risk. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  reacted  by  extending  its  purchases 
under  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  from  the  summer  onwards,  reducing  the  official 
interest rates in two steps and lowering the compulsory reserve ratio by half in December. It 
decided  to  carry  out  two  refinancing  operations,  in  December  and  at  the  end  of  February, 
with exceptionally long, three-year, maturities and full allotment. In addition, it extended the 
range of assets that could be used as collateral for loans. 
In the euro area as a whole the liquidity injected by the two three-year operations amounted 
to  over  €1,000  billion,  or  €500  billion  net  of  the  amounts  maturing.  In  Italy  112  banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
participated in the operations, receiving a total of €255 billion, or €140 billion on a net basis. 
The shortfall in wholesale fundraising was thus made good by Eurosystem refinancing; part 
of the resources obtained in this way was invested in government securities. 
In  the  aggregate,  in  view  of  developments  in  the  economy,  there  was  no  increase  in 
euro-area banks’ overall requirement for liquid funds. The liquidity created through the two 
three-year  refinancing  operations  could  not  fail  to  translate  into  an  equal  increase  in  the 
amount of funds held with the Eurosystem’s deposit facility. But this does not mean that the 
liquidity  remained  idle:  rather,  it  was  re-deposited  by  different  banks  from  those  that  had 
originally received it, after circulating among banks in different euro-area countries and taking 
the place of private capital flows where these had been interrupted. It preserved the orderly 
operation  of  the  markets,  kept  yields  down,  and  prevented  the  fall  in  fundraising  from 
triggering a ruinous credit crunch for households and firms. 
In  the  last  twelve  months  Italian  banks’  loans  to  the  private  sector  have  increased  by 
1.3 per cent. Lending to businesses began to slow down in the spring of 2011 and contracted 
sharply in December, by more than €20 billion. It stagnated in the first quarter of this year 
and grew in April.  
The actual dynamics of lending has not been due to supply factors alone but also to cyclically 
weak demand and falling credit quality. Nevertheless, there are signs that the improvement 
in banks’ liquidity is helping to foster the supply of credit. In the first few months of this year, 
surveys of banks and firms reported some easing of lending terms with respect to the very 
critical conditions of the fourth quarter of 2011. On average, the interest rates on loans to 
firms turned downwards. 
Italian  banks’  net  purchases  of  Italian  government  securities,  which  had  been  modest  or 
negative  in  the  closing  months  of  last  year,  amounted  to  €70  billion  in  the  first  quarter  of 
2012,  about  a  third  of  it  at  maturities  of  less  than  a  year.  The  liquidity  of  the  market  was 
partially restored. The banks’ build-up of short-term assets will enable them to cope with the 
possible failure to roll over their maturing bonds and to serve a recovery in the demand for 
credit. 
Re-establishing  orderly  credit  market  conditions  is  essential  to  the  future  growth  of  the 
economy. So far the rise in government security yields, banks’ fundraising problems, and the 
higher cost and reduced availability of credit to the economy have had a depressive effect on 
economic activity in Italy that is estimated at about one percentage point for 2012 as a whole. 
Without the Eurosystem’s interventions the effect would have been greater. 
Italian  banks’  assets  pledged  as  collateral  for  Eurosystem  refinancing  have  increased  by 
about €80 billion, thanks to the possibility, introduced at EU level in December, of obtaining 
government guarantees for bank bonds. The collateral pool deposited with the Bank of Italy, 
net of haircuts, reached €360 billion, €85 billion of which was unencumbered and promptly 
usable.  Italian  banks  have  an  additional  €100  billion  worth  of  unencumbered  eligible 
securities outside the pool.  
Moreover,  the  availability  of  eligible  collateral  may  increase  significantly  as  a  result  of  the 
Bank of Italy’s measures making additional types of credit claims eligible, in implementation 
of the ECB Governing Council’s December decision. The Bank of Italy’s selection of the new 
collateral assets is subject to strict standards and controls, further refined of late. Hopefully, 
banks will adapt in order to take full advantage of this opportunity. 
The Eurosystem’s liquidity support measures were made possible by the credibility that its 
monetary  policy  had  gained  over  the  years  and  the  stability  of  inflation  expectations.  The 
Governing Council’s decisions responded fully to the mandate of the ECB. It was essential to 
keep monetary policy from losing effectiveness and being transmitted unevenly in different 
countries. The brusque cessation of the flow of credit to the economy and the interruption of 
the  orderly  working  of  markets  would  have  entailed  extremely  serious  threats  to  financial 
stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In Europe, the safeguarding of financial stability is entrusted to the regulatory authorities and 
the central banks. Macro-prudential oversight is the responsibility of the European Systemic 
Risk Board, within which the central banks play a leading role. The primary objective of the 
Eurosystem is to ensure price stability over the medium term; under the Treaty, it contributes 
to preserving the stability of the financial system. When financial stability is jeopardized, price 
stability itself is put at risk.  
Monetary  policy  cannot  redress  all  the  imbalances  within  the  euro  area,  but  it  can  stop 
contagion,  avert  systemic  crises  and  ease  tensions.  Its  contribution  in  sustaining  markets 
and supporting liquidity remains essential. Today, an exit from the present policy framework 
would be absolutely premature. 
The financial system and the Bank of Italy’s supervision 
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  Italian  banks  have  made  considerable  progress  in 
strengthening their capital. They have turned to the market in difficult circumstances. Since 
2007  the  core  tier  1  ratio  of  the  five  largest  banking  groups  has  been  raised  from  under 
6 per cent to 10 per cent. For the other banks it has remained stable at around 10 per cent. 
Based on risk analyses, the Bank of Italy has invited banks to take the necessary steps to 
maintain or achieve capital ratios well above the regulatory minimum. The advance towards 
Basel III is on schedule. 
In  these  years  the  stability  of  Italian  banks  has  been  assured  by  a  series  of  factors:  low 
exposure  to  structured  finance  products;  regulation  and  supervisory  controls  to  prevent 
excessive risk-taking; low leverage  by comparison with other banks in Europe; and a high 
proportion of capital instruments effectively capable of absorbing losses. Contributory factors 
were  the  absence  of  any  real-estate  bubble  in  Italy  and  the  low  level  of  household  debt. 
However,  the  credit  system  is  feeling  the  repercussions  of  two  sharp  recessions  in  three 
years and the sovereign debt strains. 
Credit quality has deteriorated. The new bad debt ratio on Italian banks’ loans to residents, 
which was less than 1 per cent in the years before the crisis, peaked at 2 per cent in 2009. 
The subsequent improvement came to an end in the second half of 2011 with the weakening 
of the economy, and the ratio went back up to nearly 2 per cent. There has also been an 
increase in substandard, restructured and overdue loans. For the most part the worsening of 
credit quality has involved loans to firms. 
By means of inspections and analysis of the information gathered from banks, the Bank of 
Italy  exercises  stringent  control  on  the  appropriateness  of  write-downs  with  respect  to  the 
actual prospects of recovering impaired loans. “Thematic” inspections of five medium-sized 
and  large  banking  groups  in  2011  found  that  management  of  the  loans  at  greatest  risk  of 
deterioration was generally correct. Not many instances of protracted support to firms with no 
hopes of survival were found. 
Italian banks’ reference market consists largely of the domestic market of households and 
firms.  In  March  2012  their  loans  to  customers  resident  in  Italy  amounted  to  some 
€1,950 billion, or 125 per cent of GDP. Deposits and bonds held by households, the most 
stable forms of funding, finance 85 per cent of lending. In the first half of the last decade the 
figure exceeded 90 per cent. The funding problems and the increase in risk premiums on the 
wholesale  markets  –  the  European  interbank  and  international  financial  markets  –  make  it 
necessary for banks to rebalance, with the requisite gradualness, the relationship between 
loans and stable sources of funding. 
Up to 2008 the expansion in loan volumes supported the growth in Italian banks’ revenues 
and profits, even if these were not especially high by international standards. Since then the 
decline in economic activity has led to a slowdown in lending and an increase in credit risk 
and the associated losses. Even excluding the huge write-downs to goodwill by some banks, 
exceptional and non-recurring events, profits in the last financial year were particularly low. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In  order  to  strengthen  capital,  self-financing  must  improve.  But  the  current  imbalance 
between lending and stable funding will make it difficult to return to a model of profitability 
growth based principally on expanding the volume of business. 
Vigorous action is needed to tackle operating costs, which have been relatively inflexible in 
relation to the state of the banking industry. The present level of labour costs is unlikely to be 
compatible with the prospective growth of the Italian banking system. The compensation of 
directors and top managers too must reflect the objective of containing costs. 
Ambitious  strategies  are  needed  to  boost  the  efficiency  of  production  and  distribution 
significantly and capitalize on the contribution of new technologies. The widespread adoption 
of new modes of access to banking services calls for a rethinking of the economic viability of 
the entire distribution network. At the end of 2011 some 14.3 million bank accounts held by 
households  and  1.7  million  held  by  firms  were  enabled  for  on-line  banking  services, 
respectively five and three times more than a decade earlier. The number of bank branches 
grew  by  some  20  per  cent  between  2001  and  2008,  and  since  then  it  has  declined  only 
modestly. 
Bank  mergers  and  acquisitions  have  not  been  followed  up  by  sufficient  streamlining  of 
groups’ organization or reduction in the number of board members. The ten largest banking 
groups  have  a  total  of  1,136  board  positions,  not  counting  foreign  companies;  bank 
subsidiaries alone have more than 700. The other intermediaries too often have overly large 
boards,  which  tends  to  make  the  individual  members  unaccountable  and  reduces  board 
efficiency.  Such  arrangements  are  costly  in  themselves  and  are  not  justified  by  the 
professional expertise needed to effectively manage banks. The recent ban on interlocking 
board membership between firms in the financial sector is also an opportunity to modify the 
number of directors.  
The  banks’  role  in  allocating  resources  has  to  be  flanked  by  further  development  of  the 
capital markets. For firms, a low proportion of equity capital and reliance on bank credit as 
the sole source of external finance constitute a factor of fragility in the short term and a drag 
on  their  growth  potential.  The  difficulty  that  no  few  firms  have  encountered  in  accessing 
credit since the start of the crisis depends in part on their unbalanced financial structures, 
with excessive debt. 
Equity  capital  is  the  appropriate  instrument  for  financing  innovation.  The  incentives  for 
increasing companies’ capital that are part of the Government’s pro-growth measures go in 
the right direction. Strengthening firms’ financial structure also necessitates changes in their 
relations with banks. 
In Italy 38 per cent of business loans are for maturities of less than twelve months, compared 
with 18 per cent in Germany and France and an average of 24 per cent in the euro area. 
Italian firms’ greater dependence on short-term debts exposes them to higher refinancing risk 
and restricts the time horizon of investments. Over half the short-term loans in Italy are in the 
form of overdraft facilities. The variability in the drawings on these credit lines exposes banks 
to  liquidity  risk;  it  is  one  of  the  characteristics  that  prevent  their  use  as  collateral  for 
Eurosystem refinancing. 
The  crisis  has  led  to  greater  appreciation  of  the  benefits  of  a  more  stringent  regulatory 
regime,  one  able  to  avoid  excessive  recourse  to  leverage,  volatile  forms  of  funding  and 
investment in assets far removed from banks’ credit function. It has shown that a high return 
on equity achieved through leverage is unsustainable and a source of instability. 
The  new,  more  rigorous  rules  drawn  up  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision aim to reduce the risks of financial crises recurring. They 
may impose costs on economic agents and the economy as a whole, but they are aimed at 
preserving  the  basic  functions  of  intermediation,  which  are  essential  to  economic  growth. 
Higher  levels  of  capital  reinforce  banks’  stability,  their  capacity  to  supply  credit  even  in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
difficult conditions. Consistency between capital endowment and asset risk is confirmed as a 
linchpin of the regulatory framework. 
Basel III comes into force next year. Two issues of fundamental importance in Europe are 
the  definition  of  capital  and  the  flexibility  permitted  to  national  authorities.  The  European 
Banking Authority must make sure that the capital instruments available to banks to protect 
against  risks  are  defined  in  accordance  with  the  reform.  Allowing  national  authorities  to 
impose conditions that are more stringent than the internationally harmonized requirements 
acknowledges the sometimes significant differences between banking systems. This needs 
to  be  accompanied  by  greater  transparency  and  prior  consultation  at  European  level;  the 
adoption of national measures must not jeopardize the smooth running of the single market. 
But rules alone are not enough. The Bank of Italy is working for the adoption of intensive and 
rigorous  oversight  and  control  practices.  One  element  that  is  essential  for  guaranteeing 
systemic stability is the choice of method to measure risk-weighted assets, the denominator 
of capital adequacy ratios. Within the European Union there is wide dispersion of ratios of 
risk-weighted to total assets. The differences depend on balance-sheet composition and risk 
profiles;  divergent  supervisory  practices  also  play  a  part.  After  the  latest  validations  of 
internal  models  of  risk  measurement,  for  the  five  largest  Italian  groups  the  ratio  exceeds 
50 per cent, well above the European average. The peer review of the methods of calculating 
risk-weighted  assets  now  under  way  within  the  Basel  Committee  and  at  European  level 
accordingly needs to be completed without delay. 
The entrepreneurial nature of financial intermediaries must not be questioned. Government 
intervention limiting banks’ freedom to do business and market competition have generally 
entailed,  including  in  Italy’s  recent  history,  high  intermediation  costs  and  widespread 
distortions in the allocation of resources. 
The recent institution of the Credit Observatory could provide additional information on the 
financing of the economy. In performing its role of monitoring credit, the Observatory must 
not  open 
in  banks’  assessments  of  customers’ 
creditworthiness. 
The  Bank  of  Italy’s  customer  protection  rules  are  based  above  all  on  the  promotion  of 
informed financial decisions, transparency of contracts and greater efficiency. The inclusion 
of  standard  information  in  the  most  common  contracts  and  the  use  of  synthetic  cost 
indicators aim to make it easier to compare the various offers available. The banks must take 
steps  to  ensure  that  their  organizations  are  focused  on  customers’  requirements.  Special 
rules for payment services and consumer credit are designed to protect the weaker parties to 
contracts. 
If the banks themselves fail to take an approach that pays greater attention to cost control, 
the management of risks, including fiscal risk, and the protection of their customers, if they 
regard high-quality customer relations as a cost rather than a competitive tool, in the long run 
the results cannot be other than disappointing. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  attentive  to  the  need  to  ensure  basic  correctness  in  bank-customer 
relations. To this end, it has stepped up cooperation with the other authorities in the financial 
sector; it ensures the full functioning of the Banking and Financial Arbiter; and it has refined 
its oversight of intermediaries. The results of the checks and analyses performed, together 
with  the  continual  flow  of  complaints  from  banking  and  financial  customers,  testify  to  the 
need for more vigorous efforts on the part of the banks.  
Controls  on  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  have  been  intensified  in  the  light  of  the 
widespread deterioration in credit quality. In this area too we are paying close attention to the 
formal and substantive correctness of relations with customers. 
The Bank of Italy is also entrusted with the task of preventing and combating the financial 
system’s  involvement  in  money  laundering.  Provisions  governing  the  organizational  and 
internal  control  structures  of  intermediaries  were  recently  adopted  for  this  purpose.  The 
interference 
to  outside 
the  door 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
banks have been called on to step up their efforts to block the infiltration of organized crime 
into the legitimate economy, which tends to intensify in times of crisis.  
The  effectiveness  of  on-  and  off-site  inspections  has  increased,  and  cooperation  with  the 
judicial  authorities  and  Finance  Police  has  been  strengthened.  The  Financial  Intelligence 
Unit,  established  at  the  Bank,  has  enhanced  the  effectiveness  of  its  role  as  a  junction 
between  reports  by  intermediaries  and  investigations,  to  which  it  makes  an  active 
contribution. 
Europe and Italy 
If the euro area were viewed as a single entity, having, for instance, the form of a federal 
state,  there  would  be  no  alarms  regarding  the  resilience  of  its  monetary  and  financial 
structure, notwithstanding the worries about the repercussions of the financial crisis on the 
economic  cycle,  banks  and  markets.  But  there  is  no  political  union  in  Europe.  In  the  long 
term this makes monetary union more difficult to sustain; tangible progress must be made in 
the European construction; a path must be charted with political union as its ultimate goal, 
and each step marked along the way. As Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa observed on the eve of 
the changeover from the lira to the euro, “The danger lies in thinking that the euro is the final 
step,  that  united  Europe  is  now  fully  forged.  Those  who  wanted  the  single  currency  most, 
wanted  it  because  it  would  facilitate  further  steps  ahead,  not  because  it  would  be  the  last 
one.” It is necessary to recall the original reasons underlying the European project, including 
in spheres that transcend economic activity. 
The  economy  of  the  euro  area  has  now  been  integrated  for  some  time;  it  counts  over 
300 million  people  and  almost  20  million  firms.  Considered  as  a  whole,  it  has  external 
accounts in balance; an estimated public sector deficit and debt for the current year of just 
over 3 and 90 per cent of GDP, respectively; households with gross financial wealth three 
times  their  annual  disposable  income  and  debt  equal  to  that  income;  and  aggregate 
corporate financial debt equal to one year’s output. The numbers depict a solid and balanced 
economy, in many respects more so than other advanced areas of the world. 
European monetary union has confirmed economic integration in these years, giving it new 
impetus.  The  traditionally  most  virtuous  countries  have  made  a  special  contribution  to  the 
rest of the area: the example of sound policies, prudent on public expenditure, attentive to 
the needs of a structurally competitive productive system; and a basic national consensus on 
the objectives of price stability and social cohesion. They have benefited from a strong but 
not overvalued currency, from the absence of competitive devaluations, from a market larger 
than the national one and easily accessible. Countries such as ours that came from repeated 
bouts of inflation and currency crises have obtained stable prices and low interest rates, two 
basic prerequisites of economic development. We have taken little advantage of it. 
Political inertia, disregard of the rules and mistaken economic decisions have favoured the 
emergence of internal imbalances, long obscured by the euro and unheeded by the markets, 
which  today  put  the  entire  European  edifice  at  risk.  We  feel  the  absence  of  some  of  the 
fundamental characteristics of a federation of states: decision-making processes that favour 
the  adoption  of  far-sighted  policies  in  the  general  interest;  shared  public  resources  for 
financial stability and growth; rules that are truly accepted; and commonly agreed and timely 
measures for the financial system and banks. These are tasks and conditions that lie outside 
the  sphere  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks:  they  imply  political  responsibilities, 
both at national and European level. The Eurosystem and the European Central Bank cannot 
be  called  on  to  shoulder  them;  what  they  can  do  is  fill  temporary  vacuums,  contribute  to 
policy analysis and design. 
In the last three years, driven by the tensions in the markets, significant progress has been 
made in reinforcing euro-area governance. But the decision-making processes, conditioned 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
by the intergovernmental method and the principle of unanimity, remain slow and tortuous. A 
change of pace is required. 
In  the  immediate  future,  above  all  the  need  is  for  convergent  manifestations  of  the 
unshakable  will  to  preserve  the  single  currency.  If  governments,  the  EU  authorities,  the 
European  Central  Bank  itself,  judge  the  progress  of  the  troubled  countries  in  financial 
restructuring  and  structural  reform  positively,  this  must  be  followed  by  a  practical 
commitment  on  their  part  to  orient  the  markets’  assessments  in  the  same  direction.  The 
current yield spreads of government securities do not seem to take account of what has been 
accomplished:  they  fuel  further  imbalances,  leading  to  a  redistribution  of  resources  from 
countries in difficulty to those perceived as sounder; they impede the correct operation of the 
single monetary policy; they are a source of risk to financial stability, an obstacle to growth. 
The instruments of financial assistance to states in difficulty must be made more effective in 
operational  terms.  There  must  be  the  possibility  of  intervening  promptly  in  the  securities 
markets  and  directly  in  favour  of  banks,  with  procedures  that  are  more  flexible  and  less 
penalizing  for  the  beneficiary  countries  that  respect  the  rules  of  the  Union.  It  must  be 
possible to make effective use of the significant resources already allocated by the member 
states. This is in the interest of all. 
Europe is also struggling with economic growth. The levers for reviving it are mainly in the 
hands  of  the  national  authorities,  but  the  immediate  launch  of  common  co-financed 
investment projects, with particular attention to the weaker countries, could be an important 
signal to citizens and investors, who are currently concerned by the poor growth prospects of 
individual countries or regions. 
The availability of more common resources and also the constitution – proposed in several 
quarters – of a fund to which to transfer sovereign debt in excess of a uniform threshold, 
to be redeemed gradually according to a clearly defined calendar and procedures, are the 
substance of a form of fiscal union that cannot be uncoupled from cogent rules nor from 
powers of control and intervention. 
The moral hazard of counting on help from others so as to persevere in the bad policies of 
the  past  needs  to  be  prevented  by  strong  political  and  regulatory  pressure,  requiring  the 
fulfilment of the commitments undertaken, on the basis of programmes that are ambitious but 
at the same time realistic. It is up to the countries in trouble to implement the reforms that will 
allow  them  to  recoup  competitiveness  and  reduce  accumulated  imbalances,  within  an 
appropriate  timeframe  and  gradually  but  without  the  bar  being  lowered.  It  is  up  to  the 
stronger  countries  to  foster  this  process  by  not  hindering  rebalancing  and  by  achieving 
structural progress that favours an expansion of demand. 
It is necessary to counter the dangerous tendency towards the renationalization of financial 
systems. In the first place, it is essential to avoid measures that, taken in good faith but from 
a  purely  national  standpoint,  effectively  impede  the  workings  of  the  single  market  and  the 
single  monetary  policy.  The  transition  to  a  uniform  system  of  rules  and  oversight  of  the 
financial  sector  must  be  hastened,  especially  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time, 
consideration  should  be  given 
insurance 
mechanisms, able to reassure savers and investors and to prevent panic and destabilizing 
flights  of  capital.  Rapid  progress  in  setting  up  a  European  fund  to  resolve  banking  crises 
would help to allay uncertainty in the markets. 
Italy  has  important  tasks  to  perform.  It  has  already  begun  to  work  on  three  different  but 
interconnected fronts: a public sector that keeps its accounts in order, is not wasteful, and 
facilitates the economy; a sound and efficient banking system; and a productive system that 
is capable of innovating, competing and growing. 
The criticism that banks have failed to heed the needs of the economy is wrong: they are 
significantly exposed to households and firms that are creditworthy, albeit in difficulty: they 
can continue to sustain them. Beyond the short term, however, inconsistency between the 
to  establishing  common  guarantee  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
level  of  lending  and  the  stability  of  funding  will  inevitably  have  repercussions  on  credit 
activity.  The  supply  capability  of  the  banking  system  needs  rethinking.  At  the  same  time, 
revised  capital  regulations,  oversight  and  market  practices  are  pushing  the  banks  towards 
more  careful  risk  control;  they  necessitate  lower  but  steadier  profits  than  in  the  pre-crisis 
decade. Bank shareholders need to realize this. 
It had been clear for some time in Italy that there was an urgent need for two necessary and 
inter-related  economic  policy  actions:  setting  the  budget  on  a  sustainable  and  credible 
course  and  carrying  out  incisive  structural  reforms  to  revive  the  capacity  for  economic 
growth. The government has undertaken both. 
The first action, on the budget, has been rapid and decisive: according to current forecasts, 
this year the deficit will be well below the 3 per cent limit; next year it will be near structural 
balance  and  the  public  debt  will  begin  to  fall  in  relation  to  GDP  thanks,  in  part,  to  the 
completion of the pension reform. There is a large and growing primary surplus; non-interest 
current expenditure has been falling in real terms for two years now. 
We have nonetheless paid the price of raising the tax burden to a level incompatible with rapid 
growth.  This  increase  can  only  be  temporary.  The  challenge  now  lies  elsewhere:  it  is 
necessary  not  only  to  reduce  tax  evasion  further  but  also  to  find  spending  cuts  to 
counterbalance the reduction that must be made in the tax burden. If the cuts are identified 
with  precision  and  based  on  equity,  they  will  not  prejudice  growth;  rather,  if  they  eliminate 
inefficiencies in the public sector, simplify decision-making processes and curb administrative 
costs, they can stimulate it. The scope for reducing the public debt by selling assets in the 
public domain must be exploited to the full. 
The  second  action,  for  structural  reform,  has  met  with  greater  and  more  widespread 
resistance, but it has nevertheless achieved some important results. Work has begun on a 
vast scale and must be continued with increased energy and taking the broad view in fields 
ranging  from  education  to  justice  and  health.  The  task  is  to  rationalize  and  prune  the 
regulations and prevent total public expenditure from increasing. Yet spending priorities can 
be revised, the budget balance remaining constant, for instance in favour of education and 
research.  The  country  can  ask  its  entrepreneurs  to  make  an  extra  financial  effort  to 
strengthen  their  firms’  capital  when  they  benefit  from  a  thorough  streamlining  of  the 
regulatory and administrative environment. Investment will benefit, the real economy will be 
more robust, firms’ relations with banks will improve. 
Economic  policy  action  can  be  undertaken  serially,  one  matter  at  a  time,  but  the  overall 
design and the stakes must be clearly communicated and reasserted. Getting out of this tight 
spot will impose costs on all of us. They are bearable costs if they are properly shared and 
seen to have a clear purpose. The journey will not be short. 
Italian  society  cannot  avoid  confronting  a  changed  world  in  which  no  position  rents  are 
allowed.  At  the  same  time,  politics  must  ensure  the  prospect  of  a  profound  renewal  that 
nourishes hope and responds to the aspirations of the younger generations. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
