Ignazio Visco: Brief overview of the Italian economy and its banks 
Address  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of the Bank  of Italy,  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Italian Banking Association, Rome, 11 July 2012. 
 The sovereign debt crisis and the Italian economy 
The Italian economy is still in recession. The consensus forecasts indicate that Italy’s GDP 
will decline by nearly two percentage points in 2012 as a whole. The increase in the cost and 
the  deterioration  in  the  availability  of  credit  following  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  have 
contributed to the worsening of the situation. 
The difference between the yields on Italian and German government securities is far greater 
than  could  be  justified  by  our  economy’s  fundamentals.  It  reflects  general  fears  of  the 
monetary union breaking up – a remote possibility but one that is nevertheless influencing 
the choices made by international investors. 
The  decisions  taken  at  the  euro-area  summit  of  Heads  of  State  and  Government  and  the 
European  Council  of  28–29  June,  and  clarified  in  last  Monday’s  Eurogroup  meeting, 
underlined the will to preserve the single currency and to break the vicious circle between the 
sovereign debt crisis and the situation of the banks. 
To  properly  orient  the  markets’  judgment  concerning  the  progress  made  by  the  member 
countries  in  fiscal  adjustment  and  structural  reform,  the  resources  of  the  European 
stabilization funds, the EFSF and the ESM, must be put to the best possible use, including 
the containment of funding costs within limits that are consistent with the fundamentals of the 
different economies. 
We  must  continue  to  strengthen  the  European  construction,  advance  towards  a  true 
federation, and lay the foundations of a fiscal union in which national sovereignties will end at 
the point where the sharing of resources and responsibilities begins. The common currency 
can only be a lasting source of stability and progress if it rests on these foundations. 
A single system of banking supervision is necessary in an integrated financial market such 
as  the  euro  area;  the  presence  of  large  banks  operating  in  several  different  countries 
requires uniform rules and controls, so as to eliminate duplications and local differences and 
pursue  the  stability  of  the  European  banking  system  as  a  whole.  European  supervision 
should  be  defined  as  a  single,  mutually  supportive  and  independent  system,  in  which 
decisions  are  taken  collectively  and  implemented  at  the  appropriate  level,  based  on  the 
experience  and  expertise  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities.  A  fully-rounded  plan 
requires that a single banking supervision system be flanked by the introduction of European 
funds  and  mechanisms  to  protect  depositors  and  resolve  crises,  with  the  necessary 
prerequisites for tax sharing; otherwise, the credibility and sustainability of the system would 
be called into question. 
The reduction of the official interest rates to an all-time low, decided on 5 July, reaffirmed the 
determination  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  to  ensure  that  monetary  conditions  are 
appropriate to the economic and financial situation of the area. This is an important decision; 
it follows on from other measures adopted last month to continue to guarantee the necessary 
liquidity for the banking system and to counter the effects of the segmentation of the money 
and financial markets within the area, which is an obstacle to the uniform transmission of the 
single monetary policy. The ECB cannot but continue to act for these objectives. 
Italy  must  continue  the  work  it  has  already  begun  on  two  fronts:  the  public  finances  and 
structural reform; it must be prepared to seize the opportunities offered by the stabilization of 
financial  market  conditions.  The  crisis  has  impelled  us  to  address  the  problems  that  have 
bridled our economy for so long. This task was put off for far too long, following the advent of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
monetary  union,  at  the  cost  of  a  progressive  loss  of  competitiveness  and  a  gradual 
deterioration of the public finances. We must make our economic environment propitious for 
enterprise, eliminate waste and make the public administration more efficient. 
Italian  banks  must  accompany  this  effort.  Low  financial  leverage,  the  emphasis  on  the 
traditional banking business of deposit-taking and lending, and the absence of any housing 
bubble have shielded them from the impact of the global financial crisis that began five years 
ago.  They  have  been  able  to  maintain  financial  assistance  to  solvent,  creditworthy 
customers.  To  continue  along  this  road,  now  that  strong  sovereign  debt  tensions  making 
themselves  felt,  banks  must  increase  their  capital  endowments  and  strengthen  their 
management of credit and liquidity risk, proceeding along the path already taken. 
The activity of Italian banks 
Since the middle of last year, with the cyclical downturn, the quality of business loans has 
worsened. The flow of new bad debts on loans to non-financial firms, which between 2005 
and 2007 had been steadily below 1.3 per cent of total outstanding lending, rose to 2.9 per 
cent in the first quarter of this year, 0.2 percentage points higher than at the end of 2011. For 
households,  by  contrast,  during  the  same  period  this  indicator fell  by  0.2  points to  1.2  per 
cent. Loans classed as substandard, restructured or overdue increased.  
At the end of 2011 the stock of bad debts amounted to 6.2 per cent of total loans to non-bank 
customers, nearly a full percentage point more than a year earlier. For the top five banking 
groups the bad debt ratio was 6.9 per cent, for the other banks 5.0 per cent.  
The  stock  of  impaired  positions  (bad  debts  and  substandard,  overdue  and  restructured 
loans) was equal to 11.2 per cent of total loans to non-bank customers at the end of 2011, 
this  too  representing  an  increase  of  about  one  percentage  point  in  the  year.  International 
comparison  of  the  balance-sheet  incidence  of  impaired  loans  is  distorted  by  cross-country 
differences in practices. The Italian definition of the aggregate is broad, including assets that 
are still generating income. Moreover, the slowness of legal proceedings for credit recovery 
in  Italy  means  bad  debts  remain  on  the  balance  sheet  longer,  thereby  raising  the  level 
recorded in the accounts.  
In  any  case,  having  a  large  share  of  impaired  claims  in  balance  sheets  puts  pressure  on 
banks’ capital and liquidity. The first safeguard against the risk of deteriorating credit quality 
is  effective  borrower  screening  based  on  objective  criteria,  robust  valuation  models  and 
optimal utilization of the information available to assess customers’ prospects.  
During the first half of 2012 the Bank of Italy conducted targeted inspections of credit risk at 
14  intermediaries  that  account  for  59  per  cent  of  lending  by  Italian  banking  groups.  The 
inspections examined the banks’ procedures and controls during the granting of loans, the 
adequacy of their internal risk measurement models, the quantification of risk assets, and the 
adequacy of their provisioning policies.  
The new  rules  on related-party  transactions,  which  will  be fully  in  effect by  the  end  of this 
year, will help to strengthen credit quality and foster greater impartiality in the allocation of 
credit.  
The bad debt cover ratio – the ratio of value adjustments to exposures – declined last year 
from  57.2 to  55.7  per cent. This  is  higher than in  the  early  1990s  but  lower  than  the  ratio 
registered before the outbreak of the financial crisis. In times of recession, when bad debts 
increase more rapidly, such a decline is normal, at least in part, but banks’ value adjustments 
for deteriorating credit quality (which were equal to €18.4 billion in 2010 and €19.3 billion in 
2011) must continue to grow.  
Even  during  the  present  phase  the  increase  in  provisioning  can  be  funded  out  of  banks’ 
ordinary earnings. Effective policy for provisioning not only strengthens balance sheets but 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
can also favour the liquidation of impaired assets. Suitable ways of reducing their weight on 
balance sheets must be devised.  
The  increase  in  sovereign  risk  has  hampered  our  banks’  wholesale  funding.  Total 
fund-raising,  net  of  Eurosystem  refinancing,  shrank  by  4.6  per  cent  in  the  twelve  months 
through May, reflecting a contraction in funding on international markets. The Eurosystem’s 
two  longer-term  refinancing  operations  compensated  for  this  shortfall  and  averted  liquidity 
strains.  
By contrast, retail funding provided by savers resident in Italy has not been affected by the 
crisis. In May bank deposits were 1.2 per cent greater than twelve months earlier.  
The current slow growth in lending depends in the first place on the slackening of demand 
due to the recession. A brusque tightening of credit supply owing to the wholesale funding 
strains  and  the  deterioration  in  loan  quality  was  observed  at  the  end  of  last  year.  Supply 
conditions  improved  in  the  early  months  of  2012  thanks  to  Eurosystem  refinancing.  New 
strains have emerged in recent months in connection with the instability of the markets. The 
three-month rate of change in bank lending to firms was slightly negative in May, while credit 
to households remained stable.  
The more stable forms of fund-raising – deposits and bonds subscribed by households – are 
sufficient to finance over 80 per cent of Italian banks’ lending, more than at the end of 2011. 
Banks need to continue their pursuit of a structural rebalancing of sources of funding.  
The  technical  forms  of  credit  must  be  evaluated  with  care.  The  share  of  total  lending 
consisting  of  current  account  overdrafts  is  28  per  cent  in  Italy  against  an  average  of 
12 per cent  in  the  rest  of  the  euro  area.  This  method  of  supplying  credit  to  customers 
exposes  banks  to  liquidity  risk,  makes  cash  outflows  less  predictable,  and  hampers  the 
formation  of  eligible  collateral  for  Eurosystem  refinancing.  More  attentive  management  of 
liquidity by firms could foster a reduction in recourse to overdrafts.  
The  strict  liquidity  requirements  for  banks  introduced  by  Basel  III  represent  a  necessary 
prudential  safeguard  of  stability.  The  rules  need  to  be  fine-tuned  to  avoid  potential 
pro-cyclical  effects.  In  particular,  the  liquidity  buffers  built  up  during  periods  of  expansion 
must be effectively usable in times of difficulty. The disincentives to the circulation of funds 
through the interbank market must be eliminated. The risks of wholesale banking business 
have to be more clearly distinguished from those of retail intermediation.  
Capital endowment and cost containment 
Italian banks have been making progress in strengthening their capital for some time now, 
partly at our request and despite the difficult market conditions. Between the period before 
the  crisis  and  March  of  this  year  the  banks’  core  tier  1  capital  increased  from  7.1  to 
9.9 per cent  of  risk-weighted  assets.  Since  the  beginning  of  2011  the  five  largest  banking 
groups  have  increased  their  capital  through  recourse  to  the  market  for  a  total  of  over 
€17 billion  and  by  restructuring  convertible  bonds  as  core  tier  1  capital  worth  a  further 
€3 billion; their core tier 1 ratio now stands at 10.0 per cent. The average capital ratio of the 
remaining 66 groups has risen to 8.7 per cent. The capital of the other 472 institutions not 
belonging  to  a  group,  for  the  most  part  mutual  banks,  amounts  to  13.7  per  cent  of 
risk-weighted assets. 
The  five  largest  Italian  banking  groups  now  comply  with  the  capital  target  set  by  the 
European Banking Authority (EBA), which asked banks to increase their core tier 1 capital 
taking into account sovereign risk exposure. The EBA’s exercise set their total capital needs 
at  €15.4  billion,  more  than  70  per  cent  of  which  has  been  covered  by  means  of  privately 
subscribed capital increases and self-financing. The reduction of risk-weighted assets as a 
result  of  more  widespread  use  of  internal  models,  carefully  evaluated  by  the  supervisory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
authorities,  has  also  contributed. We  examined  the  measures  proposed  by  the  banks  with 
the specific aim of preventing any significant contraction in lending to the economy. 
Public intervention was needed in the case of Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena owing to the 
pronounced tensions affecting the financial markets, which made the cost of new issuance 
prohibitive,  and  the  difficulty  of  making  asset  disposals  in  very  strained  market  conditions. 
Achieving the same target by alternative means would have entailed a reduction in lending to 
the economy. 
Even with this operation, the total amount of government intervention in support of the Italian 
banks  is  still  low  by  international  standards.  This  also  reflects  the  low  level  of  trading  in 
opaque and risky financial instruments. 
From  2008  to  2010  government  aid  disbursed  to  European  banks  for  recapitalization  and 
coverage of losses amounted to €409 billion, or 3.3 per cent of GDP; the guarantees utilized 
for  new  issues  of  debt  totalled  €1,111  billion  (9.1  per  cent  of  GDP).  In  Italy,  equity 
transactions  amounted  to  €4.1  billion  or  0.3  per  cent  of  GDP,  and  the  banks  required  no 
guarantees. 
Including  approved  state  financial  assistance,  for  which  figures  are  available  up  to  the 
autumn of 2011, the value of government measures in Europe has now risen to 37 per cent 
of GDP; however, this does not take account of the latest recapitalization measures in favour 
of some European banking systems or of the guarantees given in respect of bank liabilities. 
In Italy, such measures are of limited magnitude: specifically, the additional capital increase 
for Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena will amount to around 0.1 per cent of GDP, while the 
guarantees  attached  to bonds  used  as  collateral  for  Eurosystem  refinancing  currently  total 
5.5 per cent of GDP. 
The progress achieved in capital strengthening must now be consolidated. On the basis of 
analyses calibrated according to the intermediary’s exposure to the different types of risk, we 
have asked banks to further raise their higher quality capital above the regulatory minima. 
The  new  rules  on  capital  are  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Basel  III  reform.  In  Europe,  their 
adoption will mark a turning point. The Bank of Italy continues to uphold the importance of 
properly  implementing  the  regulatory  provisions  already  agreed  by  the  G20.  It  would  be  a 
grave  error  to  undermine  the  reform  approved  at  international  level.  The  markets  would 
punish such a decision. 
As  a  result  of  the  capital  operations  conducted  in  the  early  months  of  this  year,  including 
those in connection with the EBA’s recommendation, the capital needed by Italian banks in 
order  to  comply  with  the  new  common  equity  requirements  that  will  apply  when 
Basel III comes into full operation has been significantly reduced. About 60 per cent of the 
capital increase still needed can be put down to the fall in the prices of sovereign securities 
from the second half of 2011 on. Under the new prudential requirements all capital losses 
directly affect regulatory capital. Italian government securities represent about one tenth of 
the assets of the country’s banks. A decline in their yields from present levels  will make it 
easier for the banks to comply with the new prudential requirements. 
Compared with the phasing-in envisaged for Basel III, the European rules (not all the main 
aspects of which have been finalized yet) allow the accelerated application of all or part of 
the  new  capital  regulations.  The  markets  apparently  already  assume  that  the  core  tier 
1 capital ratios will be on the order of 7 per cent (the minimum of 4.5 per cent plus the 2.5 per 
cent capital conservation buffer). The change-over to the new system must nonetheless be 
promptly and clearly prepared by banks and authorities working together. 
Ensuring  the  soundness  of  banks  necessitates  that  national  supervisory  authorities  apply 
rigorous criteria in assessing risk-weighted assets (the denominator of capital ratios). Italian 
banks’ ratio of risk-weighted assets to total exposures is high by international standards. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
loss  absorbency 
requirements  and 
to  calibrate  capital 
For global systemically important banks, the higher capital levels approved by the G20 and 
crisis management measures will strengthen their ability to absorb losses and will limit how 
far banks are interconnected and the risk of contagion among intermediaries and between 
finance and the real economy.  
On 29 June the Basel Committee began a public consultation on its proposed principles to 
ensure that domestic systemically important banks too are endowed with a high capacity to 
absorb  losses.  Compared  with  the  rules  for  the  global  systemically  important  banks,  the 
national authorities are given more leeway to determine which intermediaries are subject to 
additional 
requirements. 
Implementation of the principles will be subject to peer review. For cross-border groups, it is 
envisaged  that  host  supervisors  may  establish  additional  requirements  if  the  subsidiary  is 
systemically  important;  reflecting  a  position  we  argued  for  vigorously  in  the  international 
discussion, the principles recognize the need for robust mechanisms of coordination between 
home  and  host  authorities  in  order  to  avoid  measures  that  could  harm  the  integration  of 
financial markets. 
In a phase of weak growth in the volume of business, heightened tensions on the financial 
markets  and  mounting  credit  risk,  a recovery  of profitability  must  be  sustained  by  gains  in 
efficiency.  As  I  have  remarked  on  other  occasions,  strategies  to  improve  production  and 
distribution processes, to exploit the contribution of new technologies in full, must be rapidly 
put into practice. 
In the first quarter of this year the operating costs of the five largest banking groups declined 
in  relation  to  gross  income.  Operating  profitability  consequently  benefited.  The  action 
undertaken to curb costs must continue. Banks must rapidly rationalize supply structures. 
Compensation policies too must be aimed at the objective of reducing costs. The main Italian 
banks  have  made  progress  since  March  2008,  when  the  Bank  of  Italy  issued  its  first 
supervisory instructions on compensation: the total pay of top management has declined in 
the last two years; bonuses have diminished. 
Cost containment is still not widespread enough among medium-sized listed banking groups, 
nor has it involved all the top positions. At a number of institutions the compensation of top 
management  is  fixed,  not  tied  to  the  bank’s  performance  over  a  number  of  years. 
Non-executive  directors,  who  often  hold  multiple  positions  within  the  group,  have  received 
increasing  compensation  in  line,  on  average,  with  that  of  general  managers.  The  Bank  of 
Italy  also  expects  the  banks  to  reduce  the  size  of  severance  packages:  overly  generous 
benefits  impinge  on  prudent  management  and  the  proper  functioning  of  governance 
mechanisms. 
The communication addressed to the banks on 2 March reiterated the need, in the current 
cyclical conditions, to align the pay incentives of directors and managers with the risks taken, 
to make them consistent with a policy of strengthening capital and curbing costs. 
The protection of consumers of banking and financial services 
The Minister for the Economy and Finance, in his capacity as Chairman of the Interministerial 
Committee for Credit and Savings and acting on a proposal from the Bank of Italy, recently 
issued  the  decree  implementing  the  new  provisions  of  the  Consolidated  Law  on  Banking 
concerning fees for overdrafts and overrunning. 
The decree gives effect to the principles of transparency, simplification and reasonable costs 
for customers provided for in the law; it also clears up some interpretative doubts to which 
market participants had drawn attention during the public consultation. 
The choices made go in the direction that I have indicated to be desirable, including in my 
Concluding  Remarks  in  May:  towards  legislation  based  mainly  on  the  promotion  of 
competition, transparency and consumers’ awareness of their financial options. They meet 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the  objective  of  allowing  customers to  understand  the  costs  of the  services  provided,  thus 
also helping to make competing offers comparable. Within the limits established by the law, 
their  quantification  will  continue  to  be  left  to  intermediaries.  It  is  essential  that  charges  be 
proportional to the costs banks bear in performing their activities and the risks they assume; 
in particular, the charges for making funds available must remunerate the services and risks 
connected with the liquidity guaranteed to the customer. 
The protection of consumers of banking and financial services is one of the Bank of Italy’s 
objectives;  we  pay  it  a  high  level  of  attention;  we  pursue  it  with  a  variety  of  instruments, 
including inspections at individual bank branches. 
Action  to  promote  and  develop  citizens’  financial  literacy  increases  their  awareness  when 
they  face  investment  choices;  we  are  taking  a  series  of  steps  on  this  front  too,  aimed 
especially at the younger generations. Financial education is important, but it is even more 
important to seek the necessary complementarities with good regulation and supervision. 
Reduction  of  the  risks  for  customers  also  depends  on  the  reform  of  the  rules  governing 
non-bank intermediaries that grant credit, financial agents and loan brokers. In recent years 
the Bank has paid a high and increasing level of attention to such reform. The objective is to 
have rules that encourage a smaller number of sound and professional operators, together 
with reliable and diversified channels of distribution that can also stimulate competition in the 
sector. 
We have worked to permit the prompt application of the new rules. The usual cooperation 
was  provided  to  the  Ministry  for  the  Economy  and  Finance  for  the  drafting  of  the 
implementing measures within its sphere of competence; the framework for the supervisory 
rules to be applied to financial intermediaries is being prepared after a first round of public 
consultation;  the  necessary  support  has  been  provided  for  the  start  of  operations  of  the 
Financial Agents and Loan Brokers Oversight Body, which a few days ago began to accept 
new registrations. 
In  June  the  Council  of  Ministers  approved  the  first  reading  of  a  measure  that  introduces 
further amendments to the text of the reform and is now being examined by Parliament. As 
regards  the  rules  for  financial  agents  and  credit  brokers,  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid 
uncertainty  about  the  duties  and  powers  of  supervision  and  interpretative  and  applicative 
difficulties for the market. 
 The  Italian  economy  needs  intermediaries  and  financial  markets  that  allocate  the  savings 
entrusted  to  them  in  the  best  possible  way  and  at  the  lowest  possible  cost.  In  this  period 
banks are being called on to make difficult decisions: to ensure viable businesses continue to 
be financed and to avoid prolonging support for those destined to fail. This is the essence of 
sound  and  prudent  management.  The  timing  and  strength  of  the  economic  recovery  also 
depend on the outcome of these choices. 
In Italy the ratio of corporate debt to GDP is similar to the level in the other leading euro-area 
economies.  Here  bank  loans  to  the  productive  sector  are  a  larger  share  of  the  total,  a 
difference that is only partly explained by the greater presence of small and medium-sized 
firms. For many businesses bank loans are the sole source of external funding, even though 
their size and characteristics are comparable to those of firms that in other countries raise 
funds directly on the capital markets. A very large portion of the risk stemming from business 
activities falls on banks’ balance sheets, and in times of recession translates into impaired 
loans,  bad  debts  and  losses,  with  serious  repercussions  on  the  flow  of  new  lending.  The 
costs are high for banks and for the economy. 
In  the  medium  term  there  is  a  need  to  achieve  greater  access  to  the  capital  markets  for 
Italian firms, through the adoption of consistent incentive policies. Starting now, banks must 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
review the validity of their business models in relation to firms, especially large ones. Lending 
policies  must  be  based  on  the  solidity  of  business  plans,  not  on  relationships  and 
connections that are irrelevant to them: forged in times of economic growth and easy funding 
conditions, they are no longer sustainable today. 
Banks  that  are  attentive  to  firms’  growth  prospects,  and  firms  that  in  turn  are  more  highly 
capitalized and more willing to access capital markets directly, are preconditions for ensuring 
that the Italian economy emerges from this crisis on a path to lasting recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
