Duvvuri Subbarao: Achieving inclusive growth – the challenge of a new 
era 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
13th L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture, Mumbai, 27 September 2012. 
 India, 
the  Reserve  Bank  of 
On  behalf  of 
in  welcoming 
Hon’ble Mr. Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Deputy  Prime  Minister  of  Singapore,  who  will 
shortly be delivering the L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture. 
I also have pleasure in acknowledging the presence here of members of the family of late 
Dr. L.K.  Jha  –  Smt.  Dipika  Maharaj  Singh,  Smt.  Sharika  Glover  and  Kiron  Glover.  Your 
presence here means a lot to us. Thank you very much. A warm welcome, of course, to all 
our distinguished invitees who have made time and to be here for this lecture. 
I  have  great  pleasure 
Dr. L. K. Jha 
History will remember Dr. L.K. Jha as one of India’s most distinguished civil servants. With a 
remarkable career as an economic administrator and several impressive accomplishments to 
his credit, he has been a role model for generations of civil servants. After graduating from 
the Banaras Hindu University, “LK”, as he was popularly known, went on to study at Trinity 
College, Cambridge where he was a student of legendary economists such as A.C. Pigou, 
J.M. Keynes and D.H. Robertson. He joined the Indian Civil Service in 1936. After an early 
career in Bihar, he was seconded to Government of India in 1942 where he served in several 
important positions, and ended up in the pivotal job of Secretary to the Prime Minister. 
Dr. Jha was Governor of the Reserve Bank from July 1967 to May 1970, at a time when our 
economy was going through one of its most challenging phases. The country was shaken by 
food  security  concerns,  and  initiatives  to  redress  them  resulted  in  the  much  celebrated 
“Green  Revolution”.  Through  his  leadership,  Governor  Jha  made  the  Reserve  Bank  an 
influential force in shaping these initiatives. The distress suffered by the poor because of the 
overall  scarcity  situation 
the  overarching 
consideration  of  all  policy.  The  Reserve  Bank,  under  Dr.  Jha’s  stewardship,  contributed to 
designing and implementing many of these anti-poverty policies. 
After his tenure in the Reserve Bank, Dr. Jha served as India’s Ambassador to the United 
States  and  as  Governor  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  widely 
acclaimed Brandt Commission which made a persuasive case for North-South cooperation. 
Global cooperation, which is now so much a part of our daily discourse, draws its intellectual 
origins from the Brandt Commission report of the 1970s to which Dr. Jha contributed. 
This lecture series in his name honours Dr. Jha’s outstanding service to the nation and his 
leadership  of  the  Reserve  Bank  during  a  very  critical  period.  So  far,  there  have  been 
12 lectures. The last one was given by Prof. Maurice Obstfeld of the University of California 
last year, in December 2011. The lecture by Hon’ble Mr. Shanmugaratnam this evening will 
be the 13th in the series. 
reduction  becoming 
in  poverty 
resulted 
The distinguished speaker – Mr. Shanmugaratnam 
Hon’ble Mr. Shanmugaratnam is the Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore, of course. But he is 
also  the  Chairman  of  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee,  the  IMFC,  a 
position which puts him in the top echelons of global leadership in the field of finance and 
economics – a leadership that is playing an important role in steering us through the biggest 
financial crisis of our generation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Mr. Shanmugaratnam has impressive academic credentials – an MS in Economics from the 
London School of Economics followed by a Masters in Public Administration from Harvard. At 
Harvard, he also received the Lucius N. Littauer Fellowship for outstanding performance and 
leadership potential, a potential that he fully demonstrated in later career. 
Tharman  started  his  career  with  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  rising  to  the 
position  of  Chief  Executive  of  that  prestigious  institution.  He  quit  that  job  in  2001  to  join 
politics, and has held cabinet appointments variously for education, economic administration 
and manpower. Currently, he is Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance. 
I  have  had  the  privilege  of  watching  Mr.  Shamugaratnam  perform  in  various  international 
forums including the G-20 and the IMF-World Bank meetings. He is widely respected for his 
intelligence  and  wisdom  and  for  his  uncommon  ability  to  see  the  big  picture  even  as  we 
grapple with the pressures of immediacy. Globally, he is seen as the principal interlocutor on 
Asian economic values and aspirations. 
Achieving inclusive growth: the challenge of a new era 
Mr.  Shanmugaratnam  will  be  speaking to  us this  evening  on:  “Achieving  Inclusive  Growth: 
The  Challenge  of  a  New  Era”,  a  topic  he  is  very  well  qualified  to  address  because  of  the 
combination  of  perspective  he  brings  to  it  –  Asian  values  and  ethos  combined  with  wide 
ranging international study and experience. 
Inclusive growth is of course a topic of undoubtedly great interest to us in India – but also of 
interest, I believe, to every country in the world – rich and poor alike. The quest for inclusive 
growth  draws  from  a  powerful  lesson  of  development  experience  –  that  growth  has  no 
meaning, or indeed even no legitimacy, if those at the bottom of the pyramid get left behind. 
But  consensus,  if  any,  breaks  down  right  at  that  point.  Beyond  the  basic  premise  that 
inclusive  growth  is  desirable,  virtually  every  issue  and  nuance  –  starting  from  what 
constitutes  inclusive  growth  to  how  it  is  to  be  achieved  and  sustained  –  is  up  for  a 
contentious, and oftentimes acrimonious, debate. 
This  debate,  like  several  others  in  development  economics,  is  one  that  has  frowned  on 
moderation.  At  one  extreme  is  the  “trickle  down”  theory  which  holds  that  the  benefits  of 
growth would automatically trickle down to the bottom; that the trickle down is a process that 
must be left to its natural pace and path, and forcing it down will be counterproductive. At the 
other  extreme  is  the  activist  view  that  rubbishes  trickle  down  and  holds  that  redistributive 
policies must be part of the development paradigm, even if it means compromising on the 
quality and pace of growth. As we all realize, inclusive growth is a deeply emotive issue that 
has transcended economics to enter into political discourse and electoral platforms. 
In  the  era  of  globalization,  the  debate  on  inclusive  growth  has  quite  naturally  acquired 
international dimensions too. Is a world order in which some countries prosper while others 
get  left  behind  sustainable?  If  not,  what  are  the  obligations  and  responsibilities  of  rich 
countries, and of poor countries? And in a world dominated by nation states, how do we build 
a constituency for the global economy? 
The concerns about inclusive growth are not unique to emerging and developing economies. 
They are resonating in the rich world as well. Last year, we saw a massive demonstration of 
popular  discontent  around  the  world.  The  “Occupy  Wall  Street”  movement  in  New  York’s 
Zuccotti Park was the most prominent, but by no means the only one. Despite its amorphous 
nature, and its refusal to articulate a set of demands, the protest campaigns across the world 
were shaped by a simple but powerful idea – that the well-off cannot go on doing obscenely 
well even as the rest keeps moving backwards. The message from this collective rage is that 
growth itself can be destabilizing if it is not inclusive. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
On that sobering thought, ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming Mr. Tharman 
Shanmugaratnam to deliver the 13th L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture on the challenge of inclusive 
growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
