Benoît Cœuré: Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Palestinian Public Finance Institute, Ramallah, 23 September 2012. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Stefan  Huemer  for  his  contributions  to  the  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the 
opinions expressed herein. 
Mr Governor, Mr Consul General, Mr Vice President of the Board of the Palestinian Institute 
for Fiscal Policy, Deputy Ministers, Heads of Public Administration, Directors General, Ladies 
and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  speak  at  the  Palestinian  Public  finance  Institute.  The 
establishment of the Institute marks an important step in the development of the economic 
governance  framework  in  the  Palestinian  Territories.  I  wish  this  project  every  success.  It 
relies  on  the  commitment  of  so  many  dedicated  people  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  in 
Adetef.  As  Jean  Monnet,  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  the  European  Union,  once  put  it: 
“Nothing is possible without men; nothing is lasting without institutions.” His words related to 
Europe but in fact they are relevant worldwide. 
The  Middle  East  and  Europe  have  always  had  close  ties.  They  are  both  part  of  the 
Mediterranean region, which is economically and financially interlinked. And currently, both 
are experiencing an institutional transformation. In this part of the world it has come to be 
called the “Arab Spring”. In Europe, it is the consequence of an economic and financial crisis 
resulting  from  weaknesses  in  the  architecture  of  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
(EMU).  
Institution-building  takes  time.  Even  though  European  integration  started  over  six  decades 
ago,  the  building  of  those  institutions  remains  a  work  in  progress.  But  to  understand  the 
challenges that Europe is currently facing, we should take a step back and look briefly at the 
origins of the Europe’s integration process. I will then share with you my thoughts on what I 
believe to be the main shortcomings in the current EMU framework. Finally, I will give you my 
views on the short- and longer-term measures that the euro area should take to overcome 
the crisis. 
1. 
Building Europe after World War II: the path towards economic and monetary 
union 
In  1945,  Europe  emerged  from  the  Second  World  War  as  a  devastated  continent, 
economically  broken  and  politically  divided.  But  even  during  the  darkest  days  of  the  war, 
there were some Europeans who were convinced that Europe would eventually overcome its 
divisions and unite in peace.  
One of them was Robert Schuman, a French statesman, who in 1950  made a declaration 
that  became  a  rallying  cry:  he  proposed  that  Europe  should  aim  for  closer  economic  and 
political cooperation. The declaration was well received, also by West Germany. This was a 
crucial  point  because  Germany  and  France  had  been  rivals  in  a  century-long  quest  for 
dominance over the European continent. The Schuman Declaration paved the way for a new 
era of peaceful cooperation between the two nations, as well as with other countries.  
A new type of Europe began to emerge from the wasteland of World War II. What was about 
to take shape was indeed “revolutionary” – because the fathers of a united Europe moved 
beyond  the  concept  of  the  nation-state  with  a  jealously  guarded  sovereignty.  They  placed 
coal and steel production – the two industries which were crucial to the war effort – under a 
new  supranational  authority.  Six  European  countries  –  France,  West  Germany,  Italy,  the 
Netherlands,  Belgium  and  Luxembourg  –  took  this  first  and  important  step  towards  closer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
cooperation in 1951. A process towards creating durable conditions for peace in Europe had 
been set in motion.  
The  six  founding  countries  came  to  realise  that  there  were  substantial  benefits  in  closer 
cooperation and agreed to deepen it further. In 1957, they signed the Treaty of Rome, which 
created a customs union and established the European Economic Community. Its overall aim 
was  to  promote  harmonious  economic  development,  raise  living  standards  and  develop  a 
common market.  
However,  the  founding  fathers  of  Europe  saw  European  integration  as  more  than  just  an 
exercise in economic cooperation. They shared a larger vision for the future of Europe. Thus, 
in the Treaty’s preamble, the signatories committed to lay the foundations for an “ever closer 
union”  among  the  peoples  of  Europe.  This  commitment  has  become  the  leitmotif  of  the 
continent’s integration. Indeed, the initial group of six countries that started this process has 
now  expanded  to  become  a  group  of  27  countries,  with  another  one, Croatia, joining  next 
year. Others are currently negotiating to become members.  
Proposals  for  deeper  monetary  integration  date  back  to  the  Werner  Report  of  1970  and 
gained political momentum in the second half of the 1980s. At that time, Member States were 
taking  steps  towards  establishing  a  single  market.  This  included  also  the  liberalisation  of 
capital movements. As a consequence, Europe became captive to what Robert Mundell and 
other  economists  have  called  the  “impossible  trinity”  –  in  other  words,  the  impossibility  of 
simultaneously  achieving  the  three  goals  of  financial  liberalisation,  exchange  rate  stability, 
and national monetary policy. One of the three goals had to be abandoned. The choice as to 
which one became increasingly clear after the failed attempt to secure exchange rate stability 
through  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism.1  Given  that  a  single  market,  including  capital 
account  liberalisation,  had  been  a  stated  goal  since  the  Treaty  of  Rome,  and  given  that 
exchange  rate  stability  was  needed  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  the  single  market,  Member 
States  agreed  to  renounce  monetary  sovereignty.  Moreover,  sharing  a  currency  makes 
sense for countries with close trade ties. This is especially true for the euro area countries 
which,  since  the  start  of  EMU,  have  conducted  almost  half  of  their  overall  trade  among 
themselves. 
The  Maastricht  Treaty,  which  was  signed  in  1992,  made  monetary  policy  a  euro  area 
competence  but  left  economic  and  fiscal  policies  under  the  responsibility  of  national 
governments.  The  concept  of  economic  union  relied  essentially  on  the  single  market,  with 
few binding constraints on economic and fiscal policies. Over time, this turned out to be a 
significant institutional shortcoming. 
Moreover,  the  transfer  of  a  core  sovereign  prerogative  like  monetary  policy  to  the 
supranational level is a highly political act which entails important political commitments for 
the  future.  In  particular,  the  participating  countries  must  undertake  to  conduct  fiscal  and 
economic  policies  in  a  way  that  allows  monetary  union  to  work  properly.  This  is  a 
responsibility that the euro area countries share, a responsibility that governments have to 
fulfil vis-à-vis their peers and vis-à-vis their own citizens. 
Seen from this perspective, it is clear that the concept of EMU goes beyond economic and 
monetary integration. Let me add that the single market itself has a political dimension as the 
proper 
institutional  underpinnings,  such  as 
enforcement of contracts, consumer protection and competition policy. It has mandated the 
creation  of  a  federal  executive  (the  European  Commission),  legislative  (the  European 
functioning  of  markets  requires  strong 
                                                
1 
In  the  late  1970s,  European  countries  agreed  on  closer  exchange  rate  cooperation  by  setting  standard 
fluctuation  bands  of  plus/minus  2.25%  for  their  bilateral  exchange  rates.  This  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism 
(ERM) functioned well for a decade or so but it ultimately fell apart due to the divergences in the economic and 
fiscal policies of the participating countries. Speculative attacks ensued and ultimately triggered a crisis that 
forced two large countries – the United Kingdom and Italy – to leave the ERM in 1992. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Parliament), and judiciary (the EU Court of Justice). The creation of the single currency is an 
act  of  further  political  integration.  Under  the  Maastricht  Treaty  the  European  Economic 
Community became the European Union, a proper reflection of the fact that the ultimate aim 
– the finalité, as we say in French – of the European project is more than just economic. The 
EU is a real, albeit limited, political union. 
The Maastricht framework and its shortcomings 
2. 
Let me now review briefly what I consider to be the three most important shortcomings of the 
Maastricht framework – the ones on which we need to achieve progress urgently: i) stronger 
fiscal institutions; ii) real convergence across the euro area; and iii) the establishment of a 
financial market union. 
The Maastricht Treaty created the European Central Bank (ECB), which took up its monetary 
operations on 1 January 1999. The monetary dimension of the Maastricht Treaty has worked 
very well. Since the start of EMU, the ECB has kept annual inflation rates on average very 
close to 2%. 
As  regards  economic  policies  however,  no  new  institutions  or  competences  were  created. 
The Maastricht Treaty includes a general clause that economic policies should be treated as 
a matter of common concern and coordinated within the EU Council of  Ministers. Member 
States  are  also  required  to  run  their  economic  policies  in  accordance  with  ECB’s  primary 
goal of maintaining price stability. The underlying philosophy was to prevent what economists 
call “fiscal dominance”: namely, that the misguided policies of governments force the hand of 
the central bank, and hinder it from pursuing its objective: safeguarding price stability.  
However,  surveillance  of  economic  policies  rested  chiefly  on  non-binding  guidelines  and 
recommendations. In 1997, this architecture was complemented by the Stability and Growth 
Pact,  which  foresaw  binding  commitments  to  fiscal  rules,  backed  up  by  sanctions.  These 
were however not enforced when cases of fiscal slippage arose later on, and not backed by 
sufficiently strong national fiscal institutions.  
Outside  the  realm  of  fiscal  policies,  coordination  was  sought  but  no  specific  rules  were 
foreseen.  This  is  another  weakness  of  the  Maastricht  framework:  the  absence  of  a 
surveillance  mechanism  for  the  timely  detection  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  their 
resolution.  Those  countries  with  a  history  of  elevated  inflation  rates  and  exchange  rate 
devaluations benefited, at the start of EMU, from unprecedented low levels of real interest 
rates. Over time, these led to wage and price increases that undermined competitiveness. 
This development showed up in increasingly deteriorating current account positions as well 
as in bubbles, particularly in the financial and real estate sectors, fuelled by capital flowing 
from  countries  with  current  account  surpluses.  When  the  bubbles  burst  after  the  global 
financial crisis of 2007, governments stepped in to support growth and some of them were 
called  to  rescue  ailing  banks.  In  this  way,  private  indebtedness  turned  into  public 
indebtedness,  with  disastrous  fiscal  consequences  even  for  countries  that  had  run  fiscal 
surpluses prior to the crisis, such as Ireland and Spain, and even more for those that had 
not, such as Greece. 
A further shortcoming of the Maastricht framework was the inability to deal with what is now 
being called the “bank-sovereign nexus”. When systemically important banks run into trouble, 
governments  are  expected  to  step  in  and  provide  fiscal  support  to  contain  the  spillovers. 
Beyond that, banks are typically the largest holders of government debt from their respective 
sovereigns.  These  ties,  or  nexus,  between  banks  and  their  governments  can  lead  to  a 
dangerous downward spiral 
Another effect of this downward spiral, under way since the euro area crisis erupted in 2010, 
is  the  fragmentation  of  capital  markets.  The  bank-sovereign  nexus  has  led  to  a  situation 
whereby cross-border lending of banks has gone down significantly, as banks retreat more 
and more to their domestic markets, encouraged by their shareholders and, sometimes, by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
national banking supervisors. The crisis is undermining a key achievement of the euro, the 
integration of capital markets.  
A fundamental problem of the Maastricht Treaty was its over-reliance on the assumption that 
market  discipline  and  peer  pressure  would  provide  sufficient  incentives  for  national 
policy-makers to conduct sound fiscal and economic policies. This did not prove to be the 
case. As Jacques de Larosière, the former IMF Managing Director, once remarked, what was 
supposed  to  be  a  system  of  “peer  pressure”  too  often  turned  into  a  system  of  “peer 
concessions” or “peer arrangements”. 
On  the  whole,  the  Maastricht  framework  proved  unable  to  deal  adequately  with  the  high 
degree of economic and financial integration in the euro area. It was not fully understood that 
sharing  a  currency  means  much  more  than  sharing  the  same  monetary  policy.  It  is  a 
commitment to ensuring sound fiscal, economic and financial conditions. Euro area countries 
largely overlooked the substantial spillover effects that national policy decisions would have 
on their fellow countries in EMU euro area partners. The ongoing crisis has brought these 
shortcomings into sharp focus. 
3.  
Short and longer-term solutions to the crisis: going beyond the Maastricht 
framework 
The ECB’s contribution to resolving the crisis  
3.1. 
Let me now turn to Europe’s policy response to the crisis. The EMU framework relies on a 
strict separation between monetary policy on the one hand, and fiscal and economic policies 
on the other. The monetary policy function is carried out by the ECB under a clear mandate: 
maintaining price stability over the medium term in the euro area. To achieve this goal, the 
ECB has been given full political and operational independence.  
Since the start of the crisis, the ECB has reacted forcefully. Since 2008, it has lowered its 
policy  rate  from  4.25%  to  0.75%  now.  However,  the  increasing  fragmentation  of  capital 
markets which I described above, and which sometimes has led to a complete drying-up of 
certain financial  market  segments,  has  impaired  the  monetary  transmission  channel  in  the 
euro  area.  Monetary  policy  signals  are  no  longer  being  transmitted  properly  to  the  real 
sector.  
The  divergence  in  bank  funding  conditions  is  certainly  a  key  factor,  in  addition  to  the 
country-specific  economic  situation,  in  explaining  the  differences  in  bank  lending  rates  to 
non-financial  corporations  across  euro  area  countries. These  divergences  are  leading to  a 
weakening  of  the  pass-through  of  monetary  policy  decisions  in  some  euro  area  countries. 
For example, among the five largest euro area countries, the maximum difference between 
short-term  lending  rates  to  non-financial  corporations  (for  short-term  loans  over  €1  million) 
reached  more  than  100  basis  points  in  recent  months.  Across  all  euro  area  countries,  the 
dispersion  of  such  lending  rates  is  greater  now  than  it  has  ever  been.  In  other  words, 
conventional monetary policy has lost its effectiveness in some parts of the euro area. For 
the ECB, the singleness of its monetary policy has been at stake. 
Against  this  background,  the  ECB  has  resorted  to  so-called  non-standard  measures  to 
ensure  the  effective  transmission  of  its  monetary  policy  across  the  euro  area.  Without  a 
properly  functioning  transmission  channel  for  its  monetary  policy,  the  ECB’s  capability  to 
maintain  price  stability  is  at  risk.  The  ECB  has  modified  its  allotment  procedures  and  its 
collateral  policy.  It  has  also  lowered  the  rate  of  the  minimum  reserve  requirements  and 
introduced very longer-term refinancing operations. 
Importantly, the ECB has also decided to resort to outright purchases of bonds on secondary 
markets.  Following  the  so-called  Securities  Market  Programme,  which  has  now  been 
terminated, the Governing Council of the ECB agreed at its meeting on 6 September on the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
modalities for undertaking Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) in secondary markets for 
sovereign bonds in the euro area.  
The OMTs will enable the ECB to address severe distortions in government bond markets 
which  originate  from,  in  particular,  fears  on  the  part  of  investors  of  the  reversibility  of  the 
euro. Monetary union  is sometimes misunderstood as an exchange rate system which the 
participating  countries  can  enter  and  leave,  as  was  the  case  with  the  ERM.  Such  a 
perception of reversibility would imply that, ultimately, one euro would not be worth the same 
in  different  euro  area  countries.  In  other  words,  the  single  currency  would  no  longer  be 
single. This perception is fundamentally flawed. Let me be very clear: the Maastricht Treaty 
refers to the “irrevocable fixing of exchange rates” when a country enters monetary union. 
The euro is irrevocable. 
With the OMTs, under appropriate conditions, EMU will now have a fully effective backstop to 
avoid  destructive  scenarios  with  potentially  severe  consequences  for  price  stability  in  the 
euro  area.  A  necessary  condition  for  the  OMTs  is  that  the  country  concerned  adheres  to 
strict and effective conditionality attached to an appropriate programme under the European 
Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  and  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  IMF 
involvement will be sought for the design and monitoring of conditionality. The OMTs are an 
instrument in the ECB’s toolbox to help it fulfil its mandate, maintaining price stability. They 
will be conducive to the monetary authority restoring its power to control credit conditions in 
the euro area and, through that channel, inflation in the medium term. 
Government actions to fight the crisis 
3.2.  
Ultimately, however, the current crisis is the result of the lack of incentives in the Maastricht 
Treaty  to  pursue  sound  fiscal,  economic  and  financial  market  policies.  This  can  only  be 
amended by the Member States, not by the ECB. The key to resolving the crisis thus lies first 
and foremost with governments, individually and jointly. 
Since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  the  Member  States  have  adopted  a  number  of  important 
measures to strengthen the institutional framework of EMU. A procedure for the surveillance 
of excessive macroeconomic imbalances has been established in order to detect and correct 
divergences at an early stage. In the case of non-adherence to agreed fiscal and economic 
rules,  sanctions  will  be  applied  in  a  more  automatic  manner  to  reduce  the  potential  for 
political  interference  and  delay  in  the  process.  Further  improvements  are  currently  under 
consideration, such as the mandatory submission of draft national budgets to the group of 
euro area finance ministers – the so-called “Eurogroup” – for vetting before those budgets 
are  submitted  to  national  parliaments  for  adoption.  The  vetting  should  ensure  that 
divergences from the fiscal rules can be identified and corrected at a very early stage. 
Moreover, earlier this year, 25 out of 27 EU Member States signed the Treaty on Stability, 
Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union, more generally known 
as the Fiscal Compact. The Compact further improves the EMU framework by introducing a 
cyclically adjusted balanced-budget rule which the participating countries need to transpose 
into national legislation. 
Finally,  a  temporary  crisis  resolution  mechanism  was  created,  the  European  Financial 
Stability Facility (EFSF), which will remain active until July 2013 despite being replaced by a 
permanent  organisation  this  autumn,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  With  a 
combined  maximum  firepower  of  €700  billion,  these  two  mechanisms  will  help  to  build 
effective firewalls to stem contagion from the crisis.  
What  has  been  achieved  so  far  is  impressive.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  very  few  would  have 
expected that Member States would reach a consensus on such fundamental changes in the 
way EMU works. But these changes are not enough. EMU now needs a longer-term vision to 
confront its challenges.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The way ahead – deeper integration  
3.3. 
In order to restore confidence, policy-makers in the euro area need to resolutely push ahead 
with  fiscal  consolidation,  structural  reforms  to  enhance  competitiveness  and  European 
institution-building.  Recently,  the  President  of  the  European  Council,  in  close  cooperation 
with the Presidents of the Eurogroup, the European Commission and the European Central 
Bank, put forward proposals for a genuine EMU.  
The  four  Presidents  are  proposing  that  a  genuine  EMU  should  be  built  on  integrated 
frameworks for budgetary policies, economic policies and financial market policies, which in 
turn must be underpinned by greater democratic legitimacy and accountability.  
When  we  look  at  the  options  to  establish  budgetary  policies  in  a  monetary  union,  and 
exclude any uncoordinated conduct of fiscal policy by Member States, three possible models 
come  to  mind.  First,  there  could  be  a  fully-fledged  fiscal  union,  with  a  central  budget  and 
federal debt issuance. It is not on the cards in the short run as important steps would need to 
be taken to establish the necessary euro area-wide political legitimacy and governance. The 
second  model  would  involve  sharing  sovereignty  on  national fiscal  policies,  with  reciprocal 
control of public expenditures serving as a basis for common debt issuance by governments. 
Such  reciprocal  control  would  also  require  strong  democratic  legitimacy,  involving  national 
parliaments. The third model would only rely on unqualified adherence to fiscal discipline by 
Member States, without risk-sharing. 
None of these three models alone is possible in the short run. There will be a combination of 
the  three.  The  desirable  mix  has  to  be  decided  upon  by  the  people  of  Europe  with  the 
appropriate democratic checks. EMU is a unique construct, tailored to European specificities, 
and  it  need  not  resemble  any  existing  federation.  Let  me  give  some  examples.  First  and 
foremost,  euro  area  countries  should  regain  their  ability  to  save  money  for  a  rainy  day  by 
adhering to their fiscal commitments in the new framework of the Fiscal Compact. They have 
already  agreed  to  limited  mutual  insurance  through  the  EFSF/ESM.  A  centralised  fiscal 
capacity could be considered too, provided it is not the basis for permanent transfers but is 
used to promote market integration and better resilience to economic shocks. For instance, a 
euro  area  unemployment  insurance  scheme  could  be  set  up,  which  would  support 
much-needed cross-country labour mobility.  
Indeed,  an  integrated  economic  policy  framework  is  needed  to boost  economic  integration 
and ensure that unsustainable policies do not jeopardise the stability of EMU. The framework 
should provide for a better enforcement of commitments to structural reforms, i.e. measures 
to  increase  a  country’s  competitiveness  and  its  capacity  to  adjust  to  economic  shocks. 
Structural reforms make EMU more robust. 
In  addition,  an  integrated  financial  market  framework  is  required  in  order  to  break  the 
bank-sovereign nexus that threatens financial integration. This is another important element 
to  make  market-based  risk  sharing  work  effectively.  While  many  euro  area  banks  have 
benefited  from  the  single  currency,  and  significantly  expanded  their  European  business 
activities, they are still supervised at national level. Financial fragmentation, as I described 
above, has led to the perception that banks’ liabilities, even though they are nominally the 
same, are in fact different from one euro area country to another. This is not acceptable: the 
currency union has thus to be complemented by a banking union. At their summit in June, 
EU  Member  States  entered  into  a  political  commitment,  and  the  European  Commission  is 
now proposing to create a single supervisory mechanism for banks in the euro area and to 
entrust this task to the ECB. This single supervisory mechanism should be implemented in a 
way that does not compromise the ECB’s independence and does not constrain monetary 
policy. It should be complemented by a single regime to wind down failed banks and by a 
single resolution fund at euro area level. 
Finally,  building  a  deeper  EMU  requires  a  strengthening  of  democratic  legitimacy  and 
accountability.  The  people  of  Europe  will  only  accept  a  further  pooling  of  competences  at 
European  level  if  European  policy-makers  are  subject  to  high  standards  of  accountability. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  European  Parliament,  whose  representatives  are  directly  elected  by  citizens,  already 
plays  a  central  role  in  holding  the  ECB  and  other  EU  institutions  to  account.  As  a 
consequence  of  deeper  economic  and  political  integration  in  EMU,  the  euro  area  will 
become, in my view, more and more a “political space” in its own right and, as such, it will 
require  proper  euro  area  accountability  mechanisms.  Political  legitimacy  is  vital  to  build 
popular support for further integration. 
Conclusion  
4. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
When Robert Schuman drafted the declaration that started the European integration process, 
he predicted that “Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be 
built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity”. When looking at 
Europe’s progress since the Second World War and the step-by-step building of EMU, we 
can indeed see that what holds Europe together, what has been its engine, and the reason 
for its success, is the notion of solidarity.  
Solidarity is sometimes narrowed down to mean one-way support, from donor to recipient. Of 
course  this  has  always  been  a  key  consideration  in  the  European  construction.  The  EU 
structural funds,  which  go  to  Europe’s  poorer regions,  are  a  very  tangible  measure  of this 
kind of solidarity. Likewise, the European crisis mechanisms EFSF and ESM are a symbol of 
euro area solidarity. Solidarity is not just a catch-phrase in EMU; it is essential for all. 
Let me come back to Schuman’s insight that “concrete achievements first create a de facto 
solidarity”. We have reached a point in the history of Europe where de facto solidarity has 
created  a  need  for  concrete  achievements.  In  recent  years  we  have  made  impressive 
progress in putting EMU’s architecture on a sounder footing. The euro area countries now 
need  to  continue  on  their  path  of  policy  reform  and  to  strengthen  their  governance.  The 
report of the four Presidents in October will provide further guidance in this regard. If these 
efforts are maintained, I am confident that the crisis will be overcome. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
