Jörg Asmussen: A European Central Bank perspective on key issues of 
the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the European Financial Congress, Sopot, Poland, 24 May 2012. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here with  you at the European Financial Congress in Sopot. It 
would have been nice to visit Poland two weeks from now for the opening game of the UEFA 
Euro 2012! However, I did have the chance to spend 30 minutes this afternoon at Sopot’s 
boardwalk  and  I  very  much  enjoyed  the  Baltic  Sea  and  the  Polish  coast  after  spending 
another long night in Brussels yesterday at the informal European Council.  
In my view, the European Council delivered two strong messages. First, it confirmed the euro 
area’s commitment to a long-term vision. The final destination is clear: a deepened economic 
union  which  manifests  the  partial  political  union  our  currency  de  facto  already  represents. 
The most important outcome of last night is that leaders showed their commitment to move 
the economic and monetary union to a new stage. Second, all EU leaders agree that growth-
enhancing measures and efforts to achieve sustainable public finances need to go hand in 
hand.  
I would like to structure my remarks around three claims. These are claims that I have come 
across more than once. They express understandable concerns and relate to key issues of 
the crisis. 
1. 
“Policy-makers  are  obsessed  with  austerity.  They  ignore  the  need  for  growth  in 
Europe.” 
“The  ECB  is  moving  on  very  thin  ice.  Its  actions  increase  inflationary  risks  in  the 
euro area.” 
“The current crisis management is all about quick fixes. There is no medium or long 
term strategy.” 
“Policy-makers are obsessed with austerity. They ignore the need for growth 
in Europe.” 
Austerity  versus  growth.  This  debate  is  wrong.  Policy-makers  are  often  accused  of  being 
obsessed with fiscal austerity and ignoring the need for growth in Europe. 
Let me be clear: fiscal consolidation is not an end in itself. Rather, it is a pre-condition for 
achieving sustainable growth. Fiscal consolidation creates the confidence that investors and 
consumers  need.  Ultimately,  it  supports  both  economic  growth  and  employment.  The  only 
alternative would be to fight debt with more debt. This is no solution. 
Improvements on the fiscal front are becoming visible in the data. The euro area public deficit 
declined to 4.1% of GDP in 2011. It is expected to fall to 3.2% in 2012. The French deficit, for 
instance, came in at 5.2% of GDP in 2011, 0.5 percentage points below the government’s 
target. I expect France to continue on this path and to achieve the 3% deficit target in 2013.  
But  while  fiscal  consolidation  is  a  necessary  pre-condition  for  sustainable  growth,  it  is  not 
sufficient. So the debate is not about austerity versus growth, instead it is about austerity and 
growth. We need both. 
No one is against growth, but growth cannot be achieved by spending  programmes which 
fuel the economy for a quarter or two but are no more than a flash in the pan. The important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2. 
3. 
1. 
reforms in product and services markets 
reforms in labour markets 
funding of growth initiatives. 
thing is to find ways to increase the growth potential, and this is far more challenging than 
introducing popular but short-sighted initiatives. 
From my perspective, a growth package should have three components:  
i) 
ii) 
ii) 
As regards reforms in services markets, for example, policy instruments that could help to 
boost  growth  already  exist  at  the  EU  level.  The  Services  Directive  was  adopted  in  2006. 
However, it has not yet been fully implemented in all Member States. Nine out of ten new 
jobs in the EU are created in the services sector. Yet cross-border provision of services in 
the EU remains difficult. While 70% of the EU’s GDP is generated in services, only 20% of 
services are provided cross-border. Up to 1.8% in additional growth could be unleashed for 
the EU with the full implementation of the Services Directive. The June European Council will 
adopt measures to make sure that the growth-enhancing potential of the Services Directive is 
fully exploited. 
In labour markets, we see that Member States have started to implement important structural 
reforms.  Spain  is  increasing  the  flexibility  of  employment  contracts  and  addressing  the 
problem of the country’s “dual labour market”. Here in Poland, the increase in the retirement 
age to 67 is a good example. It illustrates the fact that implementing structural reforms can 
be painful. But this pain should pay off in the future, as we have seen in Germany with the 
“Agenda  2010”  labour  market  reforms  implemented  from  2003  to  2005.  Germany  is  now 
profiting significantly from these reforms now. 
A key factor in labour market reforms is mobility – particularly in the euro area, but also at the 
level of the EU 27. The restrictions on the free movement of workers from Eastern Europe 
after  the  EU  enlargement  of  2004  will  be  gradually  phased  out;  they  no  longer  apply  to 
Poland. Enhanced procedures in the cross-border recognition of higher education diplomas, 
easing the issue of pension transfers and a better networking of job agencies across Europe 
come immediately to mind as ways to further increase the mobility of workers.  
As I said, a growth package should not be confused with the idea of large-scale spending 
programmes. Nevertheless, growth-enhancing measures will not come for free in each case. 
For the funding, financial instruments of the European Investment Bank (EIB) could be used, 
for example project bonds to support infrastructure projects. More generally, funds from the 
EU budget should be redirected to areas where the money is really needed and where its 
impact would be greatest. Member States have to move away from “juste retour” thinking. 
2. 
“The ECB is moving on very thin ice. Its actions increase inflationary risks in 
the euro area.” 
Let me now address the recent action taken by the ECB. In particular, I would like to focus on 
the  two  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  that  we  conducted  in 
December 2011 and February 2012.  
Any assessment of the impact of the LTROs on the real economy would be premature at this 
stage. It is true that bank lending to the private sector is still very much subdued. But the data 
up  to  March  confirm  that  the  LTROs  have  reduced  deleveraging  pressures  for  banks  and 
helped to avoid a major credit crunch in the euro area.  
A  number  of  questions  have  been  raised  about  these  operations.  The  most  important 
concern is that the LTROs increase inflationary pressures.  
A  large  injection  of  central  bank  liquidity  could,  in  principle,  give  rise  to  inflationary  risks. 
Inflationary risks would increase if a massive rise in firms’ demand for credit was met by an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
equally  massive  increase  in  banks’  capacity  and  willingness  to  supply  credit.  These 
conditions are clearly not met at the moment.  
As with all other measures the ECB has taken, the LTROs are fully in line with our guiding 
principle:  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  We  constantly  monitor  the  developments  of 
credit and money in the euro area. If inflationary risks were to emerge, we  would take the 
necessary action to prevent these risks from materialising and withdraw any excess liquidity. 
When  we  measure  monetary  liquidity,  we  do  not  look  at  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
Eurosystem. We look at the balance sheet of the euro area banking sector. Only the latter 
shows  the  interaction  with the real  economy.  And  it tells  us that  the growth  of  money  and 
credit remains very subdued, despite a recent stabilisation.  
There  is  no  reason  to  question  our  commitment  to  price  stability.  According  to  the  most 
recent ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters (for the second quarter of 2012), euro area 
inflation is expected to rise to 2.3% in 2012. But it will fall thereafter and remain close to or 
slightly below 2% for the foreseeable future (up to 2016).  
As regards the collateral framework that has been adopted by some national central banks to 
give  banks  access  to  the  liquidity  of  the  three-year  LTROs,  let  me  just  say  the  following: 
appropriate haircuts, often very high, are applied to all credit claims provided as collateral. 
Any discretion on the part of national central banks is limited. The ECB constantly monitors 
all related risks.  
3. 
“The current crisis management is all about quick fixes. There is no medium 
or long term strategy.” 
This  leads  me  to  the  third  and  last  part  of  what  I  would  like  to  say.  In  the  current  crisis 
management, the ECB has a prominent role, more prominently than I would actually like. But 
the bulk of the responsibility for resolving this crisis lies  with national governments. I have 
mentioned the need for fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. But more is being done. 
To many observers the crisis management looks very much like “muddling through”. This is 
only half true. In addition to the day-to-day crisis fighting, a number of far-reaching decisions 
have been taken at the European level, some under the Polish Presidency last year. These 
decisions are more than just quick fixes. They should help to improve the functioning of the 
Monetary Union in the future. 
Strong firewalls have been created. In July 2012, the European Financial Stability Facility will 
be replaced by a permanent safety net, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). The ESM 
will  have  a  robust  capital  structure  and flexible  crisis  intervention  tools  at  hand  to  mitigate 
contagion risks in the euro area. Overall, the euro area is mobilising a firewall of about EUR 
800 billion, or more than USD 1 trillion.  
The  EU’s  fiscal  regime,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  has  been  strengthened.  25 EU 
Member  States  have  signed  the  fiscal  compact,  which  commits  countries  to  enshrining 
important fiscal rules in binding national legislation. The fiscal compact is an important step 
towards a fiscal union in the euro area. Its timely ratification is now key. 
A  real  innovation  is  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure.  It  will  help  to  detect  and 
correct economic imbalances, for instance in house price developments. This should avoid 
situations  like  in  Ireland,  where  a  bursting  housing  bubble,  together  with  bank  guarantees 
provided by the state, led to an abrupt fiscal deterioration. 
More legislative acts are under way to further increase the surveillance of national economic 
policies. Once the “two-pack” has been adopted, it will be possible for draft national budgets 
to be examined in Brussels. And revisions  will  be demanded if the budgets are not in line 
with the euro area’s fiscal rules.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
If implemented successfully, these measures will help countries to internalise an important 
point:  any  member  of  a  currency  union  has  to  treat  its  economic  policies  as  a  matter  of 
common concern. The euro area is already much closer to a political union than many of us 
realise. 
There is one broad area, however, where a good strategy is still missing. This is the area of 
financial  markets.  Let  me  mention  just  one  concern  which  needs  to  be  addressed:  the 
negative feedback loops between banks and national governments. The recapitalisation of a 
troubled  bank  by  its  government  may  lead  to  a  deterioration  of  the  government’s  fiscal 
position.  The  deteriorating  fiscal  position  in  turn  further  weakens  banks’  balance  sheets, 
through their holdings of sovereign bonds.  
This feedback loop has to be stopped. We have to move closer to a financial markets’ union. 
A  European  bank  resolution  authority  and  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme  are  two 
elements that could be used to address the nexus between sovereigns and banks. 
I see further issues that need to be addressed in the area of financial markets, for example 
the  potential  conflict  of  interest  for  national  supervisors  whose  task  should  be  to  ensure 
financial stability and a smooth functioning of European financial markets, but who are – at 
the end of the day – accountable to a national parliament and the tax payers of one single 
country.  This,  from  my  point  of  view,  is  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  single  European 
rulebook  without  loop-holes  and  a  supervisory  authority  at  the  European  level  for 
systemically relevant financial institutions with a cross-border business model.  
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude.  The  crisis  in  Europe  is  still  ongoing,  but  we  have  come  a  long  way  in 
addressing the most important issues.  
It  is  important  for  the  euro  area  to  continue  on  its  reform  path.  This  is  difficult  but 
indispensable. 
I am aware that here in Poland, people view the euro area’s crisis management with some 
scepticism. They fear a division of the EU into two blocs: the euro area and the rest.  
The creation of a dividing line is certainly not our goal. The Single Market binds all 27 EU 
Member States closely together. This level playing field has to be preserved. But the crisis 
has shown that the economies inside the euro  area are even more intertwined than those 
outside. Therefore, reforms have to be more ambitious and rules stricter. This does not mean 
that those outside the euro area are excluded. As you are well aware, Poland, for instance, 
has signed the Euro Plus Pact and the fiscal compact. 
And the euro area is not a closed club: it is open to every EU Member State that fulfils the 
convergence criteria on a sustainable basis. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
