K C Chakrabarty: Indian banking sector – towards the next orbit 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the 9th Advanced Management Programme at IMI, Delhi, 13 February 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. Theresa Karunakaran and Shri Sanjeev Prakash in preparation of this address is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Dr.  Pritam  Singh,  Director  General,  International  Management  Institute,  Dr.  Ahindra 
Chakrabarti,  Programme  Director,  participants  from  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the 
commercial banks. 
It gives me great pleasure to be before you today as you embark on this journey of learning 
here at IMI and later across Paris, Berlin and Milan to imbibe the culture of these countries 
and the best practices. The Advanced Management Programme is the ninth in the series and 
includes  study  visits  to  central  bank/leading  commercial  banks  of  these  countries  and 
interacting  with  their  senior  management,  the  objective  being  to  enable  the  participants  to 
see  world  class  banking  systems,  understand  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the 
European  banking  system  and  develop  awareness  and  appreciation  of  the  emerging 
business  environment.  Lectures  and  interactions  with  some  leading  academicians  and 
management  experts  of  the  European  business  schools  will  give  rare  insights  to  the 
participants  on  present  status  of  the  Eurozone  economies.  Apart  from  the  structured 
classroom learning, these kind of programmes offer a unique opportunity to the participants 
for  learning  from  each  other  and  also  understand  the  best  management  practices  across 
organizations.  It  is  expected  that  the  participants  will  try  to  develop  further  on  these  best 
practices and implement them in their organizations in their own way. All these and more are 
required as each one of you have a role to play in taking Indian banking to the next orbit. 
Having said that, I have been asked to speak on “The Indian Banking Sector: Towards the 
Next Orbit”. I would like to begin with an analogy. A spacecraft needs to achieve a certain 
momentum before it breaks free from the earth’s gravitational pull, leaves behind the familiar 
and comfortable and enters into the unchartered vastness of a new orbit. The success of the 
mission  and  certainty  of  reaching  its  goals  would  lie  in  how  effectively  it  has  made  its 
preparation,  the  skills  of  its  crew  and  its  ability  to  manage  the  risk  of  turbulence  and 
overcome the snags and obstacles in its flight path. The banking system is no different. To 
move into the next orbit, it is vital to understand the environment we are in, the inefficiencies, 
the pitfalls that limit growth and build on synergies and innovation for catapulting it into the 
future. 
The outlook for the global economy remains uncertain with green shoots of optimism in the 
US as fresh jobs were added, but the Eurozone remains embroiled in uncertainty of decision 
making and lack of consensus with the battered economies unwilling to commit bailout funds 
to  the  troubled  nations.  India  has  been  more  fortunate  in  that  it  has  emerged  virtually 
unscathed from the global crisis. A combination of strong regulation and supervision and a 
will to evolve policies that lean against the wind helped insulate the Indian financial system 
from  the  crisis.  It  helped  too  that  the  Indian  banks  were  not  very  sophisticated  and 
excessively  leveraged.  However,  in  a  world  where  financial  systems  recognize  no 
boundaries and the fortunes of nations are intertwined, no nation can consider itself an island 
and remain immune to the changes in the tides of the world economy for a prolonged period. 
If  the  envisaged  growth  rate  of  9  per  cent  per  annum  during  the  Twelfth  Plan  is  to  be 
achieved and banks have to remain competitive and continue to improve their margins, they 
would need to look at the new drivers of growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Key drivers for propelling Indian banking sector 
I. 
A recent IBA-FICCI-BCG report, titled "Being five-star in productivity-Roadmap for excellence 
in Indian banking" has projected that the domestic banking industry is set for an exponential 
growth in the coming years with its asset size poised to touch USD 28,500 billion by the turn 
of  the  2025  from  the  current  asset  size  of  USD  1,350  billion  (2010).  It  is  fairly  obvious  to 
presume that scope for such growth rates would inevitably usher in more competition for the 
Indian  banks  aided  in  part  by  regulatory  impulses  and  increased  openness  of  the  Indian 
economy.  Simultaneously,  the  reach  and  penetration  of  banking  is  going  to  increase 
tremendously due to the policy spotlight on inclusive growth and financial inclusion. Aiding 
the  transition  would  be  another  fortuitous  transformation  in  human  resources  area.  Public 
sector  banks  which  account  for  nearly  three  fourths  of  the  one  million  people  working  in 
Indian banks face the prospect of retirement of nearly 55 per cent of their people in the next 
decade. Thus, if ever there was a time for right sizing the organisation, hire the right talent, 
the right skilling of the workforce and bring about a cultural transformation, the time is now. 
We  are,  therefore,  on  the  cusp  of  a  defining  decade  in  banking  history.  What  are  the  key 
drivers  that  would  propel  the  Indian  banking  sector  into  the  next  orbit?  To  answer  this,  I 
would  draw  upon  extensively  from  an  address I  delivered at  BANCON  2011  where  I  have 
identified three sets of drivers – external, regulatory and internal which will define banking in 
the next decade. 
i. 
External drivers 
Financial inclusion 
A.  
The overriding and most transformative driver would be the policy imperative to extend the 
reach  of  banking  services  and  to  provide  fair,  transparent  and  affordable  products  and 
services. To borrow from the spacecraft analogy given previously, the momentum to escape 
to the next orbit will come from universal financial access. Apart from the potential to expand 
banks’ business manifold besides acquiring new customers for other value added services, 
they would have the satisfaction of contributing immensely to higher inclusive growth. This is 
an  opportunity  which  will  not  present  itself  again.  With  the  Government  of  India  and  the 
Reserve  Bank  prioritising  financial  inclusion,  banks  have  been  encouraged  to  expand  the 
network through setting up of new branches and also through the Business Correspondent 
Model.  Resultantly,  the  population  per  bank  branch  improved  from  14000  in  2009–10  to 
13466 in 2010–11 while population per ATM from 19,700 to 16243 during the same period. 
In June 2011, banks were advised to allocate at least 25 per cent of the total new branches 
to un-banked rural centres. The number of branches opened in hitherto un-banked centres 
has increased from 281 in 2009–10 to 470 in 2010–11, but the population per bank branch is 
significantly higher than the national average in the North East, Eastern and Central Regions. 
To strengthen the outreach of banking services, banks were advised to cover all villages with 
more  than  2000  population  with  at  least  one  banking  outlet  by  March  2012  and  also 
encouraged  to  cover  peripheral  villages  with  population  less  than  2000.  Banks  were  also 
required to put in place Board approved Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) and the Reserve Bank 
is monitoring the implementation of these plans. Significantly, the number of villages covered 
by  at  least  one  banking  outlet  grew  by  82  per  cent  in  2010–11  over  the  previous  year, 
besides  47  per  cent  of  the  villages  covered  under  FIPs  were  villages  with  population  less 
than 2000. Almost 77 per cent of the villages covered were through business correspondent 
model.  The  number  of  no  frills  accounts  also  grew  by  50  per  cent.  While  considerable 
progress has been made, a lot more needs to be done to garner the savings of households. 
The moderating of financial savings of households from 12.1 per cent of GDP in 2009–10 to 
9.7  per  cent  in  20010–11  is  an  area  of  concern.  Banks  need  to  tap  into  the  untapped 
business  opportunities  for  resources  to  power  the  growth  engine.  A  GDP  growth  target  of 
9 per cent requires harnessing resources and fortune at the bottom of the pyramid. The small 
customers  are  the  key  to  big  business  opportunities  waiting  to  be  tapped.  Improving  the 
quality  of  life  of  the  people  of  our  country  by  enabling  them  to  have  access  to  banking 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
services  could  be  the  next  big  game  changer  as  it  could  unlock  the  vast  potential  of  rural 
India. 
Competition, consolidation and globalisation 
B.  
The past decade has virtually been a sellers’ market in so far as the Indian banking sector is 
concerned. The ability of the customers to choose the banking products and services were 
severely  restricted  since  they  could  hardly  differentiate  between  the  product  and  service 
offerings  of  banks.  The  design  of  products  and  services  was  more  bank-centric  than 
customer-centric. A bank would now need to convince a customer as to why he should bank 
with them rather than another bank. While the lack of innovations by the banks could partially 
be  attributed  to  the  extant  regulatory  regime,  the  banks  on  their  part  have  also  remained 
largely unimaginative and lacked inspiration to experiment even after freeing of interest rates. 
The recent regulatory initiatives like deregulation of savings bank interest rates, opening of 
government business to more banks, etc. and some imminent steps such as licensing of new 
banks and subsidiarisation of the foreign bank branches, on the one hand, and the changing 
profile and simultaneously rising aspirations and expectations of the customers on the other, 
should make the turf more competitive and increasingly, a buyers’ market. 
In  view  of  the  impending  competition,  banks  would  be  forced  to  take  a  hard  look  at  their 
existing  bouquet  of  product  and  service  offerings  and  customer  base  so  that  they  may 
reposition themselves as “differentiated and niche” players. The increased competition could 
also drive a spate of mergers among existing players and lead to consequent consolidation 
within  the  sector.  The entry  of  new  players  will  also spur  efficiency  and  productivity  in  the 
system. While, at the moment, financial inclusion takes precedence, once financial inclusion 
is substantially achieved, the banks may focus on consolidation. As the Indian banking sector 
is propelled forward to a higher orbit, the banks would have to strive to remain “relevant” in 
the changed economic environment by reworking their business strategy, designing products 
with the customer in mind, focussing on improving the efficiency of their services and having 
global ambitions. The mantra would be to “Innovate or perish”. 
Globalisation of Indian banks could be a consequence of their customers becoming global 
once increased competition and consolidation set in. Apart from banks’ own global ambitions, 
as  Indian  businesses  turn  global,  their  need  for  financial  products  and  services  would  be 
reason enough for banks to go global to service them. However, banking is a business of 
size and more so for those that harbour global aspirations. Hence, consolidation is one way 
to achieve the needed scale. Thus, the second set of external drivers that could propel the 
Indian  banking  to  the  next  orbit  would  be  increased  competition,  consolidation  and 
globalisation. 
Regulatory drivers 
ii.  
The  next  set  of  drivers  which  would  also  be  essentially  external  in  nature  would  be  those 
provided  by  the  regulator.  Across  the  globe  there  is  an  increased  convergence  and 
realisation that regulations would become more stringent especially in the areas of providing 
fair treatment to customers, KYC norms and risk management. 
Fair treatment to customers 
A.  
In recent times, the provision of fair treatment to customers has gained prominence globally. 
The writing is firmly on the wall that regulations in this area are likely to become stricter in 
years to come. Banking/ financial services industry being a highly regulated industry with stiff 
entry  norms,  regulators  have  a  critical  role  in  ensuring  fair  treatment  to  customers  and  it 
cannot be left to the market forces alone. Banks need to price their products and services 
fairly and competitively and ensure higher transparency in their products and pricing. Lack of 
transparency  in  designing  and  pricing  of  products  and  services  and  selling  them  to 
inappropriate customers could expose banks to litigation, reputational risks besides making 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
them liable for supervisory action. There should be no unreasonable post sale barriers if the 
customers wish to change product or bank. Customer education is also critical to providing 
appropriate and need based products and services and Indian Banks’ Association may have 
a critical role to play in this regard. The banking business would thus have to turn customer 
centric in all its true dimensions. 
Knowing your customer 
B. 
A customer-centric business needs to know its customer, the nature of his business and the 
inflows/  outflows  into  the  accounts,  if  it  is  to  provide  customised  business  products  and 
solutions. But, banks need to understand the risks associated with customer’s business to 
manage risks arising from potential delinquency, fraud and consequent losses as also legal 
and  reputational  risks  arising  from  exposure  to  customers  having  links  to  Multi  level 
Marketing (MLM) business/terrorist activities/hawala transactions, etc. Know Your Customer 
(KYC), Know Your Customers’ Business (KYB) and Know Your Customers’ Business Risks 
(KYCBR) should be ingrained in the DNA of the bank’s business. It should be understood 
that  it  is  not  just  procedural  compliance,  but  that  good  KYC  and  KYCBR  compliance  are 
good for the bank’s business. 
The banking system runs on information and data. Although financial data are made up of 
innumerable complex components, one of the fundamental building blocks is reference data 
about  companies,  organizations,  firms  and  individuals  customer.  Reference  data  might 
include a number of things, but an essential component is a systematic structure or code that 
uniquely  identifies  each  entity.  Essentially  a  bank  should  have  a  Unique  Customer 
Identification (UCI) Code which helps it to identify a customer, track facilities availed, monitor 
financial transactions in various accounts for compliance with KYC/AML regulations. A key 
factor in ensuring KYC compliance is having a Unique Customer Identification Code which 
may  serve  as  a  lynchpin  for  financial  data  and  assist  in  improving  regulation,  risk 
management  and  business  processes.  It  would  help  the  bank  identify  the  customer,  track 
facilities  availed,  monitor  financial  transactions  across  accounts  for  compliance  with 
KYC/AML regulations. The UCI should eventually graduate to a Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 
which  is  a  unique  ID  associated  with  a  single  corporate  entity  which  assists  in  easy 
identification of the same party across multiple financial market utilities and aids in tracking 
settlement  activity  and  exposures.  The  financial  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  the  extreme 
“complexity  of 
that  exist  between  parties, 
counterparties, issuers, guarantees, and guarantors and the domino effect that takes place 
should one or more of the nodes within these horizontal or vertical relationships come under 
pressure. Unique identification of each and every entity would be critical to unravelling these 
linkages and (inter)relationships. 
Some  of  the  Indian  banks  have  developed  UCI  numbers  which  enables  them  to  track  the 
transactions  of  customers  across  the  bank  and  monitor  customer  wise  exposure  limits, 
account status and generate AML alerts/reports for FIU-IND filings etc. However, there is no 
unique number to identify a single customer across the banking system based on a shared 
database  which  provides  an  avenue  for  the  customers  to  circumvent  the  risk  profiling 
guidelines and obtain multiple facilities across banks by opening several accounts. Even for 
banks that have some form of unique customer identification, there is no guarantee that a 
single customer does not hold multiple IDs. 
The  principles  behind  the  Legal  Entity  Identifier  (one  entity  –  one  identifier)  could  be 
borrowed for shaping the KYC/ AML framework for the Indian banks. Towards this end, the 
UIDAI initiative, Aadhaar, launched by the Government of India, which is envisaged to issue 
a  unique  identification  number  to  individuals  that  can  be  verified  and  authenticated  in  an 
online, cost-effective manner for eliminating duplicate and fake identities, could be leveraged 
upon  by  the  banking  system.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  UIDAI  uses  a  state  of  the  art 
biometric technology (combining both – 10 Finger Prints and 2 Iris) and has achieved a high 
degree of accuracy (99.96 per cent) in duplication detection. 
interrelationships”  and  dependencies 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Presently the Reserve Bank guidelines permit the use of Aadhaar as a KYC document for 
small accounts. Since the coverage of the entire set of bank customers/potential customers 
under  Aadhaar  would  take  time,  in  the  interim,  the  banks  should  consider  putting  in  place 
unique  identification  numbers  for  each  of  their  customers  and  filter  out  multiple  banking 
facilities availed by them through a de-duplication exercise. The banks could also work jointly 
to  set  up  a  shared  database  which  would  enable  them  to  securely  see  information  on  a 
customer (KYC information and facilities availed from various banks etc.) based on a unique 
identifier i.e. his Aadhaar ID. In the process, banks would be able to leverage upon the KYC 
exercise already carried out by the previous bank and also benefit from consequent lower 
customer  acquisition  costs,  simplified  account  opening  processes  without  repeated 
burdensome procedures for the customers and also promote financial inclusion. 
Risk management 
C.  
The road ahead demands that banks further refine their risk management skills for enterprise 
wide  risk  management.  Globally,  there  is  an  inexorable  move  towards  more  advanced 
approaches  to  risk  management.  However,  we  are  still  at  a  very  rudimentary  stage.  As 
capital  comes  always  at  a  cost,  banks  need  to  have  in  place  a  fair  and  differentiated  risk 
pricing of products and services. This involves costing, a quantitative assessment of revenue 
streams from each product and service and an efficient Transfer Pricing Mechanism which 
would determine capital allocation. Each business unit in the enterprise would have to aim at 
being  a  profit  centre  within  the  overall  risk  –return  framework.  In  essence,  it  would  mean 
accountability for profit tempered by the discipline of risk–return within a deeply embedded 
culture of good governance, the tone of which is set by the bank’s Top Management. As an 
illustration,  the  base  rate  is  intended  to  serve  as  a  benchmark  for  interest  rates.  Our  past 
experience  has  been  of  poor  customers  subsidising  the  rich  borrowers.  Also,  there  are 
incidences  of  rampant  mis-pricing  of  risks.  From  a  business  perspective,  pricing  of  assets 
should  be  non-discriminatory  and  in  line  with  risk  rating  of  the  customer.  A  lower  rated 
customer  should  not  get  a  better  price  than  a  higher  rated  customer.  Once  these  basic 
issues  are addressed, other  issues  such  as  migration  to  advanced  approaches  etc.  would 
gain importance. 
Migration to advanced approaches under Basel II 
All  the  Indian  banks  have  adopted  the  standardised  approaches  under  the  Basel  II 
framework  in  2009,  however,  the  pace  of  migration  to  the  advanced  approaches  has 
naturally been very slow. Though the Reserve Bank has set an indicative time schedule for 
implementation  of  the  Advanced  Approaches,  banks’  response  has  been  less  than 
encouraging  so  far.  Migration  to  the  Advanced  Approaches  is  important  for  larger  banks 
because  it  involves  adoption  of  more  sophisticated  risk  management  systems.  Moreover, 
there are reputational issues too if large banks continue with standardised approaches. Apart 
from the fundamental issues mentioned above, much of this sluggishness could be attributed 
to issues relating to development of human resource skills, technology upgradation, branch 
interconnectivity,  availability  and  management  of  historical  data,  robustness  of  risk 
management systems, etc. within the banks. Even within the Reserve Bank, the supervisors 
would have to make rapid strides to be able to appreciate the nuances associated with the 
quantitative techniques and modelling. 
Journey to Basel III regime 
(a)  
An  assessment  of  Indian  banks’  capital  requirements  under  Basel  III  has  revealed  that, 
notwithstanding some issues with a few individual banks, the system as a whole, is very well 
capitalised and the transition to the revised capital norms of overall capital adequacy, Tier I 
component or equity component would be smooth. The stress, however, could however arise 
from a need for the banks to adjust the unamortized portion of Pension and Gratuity liabilities 
in the opening balance sheet on April 1, 2013 on transition to IFRS. 
Capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Addressing too-big to fail 
(b)  
The negative externalities associated with the large and complex financial institutions forced 
the Central Banks/Governments the world over to bail them out during the financial crisis by 
committing taxpayers’ money. With an eye on reducing the probability and impact of failure of 
such global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) as also to reduce the inherent competitive 
advantages  they  enjoy  in  the  funding  markets,  the  standard  setters  have  agreed  on  a 
combination  of  capital  surcharges,  better  resolution  regimes,  living  wills,  more  robust 
financial  market  infrastructures  and  a  more  intense  supervision  for  these  systemically 
important financial institutions since then. Large size, excessive interconnectedness, reliance 
on  a  single  or  few  firms  for  the  provision  of  key  financial  infrastructure,  and  complexity  of 
operations  and  cross-border  activity  have  been  identified  as  key  indicators  of  systemic 
importance of internationally active banks by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS). Financial Stability Board (FSB) has since released the names of the 29 banks which 
have been reckoned as G-SIBs based on the criteria laid down by BCBS. 
While  none  of  the  Indian  banks  feature  in  this  list  of  29  G-SIBs,  the  BCBS  and  FSB  are 
already  working  towards  laying  down  a  criterion  for  identification  of  domestic  SIBs  which 
would need to be subjected to additional capital and liquidity requirements on the lines of that 
applicable  to  the  G-SIBs.  The  industry  may  argue  that  the  Indian  banks  are  very  well 
capitalised and no additional capital may be necessary on account of the SIFI-ness of the 
banks. As part of the superequivalence to Basel III banking reforms, under which the national 
regulators  prescribe  a  much  higher  regulatory  capital  ratios  as  compared  to  the  Basel 
norms,,  the  Swiss  banking  regulator  has  already  set  much  more  stringent  capital 
requirements for the largest Swiss banks and the United Kingdom is expected to follow suit 
based  on  the  report  of  the  Independent  Banking  Commission..  The  readiness  of  banks  to 
these  evolving  regulatory  requirements  would  very  critically  determine  whether  they  can 
successfully transit to the next orbit. 
iii.  
Internal drivers 
Managing human resources 
A.  
An  organisation  can  only  be  as  good  as  its  people.  They  are  the  force  behind  innovation, 
business process re-engineering and making the difference between success and failure. A 
committed and highly motivated work force can make the difference in winning and retaining 
customers  as  banking  is  a  people  oriented  business.  Banks  have  to  be  knowledge 
organisations, able to attract and retain talent. HR policies should look at right size, right fit 
and career growth with market related compensation. Increasingly, there is a going to be an 
intense competition for the right kind of talent as they are likely to be in short supply. The 
demand  will  not  only  stem  from  domestic  institutions  but  it  will  also  be  from  foreign 
institutions  and  countries.  The  challenge  before  Indian  banks  is  therefore  to  revitalise 
themselves  by  hiring  the  right  talent,  investing  in  training  and  bringing  about  a  vibrant 
transformation in their DNA, in effect doing what Sumantra Ghoshal, the management guru 
and  Founding  Dean  of  the  Indian  School  of  Business,  called  changing  the  “Smell  of  the 
Workplace”. Successful organizations, he felt, exude a vibrancy which uniquely defines the 
“Smell  of  the  Workplace”.  Ghoshal  describes  the  smell  of  the  air  in  the  forest  of 
Fontainebleau, 40 miles south of Paris, the vibrancy which spurs the casual walker to run, 
jog or do something, and is in essence revitalising. He compares it to downtown Kolkata in 
summer  which  is  hot  and  drains  energy  and  vitality.  Most  large  companies  in  India  and 
abroad, he felt end up creating downtown Kolkata in summer inside themselves. The smell of 
the  workplace  then  becomes  encapsulated  in  an  environment  of  constraints,  where 
jobs/relationships are only contracts and actions are defined by control and compliance. As 
opposed  to  it,  successful  companies  promote  stretch,  which  means  doing  more  with  self 
discipline,  as  opposed  to  control  there  is  support  and  enhancing  collaboration  across  the 
organisation through combination of support on the one hand and trust on the other. The real 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
source  of  competitive  advantage  in  organizations  is  not  merely  in  technology  but  in  the 
behaviour  of  individuals  in  the  organisation  where  each  one  of  them  takes  initiative, 
collaborates, has self confidence, has commitment to himself, to their teams, to their units, 
and  to  their  organisation.  The  challenge  before  management  is  to  use  the  vast  unused 
potential in people and make ordinary people produce extraordinary results thereby changing 
the smell of the workplace. 
Leveraging technology 
B.  
A recent article in the Economic Times dated December 27, 2011 detailed how e-governance 
initiative helped check grass root pension fraud. In Keregodu village in Karnataka’s Mandya 
district, senior citizens, all 65-plus, face an endless wait in front of the local post office for 
their pension money orders. Hours later they are told by a post office official – “the money 
had  already  been  collected  by  someone”.  In  this  south-eastern  district  of  Karnataka, 
thousands of pensioners haven’t received their pension and entitlements for months – it is 
siphoned off in transit. Even  worse, out of the  2,95,525 pensioners in the district – whose 
allowances get released from the state treasury every month – names of 37,000 are missing 
– causing a monthly loss of nearly Rs 1.48 crore to the exchequer (or Rs 17.76 crore a year). 
The state also suffers on account of distribution and delivery losses for pensioners whose 
name  exists  but  still  do  not  get  their  money.  But  the  situation  in  Mandya,  a  thriving 
agricultural town till the late 1980s, is set to change with the state government along with an 
IT services firm digitising the entire pension records and issuing smart cards to pensioners to 
plug  the  leakage.  It  is  perhaps  one  of  the  biggest  financial  inclusion  projects  where 
technology can come to the aid of thousands of old and poor farmers, widows and other rural 
pensioners.  But  that’s  only  the  first  part.  For  the  last-mile  authentication  and  financial 
transaction,  the  state  government  has  tied  up  with  a  Karnataka-based  bank.  A  bank 
correspondent  will  now  be  sent  to  each  pensioner’s  house  with  a  card-reader  where  the 
pensioner  would  swipe  his  smart  card  and  give  his  thumb  impression.  Once  the  bank 
receives the data at its central server, the amount would be credited to the pensioner’s bank 
account.  The  system  is  expected  to  fight  ground-level  corruption  by  cross-checking  the 
pensioner’s  identity  against  multiple  databases,  making  it  difficult  for  any  single  agency  or 
person  to  log  false  information.  This  would  make  a  huge  difference  to  the  lives  of  the 
pensioners. Technology, the will and desire to make a difference to the lives of the rural poor 
living on the fringes of financial exclusion are the change agents. 
Most banks are already on Core Banking Systems (CBS) which covers banking operations 
pertaining to deposits, withdrawals, credit delivery, back-office operations etc. Banks need to 
look beyond Core Banking to harness the benefits of technology. CBS could provide inputs 
for developing customised products based on customer data base. It would help in planning 
product  delivery  and  service  at  multiple/selected  delivery  points  and  better  Customer 
Relationship  Management  and  building  lasting  customer  relationships  which  will  translate 
into  higher  revenues.  Technology  needs  to  be  more  customer  focussed  than  employee  or 
vendor focussed. The costs of banking transactions need to be dramatically reduced just as 
in so many other fields such as telecom after the advent of technology. In case of glitches, 
the rectification must be swift to instil faith and confidence in the system. It is only the more 
agile and innovative players who will stay ahead in the game. Along with IT solutions arise 
allied  issues  such  as  IT  security,  governance  and  audits.  Gaps  in  IT  security  could  make 
banks  vulnerable  to  data  piracy,  fraud  and  operational  risk  leading  to  reputation  risk  and 
erosion of customer confidence. 
Improving managing information systems 
C. 
MIS is an inseparable part of bank’s decision making process. The integrity and timeliness of 
data  is  critical  in  formulating  the  bank’s  capital  planning,  business  strategies,  reviewing 
achievements  vis-a-vis  targets,  formulating  course  correction  exercises  where  required, 
feeding data into stress tests and importantly taking action on the outcomes. This brings us 
to  technology  support  for  decision  making.  Banks  have  made  huge  investments  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
technology, which should be translated into better MIS as decision support systems and yield 
returns on investment by providing economical, affordable and customised customer centric 
banking  solutions.  The  use  of  technology  should  not  be  seen  as  an  end  in  itself  but  as  a 
means to an end. 
Business plan, strategy and vision 
D.  
The role of banks’ Boards would become increasingly crucial in the next decade in view of 
the  looming  competition.  The  Board  would  need  to  have  a  clear  vision  for  the  bank,  a 
strategy to achieve its objectives, both medium and long-term and a well laid out long-term 
plan.  The  banks  would  need  to  look  beyond  their  existing  customer  base  and  large 
corporates  and  reach  out  to  rope  in  the  vast  number  of  small,  retail  and  the  SME  clients 
which are presently deprived of bank credit. Alongside extending the reach of their banking 
services there would be a need to improve the products offered to customers and the quality 
of services. They need to have proper business model and delivery model. 
Managing change in the emerging regulatory and supervisory landscape 
II.  
It  has  become  fashionable  to  attribute  any  adverse  feature  to  the  economic  downturn. 
Perhaps,  we  need  to  draw  the  right  lessons,  learn  from  it  and  move  ahead  so  as  not  to 
repeat it in future. As an example, the 2011 financial results of most banks show a growing 
increase in NPAs. While some slippage in an economic downturn is inevitable ,it does not 
absolve banks from quick mortality/slippage due to adverse credit selection, lack of critical 
credit appraisal and due diligence, laxity in monitoring end use of funds and performance of 
the account. I am reminded of a story in the times of the Great Depression. 
A man stood at the street corner every day selling hamburgers. He was cheerful and whistled 
a  tune  as  he  sold  his  tasty  hamburgers.  His  cheerful  demeanour  and  modestly  priced 
hamburgers had a brisk sale. He had through his trade managed not only to do well but also 
put his son through University. One day when the son came home on a holiday and saw his 
father plying his trade as usual he was surprised. “Dad”, he said, “You shouldn’t be making 
so  many  hamburgers  as  we  are  going  through  the  Great  Depression”.  And  then  the  boy 
proceeded  to  educate  his  father  on  the  finer  details  of  the  Depression.  The  father  thought 
over what his son said and made fewer hamburgers. At work he was preoccupied and less 
cheerful each day. Soon sales dwindled. Returning home one day with his products unsold, 
he said to his son: “Son, you were right about the Great Depression. That’s the advantage of 
a university education!” 
The stable funding profile of commercial banks – strong retail franchise and relatively less 
dependence on wholesale funding is a comforting factor. Even under a worst case scenario 
wherein  the  quarterly  growth  rate  of  September  2011  in  gross  NPAs  and  gross  advances 
continues for the next two quarters and GNPA ratio reaches 3.74 per cent; the system would 
remain  resilient  as  per  the  results  of  the  credit  risk  tests  mentioned  in  the  latest  Financial 
Stability Report (FSR). The report goes on to predict that even under a worse case scenario 
when NPAs are assumed to grow by 150 per cent and the NPA ratio reaches 7 per cent, the 
system  as  a  whole  would  remain  resilient  inasmuch  as  its  CRAR  would  remain  at  11  per 
cent, though some of the banks may come under duress. But, pressures are building up in 
certain infrastructure sectors especially power sector, aviation, telecom, which could further 
increase  the  NPAs.  Increase  in  interest  rate  and  slowing  economic  growth  may  adversely 
impinge  on  repayment  capacity  of  all  categories  of  borrowers  especially  those  from  SSI, 
MSE,  etc.  There  could  be  renewed  requests  for  further  restructuring  from  several  sectors. 
Banks,  however,  need  to  strengthen  their  credit  appraisal  and  monitoring  system  as  also 
recovery  efforts.  Recovery  through  compromise  settlements/under  OTS  should  be  a 
transparent and analytical process after assessing all the options and ensuring that the net 
present value of the settlement amount is not less than the net present value of the realisable 
value of the available securities. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The idea behind this digression was to illustrate that for banks to move to the next orbit, they 
have to realise their true strengths and weaknesses. They need to build on their strengths 
and  rectify  their  weaknesses  to  prepare  and  adapt  themselves  for  the  challenges  which 
these external, regulatory and internal drivers are going to entail. In this, a very relevant and 
critical issue which emerges is whether the regulatory and supervisory processes are also 
geared up for the next orbit. 
How equipped are the supervisors? 
III.  
The existing supervisory framework for commercial banks in India has fared rather well over 
the years and drawn praise from peer supervisory agencies, global standard setters and the 
FSAP  assessors  for  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  as  the  Indian  banking  system 
remained largely stable during the global financial crisis. 
However,  as  supervisors,  we  face  challenges.  The  growing  complexities  of  the  banking 
business coupled with significant cross-border and cross-sector expansion has rendered the 
system increasingly vulnerable to the threat of “contagion”. The paradigm shift in the banks’ 
business processes, products and systems with an ever-growing reliance on ICT, as delivery 
channels pose immense challenges before the banking supervisor. While on the one hand, 
the  banking  landscape  has  witnessed  considerable  changes,  the  supervisory  processes 
within the Reserve Bank have remained more or less static. This has necessitated a review 
of  the  supervisory  processes  and  rationalisation  of  the  organisational  structure  for  bank 
supervision. Additionally, lessons from the financial crisis which have manifested in form of 
new regulatory and supervisory benchmarks like Basel III, revisions to the Core Principles for 
Effective Bank Supervision, increased focus on systemically important banks also have to be 
factored in for making the supervisory processes and mechanism at the Reserve Bank more 
robust and capable of addressing emerging issues. 
The present supervisory processes followed by the Reserve Bank are focused on elaborate 
transaction testing and compliance monitoring and do not provide a forward looking measure 
of risk that the supervised entities pose to the supervisory objectives. We need to move away 
from transaction based to risk based and from incidence based to theme based supervision. 
The on-site assessment and the off-site surveillance processes also need rationalization so 
that efforts made by the external /internal auditors of banks could be effectively utilised and 
duplication  avoided.  Supervision  has  to  be  intrusive  and  decisive.  The  basic  underlying 
theme  should  be  that  supervision  must  facilitate  good  business  and  must  obstruct  bad 
business.  Another  issue  worth  pondering  is  whether  the  Reserve  Bank’s  supervision  adds 
value for the supervised entity or is it an “unnecessary evil” that they have to endure. With a 
view  to  addressing  some  of  the  above  mentioned  shortcomings,  the  Board  for  Financial 
Supervision has constituted a High Level Steering Committee which is conducting a thorough 
assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  supervisory  policies,  procedures  and 
processes  and  would  recommend  measures  to  make  the  Reserve  Bank’s  supervisory 
policies  comparable  to  the  global  standards  and  be  more  value-adding  to  the  supervised 
entities. 
The  approach  to  supervision  world  over  is  undergoing  a  change  with  the  financial  system 
under increased public scrutiny and movements such as the Occupy Wall Street movement 
gaining traction. Both the Central Bank and supervised entities are increasingly accountable 
for their actions. The challenge for the supervisors is to be nimble footed and attuned to the 
changes and nuances in the way banks do their business, identify emerging areas of risk for 
the bank and the banking system and intervene swiftly where required. Financial stability is 
on  top  of  every  Central  Bank’s  agenda  and  the  Reserve  Bank  is  no  exception.  Besides 
changes in the way it supervises and inspects banks, it is looking at closer collaboration with 
other supervisors both at home and overseas. MoUs with other supervisors overseas is part 
of our ongoing effort for sharing supervisory information. The Bank is also working to bring in 
legislative  changes  in  the  statues  to  give  it  greater  autonomy  in  entering  into  MoUs, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
collaborating  with  overseas  /other  supervisors  and  strengthen  powers  of  supervision  over 
entities in a conglomerate, among others. 
The  changes  in  the  way  banks  do  business,  increased  sophistication  of  products  and 
services calls for capacity building not only in banks but also for the supervisor. the Reserve 
Bank is investing in human resources through focused skill building and collaborative efforts 
with other supervisory agencies, the World Bank and top training institutes both at home and 
abroad to be on top of the learning curve. 
Conclusion: Prepare to move into the next orbit 
We are at the cusp of a defining decade in the banking system. The Indian banking system 
has  come  a  long  way  in  terms  of  technology,  business  systems  and  processes.  It  has 
weathered the global economic crisis, but going forward it needs to focus on the key drivers 
of growth to be globally competitive. The lodestone of external impulses would be financial 
inclusion  and  the  other  key  stones  would  be  competition,  consolidation  and  globalisation. 
The  regulatory  drivers  would  be  more  stringent  regulations,  essentially  in  fair  treatment  to 
customers, know your customer norms and risk management. The internal impetus would be 
provided  by  the  unique  human  resources  opportunities  created  by  impending  retirements, 
leveraging technology to increase reach, lower costs and provide improved customer service 
and  to  re-orient  the  organisation  to  be  customer  centric  in  all  its  manifestation.  It  would 
require the complete involvement of the top management and board of banks. Each one of 
you has a role to play in this agenda and stretch to achieve the objectives that would make 
your organisations from good to great and take it to the next orbit. 
I wish you all success in this endeavour. 
References 
1. 
Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty (2011), “Gearing up for the Competitive Impulse of the Indian 
Banking in its Defining Decade”, BANCON 2011, Chennai 
Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 2010–11 
“The Smell of the Place” by Professor Sumantra Ghoshal  
2. 
3. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
