K C Chakrabarty: Empowering MSMEs for financial inclusion and growth – 
the role of banks and industry associations 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “SME 
Banking  Conclave  2012”  organised  by  the  SME  Chamber  of  India,  Mumbai,  4  February 
2012. 
 Assistance provided by Smt Lily Vadera in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri  G.  N.  Bajpai,  Former  Chairman,  SEBI  &  Chairman,  Indian  SME  Knowledge  Forum, 
Shri M. Narendra, Chairman & Managing Director, Indian Overseas Bank, Shri N. Shankar, 
CMD,  ECGC,  Shri  A.  Krishna  Kumar,  MD,  SBI,  Shri  R.  K.  Dubey,  ED,  CBI, 
Dr K. Ramakrishnan, CEO, Indian Banks’ Association, Shri K V Srinivasan, CEO, Reliance 
Commercial  Finance  Ltd,  Shri  Chandrakant  Salunkhe,  President,  SME  Chamber  of  India, 
SME Entrepreneurs, other distinguished guests, members of the print and electronic media, 
ladies and gentlemen. 
1. 
It is a matter of great pleasure for me to be present here today at the “SME Banking 
Conclave  2012”  and  share  some  of  my  thoughts  and  experiences  on  the  development  of 
MSMEs  which  is  a  vital  sector  of  our  economy.  This  Conclave  gains  importance  in  the 
context of globalization when the Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) face challenges and 
take advantage of opportunities created. Such a forum helps in garnering and shaping public 
opinion, building consensus, crystallizing policy inputs and giving us feedback on our policy 
initiatives. I congratulate SME Chamber of India for organizing the “SME Banking Conclave 
2012”. The SME Chambers has succeeded in bringing a large number of MSMEs under a 
single umbrella, thereby, making it a potent and active forum for dialogue with the potential 
partners in the development of the MSME sector in the country, which includes the industry, 
the financial sector and the Government. 
Importance of the MSME sector 
2.  
As all of you are associated in some ways with the MSME sector, its critical role and 
place  in  the  Indian  economy  is  very  well  known  to  all  of  you  in  terms  of  employment 
generation, exports and economic empowerment of a vast section of the population and I do 
not want to spend a lot of time overemphasizing it. But let me quote just a couple of statistics. 
As per available statistics (4th Census of MSME Sector), this sector employs an estimated 
59.7  million  persons  spread  over  26.1  million  enterprises.  It  is  estimated  that  in  terms  of 
value, MSME sector accounts for about 45% of the manufacturing output and around 40% of 
the total export of the country which is next only to the agricultural sector. It is, therefore, only 
appropriate  that  public  policy  has  accorded  high  priority  to  this  sector  in  order  to  achieve 
balanced, sustainable, more equitable and inclusive growth in the country.  
The MSMEs primarily rely on bank finance for their operations and as such ensuring 
3.  
timely  and  adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  sector  has  been  an  overriding  public  policy 
objective.  Over  the  years  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  credit  extended  to  this 
sector by the banks. As at the end of March 2011, the total outstanding credit provided by all 
Scheduled  Commercial  Banks  (SCBs)  to  the  MSE  sector  stood  at  Rs.4785.27  billion  as 
against Rs. 3622.90 billion in March 2010 registering an increase of 32%. The outstanding 
credit for the last four years to the MSE sector is given in Table 1.1 below: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Table1.1 
Outstanding credit to the MSE sector by SCBs 
(No. of A/Cs – in million) (Amount – Rs. in billion) 
   Year 
Last Friday 
of 
March 2008* 
March 2009 
March 2010# 
March 2011 
 Public Sector Banks 
No of 
A/Cs 
3.967 
4.115 
(3.73%) 
7.217 
(75.38%) 
7.398 
(2.51%) 
Amt O/s 
1511.374 
1914.083 
(26.64%) 
2763.189 
(44.36%) 
3694.30 
(33.70%) 
   Private Sector Banks 
No of 
A/Cs 
0.819 
0.678 
(‐17.21%)
1.131 
(66.81%) 
1.718 
(51.90%) 
Amt O/s 
469.118 
466.563 
(0.54%)
648.247 
(38.94%) 
881.16 
(35.93%) 
 Foreign Banks 
No of 
A/Cs 
0.065 
0.058 
(‐10.78%)
0.157 
Amt O/s 
154.892 
180.634 
(16.61%) 
211.470 
(17.07%) 
209.81 
(‐0.78%) 
(170.69%)
0.186 
(18.47%) 
All Scheduled 
Commercial Banks 
Amt O/s 
No of A/Cs 
  4.851 
4.851 
(No change) 
8.505 
(75.32%) 
9.302 
(9.37%) 
2135.386
2561.280
(19.94%)
3622.907
(41.44%) 
4785.27 
(32.08%) 
* change in definition of the sector as per the MSMED Act 2006 advised to banks in 2007 
# Retail trade included in service sector 
Source:  Scheduled Commercial Banks 
Note: Figs. In parentheses indicates Y(cid:31)o(cid:31)Y % growth/decline 
4.  
The total MSE Credit as percentage of Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) has been 
increasing since 2007 as shown below in Chart 1.1. In March 2011, it stood at 14.8% for the 
Public Sector Banks (PSBs). 
Chart 1.1 
Credit to the MSE by PSBs (as % to ANBC) 
5.  
Despite the increase in credit outstanding to the sector, the MSME borrowers feel 
that the lenders are not doing enough for the MSMEs and are catering more to the needs of 
the large corporates. This gap in perception needs to be bridged. 
6.  
SMEs face a number of problems, such as, absence of adequate and timely banking 
finance, limited capital and knowledge, non-availability of suitable technology, low production 
capacity,  ineffective  marketing  strategy,  identification  of  new  markets,  constraints  on 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Access to credit 
modernisation & expansion, non availability of highly skilled labour at affordable cost, follow 
up  with  various  government  agencies  to  resolve  problems,  etc.  More  recently,  the  MSME 
Association/Chambers feel that the global recession, inflation and depreciation of the rupee 
is affecting them adversely. 
7.  
I  would  now  like  to  highlight  some  of  the  major  constraints  faced  by  the  MSME 
sector and the important measures taken by Government of India and Reserve Bank of India 
to address them: 
(i) 
Access  to  timely  and  adequate  credit  is  critical  for  MSMEs  growth  and  development.  To 
ensure enhanced credit flow to the sector, and more so to the micro units, in terms of the 
recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs (Chairman: Shri T.K.A.Nair, 
Principal  Secretary,  Government  of  India)  constituted  by  the  Government  of  India,  banks 
have been advised to achieve a 20 per cent year-on-year growth in credit to micro and small 
enterprises;  the  allocation  of  60%  of  the  MSE  advances  to  the  micro  enterprises  is  to  be 
achieved in stages viz. 50% in the year 2010–11, 55% in the year 2011–12 and 60% in the 
year  2012–13  and  achieve  a  10%  annual  growth  in  number  of  micro  enterprise  accounts. 
The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the achievement of targets by banks on a quarterly 
basis. The matter is followed up with the laggard banks to know their constraints and impress 
upon  them  the  need  to  devise  strategies  to  gear  up  the  credit  mechanism  for  the  sector. 
While  the  banks  have  achieved  the  target  of  20%  y-o-y  growth  in  credit  to  the  sector  the 
target for the micro units is still an area of concern. The banks have been advised to device 
strategies to step up their lending to micro units. 
I would, however, like to clarify to the MSME units, the difference between credit and money 
which  should  be  clearly  understood.  Unlike  money,  credit  has  to  be  self-liquidating  on  a 
viable project and has a cost. It is to be appreciated that banks are highly leveraged bodies 
that  lend  money  placed  by  depositors  with  them  and  therefore,  have  to  practice  prudent 
lending and be cautious and sure of the safety of the money of their depositors. On the cost 
of credit, while interest rates have been deregulated by Reserve Bank of India, my message 
to the MSME sector is that as interest costs are a very small fraction of their operating costs, 
only approximately 4%, do not ask for low interest rates from the banking sector, and instead 
ask for credit at competitive rates. 
Further,  the  extent  of  financial  exclusion  in  the  sector  is  very  high  as  shown  in  Chart  1.2 
below. 
The statistics compiled in the Fourth Census of MSME sector September 2009 revealed that 
only  5.18%  of  the  units  (both  registered  and  unregistered)  had  availed  of  finance  through 
institutional sources, 2.05% had finance from non-institutional sources the majority of units 
i.e. 92.77% had no finance or depended on self finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Chart 1.2 
Financial Exclusion in MSME Sector 
 Source: Highlights of 4th Census on MSMEs 
 There  is,  therefore,  a  need  to  ensure  access  of  banking  facilities  in  the  remote 
unbanked/under banked areas. Financial inclusion, including MSME finance and the drive to 
universal access is the national mandate. Financial inclusion makes growth broad based and 
sustainable by progressively encompassing the hitherto excluded population. 
With an objective of ensuring uniform progress in provision of banking services in all parts of 
the country, banks were advised to draw up a roadmap to provide banking services through 
a banking outlet in every unbanked village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2012. 
The  Reserve  Bank  advised  banks  that  such  banking  services  need  not  necessarily  be 
extended through a brick and mortar branch but could be provided also through any of the 
various forms of Information and Communication Technology (ICT)-based models, including 
Banking Correspondents (BCs). About 74,000 such unbanked villages have been identified 
and allotted to various banks through State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs). As at the 
end  of  September  2011,  as  reported  by  the  State  Level  Bankers’  Committees  of  various 
states/Union  Territories,  banking  outlets  have  been  opened  in  42,079  villages  across  the 
various  States  in  the  country.  This  comprises  of  1127  branches,  39998  business 
correspondents  and  954  other  modes  like  rural  ATMs,  mobile  vans  etc.  In  addition,  the 
Reserve Bank of India has advised banks to roll out the Financial Inclusion Plans (FIP) for 
drawing up an action plan to provide banking facilities in villages with population less than 
2000 through multiple channels. 
(ii) 
Venture  /Risk  capital  is  often  a  more  appropriate  financing  instrument  for  high-growth-
potential  and  start-up  SMEs.  Although  MSMEs  commonly  use  traditional  debt,  this  type  of 
financing is often not accessible for fast-growth and start-up firms. During their initial phase, 
firms  need  finance  to  study,  assess  and  develop  an  initial  concept  (seed  phase)  or  for 
product development and initial marketing (start-up phase). At this stage, firms may be in the 
process  of  being  set  up  or  may  exist,  but  have  yet  to  sell  their  product  or  service 
commercially. High-growth firms usually develop an idea, concept or product that requires an 
incubation  period  before  generating  revenues  and  profits.  Firms,  typically,  look  for  venture 
capital to provide them with the financing they need to expand or break into new markets and 
grow  faster.  Thus,  the  ability  of  MSMEs  (especially  those  involving  innovations  and  new 
technologies) to access alternative sources of capital like angel funds/risk capital needs to be 
enhanced considerably. For this purpose, removing fiscal/regulatory impediments to the use 
Need for venture / risk capital 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Need for skilled labour  
Access to equity capital 
of such funds by the MSMEs should be considered on priority. The Government of India, in 
terms of the recommendations of the PM’s Task Force on MSMEs, is looking into the area. 
(iii)  
Access to Equity capital is a genuine problem. At present, there is almost negligible flow of 
equity  capital  into  this  sector.  Absence  of  equity  capital  may  pose  a  serious  challenge  to 
development  of  knowledge-based  industries,  particularly  those  that  are  sought  to  be 
promoted by the first-generation entrepreneurs with the requisite expertise and knowledge. 
There is a demand for a dedicated Exchange for MSMEs and SEBI has permitted BSE and 
NSE to set up an Exchange for MSMEs in terms of the recommendations of the PM’s Task 
Force on MSMEs. 
(iv)  
The sector often feels the constraint of non-availability of skilled labour. It is indeed ironic that 
in a nation of more than a billion individuals, skilled labour is cited as scarce. In this regard, I 
feel that we are a very young nation – just over 64 years since independence – setting out on 
a path of sustained economic growth, for decades to come. As per the National Commission 
on  Population,  the  age-wise  distribution  of  the  population  of  India  is  going  to  change 
significantly in the coming years. By 2016, approximately 50 per cent of the total population 
will be in the age group of 15–25 years. Thus, there would be a tremendous increase in the 
number of youth entering the education and job market in the ensuing years. On an average, 
it is estimated that around 1.5 crore persons per annum would enter the employment market 
during the next 30 years. Each person, in this bold new generation, will be in the prime of his 
or her life, striving for a better tomorrow – creating, in the process, new growth opportunities, 
for budding entrepreneurs! We need to capitalize on this unique demographic advantage. At 
present, there are various organizations at the national and State levels offering support to 
entrepreneurs  in  various  ways.  The  Government  of  India  and  various  State  governments 
have been implementing a number of schemes and programs over the years. The Rural Self 
Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) are working in this direction. There is, however, a 
need to examine the impact of RSETIs. 
(v)  
Considerable delay in settlement of dues/payment of bills by the large-scale buyers to the 
MSMEs units adversely affects the recycling of funds and business operation of MSME units. 
Though the Government has enacted the Delayed Payments Act, 1998 many of the MSME 
units are reluctant to pursue cases against major buyers. After the enactment of the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED), Act 2006, the existing provisions of 
the  Interest  on  Delayed  Payment  Act,  1998  to  Small  Scale  and  Ancillary  Industrial 
Undertakings, have been strengthened. The banks have been advised by Reserve Bank of 
India  to  sanction  separate  sub-limits  within  the  overall  limits  sanctioned  to  the  corporate 
borrowers  for  meeting  payment  obligations  in  respect  of  purchases  from  MSME  sector.  In 
practice,  however,  the  legislation  did  not  improve  the  position  of  MSEs  because  of  their 
dependence  on  large  businesses  for  continued  business.  This  problem  has  to  be 
institutionally  tackled  by  factoring  and  banks  should  provide  such  services  particularly  for 
MSMEs. To facilitate factoring services the Government has recently passed the Factoring 
Regulation  Bill  that  would  address  delays  in  payment  and  liquidity  problems  of  micro  and 
small enterprises. Factoring provides liquidity to small and medium enterprises against their 
receivables from customers and is regarded as a cash management tool. Besides, factors 
would be entitled to take legal recourse for recovering assigned debt and receivables from 
buyers  of  goods  and  services.  The  Factoring  Bill  creates  the  legislative  environment  for 
factoring and makes the process easier. 
(vi)  
Growing incidence of sickness of SSIs is yet another area of concern. When the sickness 
prolongs it leads to the closure of units and unemployment. The mortality of the SSI units is 
Factoring to tackle delayed realization of receivables 
Sickness 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
high. This has wider implications including locking of funds of the lending institutions, loss of 
scarce  material  resources  and  loss  of  employment.  The  data  showing  the  position  of  sick 
small and micro enterprises as at the end of March 2010 & 11 is given below: 
Total No. of Sick 
Units 
Units 
O/S 
Potentially 
Viable 
Units  O/S 
Non-Viable 
Units 
O/S 
(Amount in Rs. crore) 
Viability yet to 
be decided 
Units  O/S 
Units put under 
nursing 
Units  O/ S 
77723 
5233.15 
9160 
964.75 
64403 
3891.33 
4160 
377.03 
2360 
478.84 
90141 
5211.25 
7118 
1112.98 
76518 
3589.12 
6505 
509.15 
4698 
518.30 
 End of 
March 
2010 
March 
2011 
 for 
timely 
the  need 
treatment  after 
The number of units identified as potentially viable as a percentage to total sick MSE units is 
around 8% whereas the number of sick units found unviable was as high as 85%. The units 
placed under nursing as a proportion to the total number of sick units stood at 5.22%. I would 
like  to  emphasize  that  timely  detection  of  sickness  is  critical  as  any  delays  in  this  regard 
makes  the  possibilities  of  its  revival  of  potentially  viable  sick  units  recede.  As  any  other 
sickness, 
identification  of  sickness  cannot  be 
overemphasized in MSMEs. In order to hasten the process of identification of a unit as sick, 
a proposal for modifying the extant definition of sickness, in line with the recommendations of 
the  Working  Group  on  Rehabilitation  of  sick  SMEs,  is  under  consideration  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of India. For viable units, timely and effective rehabilitation by way of renegotiations of 
terms  of  loans,  induction  of  fresh  dose  of  funds,  business  restructuring,  change  of 
management etc. may become necessary. The process should not only be quick, efficient, 
cheap  and  fair  to  all  stakeholders  but  also  acceptable  to  and  implementable  by  all,  with 
necessary monitoring arrangements for implementation of the same. In case the unit is not 
found  viable,  recovery  of  the  dues  of  lenders  through  a  fair,  efficient  and  swift  legal 
mechanism should be the focus. As it is observed that rehabilitation of sick micro, small and 
medium enterprises could not be taken up due to non-availability of promoters’ contribution in 
a large number of cases, we have recommended to the GOI to set up a Rehabilitation Fund 
for rehabilitation of sick MSMEs. 
All Scheduled Commercial Banks have also been advised on May 4, 2009, to review and put 
in  place  MSE  Loan  policy,  Restructuring  /  rehabilitation  policy  and  Non-discretionary  One 
Time settlement scheme for recovery of non-performing loans, duly approved by their Board 
of  Directors.  Banks  were  advised  in  December  2009  to  give  wide  publicity  to  the  Non-
discretionary One Time Settlement scheme for recovery of non-performing loans for the MSE 
sector  by  placing  it  on  their  bank’s  web-site  and  through  other  possible  modes  of 
dissemination.  
(vii)  
An exit route for non-viable units is necessary to manage sickness. Worldwide, MSMEs are 
credited  with  high  level  of  innovation  and  creativity,  which  also  leads  to  higher  level  of 
failures. Keeping this in view, most of the countries have put in place mechanisms to handle 
insolvencies  and  bankruptcies.  The  present  mechanism  available  in  India  for  MSMEs  is 
archaic. Business failure in India is viewed as a stigma, which adversely impacts individual 
creativity and development in the country. The existing legislations may have to be toned up 
so as to provide for efficient liquidation of non-viable businesses.  
Exit policy for MSMEs 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Infrastructure 
(viii) 
To ensure competitiveness of the MSEs, it is essential that the availability of infrastructure, 
technology and skilled manpower are in tune with the global trends. MSEs are either located 
in industrial estates set up many decades ago, or have come up in an unorganized manner 
in rural areas. The state of infrastructure, including power, water, roads, etc. in such areas is 
inadequate  and  unreliable.  Further,  the  MSE  sector  in  India,  with  some  exceptions,  is 
characterized  by  low  technology  levels,  which  acts  as  a  handicap  in  the  emerging  global 
market.  Technological  upgradation  of  the  units  would  help  in  enhancing  capacity  and 
increase supplies which would also help to combat inflation. Need for marketing,  research 
etc.  is  also  critical.  The  Prime  Minister’s  Task  Force  on  MSMEs  recommended  several 
measures having a bearing on the functioning of MSMEs, viz., credit, marketing, labour, exit 
policy, 
taxation.  The  comprehensive 
recommendations  cover  measures  that  need  immediate  action  as  well  as  medium  term 
institutional  measures  along  with  legal  and  regulatory  structures  and  recommendations  for 
North-Eastern States and Jammu & Kashmir. The implementation of the recommendations, 
in a time bound manner, is being monitored by Government of India at the highest level. 
infrastructure/technology/skill  development  and 
Global slowdown and MSMEs  
The recent past has been a challenging time for both the bankers and the MSME 
8. 
sector due to recession in many countries of the globe and depreciation of the rupee. The 
recession has led to slowing down of the global demand for goods and services. But I would 
urge upon the entrepreneurs to tap the huge demand in the local markets. MSMEs are the 
best  vehicle  to  create  local  demand  and  consumption  and  also  to  fight  with  the  global 
meltdown.  The  depreciation  of  the  rupee  has  made  the  price  of  the  products  of  exporting 
firms in the sector more competitive. 
Role of banks  
9. 
Banks have a vital role to play in addressing several problems faced by the sector 
today. Banks have to view themselves not just as providers of credit but as partners in the 
growth  of  these  enterprises,  through  a  process  of  hand  holding  of  first  generation 
entrepreneurs,  while  they  find  their  feet  in  the  business.  In  financial  management  MSE 
enterprises  do  not  have  the  size  to  support  the  competence  they  need.  Operational  skills, 
including  accounting  and  finance,  business  planning,  marketing  and  human  resource 
management,  etc.  can  often  pose  a  challenge  and  necessitate  support  for  the  MSE 
borrowers. Typically, for instance, they operate with a woefully low productivity of capital and 
have  either  too  little  or  too  much  cash.  The  tools  for  doing  this  work  are  fully  developed 
e.g. cash-flow  forecast  and  cash  flow  management.  The  financial  management  needs  of 
these businesses are predictable. And worldwide they fall into a small number of categories, 
well-known to any experienced banker. The rewards for building a firm providing these small 
businesses with financial management might be enormous. Banks should therefore, provide 
financial consultancy / financial management services to their MSE borrowers to give them 
holistic guidance and support and nurturing them. Banks could set up special industrial and 
management consultancy departments to address functional inadequacies and market gaps. 
Bank branches need to ensure greater participation in the affairs of their MSME clients by 
convergence  of  credit  services  and  non  credit  services.  But  for  this,  bank  staff  should  be 
trained through customised training programmes to meet the specific needs of MSEs such as 
knowledge  of  markets,  both  domestic  and  global,  use  of  technology,  etc.  Banks  need  to 
innovate  to  create  products  specifically  suited  to  the  requirements  of  MSMEs  and  should 
take a longer term view of its relationship with such entities while pricing such products. 
As the availability of timely and adequate credit is a key requirement for this sector, banks 
should introduce single window facility for providing loans to MSMEs. For this purpose, they 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
can  set  up  Centralized  Processing  Centres  specifically  to  cater  to  such  clients,  which  will 
handle  the  appraisal,  sanction,  documentation,  monitoring,  renewal  and  enhancement 
activities. As in any area, there would be a higher failure rate for start-up MSMEs. However, 
despite the risk, the financing of these enterprises is a must for ensuring inclusive growth. 
Banks  will,  therefore,  be  required  to  build  up  their  risk  assessment  and  risk  management 
capabilities and provide for any instances of failures as a part of their risk mitigation process. 
I would also urge upon the Top Management of banks to put in place a credible, proactive 
and a functional monitoring mechanism to review the progress in actual concrete outcomes. 
Bank staff has to be sensitive to the need to nurture these enterprises and to ensure that 
they  get  the  necessary  support  during  the  initial  phase.  The  performance  of  branch 
managers in dealing with the sector should be included as a criterion for evaluation of their 
performance. 
Role of MSME associations / chambers 
The MSME Associations and Chambers have an important role to play in stepping 
10. 
up  credit  to  this  segment.  They  need  to  proactively  engage  themselves  in  organising 
workshops  and  training  programs  for  their  members  to  enlighten  them  about  cash  flow 
cycles,  various  financial  products,  accounting  practices,  etc.  In  this  regard,  the  MSME 
Associations, Chambers of Commerce, etc. may like to collaborate with banks, NIBM or any 
other training institute in the area of banking and finance, basic accountancy and information 
technology  for  MSEs.  I  appreciate  the  effort  of  the  SME  Chambers  in  organizing  this 
Conclave. I would, however, urge upon the Industry Associations to play a more proactive 
role and bring forward specific cases where the MSME entrepreneurs are facing problems in 
accessing  credit  through  the  banking  channels.  Such  issues  could  be  discussed  and 
resolved  in  such  a  forum.  Even  if  we  can  resolve  ten  percent  of  the  cases  of  genuine 
problems being faced by a MSME entrepreneur, I would feel that such conclaves have been 
successful. By  doing  so,  the  industry  associations  can  bridge  the  gap between  banks  and 
individual  firms  in  reaching  of  objectives  such  as  addressing  problems  common  to  all 
members,  stimulating  cooperative  action  among  manufacturers  and  providing  access  to 
resources aimed at assisting manufacturers. 
11. 
MSMEs  should  understand  that  banks  are  responsible  to  their  depositors  and 
shareholders and, therefore, they, i.e. the MSEs, as customers of bank credit, have certain 
obligations  to  fulfill  by  way  of  repaying  bank  loans,  maintaining  proper  books  of  accounts, 
submitting  information  correctly  and  more  importantly,  sharing  information  about  financial 
problems when these arise so that they can work together with the bank in resolving these. It 
is  in  the  interest  of  MSEs,  to  get  themselves  rated  by  independent  rating  agencies,  as  it 
could enable them to negotiate with their bankers for interest rate reduction, larger loan size 
or even obtain faster processing of their loan applications etc. MSEs need to be aware that if 
they default and their credit history is poor they will find it difficult to access bank finance, as 
banks have been mandated by RBI to pass on all credit history of their clients to CIBIL or any 
other credit bureau registered with RBI.  
12. 
Further,  senior-level  representatives  of  SME/SSI  Associations  in  each  State  are 
members of the Empowered Committee set up by RBI at each of its regional offices, with the 
SLBC Convenor, representatives of banks having predominant share in SME financing in the 
State, SIDBI, Director of Industries of the State Government etc., are also members. MSE 
Associations need to use this Forum not only for removing bottlenecks in the smooth flow of 
credit  to  the  sector  and  for  reviewing  the  accessibility  of  bank  finance  to  more  and  more 
MSEs, but also highlight gaps if any in the attitude and skills at the bank branch level. I would 
urge upon the Industry Associations/Chambers to take up region-specific issues relating to 
MSEs  with  the  concerned  Regional  Director  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the  SLBC 
convener  banks.  Such  issues  that  cannot  be  resolved  at  regional  office  level  could  be 
brought  to  the  notice  of  central  office  of  RBI.  They  could  also  spread  awareness  of  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Government  Schemes  and  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to  MSEs  among  their  members. 
Lastly, the success stories of micro and small enterprises may be widely disseminated as it 
would inspire others to  strive for excellence and thus contribute towards achieving greater 
heights in building a strong and prosperous India. The new entrepreneurs could also take a 
cue from the mistakes of their experienced counterparts and ensure not to repeat the same. 
A piece of advice 
13. 
While  I  have  sought  to  highlight  the  expectations  from  various  stakeholders  in 
supporting  the  growth  of  MSMEs,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  individual  MSMEs, 
themselves,  have  to  constantly  seek  to  transform  themselves,  in  line  with  changing 
environmental factors, to ensure that they end up among the success stories instead of the 
failures. I have, in the past also, drawn from the famed management thinker Peter F. Drucker’s 
writings to highlight four typical mistakes that entrepreneurs need to avoid as they develop their 
businesses.  These  are,  particularly  relevant  for  MSMEs  during  the  growth  phase.  These 
include the need to be open to potential new/unintended markets or applications for products 
developed by companies; the need to focus on cash flows instead of focusing only on profits as 
these  are  the  lifeline  that  keeps  the  company  going;  creating  a  management  team  as  the 
business develops; and lastly, the need to constantly ask the question that what the business 
needs at this stage and whether one is concentrating on the right things. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  restating  the  fact  that  MSMEs  will  continue  to  play  a  very 
14. 
important  and  vital  role  in  our  economy  where  the  twin  problems  of  unemployment  and 
poverty constitute a major developmental challenge. In fact, if India were to have a growth 
rate  of  8–10  percent  for  the  next  couple  of  decades,  it  needs  a  strong  micro,  small  and 
medium sector. MSMEs are the best vehicle for inclusive growth, to create local demand and 
consumption.  The  MSMEs  of  yesterday  are  the  large  corporates  of  today  and  could  be 
MNCs of tomorrow. Thus, the banks and other agencies should take pride while servicing the 
MSMEs  as  they  are  playing  an  instrumental  role  in  the  formation  of  MNCs  of  tomorrow. 
MSMEs themselves have to be on their toes, in this rapidly changing business environment, 
and keep evolving to stay clear of all the potential pitfalls that confront them in their progress 
from small enterprises to large corporations. 
I  look  forward  to  your  feedback  in  creating  an  enabling  environment  for  the  promotion  of 
MSMEs in the country.  
Thank You. 
References: 
1.  Peter  F.  Drucker:  “Managing  in  the  next  Society”,  Truman  Talley  Books,  St.  Martin’s 
  Press, New York. 
2.  Report of the PM’s Task Force on MSMEs, January 2010 (Chairman: Shri T.K.A.Nair) 
3.  Report  of 
  Dr.K.C.Chakrabarty) 
4.  RBI Annual Reports 
the  Working  Group  on  Rehabilitation  of  sick  SMEs 
(Chairman: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
