Ivan Iskrov: Conflicts and complementarities between monetary and 
macroprudential policies 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Ivan  Iskrov,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  before  the 
International Conference on the Occasion of the 15th Anniversary of the Introduction of the 
Currency  Board  Arrangements  in  Bulgaria  “Conflicts  and  Complementarities  between 
Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies”,  organised  by  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  Sofia, 
5–6 July 2012. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  today  with  you  and  to  open  this  conference  under  the  topic 
“Conflicts  and  complementarities  between  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies”.  These 
issues  have  been  discussed  extensively  in  recent  years  by  policymakers,  financial  market 
players and academicians alike. The ongoing financial and sovereign debt crisis has sparked 
a need to reassess the existing economic governance structure and to come up with options 
for  better  policies.  And  one  of  the  key  aspects  of  this  debate  is  about  the  optimal  mix  of 
policies, which is precisely the topic of our conference. 
The BNB has decided to organise this conference because there is a big interest nowadays 
in the way monetary and macroprudential policies interact or, according to some, could be 
even in conflict. 
Since  these  issues  to  a  great  extent  relate  to  the  role  and  responsibilities  of  the  central 
banks, the timing of this conference conveniently coincides with the 15th anniversary of the 
introduction of the currency board arrangements in Bulgaria. This is an opportunity for us to 
discuss  the  success  of  Bulgaria’s  monetary  policy  regime  in  the  broader  context  of  the 
lessons  from  the  current  crisis.  The  speakers  and  discussants  from  the  BNB  today  and 
tomorrow  will  share  the  knowledge  we  have  acquired,  based  on  our  rich  institutional 
experience. 
The  experience  of  the  Bulgarian  central  bank  is  unique.  We  are  one  of  very  few  central 
banks  in  the  world  which  have  both  practiced  “conventional”  monetary  policy  (involving 
setting of policy rates and conducting open market operations) and then operated a currency 
board after that. We have had a track record, during the last two decades, of monetary policy 
under two remarkably contrasting regimes. Thus our legacy is very different from that of the 
other similar monetary policy regimes in Europe (such as Estonia, Lithuania, or Bosnia and 
Herzegovina), where the currency boards were adopted by newly-established central banks 
in newly-independent states as a means of bringing confidence in a new national currency, 
promoting political emancipation and national identity. That was not our case, however. 
The currency board arrangements were introduced in Bulgaria exactly 15 years ago with the 
very same motivation that stays behind the current reform agenda in the euro area. We did it 
in  order  to  achieve  a  much  more  efficient  macroeconomic  management  and  to  bring  in 
credibility 
the  case  of  Bulgaria 
demonstrates  the  importance  of  maintaining  wide  consensus  among  politicians  and  the 
society at large, on the key principles of economic policy. 
The currency board arrangements are not just another monetary policy regime. They are a 
“frame of mind”, a way to view and tackle the economic, political and social processes. Some 
Western analysts and researchers fail to understand this. But I am sure the contributions by 
my  colleagues  from  the  BNB  will  clearly  illustrate  during  this  conference  that  the  currency 
board is something more than just a monetary policy regime. 
Following a dramatic banking and financial crisis in 1996–1997, the economy was stabilised 
by the introduction of the currency board arrangements, in combination with the strong fiscal 
the  whole  policymaking  process.  Furthermore, 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
discipline,  the  liberalisation  and  privatisation  of  the  Bulgarian  economy,  and  the  use  of  a 
broad range of macroprudential instruments. 
The  current  global  crisis  is  not  the  first  one  successfully  weathered  by  the  Bulgarian 
economy.  In  only  two  decades  we  have  endured  the  Asian  crisis,  the  Russian  Crisis,  the 
“dotcom bubble” burst, the U.S. subprime crisis and the failure of Lehman Brothers, before 
the euro area financial and sovereign debt crisis came in. But the recent crisis has served as 
perhaps the biggest “litmus test” for the optimality of our monetary policy regime. 
We believe that a small open economy, which is not rich in certain commodities or natural 
resources, cannot succeed in pursuing the so-called independent monetary policy. All these 
issues  will  be  elaborated  today  by  deputy  governor  Hristov  who  will  share  our  experience 
with you during the afternoon session of this conference. 
Dear colleagues, 
No monetary policy regime per se is universally superior, however. This is where the need 
for an optimal policy mix, which relates to the topic of this conference, can be illustrated by 
the case of Bulgaria again. 
Fiscal policy must play a vital buffer and corrective role in a small open economy. The same 
is valid for an economy with a fixed exchange rate. While the importance of fiscal discipline is 
only  now  being  acknowledged  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  area,  the  philosophy  of  constant 
fiscal  vigilance  has  been  guiding  the  policymakers  in  Bulgaria  since  1997.  But  even  fiscal 
discipline is not enough for the overall macroeconomic stability. The reason for this is the fact 
that there has always been, and there will always be, a strong interconnection between the 
state of the public finances and the quality of the banks’ balance sheets. 
Because  of  that,  following  a  deep  financial  and  banking  crisis  in  the  mid-1990s,  Bulgaria 
adopted one of the most conservative supervisory standards and practices in Europe. What 
is more, they have been persistently implemented in a countercyclical fashion, both before 
and during the crisis. 
As deputy governor Simeonov will detail later at this conference, the BNB has mastered and 
tested successfully a long list of both “macro” and “micro” bank supervision instruments. In 
the  “good”  times,  the  BNB  insisted  on  the  build-up  of  capital  and  liquidity  buffers, 
discouraging banks from excessive asset growth and risk-taking. But since the end of 2008, 
the BNB focused on the capital and liquidity relief for banks while also allowing them to ease 
lending. 
As  a  result  of  these  conservative  and  countercyclical  policies  of  the  BNB,  and  the  rather 
prudent behaviour of the banks themselves, today Bulgaria manifests a very stable banking 
sector, with outstanding capital adequacy and liquidity ratios. Four years after the Lehman 
Brothers collapse, the banking system of Bulgaria remains one of the few in the EU where no 
single bank needed to be rescued or supported with taxpayers’ or central bank money. 
Merging the monetary and macropdudential mandates (including banking supervision) under 
the  auspices  of  the  central  banks  is  currently  being  implemented  in  some  of  the  “older” 
EU Member  States.  The  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system  is  being 
introduced only recently at the EU level. While these new concepts are now being embraced 
by central bankers and politicians worldwide, the simultaneous pursuit of both monetary and 
banking stability, from a true macroprudential perspective, has been the order of the day for 
the BNB for more than a decade now. 
Through our own painful experience with a crisis in 1996–1997, we became fully aware of 
the systemic importance of the financial system. Thus a key element behind the success of 
the  overall  policy  mix  in  Bulgaria  is  that  our  central  bank  is  entrusted  with  the  tasks  and 
responsibilities to regulate and supervise the banks in the country, with the goal of ensuring 
the stability of the banking system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Only  three  days  ago,  the  capital  markets  provided  the  latest  proof  of  the  efficiency  of  the 
macroeconomic policies in Bulgaria and the resilience of our economy in the face of such a 
severe global crisis. Bulgaria’s global issue of 5-year euro-denominated bonds, marking our 
country’s return to the international bond markets after a decade, was a great success. The 
international investors’ orders oversubscribed the offered amount more than 6 times. Their 
strong  interest  has  resulted  in  a  very  low  annual  yield  of  4.436%.  At  present,  only  the 
highest-rated EU Member States can afford to pay a lower price for borrowing on the private 
capital markets. 
To  conclude,  we  have  achieved  monetary  and  banking  stability  in  Bulgaria  during  the  last 
15 years.  They  have  been  bolstered  by  the  synergies  of  monetary  and  macroprudential 
mandates  (including  banking  supervision)  within  the  central  bank,  complemented  by  the 
prudent 
fiscal  policies  of  several  consecutive  governments  since  1997.  The 
BNB representatives will be eager to discuss our knowledge today and tomorrow, while also 
looking forward to learning about the experiences of the other countries represented at this 
conference. 
I wish you a most fruitful exchange of views and ideas. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
