Thomas Jordan: Discussions on the topic of the euro/Swiss franc 
minimum exchange rate 
Speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, held at the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 10 April 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
I would like to welcome you to this discussion on the topic of the euro/Swiss franc minimum 
exchange  rate  and  thank  you  for  attending  at  such  short  notice.  As  you  are  aware,  on 
Thursday of last week a few of the transactions in the foreign exchange market for the euro 
were concluded at a rate below the minimum exchange rate set by the Swiss National Bank 
(SNB). I consider it important that you are aware of the sequence of events, and also that I 
reaffirm the SNB’s current policy. Since this is a specifically market-related topic, we have 
chosen this rather special approach involving a discussion with news agencies. 
The fact that a few individual transactions at less than CHF 1.20 per euro were observed last 
Thursday has led to some isolated doubts being raised about the SNB’s resolve to enforce 
its minimum exchange rate. Right from the start I want to make it quite clear that such doubts 
are misplaced. The Swiss National Bank is enforcing the minimum exchange rate with all the 
means at its disposal. We are prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities for this 
purpose. In this respect, our policies are totally unchanged. 
What  precisely  occurred  last  Thursday?  Within  just  a  few  seconds,  the  euro/Swiss  franc 
exchange rate fell from 1.2020 to 1.2000. Despite SNB offers placed in the trading systems, 
a few isolated transactions occurred below CHF 1.20 per euro. However, at no time did the 
best  available  euro  exchange  rate  in  the  market  fall  below  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of 
CHF 1.20. Thus, for a short time, what is known as a segmented market could be observed, 
in  which  transactions  below  the  best  price  were  concluded.  This  situation  was  remedied 
within very few seconds, however, by means of arbitrage. 
How could transactions take place on the foreign exchange market for below CHF 1.20 per 
euro  despite  the  fact  that  the  SNB  was  at  all  times  present  in  the  market?  The  foreign 
exchange market is a decentralised market. Rather than foreign exchange being traded on a 
bourse, forex transactions are made directly between market participants. Each bank has its 
own individual group of counterparties, and, in particular, banks with lower ratings only have 
a  small  number  of  counterparties.  The  exchange  rates  below  CHF  1.20  per  euro  were 
concluded by banks that do not have an agreement relating to limits with the SNB, in other 
words, by banks that cannot or do not wish to trade with the SNB. The SNB was at all times 
prepared to buy unlimited quantities of euros at CHF 1.20 per euro. All market participants 
were at all times aware of this SNB purchase offer, including the banks without an agreement 
relating  to  limits.  Consequently,  banks  which  sold  euros  for  less  than  CHF  1.20  did  not 
receive the best market price and had – relatively speaking – to accept losses. Since there is 
no  compulsion  to  make  business  transactions  at  the  best  prices,  such  anomalies  cannot 
always be excluded. However, they can only be maintained for a very short period. 
How  is  the  SNB  organised  in  operational  terms  for  implementing  the  minimum  exchange 
rate?  Since  the  introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  SNB  has  monitored  the 
foreign exchange market from market opening in Asia on Sunday evening to market closing 
in New York on Friday evening without any interruption. The same applies to holidays. The 
interbank market, which is the market of relevance for the SNB, includes its counterparties. 
The SNB accepts well over 100 banks with more than 700 trading desks as counterparties. 
Thanks to this network of contacts, the global foreign exchange market is almost completely 
covered. On the part of the SNB, the trading limits amount to some hundreds of billions of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
euros a day. These limits can be flexibly adjusted by the SNB, should this be necessary. Via 
electronic  trading  systems,  the  banks  have  access  at  all  times  to  the  offers.  The  SNB’s 
strategy for implementing the minimum exchange rate has proved effective – including in the 
last few days. On the relevant interbank market, CHF 1.20 per euro qualifies as the lowest 
exchange rate. Consequently, the minimum exchange rate applied at all times. 
Does  the  minimum  exchange  rate  continue  to  apply?  Yes.  Without  any  qualification.  The 
SNB  has  successfully  enforced  the  minimum  exchange  rate  and  will  continue  to  do  so, 
without  any  restrictions.  The  Swiss  franc  is  still  overvalued  and  represents  a  substantial 
challenge  for  the  Swiss  economy.  The  SNB  continues  to  expect  that  the  Swiss  franc  will 
weaken. Should the economic outlook and the risk of deflation so require, the SNB stands 
ready to take further measures at any time.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
