Stefan Gerlach: Macro prudential policy in Ireland 
Address by Mr Stefan Gerlach, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the ESRI 
Conference on Economic Renewal “Financial Stability after the Crisis”, Dublin, 29 February 
2012. 
1. 
Introduction  
 I am delighted to be here this morning. Since the ESRI was established in 1960, it has been 
a major contributor to the debate on a wide range of economic issues facing Ireland. This 
conference,  entitled  “Financial  Stability  after  the  Crisis,”  is  yet  another  of  a  long  series  of 
such events that focus on the policy questions of the day.  
Today  I  will  talk  about  “Macro  prudential  policy  in  Ireland.”  Unfortunately,  recent  financial 
sector  developments  across  the  world  have  shown  the  serious  consequences  of  macro 
prudential  policy  failures.  Thus,  there  is  little  doubt  that,  in  Ireland  and  elsewhere,  much 
attention must and will be paid in the future to ensuring that macro prudential frameworks are 
effective so that we can avoid events such as a repetition of the housing bubble, the bursting 
of which has had such devastating consequences here in Ireland.  
I should say from the outset that while the question of how to design macro prudential policy 
has been increasingly prominent in the public debate; it remains an admittedly arcane field of 
economic policy. My talk this morning I hope will remove some of the mystique surrounding 
this topic and help trigger more public discussion about how best it can be pursued.  
2. 
The macro prudential policy framework  
In the last 20 years or so, it has become widely recognised that in order to conduct monetary 
policy  well,  it  is  essential  that  there  is  clarity  about  the  framework  of  policy.  To  my  mind, 
clarity  of  the  framework  is  equally  important  for  effective  macro  prudential  policy.  It  is 
therefore natural to start my talk by reviewing it.  
The framework consists of four parts:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
In  my  discussion  today,  I  will  follow  this  structure.  I  will  also  say  a  few  words  comparing 
monetary  and  macro  prudential  policy,  since  they  are  closely  related  but  distinct  policies. 
Nevertheless, I will argue, they should not be thought of as close substitutes.  
The goal or objective of macro prudential policy.  
The indicators policy makers will use to judge if systemic risk is present.  
The policy instruments that are available to deal with these risks.  
The decision-making procedures used to set policy.  
The goal of macro prudential policy  
2.1 
The goal of macro prudential policy is to ensure the stability of the overall financial system by 
limiting the build-up of systemic risk. It is important to understand that this is not necessarily 
the same as the stability of individual financial institutions.  
Historically, financial regulation and supervision has had a micro prudential focus, that is, it 
has focussed on individual financial firms. The underlying rationale was that if individual firms 
were safe and sound, then so too would be the overall financial system. Thus, policies that 
were  desirable  for  individual  firms  were  seen  as  also  desirable  for  the  broader  financial 
system. But, of course, that is a fallacy of composition because actions undertaken by one 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial institution to reduce risk can lead to difficulties elsewhere in the financial system, 
that is, externalities can arise.  
In  modern  financial  systems  such  externalities  can  be  significant.  Financial  institutions 
interact  by  trading  in  a  myriad  of  markets  and  instruments,  leading  to  a  high  level  of 
interconnectedness. Shocks can therefore be transmitted rapidly across the global financial 
system.  
Unfortunately, individual firms have little reason to consider how their actions impact on other 
firms; they tend to act as price takers and disregard how their trading decisions might impact 
on asset prices. They also tend to hold similar portfolios and are therefore exposed to the 
same shocks.  
To  see  why  this  can  be  a  problem,  suppose  that  some  event  occurs  leading  financial 
institutions  to  rebalance  their  portfolios.  If  the  shock  is  large  and  they  do  so  collectively, 
markets may become one sided and prices can plunge, leading to financial distress being 
transmitted  across  the  financial  system.  Because  of  such  externalities,  it  is  essential  that 
macro prudential policy makers worry about the health and resilience of the financial system 
as a whole.  
It should be noted that such commonality in behaviour can be encouraged by regulators. For 
instance, the use of mark-to-market valuation practices and value-at-risk methodologies, and 
the reliance on credit ratings can lead firms to behave in similar ways magnifying the impact 
of  economic  disturbances  on  markets.  Remuneration  practices  that  provide  incentives  for 
investors to hold similar portfolios can also have this effect.  
Macro prudential indicators  
2.2 
The second part of the framework is the indicators that policy makers use to judge whether 
systemic risk is present. Since risk can arise anywhere in the economy, it is necessary to use 
a broad range of indicators.  
It is useful to distinguish between the time series and the cross sectional dimension of risk, 
both  of  which  must  be  captured  by  the  macro  prudential  indicators.  The  time  series 
dimension of risk relates to the cyclicality of the financial system. These risks build up over 
time,  and  are  often  related  to  over-optimism  about  economic  prospects  associated  with 
positive economic developments. An example of this is the expansion of credit during times 
of rapid economic growth and generalised asset price increases.  
Cross sectional risks relate to the interconnectedness of the financial system that arises, for 
instance,  from  exposures  between  financial  firms  through  wholesale  funding  markets, 
derivatives markets or through large exposures to a single counterparty.  
After  having  selected  appropriate  indicators,  policy  makers  face  two  problems.  First,  the 
indicators must be accurately benchmarked, that is, a judgement must be made of what their 
“normal” range is and when they signal that risks are accumulating. This may be  done by 
comparing them against a historical average, a peer group or a model-based estimate of a 
“natural”  level.  Nonetheless,  there  will  always  be  competing  views  on  the  size  and 
importance  of  any  deviation  from  that  level  and  a  healthy  dose  of  judgement  is  therefore 
essential when formulating policy.  
Second,  no  matter  how  good  the  indicators  are,  there  is  an  unavoidable  limit  to  how 
informative any indicator can be arising from the possibility of multiple equilibria. That is, a 
certain reading of an indicator may be compatible with financial stability if confidence is high 
and incompatible with stability if it is low. Moreover, the economy can switch from one state 
or equilibrium to another with little or no forewarning from the indicators.  
For instance, if economic conditions are weak, an increase in long bond yields arising from 
concerns, warranted or not, about a government’s creditworthiness will make it more difficult 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
for  it  to  finance  the  public  debt  and  therefore  lead  to  an  increase  in  sovereign  risk.  Such 
self-fulfilling prophesies are much less likely to occur if economic conditions, and therefore 
the government’s finances, are strong.  
Types of indicators  
2.2.1 
Given  the  range  of  risks  to  guard  against,  there  are  a  large  number  of  indicators  that 
potentially may be useful. The IMF-BIS-FSB (2011) have suggested distinguishing between 
three sets of indicators.  
The first of these comprise aggregate indicators of financial imbalances. These rely on macro 
economic data and balance sheet data to capture risks building in the financial system and 
the broader economy. These would include, for instance, indicators of bank credit, liquidity 
and  maturity  mismatches,  and  sectoral  imbalances.  Such  data  are  typically  available 
quarterly or at most monthly.  
The  second  set  consists  of  indicators  of  financial  market  conditions,  which  are  typically 
available  at  much  higher  frequencies  than  aggregate  indicators,  even  continuously.  These 
can be direct indicators such as bond yields or CDS spreads, or indirect indicators derived 
from analytical models such as default probabilities calculated using credit risk models.  
The  third  set  contains  indicators  of  interconnectedness  that  capture  cross-section  risks  by 
focusing on common exposures and interconnectedness between countries, sectors of the 
economy,  or  financial  institutions.  For  instance,  payments  system  data  can  be  used  to 
assess tensions in the network of interbank transactions.  
2.2.2  Housing market indicators  
Many,  if  not  most,  severe  financial  crises  have  been  related  to  reckless  property  lending. 
Bordo  and  Jeanne  (2002)  study  15  advanced  economies  –  Australia,  Canada,  Denmark, 
Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, 
the  UK  and  the  US  –  over  the  period  1970–2002.  They  identified  20  episodes  of  housing 
booms, of which 11 were followed by a bust. Of these 11 boom-bust cycles, 6 experienced 
banking  crises.  In  a  study  of  14  OECD  countries,  Barrell  et  al.  (2010)  found  that  a  single 
percentage point rise in real house price growth is sufficient to raise the probability of a crisis 
by up to 0.74%. Similarly, work by the IMF6 found that approximately 40 per cent of house 
price  booms  were  followed  by  busts,  resulting  in,  on  average,  30  per  cent  house  price 
declines, and lasting for approximately four years. The result was an average output loss of 
8%  of  GDP,  reflecting  greater  effects  on  consumption  and  banking  systems  thus  making 
house price busts more costly than those associated with equity prices busts. 
Given the importance of the housing market for financial stability, it is instructive to explore 
whether  and  how  the  build-up  of  imbalances  in  the  Irish  property  sector  before  the  crisis 
appeared  on  various  macro  prudential  indicators.  One  conclusion  we  can  draw  from  this 
exercise is that even simple measures can be useful for guarding against a build-up of risk.  
These  two  panels  in  Figure  1  show  indexed  prices,  rents,  and  price-to-rent  ratios  for  both 
residential property on the left and commercial property on the right. A price-to-rent ratio can 
be thought of as the property market equivalent of the price-earnings ratio in equity markets. 
Theory suggests that it will depend on the growth rate of rents and the interest rate used to 
discount future rents in much the same way as stock prices depend on dividends. While this 
ratio can thus evolve over time and will be highly sensitive to these variables, one would not 
expect the “normal” level to fluctuate strongly. Thus, the tripling of the price-rent ratio in the 
residential property market between 1995 and 2007, and the 50% increase of the same ratio 
in the commercial property market between 2003 and 2007, ought to have struck observers 
as out of line and as not unlikely to be reversed.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Thus,  price-rent  ratios  in  the  residential  and  commercial  property  markets  would  have 
provided plenty of grounds to be worried that prices could come tumbling down. What risks 
did that pose for banks’ balance sheets?  
To explore this issue, the panel to the left in Figure 2 shows the share of Irish banks’ lending 
that was accounted for by property. Here speculative property-related lending includes the 
construction,  buying  and  developing  of  property  or  other  projects  which  are  not  pre-let  or 
pre-sold, that is, that are at risk of not generating any income stream or sales revenue. The 
panel shows that banks’ property-related lending rose from about 40% of total loans in 1999 
to about 65% by 2007.  
It is also of interest to look at lending to business sectors as a percentage of GDP which is 
shown in the right-hand panel of Figure 2. While lending to most sectors remained broadly 
constant over the time period considered, the red portion of the graph shows how lending to 
the construction and real estate sectors increased from about 10% of GDP in 1999 to about 
60% in 2009. It doesn’t take too much imagination to conclude that in this situation a large 
fall in property prices, if it were to happen, could have a devastating effect on banks’ balance 
sheets.  
Overall, these figures illustrate that even simple macro prudential indicators showed that Irish 
property prices were high, given fundamentals, and that banks were highly exposed to the 
property market before the crisis struck.  
3. 
Macro prudential instruments  
The third part of the macro prudential framework consists of the instruments or the tool kit. In 
addition  to  being  important  in  their  own  right,  the  instruments  help  define  what  macro 
prudential policy is and what it is not. It must be remembered that a number of other public 
policies impact on systemic risk but do not constitute macro prudential policy because their 
primary objective is not the stability of the overall financial system. For instance, a tight micro 
prudential regulatory and supervisory regime and monetary policy that leans against financial 
imbalances are both likely to reduce the need for macro prudential intervention yet do not 
constitute macro prudential policy. The IMF (2011) proposes two criteria for what constitutes 
a macro prudential tool: it explicitly and specifically targets systemic risk, and it is controlled 
by the macro prudential authority.  
Like most aspects of macro prudential policy, the toolkit is in its formative stage. At present, it 
relies  largely  on  prudential  instruments  adapted  to  address  systemic  risk.  New  tools 
specifically designed to address systemic risk are likely to be developed in coming years.  
While some macro prudential tools have been implemented, few, if any, have been used on 
a  systematic  basis  over  time  and  across  economies.  As  such,  care  must  be  exercised  in 
employing  them.  In  particular,  it  is  not  straightforward  to  calibrate  the  setting  of  the 
instruments precisely as there is little if any experience to draw on.  
Furthermore, there is a risk of unintended consequences in the form of regulatory arbitrage 
or unexpected responses by financial institutions. For instance, measures aimed at limiting 
credit  supply  may  simply  push  activity  into  the  shadow  banking  system  or  lead  foreign 
lenders  to  step  forward.  Macro  prudential  policy  will  therefore  necessarily  be  a  process  of 
trial-and-error, at least initially.  
Moreover, policy-makers will likely employ several tools and it may be difficult to assess their 
interactions  in  advance.  Finally,  there  is  a  need  to  recalibrate  macro  prudential  policy  in 
response  to  changes  in  monetary  policy.  Let  me  therefore  leave  the  framework  of  macro 
prudential  policy  for  a  moment  and  consider  the  links  between  monetary  and  macro 
prudential policy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy and macro prudential policy  
3.1 
It is sometimes argued that monetary and macro prudential policy are close cousins, and that 
changes in one can substitute for the other. Of course, they both affect the supply of credit in 
the economy and therefore firms’ and households’ spending decisions. In turn, that means 
that  they  both  affect  economic  activity  and  inflation.  There  is  therefore  a  need  for  some 
coordination between them to ensure that they do not operate at cross purposes. This is one 
reason  why  it  is  essential  that  the  central  bank  is  crucially  involved  in  the  formulation  of 
macro  prudential  policy.  But  despite  their  similarities,  there  are  important  differences 
between these policies pertaining to their focus and scope, the clarity of the policy objective, 
the policy horizon and the tools used, as set out in Table 1.  
It is sometimes argued that monetary and macro prudential policy are close cousins, and that 
changes in one can substitute for the other. Of course, they both affect the supply of credit in 
the economy and therefore firms’ and households’ spending decisions. In turn, that means 
that  they  both  affect  economic  activity  and  inflation.  There  is  therefore  a  need  for  some 
coordination between them to ensure that they do not operate at cross purposes. This is one 
reason  why  it  is  essential  that  the  central  bank  is  crucially  involved  in  the  formulation  of 
macro  prudential  policy.  But  despite  their  similarities,  there  are  important  differences 
between these policies pertaining to their focus and scope, the clarity of the policy objective, 
the policy horizon and the tools used, as set out in Table 1.  
First, the focus of the two policies is different. Monetary policy focuses on the most likely rate 
of  inflation  at  some  future  date.  By  contrast,  macro  prudential  policy  aims  to  avoid  some 
highly adverse and unlikely tail event. Since crises occur rarely, it is difficult for the public to 
monitor the success of macro prudential policy.  
The policy horizons are also different. Monetary policy impacts on inflation with a time lag of 
about 2 years. Since senior central bankers are typically appointed for a period of five or six 
years, it is reasonably easy for the public to judge their performance and ascertain whether 
price stability has been achieved. By contrast, asset price bubbles are slow to develop and 
shocks of sufficient magnitude to burst a bubble happen only rarely. Thus, it is possible for 
macro  prudential  policy  to  be  too  lax  for  an  extended  period  of  time  without  a  collapse 
occurring. This makes it difficult for the public to judge whether policy makers are achieving 
their objective.  
The clarity of the objectives also differs. Monetary policy is typically geared at ensuring that 
inflation is at some announced target level. In the case of the euro area, this level is “below 
but close to two per cent”. Since there is monthly data on inflation, it is simple to monitor the 
central bank’s skill in pursuing price stability.  
Assessing financial stability policy is arguably much harder. As an illustration many analysts 
define  it  as  the  absence  of  financial  instability.  This  difficulty  in  defining  financial  stability 
makes it problematic for the public to judge how successful macro prudential policy is.  
Further differences concern the instruments. Monetary policy in normal times – that is, when 
the  interest  rate  is  above  some  lower  bound  and  interbank  markets  function  properly  –  is 
conducted by controlling nominal short-term interbank rates. This is a blunt instrument that 
affects  the  economy  in  many  ways.  By  contrast,  macro  prudential  policy  can  –  in 
principle – be made to focus on only some banks or some types of lending.  
While  some  observers  have  suggested  that  monetary  policy  can  be  used  as  a  macro 
prudential  tool,  the  earlier  consensus  that  monetary  policy  should  focus  on  ensuring  price 
stability  remains  unchanged.  Nevertheless,  there  is  broad  agreement  that  financial 
developments needs to be taken into account more fully in monetary policy than previously 
was the case in many central banks (IMF 2010). One reason central banks did not monitor 
financial market developments sufficiently closely before the crisis was that macro economic 
models  typically  do  not  rely  on  information  from  corporate  balance  sheets,  financial 
intermediaries and asset prices (Kohn 2009).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Overall, the thrust of the analysis above is that monitoring how well macro prudential policy is 
conducted  is  difficult.  In  particular,  it  is  hard  for  the  policy  maker  to  demonstrate  what 
benefits  come  from  pursuing  particular  policy  actions.  This  is  particularly  so  if  policy  is 
successful and  financial  stability  is maintained,  in  which  case  all  the public  can see  is  the 
macro  prudential  policy  makers  moving  their  instruments  and  making  statements,  but  no 
evidence of financial instability.  
By contrast, the costs of various macro prudential policy measures will be readily felt. Since a 
tightening of macro prudential policy is likely to reduce the profitability of financial firms, one 
would expect on occasion strong reactions from the financial sector when macro prudential 
policy is tightened.  
This combination of difficult-to-measure future benefits and obvious and immediate costs can 
lead  to  a  strong  bias  against  taking  macro  prudential  action,  even  when  policy  makers 
believe  it  is  necessary.  This  arguably  was  the  case  in  a  number  of  countries  before  the 
financial  crisis  erupted  in  2007–08.  It  is  therefore  essential  to  strengthen  policy  makers’ 
willingness  to  act  against  perceived  risks  by  providing  them  with  clear  objectives  and 
independence, and by making them accountable for the outcomes of policy.  
Macro prudential tools addressing excessive property lending  
3.2 
What are the tools available to macro prudential policymakers? Many instruments have been 
discussed and, in the interest of brevity, Table 2 outlines only a few possible tools that have 
been adopted elsewhere to address risks arising from property-related lending.  
For  instance,  dynamic  provisioning  requires  banks  to  hold  provisions  against  expected 
losses due to inherent credit risks. This tool has been implemented in Spain, where banks 
are required to build up buffers of against performing loans in an upturn, which can then be 
drawn down in a recession.  
Sector lending limits are hard limits on the individual bank or system-wide share of lending to 
individual sectors. The Central Bank of Ireland instituted a form of this measure in the 1970’s 
and  1980’s  when  it  advised  banks  not  to  increase  private-sector  credit  to  what  were 
considered  “non-productive  sectors”,  that  is,  property  companies  and  the  financial  and 
personal sectors. 
Increasing risk weights raises the amount of capital banks must hold against certain types of 
exposures.  For  instance,  the  risk  weights  on  mortgages  for  buy-to-let  properties  could  be 
increased  relative  to  those  for  primary  dwellings.  This  would  tend  to  reduce  this  type  of 
lending and ensure that banks’ resilience was bolstered by the additional capital buffer. 
Altering  risk  weights  is  a  tool  available  under  Pillar  I  of  the  Basel  rules.  Macro  prudential 
policy makers could also address risks under Pillar II, where capital add-ons can be applied 
for risks not fully addressed under Pillar I. For instance, additional capital could be required 
to address concentration risk as lending to certain sectors of the economy increases. 
A  loan-to-income  ratio  is  generally  defined  as  the  percentage  of  a  borrower’s  monthly 
disposable  income  accounted  for  by  debt  repayments.  It  is  a  simple  tool  to  ensure  the 
creditworthiness  of  borrowers  by  limiting  their  repayment  burden.  Tightening  LTIs  in  the 
upswing would help to ensure against income shocks in the downswing and limit the overall 
level  of  credit  in  the  economy  as  some  loans  would  no  longer  be  permissible  and  others 
would be reduced in size. 
I  will  focus  a  little  more  closely  on  a  time-varying  LTV  limit  as  it  is,  perhaps,  the  most 
frequently cited macro prudential tool and is defined as the ratio of the value of a loan to the 
value  of  the  underlying  property.  The  LTV  ratio  is  intended  to  ensure  that  the  underlying 
collateral – the property – is sufficient to cover the loan, were the borrower to default. For 
borrowers, negative equity occurs when the value of their outstanding mortgage falls below 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the value of the property. Needless to say, this is less likely to happen the lower the initial 
LTV ratio.  
Figure 3 shows that the proportion of new loans with a LTV ratio above 80% increased every 
year preceding the crisis. Thus, property lending expanded not only because property prices 
rose  but  also  because  banks  were  willing  to  provide  funding  for  an  increasing  fraction  of 
purchase  prices  as  the  bubble  was  growing.  One  wonders  what  would  have  happened  if 
banks had maintained LTV ratios of at most 80% throughout this period.  
Varying  LTVs  over  the  financial  cycle  seems  desirable  and  will  prevent  banks  from 
expanding lending rapidly when the property market is exuberant. This would increase the 
resilience of the banking sector by maintaining the collateral margin when prices are rising 
and thus limiting the potential losses in real estate portfolios were prices to fall. Further, by 
increasing the own funds required upfront by home purchasers, they limit credit demand and 
lean  against  house  price  increases.  Of  course,  the  LTV  limits  could  then  be  relaxed  if  the 
property market weakened.  
However, if prices are rising too rapidly, the additional collateral buffer may not be sufficient. 
Moreover, LTV limits become less effective when house price increases are large, as capital 
gains can be used to finance deposits for second homes. Finally, the effectiveness of this 
instrument  may  be  undermined  by  borrowers  “topping  up”  any  short-fall  in  own  funds  with 
personal loans or second mortgages.  
4. 
Decision-making arrangements  
The  fourth  component  of  the  macro  prudential  framework  concerns  the  decision-making 
arrangements. It is important to recognise that the precise arrangements underpinning macro 
prudential  policy  depend  on  country-specific  circumstances.  In  many  countries,  macro 
prudential policy is conducted by a financial stability committee, reflecting the fact that the 
powers to set the relevant policy tools are spread among a number of government agencies 
and regulators. If so, the establishment of a formal committee seems desirable.  
For  instance,  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  interim  Financial  Policy  Committee  has  been 
established within the Bank of England with the objective of identifying, monitoring and taking 
action to reduce systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing the resilience of the 
UK  financial  system.  It  is  a  committee  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Court  of  Directors  and  is 
chaired  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank.  The  members  include  senior  representatives  of  the 
central  bank  and  the  microprudential  supervisor,  the  chief  executive  designate  of  the 
Financial Conduct Authority, four external members and a representative of the Treasury.  
In the United States, the Financial Stability Oversight Committee (FSOC) has the objective of 
identifying risks and responding to emerging threats to financial stability. The objective of the 
FSOC  is  to  ensure  coordination  and  information  sharing  across  the  various  supervisory 
organisations in the US. Voting members of the FSOC include the Secretary of the Treasury, 
the  Chairman  of  the  Fed,  the  Chairman  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  the 
Chairperson of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and representatives from other 
relevant authorities.17  
In  the  European  Union,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  is  charged  with 
macro-prudential oversight of the financial system. Voting members of the ESRB include the 
President  and  Vice-President  of  the  ECB,  Governors  of  EU  Central  Banks,  Chairs  of  the 
three  European  Supervisory  Authorities,  a  member  of  the  European  Commission,  and 
representatives of ESRB advisory committees. The Head of Regulation from each Member 
State and the President of the Economic and Financial Committee are non-voting members. 
Where the ESRB identifies a significant risk it issues warnings to the relevant authorities, and 
where appropriate, recommendations for remedial action. The ESRB recently recommended 
that five criteria regarding the macro prudential mandates of national authorities be set down 
in national legislation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
First,  central  banks  must  play  a  pivotal  role  in  macro  prudential  policy.  There  are  several 
reasons  for  this.  Importantly,  central  banks  have  considerable  analytical  resources  and 
technical  expertise.  In  particular,  they  have  staff  that  has  expertise  in  analysing  financial 
sector  developments.  Moreover,  they  have  oversight  of  payments  systems  and  serve  as 
lenders  of  last  resort.  Finally,  there  are  obvious  links  between  monetary  policy  and  macro 
prudential policy.  
Second,  it  is  essential  that  policy  makers  have  access  to  information  and  data  on  the 
components  of  the  financial  system.  This  must  include,  for  example,  data  on  individual 
financial institutions and developments in payments and settlements systems. 
Third,  the  macro  prudential  policy  maker  must  enjoy  independence.  Every  now  and  then, 
macro prudential policy will have to be tightened to constrain the financial system during a 
boom. There will then no doubt be strong pressures from financial institutions and borrowers 
alike not to do so, and there is always a risk that political pressures will arise. For much the 
same reasons as monetary policy makers are independent, macro prudential policy makers 
must also be.  
Fourth,  good  policy  requires  policy  makers  to  be  accountable.  Thus,  the  macro  prudential 
policy  makers  should  explain  to  the  public,  through  regular  reports  and  perhaps  also  to 
parliament or a parliamentary committee, what measures it has taken and why.  
Fifth,  the  objectives  of  policy  must  be  clear  in  law  and  the  policy  makers  must  have  legal 
power to set the policy instruments as needed to achieve these objectives, that is, there must 
be a firm legal basis for macro prudential policy. 
Macro prudential policy in Ireland  
4.1 
It  is  of  interest  to  take  stock  of  the  current  situation  in  Ireland  in  light  of  the  ESRB’s  five 
recommendations. First, as the Central Bank of Ireland is responsible for financial regulation 
and  supervision,  it  has  access  to  the  relevant  information  and  the  technical  expertise 
necessary to analyse macro prudential risks. Furthermore, it controls many potential policy 
instruments  necessary  to  conduct  macro  prudential  policy.  An  advantage  of  an  integrated 
central  bank  and  micro  prudential  supervisor  is  that  it  allows  macro  and  micro  prudential 
policy  to  be  pursued  in  unison  and  policy  trade-offs  that  arise  to  be  internalised  and 
discussed within a single institution. 
The primary role of the Central Bank in relation to macro prudential policy is clear. Firstly, the 
2010 amendment to the Central Bank of Ireland Act (1942) states that the “stability of the 
financial  system  overall”  is  an  objective  of  the  Bank.  Although  not  legally  binding,  the 
Memorandum of understanding on roles and responsibilities in relation to the financial sector 
between  the  Department  of  Finance  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  that  was  signed  in 
2011 states  that  the  “Central  Bank  has  the  statutory  objective  of  stability  of  the  financial 
system overall.”  
Similarly, the 2007 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on financial stability between the 
Department  of  Finance,  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Financial  Regulator,  also  holds  that  the 
central bank is responsible for the stability of the financial system. That said, there is little 
doubt that the Department of Finance also has responsibilities in this area. Indeed, the MOU 
reflects the high level of cooperation on financial stability issues which operates in practice 
between the Department and the Central Bank. 
5. 
Conclusions  
In the years ahead, policy makers across the world will do their best to avoid a repetition of 
the  financial  crisis  that  started  in  2007.  In  doing  so,  much  attention  will  be  paid  to 
strengthening  the  macro  prudential  framework.  There  is  much  to  be  done.  More  work  is 
needed on developing indicators for financial stability analysis. That said, there is likely to be 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
an  upper  bound  to  how  well  any  indicator  can  help  predict  the  development  of  financial 
tensions. A better understanding of what instruments are likely to be most effective, and how 
they are best used, must also be reached. Furthermore, it is important to determine how the 
task of preventing asset market bubbles from developing should be shared between macro 
prudential and monetary policy, if at all.  
Ensuring that policy makers are willing and able to act on any information that suggests that 
financial stability may be at risk is crucial. Tightening macro prudential policy will never be 
popular since the costs of doing so are obvious and the benefits much harder to pin point. 
Clarity regarding the objective of macro prudential policy, where responsibility lies for policy 
and what the accountability arrangements are, as well as the independence of the decision 
makers are all essential features of a strong macro prudential framework. 
REFERENCES  
the 
(2009), 
repost 
Progress 
“Assessing 
frameworks”, 
Bank  of  England,  (2011),  “Instruments  of  macroprudential  policy”,  Discussion  Paper, 
December. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/financialstability/discussionpaper111220.
pdf  
Barrell,  Ray,  E.  Philip  Davis,  Dilruba  Karim  and  Iana  Liadze,  (2010),  “Bank  regulation, 
property prices and early warning systems for banking crises in OECD countries”, National 
Institute  of  Economic  and  Social  Research,  Discussion  Paper  No.  330,  February. 
http://www.niesr.ac.uk/pdf/dp330.pdf  
Borio,  Claudio  and  Mathias  Drehmann, 
risk  of  banking 
crises – revisited”, BIS Quarterly Review, March. http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt0903e.pdf  
BIS,  (2010),  “Macroprudential  instruments  and  frameworks:  a  stocktaking  of  issues  and 
experiences”, CGFS Papers No. 38. http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs38.pdf  
BIS,  (2011),  “Central  bank  governance  and  financial  stability:  A  report  by  a  Study  Group”, 
May. http://www.bis.org/publ/othp14.pdf BIS-FSB-IMF, (2011), “Macroprudential policy tools 
and 
October. 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/102711.pdf  
Bordo,  Michael  D.  and  Olivier  Jeanne,  (2002),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices:  Does 
“Benign 
Paper  WP/02/225. 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2002/wp02225.pdf  
CEBS, (2010), “Guidelines on the management of concentration risk under the supervisory 
review  process 
(GL31)”.  http://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/Publications/Standards 
---Guidelines/2010/Concentration-risk-guidelines/Concentration.aspx  
Espinosa-Vega,  Marco  A.,  Charles  Kahn,  Rafael  Matta  and  Juan  Sole,  (2011),  “Systemic 
Risk  and  Optimal  Regulatory  Architecture”, 
IMF  Working  Paper  WP/11/93 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp11193.pdf  
European  Central  Bank,  (2010),  Analytical  models  and  tools  for  the  identification  and 
assessment  of  systemic  risks”,  Financial  Stability  Review,  Special  Feature  B,  June. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview201006en.pdf?3ab15dfbf4e228e6e0a
4ef14b01a78ce  
European Systemic Risk Board, (2011), “Recommendation on the macro-prudential mandate 
of 
December. 
http://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/recommendations/ESRB_2011_3.en.pdf?c39d6a7fa3d12f
1e89e069616470c681 22  
Everett,  Mary  and  John  Kelly,  (2004),  “Financial  Liberalisation  and  Economic  Growth  in 
Autumn. 
Ireland”, 
(ESRB/2011/3), 
authorities”, 
Quarterly 
Sense?”, 
Neglect” 
Bulletin, 
national 
working 
Ireland, 
Central 
G20, 
Make 
Bank 
IMF 
27 
to 
of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
for 
the 
and 
future”, 
(2010), 
systems 
(2003),  When  Bubbles  Burst”,  World  Economic  Outlook,  Chapter 
http://www.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/2004%20Autumn%20Financial%20Liberal
isation%20and%20Economic%20Growth.pdf  
Group of Thirty, (2010), “Enhancing financial stability and resilience – Macroprudential policy, 
tools 
October. 
http://www.group30.org/images/PDF/Macroprudential_Report_Final.pdf  
Hart,  Oliver  and  Luigi  Zingales,  (2010),  “A  new  capital  regulation  for  large  financial 
institutions”, FEEM Working Paper No 124.2009.  
HM Treasury, (2011), “A new approach to financial regulation: the blueprint for reform”, June. 
http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/consult_financial_regulation_condoc.pdf  
Honohan,  Patrick,  (2010),  “The  Irish  banking  crisis,  regulatory  and  financial  stability  policy 
2003–2008”, a report to the Minister for Finance by the Governor of the Central Bank, May. 
http://www.bankinginquiry.gov.ie/The%20Irish%20Banking%20Crisis%20Regulatory%20and
%20Financial%20Stability%20Policy%202003-2008.pdf  
Honohan,  Patrick,  and Luc  Laeven,  (2005)  (eds.),  Systemic  Financial Crises:  Containment 
and Resolution, Cambridge University Press, UK.  
IMF, 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2003/01/pdf/chapter2.pdf  
IMF 
from 
Lessons 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2010/052710.pdf  
IMF, 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/031411.pdf  
Kashyap,  Anil,  K.,  Raghuram  G.  Rajan  and  Jeremy  C.  Stein,  (2008),  “Rethinking  Capital 
Regulation”, 
August. 
http://www.kc.frb.org/publicat/sympos/2008/KashyapRajanStein.08.08.08.pdf  
Kennedy,  Gerard  and  Tara  McIndoe  Calder,  (2011),  “The  Irish  Mortgage  Market:  Stylised 
Facts,  Negative  Equity  and  Arrears”,  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  Research  Technical  Paper 
12/RT/11. http://www.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/12RT11.pdf  
Kohn, Donald L., (2009), “Monetary Policy Research and the Financial Crisis: Strengths and 
Shortcomings”, speech given at the Federal Reserve Conference on Key Developments in 
Monetary 
October. 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20091009a.htm 23  
Reinhart, Carmen, M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, (2008), “Is the 2007 US sub-prime financial 
crisis so different? An international historical comparison”, American Economic Review 982, 
339–44.  
Saurina,  Jesus,  (2009),  “Loan  loss  provisions  in  Spain:  A  working  macro-prudential  tool”, 
Revista 
11–26. 
http://bde.eu/webbde/Secciones/Publicaciones/InformesBoletinesRevistas/RevistaEstabilida
dFinanciera/09/Noviembre/ief0117.pdf 24  
“Macroprudential 
Washington, 
framework”. 
conference, 
Financiera, 
Estabilidad 
organizing 
17,Banco 
II,  April. 
prepared 
España, 
Jackson 
Banking 
“Central 
(2011), 
Crisis”, 
Policy, 
policy: 
paper 
D.C., 
May. 
Hole 
pp. 
the 
for 
de 
de 
an 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
