Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Outlook for Thailand at a time of economic 
uncertainty 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thomson 
Reuters Forum, Bangkok, 21 February 2012. 
 Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be the keynote speaker at this Thomson Reuters forum. This is a special 
opportunity for me to share my views on the “Outlook for Thailand at a Time of Economic 
Uncertainty.” At the outset, I would like to highlight that the Thai economic outlook for 2012 is 
likely to be strong in terms of projected GDP growth while pressure on inflation should be 
well- contained. Having said that, I know that all of you, especially those in financial markets, 
are well aware that in today’s fast-paced world we cannot be complacent. Positive outlooks, 
such as the one I just described, may change quickly. Today, my speech will focus on laying 
out the challenges, my assessment of the challenges, and our policy options going forward. 
First, let us turn to the challenges. 
Last  year  2011  was  a  year  of  regaining  poise  and  balance  for  monetary  policy.  One  year 
ago, the global recovery had started to gain traction. Capital flows had begun to stabilize and 
became less uni-directional. The balance of risks had started to shift away from  growth to 
inflation. As a result, the Bank of Thailand (BOT), and indeed, the majority of central banks in 
the region, normalized interest rates throughout most of the year. But that was one year ago. 
And one year can be a long time. Therefore, the need to focus on ensuring macroeconomic 
stability can never be taken for granted. 
This  year  Thailand  faces  challenges  from  both  within  and  without.  On  the  internal 
front,  the  main  challenge  is  the  flood  –  more  specifically,  how  to  ensure  domestic 
recovery and restoration after the flood. The extent of the damage inflicted by the flood in 
the  last  quarter  of  2011  was  larger  than  expected  and  disrupted  agricultural  and 
manufacturing  supply-chains  in  the  flooded  areas.  As  a  result,  the  economy  grew  by 
0.1 percent in 2011. The economy is projected to rebound in 2012, growing by 4.9 percent, 
boosted by private and public spending for post-flood restoration. In 2013, economic growth 
is projected to gather momentum, expanding by 5.6 percent. 
The  Bank  of  Thailand  is  confident  that  the  economy  continues  to  be  supported  by  strong 
fundamentals.  Let  me  give  you  a  few  examples.  Inflation  expectations  remain  anchored. 
Healthy corporate balance sheet from past savings and profits will allow firms to rebuild and 
re-invest.  Corporate  lending  remains  high  despite  some  headwinds  to  the  banking  sector. 
These  headwinds 
the 
macroeconomic  outlook  and  on  loan  quality,  as  we  have  seen  some  pressure  on  the 
delinquency  rate.  The  new  FIDF  fee  will  also  have  some  effect  on  banks’  bottom  line. 
Nevertheless, the Thai banking system will be able to handle these challenges given a strong 
capital  base  as  a  result  of  continued  profitability  in  the  past  ten  years,  a  good  risk 
management  system,  and  strong  risk-based  supervision.  Therefore,  Thailand’s  key 
fundamentals  remain  resilient  in  the  face  of  these  challenges.  Most  importantly,  human 
resources and know-how remain intact. History shows that no matter how severe the natural 
disaster, roads can always be rebuilt and buildings restored in a relatively brief span of time 
should the human spirit remain, as it does in Thailand. 
The growth rates I have mentioned for 2012 and 2013 are consistent with the medium-term 
trend,  as  strong  fundamentals  mean  that  Thailand’s  long-term  growth  trajectory  remains 
intact despite the flood and volatile external environment. An important reason for this is 
flood  and  global  uncertainty  on 
the  effect  of 
include 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that Thailand is well positioned geographically to reap the benefits of growth in Asia. 
The  rise  of  China  and  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC)  provide  enormous  growth 
opportunities  from  economic  integration.  For  sure,  there  will  be  more  competition.  But  our 
research shows that trade gains will be substantial, from both inside and outside the region. 
However,  there  is  a  catch.  To  reap  these  gains,  the  Thai  economy  will  have  to  undergo 
structural adjustment, that is, the flow of labor and capital from sunset to sunrise sectors. The 
exact form of adjustment is uncertain, as it depends on global developments. However, what 
is quite certain is that the size of structural change required will be large, comparable to what 
Thailand experienced during the economic liberalization of the 1980s and 90s. This change, 
almost by definition, will not be easy. If Thailand overcomes this hurdle, it will benefit from 
exporting  more  goods,  possibly  more  hi-tech,  to  the  region  while  becoming  part  of  the 
regional supply chain and enjoying a greater range of imports. 
But  while  the  domestic  outlook  appears  positive,  the  global  environment  remains 
uncertain. The lingering euro debt crisis and fragile US recovery continue to weigh on global 
growth. Why? Current technical solutions do not address deep-rooted long-term  problems. 
As  a  result,  resolution  has  been  delayed,  adding  to  uncertainty.  Moreover,  the  longer  the 
delay, the more interest rates and fiscal stimulus in both the US and euro area will be pushed 
to new limits. The tightened policy space means that new shocks will be hard to manage and 
could derail the ongoing recovery. In my view, it appears that the global economy currently 
lacks the clear leadership especially in regards to getting the advanced economies out of the 
woods.  Countries  which  had  previously  provided  the  leadership  for  global  macroeconomic 
management through, for example, the International Monetary Fund, are now caught in the 
dilemma  of  solving  their  own  economic  problems  versus  choosing  policy  options  for  the 
greater good of the global economy. This is a separate issue deserving of its own discussion. 
Let me now turn to the policy options going forward, particularly from the perspective 
of BOT. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As the global environment remains uncertain and without global economic leadership, 
it  is  even  more  important  than  before  that  the  BOT  policy  strikes  the  right  balance 
between  accommodating  the  domestic  recovery  while  ensuring  stability  in  the 
long-term.  Currently,  monetary  policy  has  shifted  toward  addressing  domestic  and  global 
challenges to growth. The combination of domestic and external events has contributed to 
the MPC’s decision to lower the policy rate. On the domestic front, the key factor was the 
flood—its economic impact proved to be larger than expected. At the same time, domestic 
inflationary  risks  look  to  moderate.  On  the  external  front,  risks  to  global  economic  growth 
increased  due  to  the  fragile  US  recovery  and  the  lingering  euro  debt  problem.  While  the 
policy rate has come down due to risks to growth, the MPC also has its eye firmly fixed on 
long-term  macroeconomic  stability.  As  such,  the  MPC  views  current  interest  rates  as 
supportive of long-term economic stability. 
I would also like to say that in response to the challenging global landscape BOT will 
undertake policy actions that will serve to anchor long-term macroeconomic stability, 
enhance Thailand’s competitiveness, and augment economic adaptability. Here I want 
to  stress  that  the  BOT  has  consistently  adhered  to  the  principle  of  conducting  policy  that 
ensures long-term sustainable growth. 
On augmenting economic adaptability, the BOT will ensure that the exchange rate moves 
broadly in line with the underlying economic fundamentals while its volatility is manageable 
by Thai businesses. In the long run, we view a flexible exchange rate regime as the most 
effective buffer for capital flow volatility. In this context, a more balanced capital account is an 
important supporting factor. To this end, the BOT is currently formulating a Capital Account 
Liberalization  Master  Plan.  This  plan  seeks  to  promote  Thai  investment  abroad  and 
streamline  foreign  exchange  regulation,  thereby  increasing  economic  adaptability  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
promoting  greater  awareness  and  capability  for  the  private  sector’s  foreign  exchange  risk 
management, which relate directly to the businesses of many of you present here. 
In  addition  to  maintaining  stability,  BOT  can  also  enhance  competitiveness  by 
ensuring  financial  institutions’  role  as  effective  intermediaries  of  capital,  thereby 
improving financial access and inclusive growth. In this regard, I like to mention that we 
have launched the Financial Consumer Protection Center to boost financial literacy. 
Clearly,  a  more  competitive  financial  sector  will  support  the  process  of  structural  change  I 
discussed before. The second Financial Sector Master Plan, which takes into account major 
global  developments  such  as  regional  integration  and  global  regulatory  reform,  will  further 
this vision of a modern financial sector landscape. In designing such a landscape, many key 
policy issues will need to be explored in depth. These issues include a regulatory framework 
that  promotes  financial  sector  development  without  compromising  financial  sector  stability, 
the  optimal  adoption  of  international  standards  for  bank  supervision,  a  level-playing  field 
among  different  domestic  financial  players,  and  the  competitiveness  of  the  Thai  financial 
system in the ASEAN context of Qualified ASEAN banks, and so on. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  believe  that  the  efforts  put  forth  by  the  BOT  will  fulfill  the  objective  of  enhancing 
competitiveness  and  ensuring  long-term  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability. 
However,  we  cannot  do  this  alone,  especially  in  a  world  of  global  economic  uncertainty, 
domestic challenges and diminishing fiscal room. A common vision among all stakeholders is 
necessary for policy coordination. The advanced economies that are now experiencing public 
debt crisis offer valuable lessons for emerging countries as well as Thailand where planned 
fiscal spending will add to fiscal debt. I believe that at this crucial juncture, many countries, 
Thailand  included,  still  have  time  to  manage  possible  future  fiscal  stresses.  Austerity  by 
means  of  cutting  public  spending  is  one  conventional  way  to  achieve  fiscal  consolidation. 
However,  most  emerging  and  developing  countries  still  require  essential  infrastructure 
investment  to  unleash  their  own  growth  potential.  Austerity  without  growth  would  be  futile. 
Therefore, what is needed is constructive fiscal consolidation rather than dogmatic austerity 
programs.  Prudential  cuts  can  be  combined  with 
to  raise 
competitiveness levels and ensure sustainable long-term growth. 
Rest assured that the BOT will do everything possible to create a stable long-term economic 
environment in which businesses can prosper. Thank you. 
infrastructure  spending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
