Fahad Almubarak: Brief review of financial developments in Saudi Arabia 
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Dr  Fahad  Almubarak,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary 
Agency  (SAMA),  marking  the  Seventh  Anniversary  of  Blessed  Allegiance  Pledge  to  the 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz, Riyadh, 17 May 2012. 
 Saudis celebrate on the 26th of Jumada II 1433H (May 17, 2012) the Seventh Anniversary of 
the blessed allegiance pledge to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Abdullah bin 
Abdulaziz.  The  celebration  is  a  true  image  of  loyalty  to  the  Custodian  of  the  Two  Holy 
Mosques, who is faithful to his nation’s interests. It is based on well-established bases, in the 
forefront of which are the tributes of our wise leadership such as the great keenness on the 
welfare  of  citizens  and  the  enhancement  of  the  development  process.  It  is  difficult  to 
enumerate the achievements of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques in a few words, but, 
however, I will touch upon some of them. 
The  Custodian  of  the  Two  Holy  Mosques  has  taken  a  broad  range  of  decisions  and 
measures  aiming  at  restructuring  and  regulating  the  economy,  updating  regulations  and 
legislation  to  enhance  the  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  the  economy  and  support  the 
optimal  operation  of  production  factors,  apart  from  providing  an  advanced  regulatory  and 
administrative framework and an attractive environment for domestic and foreign investments 
to achieve diversity in the economic and productive environment in order to continue creating 
job opportunities for the sons and daughters of the Kingdom. 
Fortunately,  oil  prices  have  constantly  improved,  helping  to  accomplish  many  of  the 
development objectives. As a result, the private sector during the period from 2005 up to the 
end  of  2011  achieved  a  real  annual  growth  rate  averaging  5.5  percent.  The  balance  of 
payments (BOP) recorded a surplus of Rls 2.5 trillion. The actual expenditure of the public 
finance  stood  at  Rls  3.8  trillion,  of  which  Rls  1.0  trillion  were  for  capital  expenditures. 
Moreover, the ratio of public debt to GDP declined from 39.2 percent in 2005 to 6.3 percent 
in  2011.  The  banking  sector  recorded  strong  and  constant  growth  during  that  period, 
surpassing  significantly  the  repercussions  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  total  assets  of 
banks rose by more than two fold. 
Many  development  projects  have  been  approved  for  enhancing  and  modernizing  the 
infrastructure,  including  roads,  airports,  telecommunications,  water  &  electricity,  health 
& educational  services  and  the  Custodian  of  the  Two  Holy  Mosques’  Foreign  Scholarship 
Program, which is considered as a long-term investment of human resources . 
The  Kingdom  has  maintained  high  sovereign  credit  ratings  as  assessed  by  global  rating 
agencies for its financial solvency. The last rating was AA- awarded by Standard & Poor’s 
and Fitch for long-term credit rating in national and foreign currency, with a stable outlook . 
Confidence is still great and solid that strong growth and comprehensive development of the 
Saudi  economy  will  continue  under  the  wise  leadership  of  the  Custodian  of  the  Two  Holy 
Mosques. 
The  Custodian  of the Two  Holy  Mosques  is  well-known  for  his  concern  about  his  citizens, 
and  he  is  determined  to  closely  follow  up  their  needs,  including  reduction  of  poverty, 
supporting Social Security, approving salaries increase & cost of living allowance, confirming 
wage earners, addressing the housing issue, supporting specialized development funds, etc. 
and other decisions aiming at improving citizen’s living conditions, which he deems as the 
objective and tool of the development process.  
We  pray  to  Almighty  Allah  that  there  will  be  many  happy  returns  of  this  dear  national 
occasion for years and years for the citizens of this country, hoping that the Custodian of the 
Two Holy Mosques and his Crown Prince will continue to enjoy full health and wellbeing, with 
the Kingdom enjoying security and stability, to continue the development process, under our 
wise leadership. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
