Sayuri Shirai: Have demographic changes affected Japan’s 
macroeconomic performance? Some implications for monetary policy 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, given at the 
Bank  of  Finland,  Helsinki,  at  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  and  at  the  Stockholm  University, 
Stockholm, 3–7 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Hello everyone. My name is Sayuri Shirai, and I am a Policy Board member of the Bank of 
Japan. I am delighted to be giving a talk today on the theme of demographic changes and 
their  impact  on  macroeconomic  performance  with  some  implications  for  monetary  policy.  I 
feel that it is important to be addressing you and exchange views with you about this issue 
here in Europe, especially in the Nordic countries, for two main reasons.   
First, after having undergone a process of rapid industrialization, many European countries 
encountered  a  rapid  decline  in  their  fertility  rates,  beginning  in  the  second  half  of  the 
nineteenth  century.  This  promoted  active  debate  on  population-related  issues  in  Europe, 
including those related to neo-Malthusianism and the conservative view of encouraging both 
a  traditional  family  style  and  childbirth.  By  the  1930s,  Sweden  was  faced  with  the  lowest 
fertility  rate  in  Europe.  The  Swedish  Nobel  Laureate  Karl  Gunnar  Myrdal  was  concerned 
about  the  consequence  of  this  declining  rate  –  namely,  an  eventual  decrease  in  the  total 
population and its medium- to long-term impact on macroeconomic performance, such as a 
decline in  investment and living standards, a rise in unemployment, and the prevalence of 
poverty.  In  his  influential  book  Crisis  in  the  Population  Question  (Kris  i  Befolkningsfrågan) 
which  he  published  together  with  his  wife  Alva  Myrdal  in  1934,  and  in  a  number  of  other 
associated  papers,  he  stressed  the  importance  of  social  policies  to  reverse  the  declining 
trend in the fertility rate and promoted the concept of socialization of consumption related to 
childbirth  and  childcare,  while  respecting  women’s  choices  in  this  matter.  These  policies 
included  free  services  to  all  child-bearing  households,  and  would  be  financed  by  a 
progressive  income  tax  system. This  idea  of  using  social  policies  to  mitigate  any  negative 
externalities  caused  by  depopulation  contributed  to  the  creation  of  the  contemporary 
Swedish  welfare  model.  Today,  the  Nordic  countries,  including  Sweden  and  Finland,  are 
famed for their distinguished universal, comprehensive social  welfare systems, which have 
generated  some  successful  outcomes,  such  as  the  maintenance  of  reasonably  high  total 
fertility  rates  (TFRs),1  high  levels  of  human  capital,  and  high  labor  participation  ratios  for 
women.   
Second, the 2012 Ageing Report published by the European Commission provides long-term 
macroeconomic  and  budgetary  projections  for  the  period  of  2010-60,  and  it  stresses  the 
challenges posed by population ageing. Assuming that the TFR in the European Union (EU) 
will moderately increase from the current rate of 1.59 to 1.64 by 2030 and further to 1.71 by 
2060, and assuming that net migration inflows as a percentage of the total population remain 
at  about  0.2  percent  throughout  the  2010-60  period,  the  report  projects  that  the  total 
population  will  decline  only  after  2040.  However,  the  size  of  the  working-age  population 
(aged 15 to 64 years old) is projected to decline after 2012.   
The  simple  fact  is  that  both  Japan  and  Europe  are  facing  a  common  structural  issue  – 
population  ageing.  Japan 
lead  with  demographic  and  associated 
macroeconomic issues. It is widely known that Japan has already witnessed a reduction in its 
taking 
the 
is 
 1  The TFR refers to the number of children that would be born to a woman if she were to live to the end of her 
child-bearing years and bear children in accordance with current age-specific fertility rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
working-age population in absolute numbers since the mid-1990s. About a decade after this 
time,  the  total  population  declined  in  2005  and  2009,  and  it  is  projected  to  decrease 
constantly from 2011 onward. As a result, Japan has become the most progressed ageing 
society: the share of the population aged 65 and over was 23 percent in 2010 – the highest 
level  in  the  world.  The  rapid  pace  of  decreases  in  the  growth  rate  of  the  working-age 
population  and  total  population  appears  to  be  unprecedented  globally.  This  has  certainly 
generated  various  unfavorable  impacts  on  Japan’s  macroeconomic  performance,  thereby 
also affecting the environment related to monetary policy management. 
Given that Japan and Europe face similar phenomena (i.e., increases in life expectancy and 
the relative size of their elderly populations), it is necessary to deepen our understanding of 
the impact of demographic changes on macroeconomic performance and possibly also about 
the environment surrounding monetary policy management. However, these issues are not 
yet being actively debated among central banks around the world. 
Let me outline the sequence of my presentation. It comprises four sections. In Part II, I will 
briefly examine demographic changes in Japan in the post-1945 period. Part III will focus on 
the impacts of these changes on macroeconomic performance. Then, the issues of the long-
standing  output  gap  and  mild  deflation,  which  are  partially  influenced  by  demographic 
changes, will be discussed in Part IV together with monetary policy management. In Part V, I 
will present concluding remarks.  
Demographic changes in the post-1945 period 
II. 
I  would  like  to  begin  my  presentation  by  making  an  overview  of  Japan’s  demographic 
changes in the post-1945 period. 
Rapidly reduced fertility rate and working-age population  
In the aftermath of World War II, Japan enjoyed a period of so-called “population dividend,” 
which  helped  produce  higher  economic  growth.  This  refers  to  a  period  when  the  total 
dependency  ratio  (defined  as  the  youth  and  elderly  population  over  the  working-age 
population) decreases drastically with a decline in the number of children. In Japan, the total 
population rose rapidly in the second half of the 1940s with the first postwar baby boom in 
1947–49; this was followed by the second-generation baby boom in 1971–74 (Chart 1). This 
trend  helped  Japan  become  one  of  the  most  populous  nations  globally  –  with  a  total 
population of 128 million in 2011, or the 10th-largest country by population size as of 2010. 
Starting with a very high TFR at around 4 in the late 1940s, the TFR dropped to around 2 – a 
rate much lower than before but still close to the replacement rate (the rate enabling natural 
population growth) – by 1958. Thereafter, the TFR remained at a still high level of 2 or above 
(Chart 2). During that period, Japan enjoyed a growing working-age population.  
Since then, the situation has changed dramatically. First, the number of childbirths started to 
show a constant decline after the second-generation baby boom in the 1970s. In parallel, the 
TFR began to decrease sharply from over 2 in the 1970s to 1.39 in 2011 – notwithstanding 
that a moderate recovery in the TFR is currently in progress. The declining trend could be 
attributed to such factors as rising income, a growing focus on work and education among 
women,  the  rising  cost of  child  care  and  education,  the  decreasing  size  of families,  and  a 
growing number of unmarried people (resulting in a smaller number of children given that few 
unmarried couples in Japan have children). Second, about 20 years after the decline in the 
TFR,  a  decrease  in  the  working-age  population  occurred.  The  size  of  the  working-age 
population started showing a clear decrease from the mid-1990s.   
According  to  official  projections,  the  total  population  will  decline  from  the  current  level  of 
127.8 million to 120 million by 2026, to under 100 million by 2048, and further to 86.7 million 
by  2060.  The  working-age  population  is  projected  to  decrease  more  drastically  –  from  the 
current level of 81.3 million to 44.2 million by 2060. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Emergence of the most progressed ageing society 
One of the most structurally important challenges for Japan is dealing with the progressive 
ageing  of  the  population.  The  pace  of  ageing  accelerated  as  life  expectancy  at  birth 
increased rapidly from 50.1 years in 1947 to 79.6 years in 2010 for men, and from 54.0 years 
to  86.4  years,  respectively,  for  women.  This  has  put  Japan  among  the  nations  with  the 
highest longevity in the world (Chart 3). This could be the consequence of such factors as 
medical  advancements,  higher  living  standards,  universal  public  health  insurance,  and 
elderly care systems. As a result, the ratio of the population aged 65 and over to the total 
population  rose  steadily  from  just  4.8  percent  in  1947  to  about  23  percent  in  2010.  This 
percentage is the highest in the world, being followed by that of Germany (20.6 percent) and 
Italy (20.3 percent). The pace of increase in the elderly ratio accelerated after the 2000s. 
Reflecting  expected  increases  in  life  expectancy  over  the  period  of  2010–60  (from  79.6  to 
84.2  years  for  men;  from  86.4  to  90.9  years  for  women),  the  proportion  of  the  elderly 
population is officially projected to grow further to 25 percent in 2013. Thus, elderly people 
will comprise one-fourth of the total population. According to projections, this proportion will 
reach  33.4  percent  by  2035,  giving  rise  to  a  society  in  which  one  in  three  people  will  be 
elderly.  This  ratio  is  projected  to  rise  to  about  40  percent  by  2050.  By  this  time,  the 
population aged 75 years and older will account for a quarter of the total population.   
Demographic changes and macroeconomic performance 
III. 
Having outlined trends in Japan’s demographic changes, I would now like to move to Part III 
of  this  presentation  and  show  some  impacts  of  demographic  changes  on  the  Japanese 
macro-economy. Though a large number of studies have investigated the supply side (i.e., 
the  impact  on  potential  economic  growth),  shedding  light  on  the  demand  side  is  equally 
important. 
Impact of demographic changes on economic growth 
Japan achieved high real GDP growth of 10.4 percent in the 1960s, which enabled it to catch 
up  with  a  number  of  advanced  countries.  This  period  was  followed  by  moderately  high-
growth  rates  of  5  percent  in  the  1970s  and  then  4.3  percent  in  the  1980s.  Following  the 
collapse  of  bubbles  in  real  estate  and  stock  prices  in  the  early  1990s,  however,  Japan 
entered  a  prolonged  period  of  low  economic  growth.  Real  GDP  growth  rates  dropped  to 
1.5 percent in the 1990s and further to 0.6 percent in the 2000s (Chart 4 [1]).  
First,  the  impact  of  population  developments  on  economic  growth  can  be  observed  by 
decomposing the real GDP growth rate into (a) the population growth rate and (b) the per 
capita  real  GDP  growth  rate.  Chart  4  (2)  shows  that  population  growth  made  a  positive 
contribution until the 1990s, even though the scale of that contribution dropped in the 1980s 
and 1990s. The positive contribution virtually disappeared in the 2000s.  
Second, the impact of population ageing on economic growth can be traced by decomposing 
the real GDP growth rate into (c) the growth rate of the number of employed workers (or the 
growth  rate  of  employment)  and  (d)  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  per  employed  worker. 
Population ageing tends to reduce both the size of the working-age population and the labor 
participation  rate  for  the  whole  economy,  thereby  reducing  total  employment.  Chart  4  (3) 
indicates  that  the  contribution  of  employment  to  economic  growth  turned  from  positive  to 
negative in the 2000s.  
Third,  the  labor  market  has  transformed  drastically  over  the  same  period,  and  this  has 
contributed to a decline in the total number of working hours. The number of part-time and 
non-regular  workers  has  increased  relative  to  that  of  regular  workers,  reflecting  the 
increasing  rate  of  female  labor  participation.  In  addition,  the  number  of  hours  worked  per 
regular  worker  has  decreased  in  accordance  with  global  trends  and  the  growing 
sophistication  of  society.  Although 
links  with 
these  developments  have  no  direct 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
demographic  changes,  the  increasing  number  of  female  and  elderly  workers  is  likely  to 
reduce the total hours worked for the whole economy. Thus, it may be useful to examine the 
impact of working hours on economic growth. This can be achieved by decomposing the real 
GDP growth rate into (e) the growth rate of hours worked and (f) the real GDP growth rate 
per  hour  (or  the  growth  rate  of  labor  productivity  per  hour).  Chart  4  (4)  reveals  that  a 
decrease in hours worked after the 1990s contributed negatively to economic growth.   
Charts 4 (2)–(4) indicate that both demographic and labor market changes have contributed 
directly  to  a  declining  trend  in  economic  growth  (these  changes  are  referred  to  as  the 
population effect, the labor force effect, and working hour effect). At the same time, the per 
capita,  per  worker,  and  per  hour  growth  effects  shown  in  the  same  charts  all  revealed 
declining trends over the same period. The per capita real GDP growth rate is a good proxy 
for measuring the average living standard of a country. The growth rate per employed worker 
is a useful indicator related to labor productivity or supply capacity. The growth rate per hour 
is valuable when one wants to see the impact of changes in hours worked. In the future, this 
hourly based indicator may become even more important in measuring a country’s efficiency; 
this  is  because  further  efforts  to  raise  the  labor  participation  rates  for  women  and  elderly 
people – in addition to a decline in the absolute number of full-time workers – are expected to 
reduce the total number of hours worked in the whole economy. 
Generally  speaking,  the  per  capita  GDP  growth  rate  tends  to  become  lower  than  the  real 
GDP  growth  per  employed  worker  when  the  working-age  population  declines  or  the 
population ages. In any case, the overall declining trends based on the three indicators could 
be  explained  by  (a)  a  decline  in  the  TFP  growth  rate  (which  could  be  explained  by,  for 
example, a completion of the catching-up process and a shift in the industrial structure as will 
be described later) and (b) a decrease in the growth rate of capital stock. Nonetheless, it is 
important to note that Japan’s real GDP growth rate per hour has been comparable to those 
of the United States and the United Kingdom, and it has been higher than those of Germany 
and France (Chart 5). At the same time, this implies that Japan needs to raise the per hour 
growth rate to a level far higher than those of other advanced countries just to maintain the 
same per capita economic growth rates. 
Impact of demographic changes on fixed asset investment demand  
The  declining  working-age  population  and  ageing  population  may  contribute  to  sluggish 
demand for residential housing and fixed-asset investment. In this regard, Dr. Myrdal already 
thought  through  the  impact  of  these  factors  in  his  1940  book  Population:  A  Problem  for 
Democracy.  According  to  him,  a  decrease  in  the  population  is  expected  to  produce  a 
negative impact on (aggregate) demand, particularly investment (Fujita [2010]). The growth 
rates of demand are projected to decline mainly because of (a) an increase in investment-
related  risk  (or  the  heightened  possibility  of  causing  over-supply  and  associated  loss)  for 
firms  as  well  as  (b)  a  decrease  in  investment  incentive  (for  example,  a  decline  in  new 
residential  investment  owing  to  a  reduction  in  the  working-age  population  and  a  drop  in 
replacement demand due to falling housing prices).   
The impact of demographic changes on housing investment was also pointed out by Bakshi 
and Chen (1994). According to their life-cycle investment hypothesis, investors in their 20s 
and  30s  enter  the  family-building  stage,  and  so  housing  becomes  a  desirable  investment. 
During this period, a higher portion of their wealth is allocated to housing and other durable 
goods. As investors grow older, the demand for housing will stabilize or decrease; instead, 
the demand for financial assets will rise. This hypothesis was demonstrated to be applicable 
to  the  United  States,  and  it  implies  that  an  ageing  population  is  associated  with  declining 
housing  prices.  Mankiw  and  Weil  (1989)  also  showed  that  the  baby-boom  generation 
contributed to the U.S. housing boom in the 1970s. 
I believe that some of the impacts discussed by Dr. Myrdal and other researchers are already 
being felt in Japan. During the bubble period in the second half of the 1980s, for example, 
the  growing  size  of  the  working-age  population  stimulated  residential  investment  demand. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 6 shows a clear positive correlation between the (inverse) total dependency ratio and 
real  land  price  level.  This  real  demand,  fueled  by  speculative  investment  activities, 
contributed to higher real estate prices and a credit boom. The number of housing starts has 
since dropped constantly, partly because of a decrease in the working-age population – the 
generation that builds families.  
Moreover, Japanese firms increasingly focus on outward foreign direct investment (FDI), and 
they especially target emerging economies, where the returns on investment are generally 
higher  than  in  Japan  and  other  advanced  countries  (Chart  7).  Firms  continue  to  invest 
domestically but not to a great extent, as evidenced by the declining trend of new business 
fixed investment as a percent of GDP (and cash flow) (Chart 8). In line with this, the main 
investment  incentives  for  companies  are  concentrated  on  upgrading,  earthquake-proof 
strengthening,  and  energy  saving  or  clean-energy  production  –  rather than  bolstering  their 
production capacity.   
One  plausible  consequence  of  reduced  investment  demand  is  weak  demand  for  credit  by 
firms  and  households,  as  pointed  out  later.  For  example,  even  though  the  fund-raising 
conditions of firms and households have generally been favorable, the loan officer opinion 
survey on bank lending practices consistently reports weak diffusion indices (DIs) of demand 
for  loans  by  both  firms  and  households.  This  result  is  consistent  with  the  low  loans-to-
deposits  ratios  –  amounting  to  only  around  70  percent  in  Japan,  which  is  far  below  the 
200 percent of Sweden and over 150 percent of Finland. And yet the banking sector in Japan 
still faces an increase in deposits; thus, the issue of how to raise profitability out of ample 
liquidity is becoming one of the main challenges for this sector. In recent years, the banking 
sector  has  increasingly  allocated  funds  toward  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  and 
overseas lending, which reflects the deteriorating fiscal position of the government and the 
higher potential economic growth in emerging economies.   
Impact of demographic changes on consumption demand and employment 
Population  ageing  may  induce  a  demand  shift  from  manufacturing  (and  other  traditional 
areas) to nonmanufacturing sectors. This is because the elderly population tends to demand 
more services (such as medical and nursing care, tourism, and social services) and fewer 
durable goods (such as cars and home electronics). Given that households whose heads are 
60  years  and  older  already  account  for  over  40  percent  of  total  consumption,  this  shift  in 
preference  by  ageing  is  gradually  affecting  the  structure  of  private  sector  consumption  in 
Japan, and it is predicted that there will be further expansion of the service-related industry in 
the  near  future  (Chart  9).  A  number  of  studies  have  identified  the  possible  impact  of 
demographic  changes  on 
the  
United  Kingdom  (Börsch-Supan  [2003];  Fougère  et  al.  [2007];  Lührmann  [2008];  and 
Rausch [2009]).  
Naturally,  this  change  in  the  demand  structure  has  also  brought  about  a  shift  in  the 
employment structure – a growing proportion of workers in the nonmanufacturing sector and 
a reduced proportion of workers in the manufacturing sector and other traditional areas. At 
the  same  time,  a  shift  in  the  demand  structure  may  result  in  an  increase  in  structural 
unemployment  unless  a  smooth  relocation  of  labor  resources  from  manufacturing  to 
nonmanufacturing  sectors  takes  place.  Katagiri  (2012)  points  out  that  a  rise  in  structural 
unemployment in the 1990s – and the subsequent sustained high level – could be associated 
with  various  labor  market  frictions,  triggered  by  a  shift  in  the  population  ageing-induced 
demand structure.   
in  Canada,  Germany,  and 
the  demand  structure 
Impact of demographic changes on labor productivity 
I  have  already  noted  that  the  growing  demand  for  services  brings  in  a  greater  number  of 
workers engaged in the nonmanufacturing sector. However, this may lower the level of labor 
productivity  for the  whole  economy. This reflects  the fact that,  as  in Japan  (Chart  10), the 
level  of  labor  productivity  per  employed  worker tends to  be  lower  in  the  nonmanufacturing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
it 
in 
to  raise 
is  possible 
labor  productivity 
than in the manufacturing sector. This is mainly due to the nonmanufacturing sector being 
more  labor-intensive  and  more  regulated  while  having  limited  opportunity  for  exercising 
economies  of  scale.  Of  course, 
the 
nonmanufacturing  sector  in  such  ways  as  intensifying  the  use  of  information  and 
communication  technology  (ICT),  improving  the  quality  of  services,  offering  innovative 
services  that  stimulate  potential  demand,  and  promoting  competition  through  deregulation. 
However, the fact that the nonmanufacturing sector tends to produce lower labor productivity 
than  the  manufacturing  sector  is  a  globally  observed  phenomenon.  A  low  level  of  labor 
productivity and sluggish growth could be referred to as the Baumol effect, which focuses on 
limited growth in productivity  in certain nonmanufacturing sectors (public services, such as 
public hospitals and public colleges).  
Thus, population ageing may affect economic growth not only directly through a reduction in 
the  working-age  population  and  employment  (as  indicated  by  the  labor  force  effect  in 
Chart 4 [3]), but also indirectly through a constant decline in labor productivity caused by a 
continuous demand shift – as illustrated by the per worker growth effect in the same chart. 
Katagiri (2012) demonstrated that the decrease in labor productivity, together with a rise in 
the structural unemployment rate, contributed to the lowering of Japan’s real GDP level. As 
for the future, the ratio of nonmanufacturing to manufacturing workers (and the ratio of value 
added  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector  to  GDP)  is  projected  to  rise  constantly;  thus,  the 
downward pressures on labor productivity may be further enhanced (Sakura et al. [2012]). 
Possible impact of demographic changes on the financial asset structure  
According  to  the  previously  mentioned  life-cycle  investment  hypothesis  of  Bakshi  and 
Chen (1994),  investors  gradually  shift  from  housing  investment  to  financial  investment  for 
retirement  as  they  get  older.  These  authors  showed  that  when  people  of  the  baby-boom 
generation  reached  the  stage  where  they  changed  their  asset  composition  from  housing 
investment  to  financial  asset  investment,  they  helped  raise  stock  prices  in  the  1980s  and 
1990s in the United States. At the same time, Bakshi and Chen demonstrated that population 
ageing tends to raise the market risk premium. This is not only because elderly people are 
unwilling  to  take  on  a  lot  of  financial  risk  since  they  have  fewer  opportunities  to  use  their 
labor  income  to  cover  potential  losses,  but  also  because  uncertainty  related  to  their 
remaining lifetime discourages them from accepting such risk. This suggests that population 
ageing  may  raise  investors’  preference  toward  cash,  deposits,  and  bonds  when  they  are 
close to or already at retirement age. These demographic movements possibly bring about 
fluctuations in asset demand on capital markets.  
Currently,  the  size  of  households’  total  financial  assets  in  Japan  amounts  to  about 
1,500 trillion  yen  (19  trillion  U.S.  dollars)  –  the  second  largest  total  in  the  world  after  the 
United States. Despite nearly zero-interest rates, the share of deposits (and cash) accounts 
for  about  half  of  total  assets.  In  general,  young  households  start  to  accumulate  financial 
assets in the form of deposits. As they become older, they may gradually shift their financial 
asset allocation toward life insurance and securities (setting aside housing investment). As 
they become much older, households with extra financial resources may increase their share 
of relatively safe assets, such as deposits and bonds (for example, JGBs). This makes sense 
since elderly people are more concerned about the stability of the valuation of their financial 
assets  and  thus  tend  to  be  more  risk-averse  than  younger  people.  Regarding  stock 
investment, elderly households hold much larger assets than any other generation, and so 
they  may  allocate  part  of  their  assets  to  stock  holdings  while  keeping  the  ratio  of  stock 
holdings  at  a  reasonably  contained  level.  However,  if  the  future  elderly  generation  has 
readier  adaptability  to  ICT,  greater  use  of  online  securities  trading  may  promote  the 
investment demand for stocks.    
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Impact of demographic changes on fiscal balance 
A natural impact of Japan’s demographic changes is deterioration in fiscal balance. It is clear 
that the rapid pace of population ageing in Japan, especially since the 2000s, has been the 
single  driving  force  behind  growing  social  security-related  expenditure  (i.e.,  public  pension 
benefits,  elderly  care,  and  medical  services)  (Chart  11).  Meanwhile,  population  ageing, 
together with sluggish economic performance, has contributed to low growth in tax revenues. 
Population ageing tends to reduce not only the income tax base, but also tax income as a 
result of the downward pressure on economic growth, while raising government expenditure 
through  increased social  security  costs. It  is  expected that  population  ageing  will  raise  the 
cost  of  the  social  security  system  while  reducing  the  amount  of  insurance  premium 
contributions  paid  by  the  working-age  population.  This  will  increase  the  burden  on  fiscal 
balance, which suggests the need for some kind of reform in the future.  
Demographic changes, the output gap, and mild deflation 
IV. 
My broad view regarding the impact of population ageing on macroeconomic performance is 
summarized in Chart 12. Based on this, I would now like to focus on the issues related to the 
output gap and mild deflation, which will be followed by a brief description of monetary policy 
conduct.  
Presence of the long-standing output gap 
Japan’s  output  gaps  have  remained  negative  for  almost  the  entire  period  since  the  mid-
1990s, although the magnitude varies depending on the methods employed to assess them 
(Chart 13). Some argue that the output gap has deteriorated following a series of domestic 
and  external  shocks,  such  as  the  collapse  of  the  asset  bubbles  in  the  early  1990s,  the 
Japanese financial crisis and East Asian currency crises in the second half of the 1990s, the 
collapse of the IT bubble in the early 2000s in the United States, the global financial crisis of 
2008, the European sovereign debt crisis since 2010, and the Great East Japan Earthquake 
of  2011.  Looking  at  this  issue  from  a  more  academic  standpoint,  there  appears  to  be 
consensus among researchers regarding the presence of a long-lasting output gap in Japan. 
By  contrast,  little  consensus  has  emerged  as  to  which  factors  contributed  to  the 
phenomenon.  
When we plot the relationship between demographic data (e.g., growth rate of the working-
age population) and the output gap, we usually do not see a strong direct correlation. This 
may reflect the fact that the impact on the output gap may be felt indirectly through various 
complex  channels.  For  example,  a  number  of  researchers  point  out  three  main  factors  as 
having contributed to the negative output gap: (1) a decline in the natural rate of interest and 
a resultant interest rate gap caused by the zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate; 
(2) a decrease in economic growth expectations caused by a reduction in potential economic 
growth; (3) banks’ risk-averse lending behavior. Of course, these factors are not necessarily 
mutually exclusive.   
Regarding  factor  (1),  it  is  possible  that  population  ageing  may  result  in  a  decrease  in  the 
natural  rate  of  interest  through  various  channels  –  for  example,  a  decline  in  demand  for 
loanable funds by firms and households, while a lower expected permanent income induces 
households to accumulate more savings (Ikeda and Saito [2012]). And when the natural rate 
of interest falls below the actual real interest rate (namely, an interest rate gap emerges), the 
monetary  condition  becomes  relatively  tight  and  contributes  to  deterioration  of  the  output 
gap. Since the natural rate of interest is non-observable, researchers often use (per capita) 
potential GDP growth as a proxy for the natural rate of interest. Various estimates point to a 
decline in the potential growth rate over the period of 1985–2011, but none of them show a 
constantly negative potential growth rate except for a brief interval caused by the 2008 global 
financial  crisis,  for  example,  as  shown  in  Chart  14  (Watanabe  [2012]).  Therefore,  it  is  not 
certain  whether  the  natural  rate  of  interest  has  turned  negative  on  a  permanent  basis.  In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
addition, Saito et al. (2012) indicated that the effects of the zero lower bound of the nominal 
interest rate are rather small (based on the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium [DSGE] 
models, where the estimated monetary policy shocks are assumed to capture the effects of 
the zero bound). Thus, whether factor (1) provides a convincing reason for the presence of 
the long-standing output gap remains debatable.  
As  for  factor  (2),  the  declining  trend  in  potential  GDP  growth,  which  partially  reflects 
population  ageing,  may  worsen  the  output  gap  through  a  long-term  reduction  in  growth 
expectations  (Chart  15).  Provided  that  growth  expectations  affect  both  the  supply  and 
demand sides, there could be cases where an adverse impact on demand may be stronger 
than one on supply – for example, in the case of a permanent negative shock on productivity 
(Saito et al. [2010]). Another example is the case of a slow adjustment of the supply side in 
response  to  a  demand  shift  caused  by  population  ageing,  as  suggested  in  Part  II.  This 
process may exacerbate the output gap in the existing (manufacturing) sector. The services 
sector  is  unable  to  fully  exploit  the  potential  demand  for  services  targeting  the  elderly 
population  owing  to  inadequate  supply  of  innovative  and  potentially  highly  demanded 
services  by  firms.  The  lower  potential  growth  and  resultant  decline  in  growth  expectations 
could provide a reasonable explanation for the presence of the negative output gap.   
On this matter, I would like to mention the view of Dr. Myrdal, as described in his previously 
mentioned  1940  book.  Although  he  did  not  appear  to  have  considered  the  concept  of 
expectations,  I  was  pleasantly  surprised  to  find  that  he  had  already  thought  through  the 
impact of demographic changes on both the supply and demand sides. According to him, a 
reduction in the population caused by declining fertility rate would be expected to provide a 
negative impact on the demand side much earlier than on the supply side. This is because 
(1)  the  negative  impact  on  supply  capacity  could  be  temporarily  offset  by  technological 
progress  and  (2)  the  impact  of  the  decreased  fertility  rate  on  supply  capacity  will  cause  a 
decline in the working-age population with a time lag of about 15–20 years.   
Factor (3) sheds light on banks’ lending behavior, which could be affected by such factors as 
tighter  financial  regulation  and  the  value-at-risk  constraint.  Those  constraints  may  induce 
banks to prefer investment in JGBs or other bonds rather than financing the private sector, 
thereby worsening the output gap (Aoki and Saito [2012]). I am not sure how important this 
impact is in reality since the DIs of lending attitudes of financial institutions have been very 
accommodating for large firms and neutral for small and medium-sized enterprises.   
Moreover, there is a view that the depressed collateral value may have affected the behavior 
of the banking sector. The collapse of the real estate price bubble in the early 1990s together 
with  population  ageing  may  have  resulted  in  a  permanent  decline  in  the  collateral  value, 
thereby reducing banks’ incentives to lend. Based on a balance sheet analysis, it has been 
pointed out that newly established firms tend to possess a limited amount of real estate while 
holding a relatively large amount of receivables and movable properties. Thus, for new firms, 
the constraints they face could likely be mitigated if a new lending method or asset-based 
lending  (ABL)  were  promoted.  This  would  involve  a  financial  institution  taking  receivables 
and movable properties that were closely tied to the firm’s business cash flow (e.g., accounts 
receivable and goods in stock) as collateral for a loan. On this issue, the Bank of Japan has 
been providing funds to financial institutions that undertake ABL in order to promote lending 
without depending on real estate as collateral, as will be pointed out later.  
Presence of mild deflation 
Japan has been facing mild deflation over almost the entire period since the second half of 
the 1990s (Chart 16). Though the issues related to a flattening of the Phillips curve in Japan 
and other advanced countries are hotly debated, I will not address this matter today. Rather, 
I  would  like  to  state  that  a  clear  positive  correlation  between  inflation  and  the  output  gap 
prevails  in  Japan.  Meanwhile,  little  correlation  has  been  observed  between  inflation  and 
money, which suggests that money velocity is not very stable (Nishizaki et al. [2012]). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A number of factors have contributed to the mild deflation. One is the presence of the long-
standing negative output gap, which could be partially affected by demographic changes, as 
already described. The other is a long-term decline in inflation expectations.   
Since various measures indicate a clear trend, there is growing consensus among Japanese 
researchers with respect to the long-term decrease in inflation expectations over the period 
of  1990–2011  (Chart  17).  Some  argue  that  this  could  be  related  to  the  Bank  of  Japan’s 
monetary policy, such as weak inflation forecasts damping inflation expectations. However, I 
feel  that  inflation  expectations  have  been  affected  more  strongly  by  structural  factors, 
including  demographic  changes.  For  example,  the  rapid  pace  of  population  ageing  and 
stagnant  productivity  growth  (which  contributed  to  lower  actual  and  potential  economic 
growth) could possibly dampen economic growth expectations of firms and households. This 
is because firms expect a shrinkage of the markets for goods and services, and households 
expect lower permanent income growth in the future. Sluggish economic growth expectations 
may induce an immediate impact on the demand side through weaker investment plans by 
firms and reduced consumption (and increased savings) by households. This may lead to a 
long-term decrease in inflation expectations, thus providing downward pressure on the actual 
rate of price change. In other words, firms that expect lower demand for their products and 
services and anticipate lower prices demanded by households are likely to set their prices 
conservatively. A number of surveys have reported that firms tend to anticipate a decrease in 
their sales prices even though their input prices are expected to rise, which suggests that the 
degree of passing on the input cost to the final sales prices is limited. 
Based  on  data  from  many  countries,  the  Cabinet  Office  (2011)  in  Japan  has  reported  a 
positive correlation between inflation expectations and the expected ratio of the working-age 
population – in addition to a positive correlation between economic growth expectations and 
the expected ratio of the working-age population. These observations seem to be consistent 
with my own understanding. 
Conduct of monetary policy  
Given  this  background,  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  naturally  concerned  about  the  long-term 
prevalence  of  mild  deflation.  To  help  the  economy  overcome  this  deflation,  so-called 
Comprehensive Monetary Easing has been implemented since 2010 and the Asset Purchase 
Program  (hereafter,  Program)  has  been  established.2  Subsequently,  monetary  easing  has 
gradually  been  enhanced  through  expansion  of  the  program.  In  February  2012,  the  Bank 
introduced  its  “price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  to  promote  public 
understanding of the Bank’s determination to overcome deflation. It was decided to set the 
goal within a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change 
in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  and  the  goal  for  the  time  being  was  set  at  1  percent. 
Moreover,  the  Bank  made  it  clear  that  it  would  continue  the  monetary  easing  policy  –  the 
virtually  zero-interest  rate  policy  and  continued  implementation  of  the  program  –  until  it 
judged the 1 percent goal to be within sight (on condition that it identified no significant risk to 
the  sustainability  of  economic  growth,  including  from  the  accumulation  of  financial 
imbalances).  At  the  same  time,  the  total  size  of  the  Program  was  increased  from  about 
55 trillion to about 65 trillion yen in the same month; it was further lifted to 70 trillion yen this 
April (Chart 18).  
                                                
2   The comprehensive monetary easing policy consists of (1) the virtually zero interest rate policy, (2) setting the 
policy time horizon based on the “understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” (commitment policy), 
and (3) establishment of the Asset Purchase Program. Of these, item (2) was modified to “the price stability 
goal in the medium to long term,” as indicated above. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Tackling the long-term structural challenge  
Next, I would like to address an issue commonly faced by a number of major central banks in 
advanced  countries  and  regions.  Namely, 
the  extremely  accommodative  monetary 
environment has not led to as much increased domestic demand, such as investment and 
consumption, as had been expected (Chart 19). Though there are structural factors related to 
this  issue,  the  root  causes  are  country-  or  region-specific,  and  thus  they  differ  from  one 
another.  In  the  case  of  Europe,  the  short-term  depressing  impact  of  the  fiscal  austerity 
measures and deleveraging of the banking sector make it difficult to increase bank lending.   
In the case of Japan, the ageing population, as discussed throughout this presentation, has 
contributed  to  the  long-term  declining  trend  in  economic  growth  and  mild  deflation.  To 
overcome  mild  deflation,  we  need  to  raise  economic  growth  expectations  by  enhancing 
productivity  growth  of  the  working-age  population  while  increasing  the  labor  participation 
rates  for  women  and  elderly  people.  However,  it  may  be  said  that  implementation  of  the 
necessary  structural  reforms  for  boosting  growth  and  productivity  has  been  sluggish  –  as 
evident in charts 4 [1]–[4] – and the shift in the economic and industrial structure has been 
limited. Issues related to mounting government debt and social security reforms have also 
generated  uncertainty  over  the  future  economic  outlook.  Moreover,  a  series  of  recent 
negative shocks, such as the global financial crisis, the European sovereign debt crisis, and 
the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  have  also  worsened  this  outlook.  Despite  a  very 
accommodative financial environment driven by monetary stimulus measures, these factors 
have combined to deter expectations of further rises in growth by firms and households.   
To meet the diverse challenges and establish a new basis for economic growth, Japanese 
firms  need  to  become  more  innovative  and  competitive  in  an  effort  to  add  value  to  their 
activities and explore new sources of demand, both at home and abroad. The government 
also  needs  to  support  the  business  community  by  creating  a  more  business-friendly 
environment.  Financial  institutions  should  strive  toward  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic  growth  by  giving  financial  support  to  innovative,  viable  firms  and  providing  new 
types of financial and other services, which are increasingly under demand.  
By promoting longer-term economic growth, moreover, the Bank of Japan has been helping 
to  sustain  the  business  community  indirectly.  It  introduced  a  fund-provisioning  measure  to 
help  reinforce  the  basis  for  economic  growth  (the  so-called  Growth-Supporting  Funding 
Facility)  in  2010,  and  it  has  provided  longer-term  fixed-rate  funds  to  financial  institutions.3 
This  facility  was  expanded  in  March  and  April  of  this  year  (Chart  20).  I  believe  that  it  is 
important  to  stress  that  the  goal  of  overcoming  deflation  can  be  achieved  through  such 
continuous,  comprehensive  efforts  by  firms,  financial  institutions,  the  government,  and  the 
Bank operating within their respective roles.  
Concluding remarks 
V. 
After  having  suffered  from  declining  fertility  rates  since  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  European  countries,  especially  the  Nordic  countries,  dealt  with  population  ageing 
issues  promptly  and  acquired  considerable  know-how  and  expertise  in  the  process.  As  a 
result, European countries enjoy more favorable outcomes and currently manage to maintain 
higher TFRs than Japan: as of 2010, 1.9 each in Finland and Sweden, and 1.6 in the EU. 
                                                
3  Since June 2010, the Bank of Japan has provided long-term funds, with a maximum duration of four years at a 
low  interest  rate  of  0.1  percent,  to  financial  institutions  up  to  the  actual  amount  of  lending  and  investment 
carried out by each financial institution. The areas eligible for investments and loans range, for example, from 
environment  and  energy  business,  medical  and  nursing  care  business,  and  development  of  social 
infrastructure  to  investment  and  business  deployment  in  Asian  countries.  In  June  2011,  this  program  was 
extended by providing funds to financial institutions that undertake equity investments and offer ABL. In April 
this year, a U.S. dollar lending arrangement was also introduced under this framework. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Nonetheless, the rate remains below the replacement rate – the rate that ensures a national 
population gain.   
Furthermore, European life expectancy at birth is approaching that of Japan: as of 2010, it is 
77 years in Finland, 79 years in Sweden, and 77 years in the EU for men; it is 83 years in 
Finland and Sweden and 82 years in the EU for women. Thus, Finland, Sweden, and other 
EU member states are all projected to face a decline in the working-age population ratio after 
2012. In Europe, therefore, population ageing and the declining working-age population are 
becoming important structural issues, as the 2012 Ageing Report, compiled by the European 
Commission, warned.   
Finally, 
impact  of  demographic  changes  on 
like 
macroeconomic  performance  is  a  newly  emerging  issue  in  the  contemporary  world.  Few 
research studies have been carried out on the impact of population ageing and depopulation. 
Since Japan is taking the lead in these demographic changes and there is a possible strong 
linkage with the monetary policy environment, the Bank of Japan is doing its best to deepen 
the understanding of this topic. Given our experiences, I strongly believe that we Japanese 
and  Europeans  can  learn  from  each  other,  and  this  could  possibly  lead  to  advances  in 
academic research in the near future.   
Thank you very much indeed for your kind attention.  
to  emphasize 
I  would 
that 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Charts 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
 14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17 
 18 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
 20 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21 
 22 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 References 
Aoki,  Kosuke  and  Nao  Sudo,  “Asset  Portfolio  Choice  of  Banks  and  Inflation  Dynamics,” 
paper presented at the conference on “Price Developments in Japan and Their Backgrounds: 
Experiences Since the 1990s,” Bank of Japan, 2011. 
Bakshi, Gurdip S. and Zhiwu Chen, “Baby Boom, Population Ageing, and Capital Markets,” 
Journal of Business, 67 (2), 1994, pp. 165–202. 
Börsch-Supan,  Axel,  “Labor  Market  Effects  of  Population  Ageing,”  Review  of  Labor 
Economics and Industrial Relations, 17, 2003, pp. 5–44. 
Cabinet Office (Japan), Annual Report on the Japanese Economy and Public Finance 2011: 
Enhance the Essential Power of the Japanese Economy, 2011. European Commission and 
Economic Policy Committee, The 2012 Ageing Report: Economic and Budgetary Projections 
for the 27 EU Member States (2010–2060), European Economy 2, 2012. 
Fougère,  Maxime,  Jean  Mercenier,  and  Marcel  Mérette,  “A  Sectoral  and  Occupational 
Analysis  of  Population  Ageing  in  Canada  using  a  Dynamic  CGE  Overlapping  Generations 
Model,” Economic Modelling, 24 (4), 2007, pp. 690–711. 
Fujiki, Hiroshi, Naohisa Hirakata, and Etsuro Shioji, “Ageing and Household Stockholdings: 
Evidence from Japanese Household Survey Data,” Paper submitted to the 2012 BOJ-IMES 
Conference, Bank of Japan, 2012. 
Fujita, Nanako, Myurudaru no Keizaigaku (Myrdal’s Economics), NTT Publishing Co., Ltd., 2010. 
Ikeda,  Daisuke,  and  Masashi  Saito,  “The  Effects  of  Demographic  Changes  on  the  Real 
Interest Rate in Japan,” Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, No. 12-E-3, 2012. 
Katagiri,  Mitsuru,  “Economic  Consequences  of  Population  Aging  in  Japan:  Effects  through 
Changes  in  Demand  Structure,”  IMES  Discussion  Paper  Series,  No.  2012-E-3,  Bank  of 
Japan, 2012. 
Nishizaki, Kenji, Toshitaka Sekine, and Youichi Ueno, “Chronic Deflation in Japan,” Bank of 
Japan Working Paper Series, No. 12-E-6, 2012. 
Lührmann,  Melanie,  “Effects  of  Population  Ageing  on  Aggregated  UK  Consumer  Demand,” 
mimeo., 2008. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory and David N. Weil, “The Baby Boom, The Baby Bust, and the Housing 
Market,” Regional Science and Urban Economies, 19, 1989, pp. 235–258. 
Nishimura,  Kiyohiko G., “How  to  Detect  and  Respond  to  Property  Bubbles:  Challenges for 
Policy-Makers,” Remarks at the 2012 Reserve Bank of Australia-BIS Research Conference, 
Bank of Japan, 2012.  
Saito,  Masashi,  Takuji  Fueki,  Ichiro  Fukunaga,  and  Shunichi  Yoneyama,  “Nihon  no  Kozo 
Mondai  to  Bukka  Hendou  (Structural  Problems  and  Price  Dynamics  in  Japan),”  Paper 
presented  at  the  conference  on  “Price  Developments  in  Japan  and  Their  Backgrounds: 
Experiences Since the 1990s,” Bank of Japan, 2011. 
Sakura, Kenichi, Saori Naganuma, Kenji Nishizaki, Naoko Hara, and Ryuhei Yamamoto, “Nihon 
no  Jinkodotai  to  Chuchokitekina  Seichoryoku  (Demographic  Changes  and  Medium-  to  Long-
Term Growth Rates in Japan),” Bank of Japan Reports and Research Papers, August 2012.   
Rausch, Sebastian, Macroeconomic Consequences of Demographic Change, Springer, 2009. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Demographic  Changes  and  Macroeconomic  Performance:  Japanese 
Experiences,” Opening remark at the 2012 BOJ-IMES Conference, Bank of Japan, 2012.    
Watanabe, Tsutomu, “Zero Kinri no Moto no Choki Defure (Long-Lasing Deflation Under the 
Zero Interest Rate Environment),” Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, No. 12-J-3, 2012. 
Williams,  John  C.,  “Heeding  Daedalus:  Optimal  Inflation  and  the  Zero  Lower  Bound,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2009. 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
