Patrick Honohan: Ireland – institutional indebtedness and the banking 
crisis 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Joint Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, Dublin, 27 March 2012. 
 Although I will need to take great care in my statement to protect the financial interest of the 
State in view of current discussions, recognising the interest and concern of the Committee 
to  understand  the  various  issues  surrounding  the  Promissory  Notes,  a  scheduled 
amortisation  payment  of  which  falls  due  next  week,  I  will  be  glad  to  provide  as  clear  an 
account of the matter as I can. 
The Promissory Notes owned by the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC) are part of the 
legacy of the banking crisis. They represent just one aspect of a large and complex structure 
of  institutional  indebtedness  involving  the  Government,  the  banks  and  the  central  banking 
system, which has resulted from that crisis.  
Although  some  commentators  have  tended  to  exaggerate  the  extent  to  which  the  tax 
increases  and  spending  cutbacks  which  have  to  date  been  put  in  place  in  Ireland  can  be 
attributed to the banking debt, this debt does hang over the economic and financial recovery 
of Ireland and – as is generally agreed – needs to be set on a more secure basis.  
The Promissory Notes were provided by the Minister for Finance, using powers granted to 
him by the Oireachtas under the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008, as a way of 
ensuring  the  compliance  of  Anglo  Irish  Bank  and  Irish  Nationwide  Building  Society  –  the 
precursor  institutions  of  IBRC  –  with  the  Capital  Requirements  Directives.  This  became 
necessary as a result of the losses entailed in the prices announced in March 2010 and the 
following months for the various tranches of NAMA purchases.  
The pace of the annual cash payment stream provided for in the Notes was, from the outset, 
structured – perhaps somewhat arbitrarily – as one-tenth of the value of the Note to be paid 
on March 31 each year, with the total duration of the payment stream being set to ensure the 
capital requirement. The Notes were reset on several occasions during 2010 to reflect the 
progressive crystallisation of losses. Interest on the value of the Notes was included at the 
yield required by the market on Irish Government Securities of comparable maturity at the 
time  of  each  issue  of  the  Notes.  It  is  relevant  to  note  that  the  spread  on  ten  year  Irish 
Government  Securities  above  Bunds  immediately  after  the  end-March  2010  PCAR 
announcement, that made it clear (to any that still doubted it) that extremely large banking 
losses would be incurred by the banks in the NAMA purchases, was only about 125 basis 
points. Clearly, the cost of refinancing the amortisation payments at such a yield would have 
been much lower than it is today. The first annual amortisation payment was made in March 
2011. (I abstract here from the question of the interest holiday for the first two years). 
Meanwhile,  it  should  be  recalled  that,  when,  despite  the  Government  guarantees  that 
covered many but not all of them, deposit outflows and bond repayments exceeded Anglo’s 
capacity, the Central Bank, consistent with the euro-area view that no senior bank creditors 
should  suffer  losses  in  the  crisis,  extended  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to  Anglo  Irish 
Bank. To cut a long story short, much of this is still outstanding to IBRC, and much of it is 
secured by the Promissory Notes. Funding such flows is not something that a central bank 
will normally do for any longer than is necessary.  
With the Troika and the other Irish authorities, the Central Bank has been actively studying 
ways of enhancing the security of the arrangements surrounding the provision of liquidity to 
IBRC  and  ensuring  that  avoidable  deleveraging  costs  to  the  system  as  a  whole  are  not 
incurred in the disposal of non-core assets. This is a large ambition, and the design of a full 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
solution that would achieve the objectives and respect the constraints of all the parties has 
not yet been finalised. 
Given the deepening of the crisis since April 2010 and in particular the loss of market access 
by  the  Government  and  the  need  to  have  recourse  to  the  EU-IMF  Programme  to  ensure 
continued financing of the Government’s budget, the sequence of annual cash payment by 
the Government of €3.06 billion envisaged for the coming years in the Promissory Notes has 
become  a  source  of  risk  to  financial  stability.  A  way  of  funding  this  cash  payment  over  a 
much longer period would clearly help reduce this risk. Ahead of the scheduled March 2012 
payment, the Central Bank has been working vigorously with the ECB and other parties on a 
mechanism for ensuring such a result in a manner that is at an acceptable cost to Ireland 
and  whose  design  is  beyond  criticism  from  the  perspective  of  Articles  123  and  124  of  the 
Treaty. While some technicalities still need to be resolved, it now seems likely that this effort 
will be successful. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
