Øystein Olsen: Monetary policy in turbulent times 
Address by  Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)/BI  Norwegian  School  of  Management,  Oslo, 
20 September 2012. 
 Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
Central banks the world over are now conducting monetary policy in what must undoubtedly 
be called turbulent times. My address today will focus on how and why new tools of monetary 
policy  are  being  deployed  internationally  and  our  response  to  these  developments  here  in 
Norway.  The  economic  situation  in  Norway  is  quite  different  from  that  of  surrounding 
countries  and  we  have  been  able  to  operate  within  the  established  monetary  policy 
framework. 
Chart: GDP growth 
Growth in the global economy has been weak since the 2008 financial crisis and has affected 
some countries more severely than others. Countries with large imbalances when the crisis 
began  are  now  facing  formidable  challenges.  The  imbalances  have  been  self-reinforcing. 
Higher pricing of risk has resulted in increased yields on the government bonds of countries 
with  a  high  level  of  debt.  Fragile  government  finances  have  become  even  weaker.  A 
decrease in the value of government bonds has also generated uncertainty concerning the 
position  of  banks.  Banks  have  had  to  consolidate  their  balance  sheets  and  have  curtailed 
lending to firms and households, amplifying the decrease in economic activity. 
Heavily  indebted  countries  are  now  working  to  make  banks  more  robust  and  strengthen 
government finances. Cost competitiveness must be restored. The road will no doubt be long 
and arduous. 
Chart: Yields on 10-year government bonds 
But the situation across countries differs considerably and is reflected in wide yield spreads. 
Investors  now  demand  substantial  premiums  for  investing  in  less  safe  assets.  Capital  is 
seeking safe havens, even though real returns on presumably risk-free investments are low 
or  negative.  Wide  yield  spreads  may  persist  for  a  period  –  it  takes  time  for  countries  to 
restore  competitiveness  and  build  up  stronger  balances,  particularly  when  growth  is  also 
weak in other regions. Substantial economic imbalances in Japan and the US also need to 
be  redressed.  Turbulence  and  bad  times  in  Europe  are  now  dampening  activity  in  these 
countries and in emerging economies. 
This situation has led to the emergence of new forms of monetary policy in many parts of the 
world. Interest rates have been low – close to zero – for a long period. The Federal Reserve 
has  indicated  that  the  federal  funds  rate  will  most  likely  be  exceptionally  low  at  least  until 
mid-2015. In the event, the US key rate will have been close to zero for almost seven years. 
As key rates cannot be lowered further, several central banks have decided to apply other 
methods. The methods fall into two main types: 
The  first  method  relates  to  communication.  Statements  concerning  the  future  central  bank 
key  rate  are  being  employed  as  a  new  monetary  policy  tool.  Here  at  Norges  Bank,  the 
application of this method is not new – the interest rate forecast has been published by the 
Bank since 2005. The aim is to influence interest rate expectations and thereby contribute to 
achieving  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy.1  The  Federal  Reserve  has  published  board 
                                                
1  See  speech  by  Janet  L.  Yellen,  25  February  2011:  “Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  and  Central  Bank 
Communications”, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20110225a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
members’  expectations  of  when  the  first  key  rate  increase  will  take  place  since  January 
2012.2  
The second method is known as quantitative easing, or balance sheet policy, and consists of 
measures to change the composition and size of central bank balance sheets. This use of 
the balance sheet differs from the usual monetary policy operations in that instruments other 
than  the  key  rate  are  used  to  influence  market  rates  and  economic  activity.  Traditional 
monetary policy operates through the commercial banking system: it influences the economy 
because  banks  let  their  interest  rate  conditions  in  the  central  bank  pass  through  to  their 
customers. Moreover, liquidity management is used to keep short-term rates close to the key 
rate. In countries where the key rate is close to zero, this instrument has been exhausted. At 
the  same time,  the  effect  of the key  rate may  be  weaker  than  normal as  many  banks  are 
consolidating and are reluctant to engage in lending. 
Using  balance  sheet  policy,  the  central  bank  seeks  to  influence  longer-term  interest  rates 
and thereby funding costs in a more direct manner.3  
Purchases of government or private sector bonds are intended to depress yields and push 
up securities prices – the so-called portfolio effect.4 Studies from the past three or four years 
indicate that the portfolio effect has been in operation in both US and UK markets – bond 
prices  have  increased  and  long-term  yields  have  fallen  as  a  result  of quantitative  easing.5 
The aim is to achieve lower long-term yields in order to boost lending and investment. 
In addition to the portfolio effect, the new use of the balance sheet can have a signal effect: 
central banks that engage in large-scale purchases of securities to pull down long-term yields 
are  sending  a  signal  that  the  key  rate  may  be  kept  low  for  a  long  period.  In  this  sense, 
balance  sheet  policy  also  contributes  to  anchoring  expectations  and  supporting  monetary 
policy communication. 
It is not easy to say what the situation would have been without these measures. However, it 
is likely that central bank bond purchases have curbed the decline in output in the UK and 
the US. 
Chart: Central bank balance sheets, stylised 
These measures, by their nature, have an impact on central bank balance sheets – in terms 
of both size and composition. 
                                                
2  See 
the  Federal  Reserve’s 
www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/mpr_20120229_part1.htm. 
“Monetary  Policy  Report 
to 
the  Congress”,  February  2012,  http:// 
3  For  a  description  by 
the  Bank  of  England  of  how  quantitative  easing  works, 
see 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/qe/default.aspx.  For  a  description  by  the  Federal 
Reserve,  see 
for  example  speech  by  Ben  Bernanke,  31  August  2012,  http://www.federalreserve. 
gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120831a.htm. 
For a theoretical description of the effects, see Michael Woodford (2012): “Methods of Policy Accommodation 
at  the  Interest-Rate  Lower  Bound”,  http://kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/mw.pdf?sm=jh083112-4  . 
See  also  Economic  Commentaries  1/2011:  “Om  nye  virkemidler  i  pengepolitikken.  Avgrensning  mellom 
pengepolitikken og finanspolitikken” (New monetary policy instruments. Delimitation between monetary policy 
and fiscal policy), Ragna Alstadheim (Norwegian only). 
4  Classic  references  are  James  Tobin  (1965):  “The  Monetary  Interpretation  of  History”,  American  Economic 
Review,  Vol  55,  pp.  464–85 and  (1969):  “A  General  Equilibrium  Approach  to  Monetary  Theory”,  Journal  of 
Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 1 (February), pp. 15–29. For a more modern presentation, see Javier Andres, 
David Lopez-Salido and Edward Nelson (2004): “Tobin’s imperfect Asset Substitution in Optimizing General 
Equilibrium”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 36 (August), pp. 665–90. 
5  See  for  example  Arvind  Krishnamurthy  and  Annette  Vissing-Jørgensen  (2011):  “The  Effects of  Quantitative 
Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 
pp 215–65 and Jonathan Wright (2012): “What does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the 
Zero Lower Bound?”, NBER Working Paper Series 17154. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
When a central bank purchases government bonds, it pays for the bonds with new electronic 
money. 
Chart: Central bank balance sheets – government bond purchases 
The money ends up as increased bank deposits at the central bank – also known as central 
bank  reserves.  This  strengthens  banks’  holdings  of  liquid  assets  and  may  induce  them  to 
increase  lending.  The  pricing  of  government  bond  holdings  in  the  private  sector  is  also 
affected. 
Chart: Central bank balance sheets – private sector bond purchases 
Private  sector  bond  purchases  can  ease  funding  conditions  for  firms  more  directly  than 
purchases  of  government  bonds  by  depressing  interest  rates  on  private  sector  market 
funding.  As  with  government  bond  purchases,  central  bank  reserves  also  increase  in  this 
case. The latest measure implemented by the Federal Reserve, known as QE3, is a plan for 
the purchase of mortgage-backed securities. 
Chart: Central bank balance sheets – foreign exchange purchases 
A third form of balance sheet policy is interventions in the foreign exchange market. Central 
bank foreign exchange purchases are also balanced by an increase in banks’ deposits in the 
central bank. 
Chart: Central bank balance sheets. Index 
In  September  2011,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  decided  to  announce  a  minimum  exchange 
rate, a floor, for the Swiss franc against the euro owing to the substantial appreciation of the 
Swiss  franc.  Interest rates  and  inflation  in  Switzerland  were  close  to  zero  and  growth  was 
low. According to the Swiss National Bank, a further appreciation could have resulted in a 
recession with deflationary developments. In order to defend the floor, the Swiss central bank 
has purchased foreign currency in large quantities. This has led to a considerable expansion 
of its balance sheet. The chart shows the wide swings in central bank balance sheets since 
the  2008  financial  crisis.  Expansion  of  central  bank  balance  sheets  has  been  particularly 
rapid in the UK, the US and Switzerland and somewhat more moderate in the euro area. 
As I mentioned earlier, the purpose of balance sheet policy is to stimulate the economy by 
lowering interest rates and funding costs in a situation where the key rate is close to zero. 
Central  banks  themselves  emphasise  that  the  positive  effects  of  balance  sheet  policy  are 
uncertain  –  and  the  effects  must  be  weighed  against  possible  problems.6  There  are  four 
factors that can be highlighted here: 
First, it may be difficult for central banks to exit the markets once they have built up large 
bond  holdings,  and  this  would  require  considerable  portfolio  adjustments  for  households, 
firms  and  banks.  Postponing  a  reversal  of  the  measures  could  generate  expectations  that 
interest  rates  will  remain  very  low  for  too  long  a  period  after  the  economy  has  recovered. 
This could in turn generate expectations of high inflation further ahead. 
Indeed,  the  connection  between  inflation  and  the  money  supply  constitutes  the  second 
challenge. When a central bank purchases securities or provides longer-term loans to banks, 
the  monetary  base,  i.e.  banks’  deposits  at  the  central  bank,  increases.  There  is  no  direct 
relationship between the monetary base and inflation. The risk of inflation can only arise if 
growth in the monetary base coincides with an increase in the broader monetary aggregates 
through  higher  customer  deposits  in  banks.  For  the  broader  monetary  aggregates  to 
                                                
6  See for example speech by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke: “Monetary Policy since the Onset of 
the  Crisis”,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  symposium,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming, 
31 August  2012.  See  also  speech  by  Spencer  Dale,  Chief  Economist  at  the  Bank  of  England:  “Limits  of 
monetary policy”, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/597.aspx 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
increase,  banks  must  increase  lending  or  purchase  securities from  enterprises  outside  the 
banking sector. Since the crisis in 2008, the monetary base in Europe and the US has grown 
considerably more rapidly than the broader monetary aggregates. The risk of high inflation in 
such a situation should be viewed in the context of central bank exit strategies. In the future, 
central  banks  will  want  to  reverse  the  extraordinary  measures  that  have  resulted  in 
substantial growth in the monetary base. This will normally be done when the crisis is over 
and the economy is recovering. 
Third,  the  large  sums  of  money  involved  may  also  affect  exchange  rates.  Even  if  central 
banks  do  not  intervene  in  exchange  markets  directly,  the measures  may  in  the  short term 
reduce the value of the currency issued by a central bank. This will, in isolation, strengthen 
exchange  rates  in  countries  that  were  initially  less  severely  hit  by  the  crisis.  Small,  open 
economies  can  be  vulnerable  to  large  capital  movements  when  powerful  instruments  are 
deployed by large countries. 
A possible side-effect of balance sheet policy is that the private sector also takes longer to 
strengthen  equity  capital  and  reduce risk than  it  would  otherwise  have  done. With  the  low 
price of capital, it costs little to postpone restructuring and put off debt repayment. 
Finally, confidence in economic policy may be affected. The dividing line between monetary 
and fiscal policy seems to be more blurred. Balance sheet policy may dampen the effects of 
market volatility on interest rates and give heavily indebted countries a breathing space and 
time to adjust. On the other hand, the measures may also reduce the incentive to carry out 
necessary fiscal tightening. 
In  the  euro  area,  different  considerations  are  now  being  balanced  in  the  new  “Outright 
Monetary  Transactions”  (OMT)  programme.  Under  this  programme,  the  European  Central 
Bank  (ECB)  may  only  purchase  bonds  from  countries  that  have  entered  into  a  loan 
agreement under the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) or the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM) – which in turn is conditional on a commitment to fiscal tightening. 
Chart: Corporate borrowing rates 
One reason for the ECB’s decision to establish the OMT programme is the partial breakdown 
of the monetary policy transmission mechanism in the euro area economy. There are wide 
differences in interest rates facing banks and firms across Europe. Although the same key 
rates  apply  to  all  the  euro  area  countries,  average  corporate  borrowing  rates  differ  widely 
from  country  to  country.  Some  of  the  variation  is  due  to  differences  in  credit  risk  across 
countries owing to very  different economic situations. Additional risk premiums may reflect 
fears that one or more countries might at some point have to replace the euro with a new 
local  currency.  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  has  referred  to  these  as  convertibility  risk 
premiums.  One  of  the  objectives  of  the  OMT  programme  is  to  reduce  this  premium  and 
restore the proper transmission of monetary policy. 
The  OMT  programme  can  be  regarded  as  an  answer  to  the  signs  of  financial  market 
fragmentation  in  the  euro  area.  Differences  in  financial  conditions  across  countries  have 
become  considerable  and  the  willingness  to  provide  loans  across  national  borders  has 
declined. The same picture is reflected in the so-called TARGET2 balances. 
TARGET2  is  the  central  interbank  settlement  system  in  the  euro  area.  In  all  countries, 
interbank  payment  settlement  is  carried  out  by  the  national  central  bank.  One  bank’s 
payment  to  another  is  settled  by  adjusting  the  two  banks’  deposits  in  the  central  bank. 
Central bank reserves are the means of interbank payment. 
In the euro area, interbank payment settlement takes place in two stages: banks have their 
settlement  account  in  the  national  central  bank,  while  each  country’s  central  bank  has,  in 
turn, an account at the ECB. If, for example, deposits are transferred from a Greek bank to a 
German bank, the Greek bank’s deposits in the Greek central bank are reduced, while the 
German  bank’s  deposits  in  the  Bundesbank  increase  by  the  same  amount.  The  Greek 
central bank’s debt to the ECB increases in turn, while the Bundesbank’s claims on the ECB 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
increase accordingly. Such changes in claims and liabilities are expressed in the TARGET2 
balances. 
Chart: TARGET2 balances 
In  a  well  functioning  market,  the  bank  that  had  drained  its  central  bank  reserves  would 
borrow  to  replace  them  in  the  interbank  market,  balancing  the  transfer  described  above. 
Imbalances  in  TARGET2  are  a  symptom  of  an  interbank  market  that  is  not  functioning 
efficiently between all countries in the euro area. If banks in the north are no longer willing to 
lend  to  banks  in  the  south,  the  southern  banks  must  meet  their  need  for  reserves  by 
borrowing directly from the central bank. The northern banks increase their reserves at the 
central bank accordingly. In addition to increasing the claims in the TARGET2 system, this 
inflates the Eurosystem balance sheet. The central banks are the hub of the system and are 
required to receive deposits from areas where banks have a surplus of reserves and extend 
loans to areas where banks as a whole need more funding. Imbalances between countries in 
the TARGET2 system give no indication of who will bear the losses if a bank defaults and the 
value  of  the  collateral  posted  is  not  sufficient.  Any  losses  are  allocated  among  the 
participating  national  central  banks  according  to  their  relative  shares  in  the  ECB’s  paid-up 
capital. 
To sum up the international picture: over the past year, growth prospects have been lowered 
for all the large advanced regions. In Europe, activity is likely to decline this year owing to 
debt problems and fiscal tightening. Unemployment is on the rise. Fiscal and monetary policy 
space is limited, or virtually exhausted. Many countries must tighten fiscal policy to reduce 
debt  to  a  sustainable  level.  Central  banks  have  responded  by  communicating that  interest 
rates will be held low for an extended period. And they have stretched the limits of monetary 
policy to counteract a deeper and more persistent downturn. 
Chart: GDP growth 
The economic situation in our external surrounding environment stands in contrast to that of 
Norway. Domestic activity is particularly high in the oil industry and construction sector, and 
both employment and the supply of labour are on the increase. Unemployment remains low 
and  stable.  Public  finances  are  healthy.  Norway’s  terms  of trade  are favourable,  with  high 
export prices and low import prices. At the same time, house prices and household debt are 
still rising. Nonetheless, the Norwegian economy is not unaffected by the turbulence abroad. 
Developments  in  Europe  and  a  strong  krone  exchange  rate  are  adversely  affecting  some 
Norwegian export industries, such as the paper, metal, and furniture industries. 
While  other  countries  have  used  nontraditional  instruments,  we  have  managed  to  come 
through by using our main instrument – the key policy rate – which is now 1.5 per cent. It is 
low because inflation is low and because adverse conditions abroad are curbing growth in a 
number of industry sectors in Norway. Very low interest rates abroad and high risk premiums 
in money and capital markets underpin this picture. 
Norges  Bank’s  conduct of monetary  policy  is  geared  towards  low  and  stable  inflation. The 
operational target of monetary policy is consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over 
time.  At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  shall  contribute  to  stabilising  output  and 
employment. We also give  weight to the risk  that  low  interest  rates may  over  time  lead  to 
excessive  risk-taking  and  debt  accumulation  in  the  household  and  business  sector.  Such 
imbalances can give rise to negative ripple effects further ahead, with a considerable impact 
on output and employment. 
Chart: Criteria for an appropriate interest rate path and loss function 
In  Norges  Bank’s  March  2012  Monetary  Policy  Report,  the  Bank  clarified  how  the  various 
considerations are expressed in Norges Bank’s response pattern. Adjustments were made to 
the criteria for an appropriate interest rate path. In the Bank’s system of analysis, the criteria 
are expressed as a loss function for monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Criterion 1, which states that the inflation target is reached, is covered by the first segment, 
where the loss is higher the more actual inflation πt deviates from the target π*. Criterion 2, 
which states that for given inflation developments, the loss Lt will increase with fluctuations in 
economic activity, is covered by the first and second segments. Criterion 3, which states that 
monetary policy shall be robust, is covered by the second, third and fourth segments. 
The adjustments made in March were expressed by slightly increasing the weight given to 
the output gap, , because financial imbalances can often build up in periods of high capacity 
utilisation.  At  the  same  time,  weight  was  given  to  avoiding  substantial  deviations  in  the 
interest rate from a normal level. This consideration is expressed in the final segment in the 
loss function. This can help to mitigate the risk of a buildup of financial imbalances, even in 
periods when capacity utilisation is not particularly high. 
Chart: Key policy rate 
Normally, the key policy rate cannot achieve several objectives simultaneously. In the case 
of  conflicting  objectives,  the  choice  of  interest  rate  path  will  involve  a  trade-off  between 
different considerations. 
If monetary policy only took into account the low level of inflation, the key policy rate would 
be rapidly reduced and kept close to zero for a good while. Inflation might then pick up faster, 
partly as a result of a weaker krone. In the light of the trade-off against other considerations, 
however, the Bank does not want to accelerate the pace of inflation. The result would be a 
pronounced  impact  on  output  and  employment.  A  prolonged  period  of  even  lower  interest 
rates would increase the risk that debt and asset prices will be driven up to levels that are 
unsustainable  over  time. We thus  obtain  a  smoother  interest rate  path  when  we  also  give 
weight to the other two criteria. 
The criteria and loss function reflect the Bank’s reaction pattern in the period following the 
financial crisis. We are responding to new insight and lessons learned. The loss function is a 
mathematical  illustration  and  must  be  regarded  as  a  simplified  representation  of  the  more 
extensive  assessments underlying  interest  rate decisions.  Interest  rate setting  is  based  on 
the Executive Board’s assessment, not a model calculation. Mathematics and models can, 
however, clarify the alternatives. 
There is considerable uncertainty as to the effect of low interest rates over extended periods 
on risk-taking behaviour and the buildup of financial imbalances.7 In this regard, we are in 
quite uncharted waters. How financial imbalances build up is not explicitly considered in the 
analytical  apparatus.  Work  is  in  progress  both  in  Norway  and  internationally  to  further 
develop the economic models used in monetary policy analysis. As we gain new insight and 
gather  experience,  our  assessments  of  economic  relationships  may  change.  This  will  also 
influence the formulation of our models. 
                                                
7  Monetary Policy Report 1/12, box on pages 15–16, Norges Bank, and “Norges Bank’s new monetary policy 
loss function – further discussion”, Snorre Evjen and Thea B. Kloster, Norges Bank Staff Memo 11/2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart: Household debt burden and interest burden 
In Norway, house prices and household debt have reached historically high levels. The rapid 
growth  in  incomes  has  been  a  primary  driving  force.  The  high  household  debt  burden  in 
Norway  represents  a  risk  of  financial  instability  in  the  longer  term.  Households  can  be  a 
source  of  both  direct  and  indirect  losses  for  banks.  Banks’  loan  losses  will  depend  on 
households’  capacity  to  pay  interest  and  principal,  and  to  the  value  of  the  underlying 
collateral, which is primarily in the form of dwellings in Norway. Banks are also exposed to 
the  economic  repercussion  effects  that  may  occur  in  the  event  of  a  fall  in  household 
consumption.  In  the  short  run,  the  risk  of  disturbances  is  probably  small  because  interest 
rates are low and the vast majority of households have job and income security. 
Chart: Household financial wealth by debt burden 
Household saving has been high in recent years, but households with the highest debt have 
the lowest financial wealth. In 2009, only about ten percent of financial assets were held by 
households with a high debt burden – that is to say those with debt that was more than five 
times their disposable income. These households also accounted for around one third of total 
household debt. 
Chart: High population growth and low residential construction rate 
In  recent  years,  pressures  in  the  housing  market  have  been  amplified  by  high  population 
growth. Despite rising housing construction, the number of housing completions remains low 
in  relation  to  population  growth.  The  housing  deficit  has  grown  over  several  years  and  is 
pushing up house prices. The housing shortage requires measures in the real economy – in 
this case, an increase in housing construction. Monetary policy cannot aim to redress such 
real economic imbalances. 
Low interest rates over time can increase the risk of driving up debt levels and asset prices, 
bringing them to a level that is unsustainable over time. This is an important lesson from the 
financial crisis. We take account of this when setting the key policy rate, as has been made 
clear in the most recent formulation of the loss function. At the same time, there is – with one 
instrument available to us – the key policy rate – a limit to how many tasks can be assigned 
to monetary policy. In order to counter financial imbalances, instruments in addition to those 
available to monetary policy must come into play. 
Macroprudential regulation of the financial industry will play a greater role in the years ahead. 
The  overall  risk  in  the  financial  system  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  risk  represented  by 
each  individual  bank.  Which  macroprudential  instruments  would  be  the  most  suitable  is 
currently  being  discussed  in  detail  in  various  international  fora  and  central  banks.  One 
instrument that will be introduced is the countercyclical capital buffer for banks. 
The purpose of this buffer is to reduce the procyclicality of bank lending. When banks are 
required to hold more capital in a period of high credit growth, they will be more robust to 
large  loan  losses.  In  addition,  increased  capital  requirements  could  restrain  credit  growth. 
The Ministry of Finance has the overriding responsibility for regulating the financial industry, 
but  Norges  Bank  will  be  given  the  primary  responsibility  for  elaborating  the  basis  for  the 
establishment of the countercyclical capital buffer. 
With  a  buffer  ceiling  of 2.5  percent  of  banks’ risk-weighted  assets,  the buffer  will  probably 
have a limited downward impact on banks’ lending enthusiasm in good times. But banks that 
have  solid  capital  reserves  can  take  larger  losses  before  having  to  limit  lending  to 
creditworthy customers. 
The  countercyclical  buffer  comes  on  top  of  a  new,  comprehensive  regulatory  framework. 
Equity capital requirements will be tightened. Banks will face stricter maturity requirements 
for funding, limiting their share of short-term funding. They will be required to hold more liquid 
assets. All in all, the new regulatory regime will contribute to a more robust financial system 
and reduce fluctuations in credit growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The turbulence in Europe, which started with the problems in Greece, has now prevailed for 
close to two and a half years. Financial market sentiment and banks’ access to funding have 
varied widely during the period. The nascent market optimism may continue, but it is fragile. 
Should the economic situation abroad worsen again, and credit markets dry up, other tools 
can  be  put  to  use  in  Norway.  During  the  financial  crisis  in  2008,  several  measures  were 
deployed,  such  as  the  so-called  swap  arrangement,  which  provided  banks  with  access  to 
liquid government securities in exchange for covered bonds. Smaller banks were given loans 
with longer maturities. The measures aimed at improving banks’ access to long-term funding. 
The measures enabled banks to maintain virtually normal lending standards for Norwegian 
households and businesses. 
Norway’s  swap  arrangement  and  quantitative  easing  have  some  common  features:  bonds 
shift  from  private  to  public  hands,  and  banks’  funding  costs  become  lower  than  would 
otherwise have been the case. But there is an important difference. The swap arrangement 
was  reflected  in  the  government’s  balance  sheet  –  not  the  central  bank’s.  Quantitative 
easing,  which  increases  the  size  of  a  central  bank’s  balance  sheet,  as  observed  in  the 
US and the UK, is still not a relevant approach for Norway. Normally, the provision of capital 
and  liquidity  by  authorities  is  not  to  replace  banks’  own  sound  liquidity  management  and 
long-term  market  funding.  Any  decision  relating  to  the  use  of  the  creditworthiness  of 
government or taxpayers to finance banks and businesses rests with the Government and 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament). 
Chart: Liquidity and EUR/NOK exchange rate 
International turbulence can push the krone in both directions. 
On the one hand, in periods of severe market turbulence, investors have tended to shy away 
from presumably less liquid currencies. The krone market is among the less liquid markets. 
One indicator of liquidity is the so called bid-ask spread.8 An exit from the krone market may 
be tight when many investors seek to shift out of krone positions at the same time. This can 
trigger a considerable depreciation of the krone, as experienced in autumn 2008. 
On  the  other  hand,  Norwegian  securities  can  be  perceived  as  safe  havens  because  the 
associated credit risk is perceived to be low. Experience has also shown that international 
turbulence can in periods lead to an appreciation of the krone. 
A krone that is too strong can over time result in inflation that is too low and growth that is too 
weak. In that case, monetary policy measures will be taken. In Norway, the key policy rate is 
the relevant instrument. We still have room for manoeuvre in interest rate setting – in both 
directions.  Foreign  exchange  interventions  are  not  in  principle  an  instrument  suited  to 
influencing the krone exchange rate over a longer period. It would only be relevant should 
the  krone  exchange  rate  move  significantly  out  of  line  with  that  deemed  reasonable  in 
relation 
the  Norwegian  economy,  and  should 
developments at the same time threaten the credibility of the inflation target. In addition, the 
interest rate weapon must have already been exhausted. 
Over the past decade, inflation has been low and stable. This shows that monetary policy 
has  functioned  effectively.  Transparency  about  the  response  pattern  and  key  policy  rate 
forecasts reinforce the impact of monetary policy. With firmly anchored inflation expectations, 
Norges Bank has also been able to give weight to economic stability when setting the key 
policy  rate.  Further  light  is  being  shed  on  the  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability. Inflation targeting in Norway has become more flexible. At the same time, 
we cannot overburden monetary policy. In weighing the various considerations, we will in our 
fundamentals  of 
the  underlying 
to 
                                                
8 
“Liquidity  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  for  EUR/NOK”,  Kathrine  Lund,  Norges  Bank  Economic 
Commentaries 3/2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
interest  rate  setting  adhere  to  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  –  low  and  stable 
inflation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
 24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
