Erdem Başçi: Financial stability and Turkey’s achievements to date 
Welcome  speech  by  Mr  Erdem  Başçi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, 
Istanbul, 
13 September 2012. 
International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors, 
the  17th 
for 
 Distinguished Deputy Prime Minister, Esteemed Guests and Distinguished Members of the 
Media,  
Welcome to Istanbul and to the 17th International Conference of Banking Supervisors jointly 
hosted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  and  the  Banking  Regulation  and 
Supervision Agency of Turkey.  
In my speech, I will try to summarize the importance we attach to financial stability and the 
achievements we have made up to date.  
Dear Guests,  
There are three essential factors that determine the growth potential of a country; these are 
price stability, financial stability and productivity. Any weakness in any of these three factors 
may  cause  considerable  damage  to  growth.  The  history  of  economics  is  teeming  with 
examples of this.  
The social costs of loss of price stability are now very well known by economists. Academic 
studies indicate that an inflation rate that is on average higher by 10 percentage points leads 
to a reduction in the GDP growth rate an average of a quarter point.1  
Meanwhile,  the  loss  of  financial  stability  has  deep  and  long-term  impacts  on  growth  and 
employment.2  The  cost  of  preventing  a  financial  crisis  is  much  lower  than  the  cost  of  the 
crisis itself. Turkey’s recent history is a very good example of this statement. The economic 
crisis,  which  Turkey  went  through  in  2001,  increased  the  country’s  sovereign  debt  by 
30 percentage points, and severely affected growth and employment prospects. As of 2002, 
Turkey  focused  on  establishing  price  stability,  financial  stability  and  introducing  structural 
reforms aimed at increasing productivity. As a result, while the country’s economic prosperity 
grew at a rapid pace, the financial sector gained a structure resilient to external shocks.  
The steps taken towards fostering financial stability helped Turkey recover rapidly after the 
2008–2009  global  financial  crisis  and  it  weathered  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  of 
2011–2012 with minimum damage.  
Distinguished Guests,  
The  primary  objective  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  is  to  achieve  and 
maintain  price  stability.  Besides  price  stability,  contributing  to  financial  stability  within  the 
limits of its purview has been also listed among the primary duties of the Bank.  
Comprehending  the  importance  of  systemic  risk  along  with  macroprudential  measures  to 
mitigate  this  risk  to  ensure  financial  stability  has  necessitated  reconsideration  of  the 
regulatory framework at global level. The enforcement of the Dodd-Frank Act in the US and 
the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) in Europe as well as new regulations introduced 
in other countries aim to mitigate systemic risk by means of macroprudential measures. In 
                                                
1  Barro, Robert J. (1995). “Inflation and Economic Growth.” NBER Working Paper Series, No: 5326. 
2  Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  Rogoff,  K.  S.  (2008).  “This  Time  is  Different:  A  Panoramic  View  of  Eight  Centuries  of 
Financial  Crises,”  NBER  Working  Papers,  No.  13882;  Taylor,  A.  (2012).  “The  Great  Leveraging,”  NBER 
Working Papers, No. 18290. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
this  context,  Turkey  established  the  Financial  Stability  Committee  in  2011.  Along  with  the 
Central  Bank,  the  Committee  is  composed  of  the  Banking  Regulation  and  Supervision 
Agency, the Capital Markets Board of Turkey, the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund and the 
Undersecretariat of Treasury.  
Distinguished Guests,  
Now I would like to briefly mention Turkey’s contributions to global financial stability. Turkey 
became  a  member  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  in  2009.  In  2014,  Turkey  will 
participate in G20 Troika and assume Presidency of the G20 in 2015. During the period from 
2014  to  2016,  when  Turkey  will  be  taking  part  in  G20  Troika,  our  representative  from  the 
Undersecretariat of Treasury will be assigned to the FSB Steering Committee.  
Turkey became a member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the 
Group  of  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  (GHOS)  in  2009.  The  Central  Bank  of  the 
Republic  of  Turkey  will  participate  in  the  FSB  Steering  Committee  during  the  period  
2013–2015 when it will be chairing FSB Regional Consultative Group for the Middle East and 
North Africa (MENA).  
The  New  Constituency  group,  formed  upon  an  agreement  signed  within  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) governance reform framework, includes Austria, Hungary, the Czech 
Republic,  Slovakia,  Slovenia,  Belarus  and  Kosovo  along  with  Turkey.  According  to  this 
agreement,  during  the  periods  of  2014–2016  and  2018–2020,  Turkey  will  assume  the 
Executive Director position on behalf of the group for two-year terms.  
At  the  latest  G-20  meeting  held  in  Los  Cabos,  a  number  of  emerging  market  countries 
including  Turkey  declared  their  intention  to  contribute  to  global  financial  stability  by 
increasing  the  resources  of  the  IMF.  The  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  will 
contribute  to  IMF  resources  up  to  USD  5  billion,  to  be  counted  as  part  of  its  international 
reserves.  
Distinguished Guests,  
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey will continue to play its part in order to achieve 
and maintain price stability and to contribute to financial stability in the upcoming period.  
I believe that this two-day-meeting will be both fruitful and beneficial in terms of contributing 
to  global  financial  stability.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  once  more  all 
distinguished participants to Istanbul. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
