Gill Marcus: The financial crisis and the crisis of trust in the banking 
sector of the advanced economies 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the  Rhodes 
University Business School strategic conversation series, Grahamstown, 10 October 2012. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to address you in this beautiful city of Grahamstown. Your city 
may be out of the hustle and bustle of the financial markets, but that does not mean that you 
have been spared the fallout of the continuing global economic crisis, which is now well into 
its fifth year, and many commentators are now talking about the possibility of a “lost decade”. 
The Eurozone contracted by 0,7 per cent in the second quarter of 2012, with 12 out of the 
17 members experiencing negative growth. US economic growth is below potential and the 
prospect of a significant fiscal contraction early next year – the so-called “fiscal cliff” – looms 
large. Unemployment in the advanced economies has on average more or less doubled, with 
both Spain and Greece reporting rates of just over 25 per cent. The sovereign debt crisis in 
Europe  remains  unresolved,  and  continued  fiscal  austerity  continues  to  retard  growth 
prospects. Compounding this bleak outlook in the advanced economies and in the Eurozone 
in  particular,  is  a  banking  sector  under  stress,  characterised  by  shrinking  lending  or 
deleveraging, as they adjust to new regulatory requirements, amid increasing reluctance to 
lend outside their own countries.  
The travails of the Eurozone are likely to last for some time, and it is ordinary people around 
the  world  who  are  suffering,  who  have  lost  their  jobs  and  future  dreams,  and  are  losing 
confidence  and  trust  in  economic  and  political  institutions. Trust  and  alignment  of purpose 
are essential ingredients of a harmonious economic and political system, and while the crisis 
has had a number of dimensions, one of the aspects often forgotten or not talked about is 
how it has undermined trust and how critical restoring confidence is to the success of any 
initiatives taken.  
Barry  Eichengreen  notes  that  everyone  talks  about  Europe’s  deficits,  southern  European 
external deficits, and the Eurozone’s institutional deficits. But, he argues, none of these is the 
deficit that really matters: “the deficit that prevents Europe from drawing a line under its crisis 
is  a  deficit  of  trust”.  He  identifies  a  number  of  levels  where  trust  has  been  undermined. 
Firstly,  there  is  a  lack  of  trust  in  leadership,  where  leaders  say  one  thing  when  everyone 
knows they mean something else, and eventually they will have to acknowledge reality. He 
points to the example of German leaders promising their citizens that no extra money would 
be spent on erecting firewalls for Eurozone countries.  
Secondly, there is the lack of trust between European states: northern European countries 
do not want to bail out the peripheral countries because they do not trust them to use the 
money wisely, and cause them to relax their reform effort. As a result, he argues, the core 
countries are prepared to provide just enough assistance “to keep the ship from capsizing, 
but not enough to set it on an even keel”. And finally, he argues that there is a lack of trust 
between social groups called on to make sacrifices. If I have to make sacrifices, will I trust 
others to do the same? Furthermore, research has also shown that inequality within society 
reinforces lack of trust and lack of cohesion.  
While these trust deficits are critical, I will focus on another element of trust, and that is lack 
of  trust  in  the  global  financial  system  in  general  and  in  banks  in  many  of  the  advanced 
economies  in  particular.  It  is  important to stress  that,  without  being  complacent, the  South 
African  banking  system  remains  sound  and  well  capitalized.  The  South  African  authorities 
have not had to assist any bank, nor provide liquidity to prop up the system.  
The anger that has been exhibited against the banking sector in various countries, for example 
the  on-going  “Occupy  Wall  Street”  campaign,  is  indicative  of  a  lack  of  trust  in  the  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
system, and the recent revelations of Libor fixing and allegations of possible money laundering 
and  fraudulent  activities  reinforce  that  lack  of  trust.  The  issue  of  distrust  in  the  advanced 
economy banking system was exacerbated by at times obscene severance packages paid to 
bank CEOs after the banks were bailed out by public funds. These golden handshakes were in 
effect excessive rewards for failure. In the past few days we have seen the New York Attorney 
General  filing  a  civil  fraud  lawsuit  against  JPMorgan  over  mortgage-backed  securities 
packaged and sold by Bear Stearns, which JP Morgan bought in March 2008.  
The importance of trust in the financial system cannot be over-emphasised, because without 
it the financial system breaks down, and without an efficiently working financial system, the 
economy  will  not  operate  effectively.  A  lack  of  trust  in  banks  or  in  financial  markets  can 
undermine the system as a whole. If clients do not trust their banks they will not borrow from 
them; if banks do not trust their customers they will not lend to them. The development of 
relationships  and  trust  between  bankers  and  their  clients  leads  to  the  build-up  of  what 
Bernanke has referred to as knowledge or informational capital. As bankers get further away 
from their clients and trust is lost, this knowledge is lost as well. A New York Times columnist 
David  Leonhardt,  in  commenting  on  the  vanishing  of  trust  in  the  banking  system,  wrote: 
“Banks now look at longtime customers and think of that old refrain from a failed marriage: I 
feel like I don’t even know you.”  
Much has been written in the economics literature about the central role of the financial and 
banking system in the economy. Real investment in an economy, which generates economic 
growth and jobs, requires funding. Similarly, households require funding to finance housing 
and  other  forms  of  expenditure,  whether  of  a  longer-term  investment  nature,  such  as 
education, or more consumer-type expenditure. Banks and other financial intermediaries play 
a  unique  role  in  channeling  savings  to  investors.  Both  savers  and  investors  face  risk  and 
uncertainty:  savers  cannot  always  easily  assess  the  risk  of  an  investment,  and  by  pooling 
savings,  banks  allow  for  increased  returns  for  savers.  Investors,  on  the  other  hand,  who 
require  funds  for  investment  projects,  can  take  advantage  of  pooling  of  savings  and  the 
intermediation services of banks or other financial intermediaries.  
It is generally accepted that a healthy, well-functioning financial sector is essential for growth. 
It is also the case that when the banking sector becomes dysfunctional and stops lending, 
the implications for the real economy can be extremely serious. Bernanke, for example, has 
argued  that  the  so-called  “lost  decade”  of  Japan  can  be  attributed  substantially  to  the 
financial  problems  banks 
insufficient  capital. 
Furthermore, the financial sector is not only important for the smooth channeling of savings 
to investors, it also has an important role in propagating business cycles. According to the 
“financial accelerator” theory, which helps to explain the procyclical nature of bank lending, 
adverse  conditions  in  the  financial  markets  impact  on  the  real  economy,  which  in  turn 
reinforces  the  negative  conditions  in  the  financial  markets.  This  negative  feedback  loop 
propagates and amplifies the downturn. The opposite is true for favourable feedback loops.  
This accelerator principle implies that there are disproportionate increases or decreases in 
credit  extension  in  response  to  changes  in  underlying  conditions.  For  example,  during  a 
boom,  asset  prices  rise,  and  this  increases  the  value  of  collateral  available,  allowing  for 
increased  leverage  and  credit  expansion.  More  investment  is  undertaken  and  more  jobs 
created,  which  in  turn  leads  to further  expansion  in  the financial  sector. Conversely,  when 
asset  values  fall,  deleveraging  occurs  as  the  value  of  existing  collateral  declines,  with 
negative implications for the real economy.  
Related to this is the work of Reinhart and Rogoff in their book “This time is different” where 
they  show  that  the  recovery  from  a  financial  crisis  takes  much  longer  than  that  of  other 
crises.  Unlike  normal  economic  cycles  or  recessions,  financial  crises  are  protracted. 
According  to  their  research,  conventional  recessions  involve  a  relatively  quick  return  to 
normalcy,  and  generally  the  economy  makes  up  the  lost  output  and  resumes  its 
pre-recession growth trend within a year. A recession involving a financial crisis involves not 
faced  with  nonperforming 
loans  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
only loss of output and employment but applies to debt, credit and deleveraging, which takes 
much longer to work through.  
Their  work  shows  that  the  aftermath  of  severe  financial  crises  share  three  main 
characteristics:  that  asset  market  collapses  are  deep  and  prolonged;  that  such  crises  are 
associated with profound declines in output and employment, with the latter being particularly 
protracted;  and  the  real  value  of  government  debt  tends  to  explode,  on  average  almost 
doubling over a short period. This debt increase is apart from possible banking bailout costs, 
and  is  a  result  of  an  inevitable  collapse  in  tax  revenues  as  well  as  countercyclical 
expenditure policies. Their findings also not only show that banking crises do not discriminate 
between emerging markets and developed markets – leading them to label such crises as 
equal opportunity menaces – but developed countries generally take much longer to recover 
than emerging markets, possibly due to greater wage flexibility in some emerging markets.  
Normal cyclical downturns are often reinforced by tight monetary policies in response to an 
overheating  economy  and  inflationary  pressures,  and  the  downturn  can  be  effectively 
moderated by a reversal of the monetary policy stance. Unfortunately we are not in a normal 
cyclical downturn, and as we have seen, despite the extraordinary efforts of central banks, 
the  crisis  cannot  be  solved  through  monetary  policy  alone.  Households  in  the  advanced 
economies  are  still  in  the  process  of  deleveraging  and  repairing  their  impaired  balance 
sheets, and monetary policy can only help to a certain extent. In the context of weak property 
and  other  asset  markets  and  stubbornly  high  unemployment,  rebuilding  of  household 
balance sheets may take a protracted period of time.  
There  are  differing  views  as  to  the  origins  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  but  it  is  widely 
accepted  that  that  a  combination  of  weak  or  light-touch  regulation  of  the  banking  system, 
coupled  with  some  rather  questionable  innovations  in  the  banking  sector,  were  at  the 
epicenter  of  the  crisis.  The  sub-prime  crisis  which  originated  in  the  United  States  showed 
how such innovations could have global repercussions. It became clear in the aftermath of 
the  crisis  that  many  of  the  senior  bank  executives  did  not  fully  understand  these  complex 
products and the risks associated with them. This led to a breakdown of trust between banks, 
as they did not know what was lurking on the balance sheets of banks they were lending to in 
the interbank market. It also became clear that in some jurisdictions, prudential oversight was 
inadequate and that the “light touch” regulation approach did not work. But with the increased 
complexity of products it was little wonder that the regulators could not keep up with financial 
innovation.  
The real impacts of the crisis were amplified by financial flows, where the motto was “bring 
cash home”. Fund managers in the advanced economies repatriated their investments, and a 
study by Philip Lane has argued that the most dramatic turnaround in capital flows took place 
with respect to banking-sector flows, with foreigners draining liquid funds from local stressed 
banks, and domestic investors draining foreign liquid assets. As Lane notes:  
“In  both  directions,  banks  were  the  main  proximate  investor  in  other  banks,  so  were 
instrumental in the cross-border retrenchment as part of the general breakdown in interbank 
markets  during  the crisis. While  individually  rational,  the  collective  exit from these markets 
contributed  to  the  illiquidity  problems  that  defined  the  acute  phase  of  the  crisis.  Given  the 
lack of an adequate international regulatory framework, cross-border liquidity runs were more 
difficult to forestall than domestic liquidity runs.”  
Other research also showed that banks were most likely to withdraw capital from countries 
that were geographically more remote from the home market.  
The global nature of the financial crisis also meant that solutions needed to be global, with a 
reversal of the lax regulatory environment that emerged in the years preceding the financial 
crisis.  Banks  and  other financial  institutions  had  become  larger,  and they  crossed  national 
boundaries with branches and subsidiaries all over the world. This made it more difficult to 
regulate them, as different countries had different regulations, and banks often engaged in 
regulatory  arbitrage.  In  an  attempt  to  restore  trust  and  to  ensure  that  banking  excesses 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
would  not  be  repeated,  various  fora,  including  the  G20,  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking 
Supervision  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  engaged  in  revising  regulations  and 
standards. Regulation has become more stringent with the impending introduction of what is 
known as the Basel III framework.  
There was, however, always a concern that the regulatory pendulum would swing too far in 
the other direction, and there is the danger that their implementation may further impede the 
slow  global  recovery.  In  the  Eurozone  for  example,  the  need  to  increase  bank  capital  has 
contributed  to  the  reluctance  of  banks  to  lend.  Higher  capital  adequacy  ratios  are  ideally 
achieved  through raising  capital,  but  in  the  prevailing  economic  climate  this  is  difficult  and 
expensive. Banks have consequently been adjusting to these tougher ratios either through 
selling off some of their assets or by reducing their lending or both. The continuing crisis in 
Europe  is  in  part  a  function  of  continued  bank  deleveraging,  and  has  required  at  times 
extraordinary intervention from the ECB. Mario Draghi, for example, reported in Davos earlier 
this  year  that  a  “major,  major  credit  crunch”  had  been  avoided  in  Europe,  following  the 
€489bn emergency loans to Eurozone banks in December 2011.  
Our  concern  has  been  that  changes  to  the  Basel  Committee  rules  to  which  South  Africa 
subscribes, are intended to solve problems in the banking systems of some of the advanced 
economies,  but  would  apply  equally  to  countries  such  as  South  Africa,  that  did  not 
experience these excesses. In other words, the changing regulation would solve problems 
that we did not have, and could in fact cause unnecessary difficulties for the banks and for 
the  broader  macroeconomy.  To  some  extent  the  revised  principles  have  proved  to  be 
challenging, but we are nevertheless expected to abide by them as members of the FSB and 
the G-20. Some aspects of these changes could have significantly negative implications for 
our  banks  and  for  the  economy  in  general  if  applied  in  the  forms  that  are  currently  being 
proposed. We are committed to meeting the Basel III requirements, and are actively working 
with  the  global  policy  makers  to  see  how  these  proposals  can  be  modified  or  allow  for 
country discretion in their application. But this is an example of how global solutions if applied 
indiscriminately to all countries, even to those such as South Africa that did not experience 
regulatory failures, could have adverse consequences for some.  
The  Basel  III  Accord  provides  for  high  capital  ratios  in  order  to  ensure  that  banks  are 
adequately  capitalised.  In  this  respect  South  African  banks  more  than  comply  with  the 
provisions.  Currently  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratios  are  well  above  the  requirements,  and 
our banks have a relatively low leverage ratio.  
Other  provisions,  however,  will  be  more  challenging,  and  South  Africa,  along  with  other 
countries in a similar position, has actively participated in these discussions in order to avoid 
possible unintended consequences. An important provision relates to the liquidity coverage 
ratio (LCR), to be implemented in 2013, which requires banks to have sufficient high-quality 
liquid  assets  to  survive  a  month-long  significant  stress  scenario.  Studies  by  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements showed that South African banks generally would be short of such 
liquid assets by virtue of their dependence on wholesale, short-term funding, which means 
that  there  would  be  a  shortage  of  assets  that  satisfy  the  prescribed  criteria.  The  Basel  III 
liquidity framework does however give discretion to national supervisors to make available to 
banks  a  committed  liquidity  facility  (CLF)  at  a  fee.  In  May  of  2012  the  registrar  of  banks 
announced the introduction of such a facility, which will be provided for an amount of up to 
40 per cent on any particular bank’s net cash outflows under stressed scenarios. This access 
will  be  against  acceptable  collateral.  The  facility  was  introduced  to  prevent  excessive 
increases in the cost of funding of banks and possible distortionary effects on the domestic 
financial markets, and takes account of the structural features of our system.  
We are, however, still concerned about the impact of the proposed net stable funding ratio 
(NSFR) which is expected to be implemented in 2018. Again, the structural features of our 
financial system may pose a challenge, given that most long-term saving in the economy is 
done through the non-bank financial institutions, which in turn provide short term deposits to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the banks. To achieve the required ratios would mean that banks to try to attract more long 
term  deposits,  or  need  to  reduce  the  maturity  structure  of  their  lending.  Such  adjustments 
could have adverse consequences for the economy. However, we are not the only country 
with such concerns, and discussions with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision are 
ongoing.  
Our banking system was one of the few that emerged relatively unscathed from the crisis. At 
no  stage  did  the  Reserve  Bank  have  to  take  any  extraordinary  measures  to  protect  the 
banks, and the interbank market ran smoothly. Prudent banking practices and oversight by 
the bank regulator meant that our banks did not create the type of toxic products that were 
central to the crisis. In general, our banking system has not suffered the same excesses that 
I have described. That is not so say that everyone trusts their bank, and there are some who, 
because of the actions of banks seen abroad, tar all banks with the same brush. There are 
also, no doubt, many people who can tell you stories about their negative experiences with 
their banks. But in general the conduct of our banks and financial system over the past few 
years has been very different to that in a number of the advanced economies.  
However, we cannot be complacent and for this reason there is ongoing work to strengthen 
the regulatory architecture with the move toward a twin peaks model of financial regulation. 
This  approach  will  see  the  consolidation  of  all  prudential  regulation  of  financial  institutions 
within the Bank, while market conduct regulation of the financial sector will be consolidated 
within the Financial Services Board.  
In conclusion, it is important that banks around the world try to regain the trust of ordinary 
people. The lack of trust is epitomised in a recent article by Financial Times columnist John 
Gapper  who  notes  that  “if  regrets,  apologies  and  promises  to  behave  better  were 
redeemable for  cash,  the  world’s  banks  would  be  rolling  in  it  …  But  what  are  the  odds of 
these noble promises enduring past the usual period of sackcloth and ashes at the bottom of 
the banking cycle? Not very high, I’m afraid. Although the new generation of bank leaders 
probably has good intentions – as well as needing to assuage public outrage – these pledges 
will be difficult to enforce, or even recall, when it matters.” The banks have a lot of work to do 
to change the culture that has crept into the sector.  
Fortunately our banking sector does not appear to have been prone to the same excesses, 
although they are by no means perfect. As I have outlined, it is critical for a growing economy 
to  have  a  vibrant,  stable  banking  sector,  and  given  the  importance  of  this  sector  it  is 
imperative that it be appropriately regulated and supervised. Given their important role in the 
economy, banks have a particular responsibility to act is such a way that engenders trust. I 
have focused on the issue of trust in the banking sector. But the issue of trust must permeate 
society in general. If we want to nurture a stable democracy, we need to behave in ways that 
will create trust in our political, social and economic institutions, and between social groups. 
Such  trust  cannot  be  demanded,  it  needs  to  be  earned  through  appropriate  actions  and 
behaviour.  During  the  current  difficult  times  that  we  are  experiencing  in  our  country,  the 
building up of trust takes on even greater importance.  
All of you who have taken the time and made the effort to be here today, both from schools 
and  Rhodes  University,  are  the  ones  who  will  be  entering  the  labour  market  in  the  near 
future. It  is  you  who  will  need  to grapple  with  the  very  complex  world  of  the  21st  century. 
Nothing can prepare you for all eventualities, but the fact that you have a sound education 
will provide you with the knowledge essential to navigate into unknown territory. Remember, 
while certificates are important, it is the knowledge that goes with the certificate that will bring 
you the life you want to live. There is no substitute for hard work, for seeking knowledge, and 
using  your  drive  and  sense  of  purpose  for  the  greater  good  of  society  and  fellow  human 
beings. Your future also depends on you. As South Africans, let us work together, young and 
old, across all our historic divides of race and gender, to build a future that belongs to all of 
us.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
References:  
Bernanke, B (2007). The financial accelerator and the credit channel. Speech at the Credit 
Channel of Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century Conference, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Atlanta, Georgia.  
Eichengreen, B (2012). Europe’s trust deficit. Project Syndicate, March 12.  
Gapper J (2012). Incentives for banks to stray will persist. Financial Times, September 12.  
Lane,  P.  (2012).  Financial  globalisation  and  the  crisis.  Paper  presented  at  the  11th  BIS 
Annual Conference on “The Future of Financial Globalisation”, Lucerne.  
Leonhardt, D (2008). Lesson from a crisis: when trust vanishes, worry. The New York Times, 
September 30.  
Reinhart  C,  and  K  Rogoff  (2011).  This  time  is  different:  Eight  centuries  of  financial  follies. 
Pricenton University Press. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
