William C Dudley: The national and regional economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), Pace University, New York City, 29 November 2012. 
 Good morning, I am pleased to be at Pace University to address the university community of 
students,  alumni,  faculty  and  university  supporters.  It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  speak  with 
academic audiences who I find to be particularly well-informed and attentive. I thank you for 
inviting me here today. In a timely note, I also want to commend Pace University for fielding 
an  excellent  Fed  Challenge  team  this  year.  As  many  of  you  know,  Pace  won  the  Second 
District  College  Fed  Challenge  this  year  and  has  just  returned  with  an  honorable  mention 
from competing in the nationals at the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C.  
Today, I want to talk a bit about the Fed – what we do and why we do it. Then I’ll provide 
some thoughts about the national and local economic outlook and monetary policy.  
 In covering the region and the nation, I will discuss the terrible impact of Sandy on the region 
and the implications for the national economy. I know I will fall short in fully acknowledging all 
the  hardship  that  our  fellow  citizens  have  endured  –  including  devastating  losses  of  loved 
ones,  homes,  communities  and  livelihoods  –  as  well  as  widespread  misery  caused  by 
flooding  and  disruptions  to  power,  fuel,  food,  transportation  and  other  services  across  the 
region.  Nor  will I be able to fully commend the  ways in which family  members, neighbors, 
co-workers and strangers have helped those in need. I am deeply moved by the evidence of 
people reaching out and pulling together across the region.  
At the New York Fed we are committed to supporting the recovery process. In addition to our 
economic  analysis,  we  are  convening  our  advisory  groups  and  other  regional  contacts  to 
receive  first-hand  accounts  of  the  impact  on  communities,  families  and  businesses  and  to 
assess  other  ways  in  which  we  may  help.  For  example,  we  are  holding  a  clinic  in  Staten 
Island  to  help  people  obtain  information  about  different  types  of  financial  support  that  is 
available.  We’re  also  encouraging  banks  to  show  appropriate  flexibility  when  dealing  with 
small business and other borrowers impacted by the storm.  
After my remarks, I’ll be happy to answer any questions you have about what the Fed does 
and why, and about the economic outlook. But I won’t comment specifically on the upcoming 
FOMC meeting next month.  
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. 
What the New York Fed does 
By way of introduction, I will briefly review what my colleagues and I do at the New York Fed. 
The New York Fed is one of 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks that, together with the Board 
of Governors in Washington D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System, our nation’s central 
bank.  
The  Federal  Reserve  is  independent  within  our  government.  By  law,  we  are  charged  with 
managing the nation’s monetary policy – taking actions that raise or lower interest rates to 
promote  full  employment  and  price  stability.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  charged  with 
promoting financial stability, without which we cannot achieve our economic objectives. We 
play an important role in the nation’s payments and settlements system, which some people 
call the financial system’s “plumbing”. For example, we help ensure that banks’ ATMs have 
cash and that the checks you write move the money to the recipient. In addition, we have a 
specific mandate to promote economic development in each of our regions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As  president  of  the  New  York  Fed,  I  serve  as  the  vice  chair  of  the  FOMC,  the  Federal 
Reserve  committee  that  meets  eight  times  a  year  in  Washington  to  set  interest  rates  and 
make decisions about monetary policy. The members of this committee all strive to achieve 
our  statutory  mandate  of  full  employment  and  price  stability.  Sometimes  we  have  different 
views on the specific policy choices at hand, and our policy decisions reflect a full discussion 
of these differences. This diversity of viewpoints is a key strength of the FOMC.  
In fact, I believe we make better decisions as a committee because we don’t all think alike. 
But  we  are  united  in  our  commitment  to  our  dual  mandate  of  maximum  sustainable 
employment  and  price  stability  and  in  our  belief  that  preserving  the  independence  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions  is  very  much  in  the  public  interest. 
That  independence  allows  us  to  make  tough  decisions  based  on  data  and  analysis  – 
insulated from short-term political considerations. 
At  FOMC  meetings,  each  Committee  member  presents  a  current  outlook  for  his  or  her 
District and for the nation. In formulating these assessments, we consult with many sources 
–  our  boards  of  directors,  regional  advisory  councils,  community  leaders  and  other  key 
stakeholders. My meeting with you today is part of this systematic effort to understand what 
is going on at the grassroots level of our economy. 
To  add  to  what  I  learn  from  my  conversations,  my  colleagues  and  I  at  the  New  York  Fed 
continually  track  conditions  in  our  District,  and  we  have  created  special  tools  for  that 
purpose.  For  example,  my  staff  tracks  local  household  credit  conditions,  including  the 
amount and type of personal debt and whether repayments are timely.  
We also conduct a periodic poll about the credit needs of small businesses, which are an 
important source of new jobs in the District. If you represent a small business and would like 
to  participate  in  our  next  poll,  please  pass  your  card  to  my  colleagues,  who  are  in  the 
audience, or see me after the speech.  
To promote growth in our local communities, we publish extensive data and analysis on the 
local  economy.  We  provide  outreach  initiatives,  including  workshops  on  access  to  global 
markets  and  to  help  small  businesses  learn  about  loan  programs  and  sources  of  credit 
enhancements. We also run an annual video festival for local college and university students. 
In  this  program  student  teams  produce  videos  that  aim  to  help  young  adults  make  sound 
personal financial decisions. A panel of advertising and video professionals selects winning 
video productions for screening in local movie theaters.  
As you know, even regions as wealthy as ours have large pockets of poverty. So, we target 
some of our work specifically to low- and moderate-income groups.  
We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates. This fall we 
hosted a conference on distressed residential real estate to share new expert analysis with 
senior policymakers and practitioners from across the nation. Later today, colleagues from 
our Research department will provide a press briefing on the housing outlook in our region as 
a whole. Next week, we will be holding a workshop so we can better understand the factors 
that  are  limiting  the  pass-through  of  lower  yields  on  agency  mortgage  bonds  into  primary 
mortgage rates offered to borrowers.  We will then be in a better position to evaluate what 
steps if any might be taken by the relevant authorities to contribute to greater pass-through.  
Regional economic conditions 
Our region’s economy was on a moderate upward trajectory before Sandy struck, and while 
the storm had many severe effects – more on that in a few minutes – I do not expect it to 
derail the region’s ongoing economic expansion.  
New York City’s economy has been performing quite well. Employment in the city reached an 
all-time  high  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  and  it  has  continued  to  grow  briskly  since  then, 
even without help from its key finance sector. While job growth has been considerably more 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
subdued  in  the  surrounding  areas,  such  as  Long  Island,  northern  New  Jersey,  Fairfield 
County and the lower Hudson Valley, many workers in these areas commute to New York 
City for their jobs, so the strength here in the city is helpful to the region as a whole. Still, the 
unemployment  rate  in  the  city  remains  high,  above  9  percent,  and  this  is  something  that 
needs  to  improve.  Upstate  New  York’s  economy  is  also  on  a  generally  positive  trajectory, 
although  some  areas  have  fared  better  than  others.  Albany,  Buffalo,  and  especially, 
Rochester  and  Ithaca  have  recouped  many  of  the  jobs  lost  during  the  recession,  whereas 
Syracuse and Binghamton have lagged.  
Looking beyond the employment statistics, I see other encouraging signs across the region. 
Housing  markets  here  have  improved.  There  has  also  been  a  noticeable  pickup  in 
multi-family construction in both New York and New Jersey this year.  
However,  the  New  York  Fed’s  measures  of  regional  credit  conditions  suggest  continued 
financial challenges for families here. Data that we just released for the third quarter of 2012 
show that for those individuals with a credit report, average debt per person in New Jersey 
was about $61,000, and about $49,000 in the state of New York. Overall debt per person 
peaked in 2008. Although balances nationally have fallen by over 11 percent, consumers in 
New  York  and  New  Jersey  have  brought  down  their  indebtedness  more  moderately,  by 
5 percent and 6 percent respectively.  
While  the  overall  delinquency  rates  are  decreasing  nationally,  delinquent  balances  in  our 
region  have  remained  stable  or  even  increased  a  bit.  In  both  New  York  and  New  Jersey, 
nearly  9 percent  of  balances  are  90  or  more  days  delinquent,  higher  than  the  6.5 percent 
national rate. 
Although there are some recent signs that home prices are starting to firm, the housing crisis 
continues to take a toll on our homeowners. Delinquency rates on mortgages, at 9.4 percent 
and 9.7 percent in New York and New Jersey, respectively, remain considerably higher than 
the 5.9 percent national rate.  
Before  discussing  the  national  outlook  let  me  talk  briefly  about  the  possible  effects  of 
“Superstorm Sandy” on the U.S. and regional economy. The damage and disruptions from 
the storm appear more extensive and longer-lasting than first anticipated.  
Of  course,  there  is  the  physical  damage,  which  was  geographically  widespread,  but 
particularly devastating in some communities right here in New York City, including Breezy 
Point, the Rockaways, and portions of Staten Island, and in so many cities and towns along 
the  Long  Island,  New  Jersey  and  Connecticut  waterfronts,  such  as  Long  Beach,  Seaside 
Heights, Spring Lake and Hoboken.  
Estimates of the costs of disruption to economic activity – that is, services that couldn’t be 
rendered  and  goods  that  couldn’t  be  produced  because  of  protracted  transit  shutdowns, 
power outages and other such damage produced by the storm – are particularly difficult to 
pin down. Thus, it will be some time before concrete figures are available. However, the early 
read  from  recently-released  data  confirm  these  disruptions  have  been  widespread.  Every 
one  of  the  New  York  City  area  firms  that  responded  to  our  recent  Empire  State 
Manufacturing Survey – fielded one to two weeks after the storm – indicated that the storm 
disrupted activity at their firm, and 40 percent of them indicated that they were completely 
shut  down  or  severely  crippled  for  at  least  five  days.  Furthermore,  the  number  of  workers 
filing initial claims for unemployment insurance in both New York and New Jersey surged to 
more  than  triple  their  pre-storm  levels  in  the  week  after  Sandy  hit,  suggesting  at  least 
70,000 storm-related job losses in these two states thus far. 
These data suggest that the disruptions that we have seen, and continue to see, could be 
substantial. We can quantify the losses in terms of days of lost output.  Given the regional 
GDP  of  $1.4  trillion,  a  rough  calculation  yields  a  loss  of  $3.8  billion  for  each  full-day 
equivalent of lost output in the region.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A considerable part of this lost activity will be offset over time or be replaced by a temporary 
shift of activity from hard-hit areas to less-affected places. But, in a services-based economy, 
much activity cannot be shifted in time: restaurants, for instance, can’t serve six meals a day 
to  make  up  for  lost  business.  The  fact  that  many  people  who  would  have  dined  in  lower 
Manhattan  in  the  weeks  following  Sandy  are  instead  patronizing  restaurants  near  their 
homes  or  near  temporary  work  sites  represents  an  offset  for  the  regional  economy  as  a 
whole. But that’s little consolation for the original restaurant, which may in turn need to lay off 
some of its people or could even possibly go out of business. And, of course, this applies 
even more dramatically to businesses in hard-hit places along the regional shoreline.  
Against this, reconstruction began soon after the storm was over and has likely intensified 
since then. The repair and replacement of damaged or destroyed infrastructure, homes, and 
businesses  is  likely  to  continue  for  some  time.  Programs  will  need  to  be  well  designed  in 
order  to  achieve  maximum  beneficial  impact.  For  instance,  on  the  housing  front,  it  will  be 
important to ensure that program design and funding recognize that our region has a wide 
variety of housing types – including multifamily and public housing – that are in need of repair 
post-Sandy. In other words, one-size-fits-all solutions may not work well here.  
Past  studies  suggest  that  reconstruction  spending  provides  a  powerful  stimulus  to  local 
economies, both in its direct effects and its associated multiplier effects. Thus, I expect that 
reconstruction will provide a similar sizeable boost to our regional economic activity, and one 
that is likely to continue well into 2013.  
All this analysis must be viewed as early and provisional. Putting all the factors together, at 
present I expect that economic activity in our region was adversely affected in October and 
November, but will show a noticeable rebound starting in December.  
In addition to the economic costs in terms of lost activity there are, of course, the costs in 
terms of human suffering to the millions of people who were adversely affected – above all 
those who lost homes and loved ones, but also the many others who were cold and without 
power for days on end, spent hours getting to and from work, waited on long gas lines, and 
experienced the stress of not knowing what lies ahead.  
We  are  also  tracking  the  impact  of  Sandy  on  schools  and  students.  In  New  Jersey, 
60 percent of schools were closed more than one and a half weeks. The storm shut down all 
New York City schools for a full week, and many schools across the region remained closed 
the following week. Hardships borne by students and families are also reflected in record low 
post-storm attendance rates. The New York City Department of Education moved quickly to 
relocate  schools  from  damaged  buildings  to  temporary  premises,  enabling  children  to 
resume their studies. But even two weeks after the storm, schools that had to be relocated 
had  attendance  rates  below  70  percent,  a  huge  drop  from  their  regular  rates  of  over 
90 percent.  Research  shows  that  lost  school  days  and  relocations  can  significantly  impair 
student learning.  
The good news is that the situation is getting closer to normal every day. Today, only 9 out of 
a total of 1,750 New York City schools remain relocated. Also of particular importance is that 
their  leaders  –  administrators,  teachers,  principals  and  others  –  have  agreed  to  make  up 
three and a half days of the lost time. It is impressive that so many districts across the region 
are working hard to make up for much of the lost time.  
Our region must learn the right lessons from this experience. The storm revealed significant 
shortcomings in the resilience of our public and private infrastructures in three critical areas: 
power, transport and communications. This vulnerability must be addressed.  
National economic conditions 
Turning to the storm’s effects on the national economy, I expect a modest negative effect on 
the  annualized  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  2012.  It  is  impossible  to 
calibrate  this  precisely  at  this  juncture,  but  I  would  guess  this  would  be  in  the  region  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
0.25 to 0.50 of a percentage point. It is important to note that the storm affected much of the 
Northeast  Corridor,  a  densely  populated  area  responsible  for  about  15 percent  of  GDP. 
Normal economic activity in the final days of October and the first few days of November was 
severely disrupted. The disruption then began to subside, but only recently has life begun to 
feel  normal  again.  The  negative  effects  of  this  disruption  have  already  been  noted  in 
economic indicators such as industrial production for the month of October and initial claims 
for unemployment insurance during the second and third weeks of November.  
Yet,  some  of  the  economic  disruption  experienced  here  was  offset  to  some  extent  by 
stronger  than  normal  activity  elsewhere.  For  example,  plants  in  Ohio  or  South  Carolina 
making portable generators may have worked overtime to fill the increased demand. Second, 
some types of disrupted activity, such as the purchase of a car or a housing start, can be 
made  up  before  the  fourth  quarter  is  over.  Lastly,  as  I  mentioned  before,  repair  and 
replacement  of  damaged  property  is  already  underway,  offsetting  some  of  the  earlier 
disruption. This rebuilding will continue well into 2013, likely providing for somewhat stronger 
growth than otherwise would have been the case. Indeed, economic studies of disasters in 
the  U.S.  and  other  advanced  economies  find  that  the  longer-term  effects  on  national 
economies have typically been negligible. Given the resilience of the U.S. economy, I expect 
the long-run effects of Sandy to be similarly small.  
Even  before  the  storm,  though,  the  pace  of  U.S.  economic  growth  was  disappointing  – 
averaging  only  slightly  above  a  2 percent  annualized  growth  since  the  recovery  began  in 
mid-2009. As a consequence, the national unemployment rate remains unacceptably high, 
and  its  decline  during  the  recovery  has  been  grudging.  In  addition,  too  many  people  are 
discouraged from looking for work. This has depressed the participation rate and held down 
the  official unemployment  rate.  Moreover,  5 million  workers  have  been  unemployed  for  six 
months  or  more.  While  job  growth  has  picked  up  some  recently,  its  pace  has  been 
insufficient to materially change the labor market picture.  
In terms of activity, there are a few bright spots. For example, the growth rate of consumer 
spending  was  a  bit  firmer  in  the  third  quarter.  Another  area  showing  improvement  is  the 
housing  market.  Housing  starts  and  sales  of  new  and  existing  single-family  homes  are 
trending up gradually. Nationally, home prices have finally begun to rise.  
However, on a more negative note, business fixed investment spending fell some in the third 
quarter and new orders for nondefense capital goods suggest continued softness. Overall, 
manufacturing  activity  remains  weak.  This  manufacturing  slump  stems  from  slower  growth 
abroad and uncertainties about how the fiscal cliff in Washington will be resolved.  
On the inflation side of ledger, despite sharp rises in energy prices in recent months, overall 
inflation, as measured by year-over-year changes of the consumer price index, is still around 
2 percent – significantly lower than last year. The signals from underlying inflation pressures, 
compensation trends, and longer-term inflation expectations are all fully consistent with our 
longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent.  
As you all know, in September, the FOMC took additional action to promote a more robust 
recovery in a context of price stability – a decision that was reaffirmed in October. In addition 
to the $45 billion monthly purchases of longer term Treasury securities already scheduled to 
run through year end, the FOMC commenced buying additional mortgage-backed securities 
at a rate of $40 billion a month. The Committee said: “If the outlook for the labor market does 
not  improve  substantially,  the  Committee  will  continue  its  purchases  of  agency  mortgage-
backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as 
appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability.”1  
                                                 
1  September  12–13,  2012  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  statement,  http://www.federalreserve.gov/ 
newsevents/press/monetary/20120913a.htm.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In terms of rate guidance, the Committee said it anticipated that exceptionally low levels for 
the federal funds rate would likely be warranted “at least through mid-2015” – emphasizing 
that  a  highly  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  would  remain  appropriate  for  a 
considerable time after the pace of the economic recovery strengthens.  
So, what does “substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market” mean to me? A 
key point is that I will focus on the labor market outlook, not just its current state. Therefore, I 
will  be  looking  at  the  growth  momentum  within  the  overall  economy  and  a  range  of  labor 
indicators, including the unemployment rate, payrolls, the participation rate, the employment 
to population ratio and job finding rates. Following the framework we set out in September, I 
will  be  assessing  the  employment  and  inflation  outlook  in  order  to  determine  whether  we 
should continue Treasury purchases into 2013.  
We  will  continue  to  do  our  part  to  push  the  economy  towards  maximum  sustainable 
employment in the context of price stability. Yet, it is important to recognize that our tools are 
not all-powerful – monetary policy is not a panacea for all that ails our economy.  
In particular, Congress and the administration must address the “fiscal cliff” in a manner that 
creates  a  credible  framework  for  long-  term  fiscal  sustainability.  It  is  widely  acknowledged 
that  the  large  fiscal  contraction  associated  with  going  “off  the  cliff”  would  drive  the  U.S. 
economy into recession. The contractionary impact is likely to be larger than normal when 
monetary policy is operating at the zero lower bound for interest rates, as is the case today. 
Thus, fiscal consolidation must be accomplished in a way that avoids derailing the economic 
recovery. The best way to do this is to craft a plan that starts small in terms of its near-term 
impact, then grows very substantially over time as the economy grows healthier. Of course 
this requires that the longer-term consolidation is truly credible. It is also important that any 
plan have broad bipartisan support so that that households and businesses understand that 
it will in fact be carried out.  
We saw in the summer of 2011 when the debt ceiling limit was in play that a failure to come 
to grips with our nation’s economic challenges and responsibilities can have a large effect on 
U.S. household and business confidence. We do not want to repeat this experience at the 
start of 2013.  
Moreover,  what  happens  will  influence  how  we  are  perceived  abroad.  When  I  meet  with 
economic leaders across the globe they do not doubt the underlying strength and dynamism 
of the U.S. economy, or the entrepreneurialism and inventiveness of our people. Nor do they 
doubt that we have the resources and capability to overcome the challenges we face. But 
they do wonder whether our political system is capable of putting the national interest above 
partisan interests and making the tough choices needed to address these challenges.  
If a credible bipartisan agreement is reached, it will strengthen global confidence in the U.S. 
and underscore to the world that our country remains a great place to do business and invest 
in.  Failure  would  suggest  a  degree  of  political  dysfunction  that  could  undermine  U.S. 
economic  leadership  and  could  encourage  global  corporations  and  investors  to  invest 
elsewhere.  
Make  no  mistake: Credible  fiscal  consolidation  will  not  be  painless,  no  matter  what  form  it 
takes. The burden will be felt across many sectors of the economy and we must expect that 
the resulting fiscal drag will exert some restraint on economic growth.  
Nevertheless, there is no reason why a carefully crafted plan would need to put the economic 
recovery  at  risk.  A  credible  plan,  after  all,  would  likely  have  very  positive  effects  on 
confidence.  In  particular,  I  believe  that  business  investment  would  respond  positively  to  a 
credible  plan.  More  generally,  reducing  uncertainty  over  future  tax  rates,  entitlements  and 
other spending programs has to be a positive development in terms of reducing uncertainty 
that can constrain economic activity. By clarifying the rules of the road, a credible fiscal plan 
is  likely  to  reduce  the  incentive  of  households  and  businesses  to  delay  spending  and 
investment. This would likely offset fiscal drag to a meaningful degree.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
To sum up, while it is still too early for a precise estimate of the economic impact of Sandy, I 
expect  a  negative  impact  on  fourth  quarter  national  and  regional  economic  growth,  but  a 
minimal long run effect nationally and regionally. This has happened during a period where 
too many people remain without the jobs that they need to help support their families and 
themselves. Although the economy continues to expand, we must grow faster if we are to put 
all of our jobless workers and idle businesses back to work. Meanwhile, price increases are 
likely to be at or slightly below our 2 percent longer-run objective over the next few years.  
Many  parts  of  our  region  were  showing  a  stronger  pace  of  growth  than  the  country  as  a 
whole before the storms hit – and I am hopeful that Sandy will not have pushed us off this 
trajectory  for  long.  The  recovery  of  housing  markets  are  important  part  of  this  renewed 
growth,  although  certain  communities  are  still  weighed  down  by  lingering  high  rates  of 
delinquencies  and  foreclosures  and  some  others  have  suffered  appalling  damage  from 
Sandy.  
Going  forward,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  Fed  will  promote  maximum  employment  and  price 
stability to the greatest extent our tools permit, and we will stay the course. When we achieve 
a stronger recovery in the context of price stability, I’ll view it as consistent with our goals and 
not a reason to pull back on our policies prematurely. If you’re trying to get a car moving that 
is stuck in the mud, you don’t stop pushing the moment the wheels start turning – you keep 
pushing until the car is rolling and is clearly free.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
