DeLisle Worrell: Improving international business and financial services 
in Barbados 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
International  Business  101  Seminar,  sponsored  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  the 
Barbados Bar Association and GWP Associates, Bridgetown, 17 November 2012. 
 Barbados has always been a society and economy oriented to the outside world, from the 
beginning of its recorded history, but the terms of our engagement with the rest of the world 
have  changed  in  fundamental  ways  in  the  21st  century.  For  all  of  our  history,  up  to  a 
generation  ago,  the  essential  driving  forces  of  our  economy  were,  to  a  greater  or  lesser 
extent, in the hands of the colonial power, our trading partners, or other persons and forces 
outside  our  control.  In  this  new  century,  for  the  first  time  in  all  our  history,  we  are  fully  in 
control. I do not mean to say that the rest of the world has no impact on us. Clearly we are as 
vulnerable,  if  not  more  so,  to  the  vagaries  of  our  trading  partners  as  we  have  ever  been. 
However, we, like Malta, Singapore and other successful small economies worldwide, have 
found ways to grow and prosper over the past 50 years or more, so that now we are ranked 
with  the  world’s  leading  economies,  in  terms  of  average  incomes,  health  and  educational 
facilities. In these important dimensions, we are now a first world country. 
That is a signal achievement, but it brings with it a great weight of responsibility. From now 
on,  Barbadians  have  to  chart  our  own  path  forward,  to  grow  our  economy  and  provide 
additional  opportunities  for  our  people.  Our  private  sector  will  have  to  seek  out  profitable 
opportunities  for  investment,  and  take  aggressive  initiatives  to  promote  and  finance  that 
investment. We can no longer depend on others to show us the way. 
It  is  especially  important  that  investors  give  priority  to  the  sectors  that  earn  us  foreign 
exchange, principally tourism and other services. When the Barbadian economy grows, the 
demand for foreign exchange grows along with it, so growth can only be sustained if there 
are additional supplies of foreign exchange available. 
Which brings us to the importance of this seminar. The IBFS sector is second in importance 
to tourism as an earner of foreign exchange for Barbados, and it is an essential complement 
to  the  tourism  sector.  Although  the  sector  is  much  smaller  than  tourism,  it  has  a  distinct 
advantage in the quality of job on offer, and the level of skill required. The sector plays a vital 
role in providing job opportunities at the tertiary level, where Barbados has a growing pool of 
talent. 
Barbados has outstanding competitive advantages in the provision of international business 
and financial services. Some are the gift of nature, like our climate, our beaches, the ocean 
around us. Others are an inheritance, like our native tongue, our diaspora, our democratic 
tradition, our infrastructure. And others, like health and educational facilities, are the fruit of 
Barbados’  remarkable  record  of  economic  development  in  the  post  Second  World  War 
period. These things together make Barbados an attractive place to live and work. 
However,  these  are  especially  challenging  times  for  the  IBFS  industry  because  of  the 
duration  of  the  international  recession,  and  the  crusading  temper  of  international  financial 
reform and tax reform in the US and Europe. In order to rise to the challenge, we need to add 
to our competitive strengths in several dimensions, by addressing new markets, developing 
new  products  and  refreshing  old  products,  and  by  increasing  the  level  of  efficiency  in  the 
delivery of support services. 
Furthermore, we need to develop additional expertise, which is why we are here today. We 
need a richer pool of talent from which prospective investors in our IBFS sector may draw, in 
the fields  of  law  and  finance.  A few  of  your  colleagues  have  pioneered in  the  provision  of 
legal services in our international business centre, and they are with us today, to share some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of their expertise. As we go forward, and to the extent that our strategies for the IBFS sector 
are successful, we will face a burgeoning demand for legal and financial services. We are a 
small  country,  and  a  tiny  slice  of  the  new  markets  that  are  the  targets  of  our  diversified 
marketing strategy will be sufficient to exhaust all the available expertise, and much of the 
potential.  
We  at  Central  Bank  are  therefore  enthusiastic  about  this  early  effort  to  widen  the  base  of 
available legal expertise with respect to the provision of international business and financial 
services. We confidently expect that this will be the first in an intensified series of activities to 
deepen and broaden the supply of these and other skills needed by our IBFS providers. In 
addition, as demand increases and opportunities open up, I know that increasing numbers of 
you will wish to form your own networks abroad, so that you can complement our efforts here 
with what you may glean from other sources of expertise. Let us collectively see to it that a 
massive mahogany grows upward and outward from the small pod that we plant here today. 
The robust growth of the IBFS sector will be the true measure of our success. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
