Vítor Constâncio: Repo market and securities lending – towards an EU 
database 
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
to  the  ECB  workshop  “Repo  market  and  securities  lending  –  towards  an  EU  database”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 3 December 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am pleased to welcome you all to this workshop. Your presence today makes clear the wide 
interest  and  also  the  urgency  to  enhance  the  monitoring  of  the  EU  repo  market.  I  want 
particularly to highlight the participation of the US authorities that kindly accepted to share 
their  experience,  the  Bank  of  England,  with  whom  we  share  the  same  transparency 
concerns, and last but not least the European Commission and ESMA who have their special 
say on the subject of regulatory reporting and trade repositories regulation. 
For years before the crisis, repos provided a stable and liquid market. Since the start of the 
euro, the euro repo market proved to be very successful. In the past years secured lending 
via  repos  has  increased  significantly,  and,  according  to  our  estimate,  since  2002  its  daily 
turnover more than doubled. This increased importance of the repo market particularly since 
the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  stems,  of  course,  with  the  market  perception  of  credit  risk 
concerns linked to unsecured transactions. The growth in this market was also underpinned 
and promoted by key legislative changes such as those brought by the Collateral Directive, 
which provided for a clear and harmonised framework across the EU. 
Yet,  in  2008,  following  deterioration  in  market  confidence,  financial  integration  in  money 
markets  deteriorated,  as  witnessed  in  an  upward  drift  in  cross  country  dispersion  for 
overnight  rates  and  a  significant  decline  in  interbank  market  activity,  particularly  in  the 
unsecured  segment.  Some  leading  commentators  (Gorton  and  Metrick1)  even  argued  that 
the  core  problem  of  the  financial  crisis  in  the  US  was  a  run  on  repos.  As  a  result  of  the 
combined  effect  of  the  measures  implemented  by  the  ECB,  the  euro  money  market 
conditions improved during 2012, although its fragmentation remains still high.  
Against this background, a key lesson from the crisis is that we need to better understand 
and monitor the repo as well as the securities lending markets, given their importance for the 
efficient  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  This  has  been  confirmed  by  the  analysis 
conducted  at  global  level  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  Also  our  US  friends  are 
conducting initiatives aimed at the same objective. 
The workshop today gathers together key representatives from public authorities, regulators 
and market representatives with the aim to achieve a common understanding of the following 
key issues: first, what are the expected benefits from requiring additional and more granular 
data for monitoring repo and securities lending markets and which data is essential to make 
such a data collection effort useful for all relevant stakeholders? Second, how could these 
data  be  better  collected,  to  inform  the  public  authorities  assessment  about  firm-level  and 
systemic risks? 
As to the first question, addressing the lack of transparency is as a matter of fact of primary 
importance as it paves the way for tackling six other key issues identified by the FSB related 
to  securities  financing  markets,  namely  the  pro-cyclicality  of  system  leverage  and 
interconnectedness,  potential  financial  stability  issues  associated  with  collateral  re-use, 
                                                
1  Gorton, Gary (2008) “The panic of 2007” NBER wp n.14358: Gorton, G and Andrew Metrick (2009) “Haircuts” 
NBER wp n. 15273 and Gorton, G and Andrew Metrick (2010) “Regulating the shadow banking system” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
potential  risks  arising from the fire-sale  of  collateral  assets,  the  potential  risks  arising from 
agent lender practices, securities lending cash collateral reinvestment and insufficient rigour 
in collateral valuation and management practices.  
Increased  transparency  can  help  regulators  or  supervisors  on  the  one  hand  as  well  as 
market participants themselves on the other hand. 
For  regulators  a  more  detailed  information  set  provides  insights  that  may  help  them  to 
identify  trends  in  the  build-up  of  risks  over  time,  either  for  a  specific  institution,  a  specific 
asset class, or for the market overall. Information availability furthermore allows regulators to 
monitor  changes  in  market  activity  that  can  lead  to  the  emergence  of  potential  new  risks. 
Finally enhanced transparency can support the development of appropriate policy responses 
in times of stress. 
Improved  transparency  can  help  market  participants  as  well  as  it  allows  participants  to 
observe how market activity is evolving over time with respect to pricing, liquidity and other 
characteristics  that  affect  their  own  risk  management  and  profitability.  It  additionally  can 
provide information regarding risks that could impact market participants.  
Increased  transparency  might  also  benefit  central  banks  in  the  implementation  of  its 
monetary policy operations. More specifically, it can provide information on structural aspects 
of the repo market regarding asset categories eligible for monetary policy operations and the 
extent of their use by counterparties as well as information on risk control measures applied. 
Such information could guide Eurosystem policy decisions (in particular in times of financial 
stress) with respect to the Eurosystem’s own collateral eligibility criteria and the calibration of 
its risk control framework. 
As the work carried out by the FSB has shown, the actual set of information to adequately 
gauge  systemic  and  firm-level  risks  arising  from  securities  financing  transactions  is  as  a 
matter of fact rather straightforward. Assuming a specific home-currency for the transactions 
covered, six transaction specific information items are essential: (1) the counterparty of the 
transaction, (2) the principal amount, (3) the interest rate or lending fee, (4) information on 
underlying  collateral  (including  type,  issuer,  maturity,  currency  and  valuation  of  the 
collateral), (5) information on the applied haircut as well as (6) the tenor or maturity of the 
transaction. I would add to these also information about re-use of securities. 
The  workshop  today  intends  to  assess  the  grounds  designing  an  infrastructure  and  data 
collection set-up ensuring confidentiality, efficiency in the data transmission, but also looking 
for  potential  synergies,  and  ensuring  through  the  publication  of  different  levels  of  data 
aggregation  to  relevant  stakeholders  that  this  exercise  can  be  beneficial  to  regulators  or 
supervisors as well as market participants. The involvement of all relevant stakeholders from 
the very beginning should allow that synergies can be explored and benefits reaped. 
Turning  now  to  the  second  of  my  initial  questions,  how  could  these  data  be  better 
collected?  
I have earlier this year, in a Conference organized by the European Commission,2 launched 
a proposal to create a EU central Database on repos, as a joint effort by public authorities 
and the financial industry. I am counting on this workshop to launch the practical discussion 
about  the  main  issues  and  the  challenges  to  be  addressed  and,  most  importantly,  the 
possible solutions for this proposal to become reality. When I first launched my proposal last 
April I noted that due to its role in macro-prudential financial stability and the closeness of 
repo to monetary policy, the ECB would be well placed to centralise the data gathering for 
the euro repo market. This remains true, but today I would like to emphasise that the ECB 
                                                
2  See  Constâncio,  V  (2012)  “Shadow  banking  –  The  ECB  perspective”  Speech  by  Vítor  Constâncio, 
Vice-President of the ECB, Towards better regulation of the shadow banking system, European Commission 
Conference, Brussels, 27 April 2012 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
organised  this  workshop  by  taking  a  wider  perspective  on  the  subject  and  acting  just  a 
catalyst. Although the ECB stands ready to provide any assistance that may be required I 
think, for instance, that a trade repository, acting as an aggregator of several others, could 
ensure  the  most  suitable  data  coverage,  leaving  us  the  flexibility  to  shape  the  data 
aggregation  and  analysis  in  line  with  our  evolving  needs  .  However  what  is  important  is 
ensuring a timely and detailed, complete central view on the market. In fact, the ECB does 
not need to centralise itself the data gathering, provided it has access to all the information it 
requires.  
Having talked about potential synergies that could be explored I would as a side remark also 
like  to  point  to  the  potential  use  of  a  trade  repository  to  establish  a  new  benchmark  on 
secured  financing.  The  discussions  on  potential  improvements  of  current  unsecured  or 
secured rates pointed to the need to move to more transactions based figures. A repo trade 
repository at first sight looks as a promising candidate for establishing and calculating a new 
benchmark for repo rates based on actual transactions. 
So  I  leave  it  to  today’s  joint  discussion  among  the  representatives  of  the  industry  and 
authorities  to  debate  what  could  be  an  optimal  solution  to  achieve  the  result  we  need. 
Whether we will need an EU central database as opposed to a complete, fully fledged trade 
repository  as  done  for  other  market  segments  will  depend  on  several  factors  that  you  are 
going to debate in the course of the day.  
In the case of repo, and contrary to other financial market segments, plenty of relevant data 
of  interest  to  central  banks  are  already  channelled  from  the  trading  layer  for  execution  to 
various  categories  of  intermediaries,  oftentimes  via  CCPs,  to  the  payment  clearing  and 
settlement  systems.  One  key  topic  for  discussion  today  is  thus  how  to  ensure  this  set  of 
highly  critical  but  dispersed  data  can  be  adjusted,  formatted,  complemented  if  necessary, 
and channelled, to form the much needed central view on the market.  
It will be indispensable today to identify practical solutions on how information can effectively 
and  efficiently  be  retrieved  and  fed  to  a  database,  by  whom,  and  to  whom,  under  what 
governance  and  technical  channels,  and  what  shall  be  the  indispensable  confidentiality 
requirements to ensure an appropriate level of data disclosure taking into account the needs 
of authorities and different stakeholders. While I say “practical” issues, I am aware that they 
entail  sensitive  policy  discussions  and  choices  to  be  made  that  may  affect  market 
participants in various ways, not least in terms of costs.  
In the light of the way ahead that will emerge from the discussion today, authorities will have 
the possibility to draw some final conclusions, including on how in their specific roles they 
can and may wish to further support this initiative.  
Because market interconnectedness knows no borders, a global alignment in terms of repo 
market transparency is desirable (in results, not necessarily in solutions). On this side of the 
Atlantic, undoubtedly, I think we should aim for an EU and not only a euro-area central view 
on the euro repo market and securities lending data. 
To conclude, let me say clearly that in this discussion, the ECB is today acting as a catalyst 
for  change, to  help  setting  out  arrangements  needed for financial  stability  monitoring, thus 
ensuring the efficient functioning of financial markets. I see this workshop and the follow-up I 
expect from it, as indispensable first steps, leading to a more structured project, involving a 
wider set of stakeholders and market participants.  
I hope that the exchange of views today will prove fruitful to our common endeavour. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
