Per Jansson: My view on inflation targeting 
Speech  by  Mr  Per  Jansson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Karlstad 
University, Karlstad, 11 October 2012. 
 Twenty years of a floating exchange rate 
I would like to begin by taking you on a trip back in time, twenty years ago to  11 October 
1992. Sweden and a number of other countries were then in the midst of a crisis that in many 
ways is similar to the one many countries in Europe are now undergoing. The situation was 
critical.  Property  and  financial  companies  had  gone  bankrupt,  the  entire  Swedish  banking 
system was rocked to its foundations, unemployment had begun to soar and public finances 
were drained. The fixed exchange rate was put under severe pressure and many assumed 
that Sweden would do what it had done so many times before – adjust the value of the krona 
to get the wheels in motion once again. 
Around one month earlier the Finnish central bank had been forced to give up its defence of 
the exchange rate and let the markka float. One week later, on 16 September, the United 
Kingdom and Italy decided to give up the fight for sterling and the lira. The Riksbank on the 
same date had instead raised its repo rate to 500 per cent in an attempt to stop the currency 
flows and the speculation against the krona. On 6 October, a statement of government policy 
declared  that  there  was  almost  total  support  for  the  hard  currency  policy  and  that  the 
prospects of success were good. 
We all know what happened. Just over one month later, on 19 November, the Riksbank was 
forced to give up the fight and the krona was allowed to float, or perhaps I should say sink. 
As  I  have  understood  things  with  hindsight,  there  was  no  clear  plan  in  place  as  to  how 
monetary policy would be conducted from then on.1 And this was perhaps not so strange – 
with the exception of a couple of brief periods between the wars, Sweden had had a fixed 
exchange rate for the past 120 years. So it was probably difficult to think along new lines. 
The aim also seems to have been that Sweden would return to some form of fixed exchange-
rate  system  as  soon  as  possible,  and  so  the  idea  was  to  find  some  way  of  conducting 
monetary policy until then. 
Inflation targeting has worked well, but has been criticised 
Some countries, New Zealand, Canada and the United Kingdom, had begun to apply a new 
type of monetary policy known as inflation targeting. This entailed setting a numerical target 
for  inflation,  which  the  central  bank  then  tried  to  attain  by  using  the  policy  rate  to  affect 
aggregate demand. Sweden also jumped onto this bandwagon and it proved to be a much 
more enduring solution than most people expected at the time. 
We have now lived with inflation targeting for almost twenty years. I am convinced that most 
people today would say that it has worked well on the whole – that it has fulfilled its purpose, 
and perhaps even exceeded expectations. But when one has got used to a particular system 
over a long period of time, it is fairly natural to start looking for faults and begin to question 
whether it might not be possible to make some modifications and improvements. And I do 
have the impression that inflation targeting in Sweden has recently been criticised somewhat 
harder and somewhat more often than usual. 
                                                
1  For  an  interesting  account  of  the  situation  at  the  Riksbank  at  this  time,  see  Andersson,  Krister  (2003), 
“Utformningen  av  inflationsmålet  och  den  penningpolitiska  analysramen”  (the  shaping  of  the  inflation  target 
and the framework for monetary policy analysis), in Lars Jonung (ed), På jakt efter ett nytt ankare (looking for 
a new anchor), SNS Förlag. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Today I intend to discuss and respond to three types of criticism that have been put forward. 
The first is the claim that the Riksbank has an inbuilt tendency to set the interest rate too high 
and has thus caused unemployment to be unnecessarily high. The second criticism suggests 
that the target for monetary policy should be revised, by raising the inflation target and giving 
the  Riksbank  a  numerical  target  not  just  for  inflation,  but  also  for  employment  or 
unemployment. The third type of criticism is that monetary policy has recently been unclear 
and difficult to understand. 
Inflation targeting’s most important contribution 
But before I move on to the different types of criticism, I would like to dwell a little longer on 
the situation twenty years ago. When analysing the inflation-targeting regime, I believe that it 
is important to remind oneself of the situation when it was introduced. Why was there such 
strong support for defending the krona, even though it meant high interest rates in the middle 
of a recession? What were the problems policymakers were so anxious to resolve? 
As I have already mentioned, the recession in the early 1990s can be regarded as a setback 
following an excessive credit expansion, similar to the situation in many European countries 
today.  The  regulation  of  the  Swedish  credit  market  was  phased  out  in  the  mid-1980s. 
Combined  with  a  tax  system  that  encouraged  borrowing  and  an  overly  expansionary 
stabilisation policy, this contributed to creating a property market bubble. When the bubble 
burst  in  the  early  1990s,  it  led  to  a  banking  crisis.  As  this  coincided  with  an  international 
economic downswing, the recession in Sweden was particularly severe. 
But there was also a deeper and more fundamental problem in the Swedish economy at that 
time.  Sweden  had  been  caught  up  in  what  might  be  termed  a  devaluation  cycle  since  the 
early  1970s.  Fixing  the  exchange  rate  is  equal,  at  least  in  theory,  to  setting  a  target  for 
domestic inflation. The idea is that domestic inflation should not be able to exceed inflation in 
the countries to which one’s own currency is pegged, at least not for any longer periods of 
time. But this requires that the commitment to holding a fixed exchange rate is backed up by 
other policies to ensure its credibility, and this was not the case in Sweden. As there were 
expectations that inflation would remain high and that the krona would  be devalued,  wage 
inflation in Sweden was persistently higher than that abroad. As the exchange rate was fixed, 
Swedish companies’ competitiveness was undermined – a cost crisis arose. To resolve this, 
it was necessary to devalue the krona, which meant that expectations were fulfilled. This in 
turn meant that the inflation trend could continue, competitiveness was gradually undermined 
once again, the exchange rate was devalued one more time, and so on. What is referred to 
as  “the  nominal  anchor”  –  the  benchmark  for  inflation  expectations  and  thereby  for  price 
setting and wage formation – had come loose. 
The widespread support for the defence of the krona should be seen against this backdrop. 
There  was  considerable  agreement  that  the  devaluation  cycle  was  harmful  and  must  be 
broken. The only way of doing this that policymakers considered possible was to convince 
everyone that the commitment to hold onto the fixed exchange rate was irrevocable. Today 
we may think they overestimated the chances of success and that the defence of the krona 
thus went too far. But one has to remember that there was no obvious alternative. Inflation 
targeting  was  new  and  untried  and  not  many  people  were  even  aware  of  its  existence. 
Moreover, it was far from obvious that it would succeed where the fixed exchange-rate policy 
had failed – in establishing an anchor for price setting and wage formation. 
We now know that it did succeed and moreover that it did so fairly quickly. If I were to choose 
what  I  think  is  the  most  important  contribution  of  inflation  targeting,  and  indeed  its  overall 
main merit, it would be this – that is provides a nominal anchor for the economy.2 It is quite 
                                                
2  The  same  conclusion  is  drawn  by  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  Thomas  Laubach,  Frederic  S.  Mishkin  and  Adam  S. 
Posen (1999), Inflation Targeting – Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton University Press. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
clear from  a  Swedish  point  of  view  that  inflation  targeting  has  helped  “to  put  the  house  in 
order” by providing such an anchor, and it is probably an important explanation as to why the 
Swedish economy has developed so well since the crisis in the 1990s. 
Has the Riksbank systematically set the repo rate too high? 
But,  as  I  noted,  inflation  targeting  has  nevertheless  been  criticised,  particularly  in  recent 
years,  so  let  me  now  move  on  to  this  criticism.  One  criticism  is  that  the  Riksbank  has  an 
inbuilt  tendency  to  set  the  repo  rate  too  high.  This  is  said  to  have  caused  inflation  to 
undershoot  the  target  for  most  of  the  inflation-targeting  period  and  to  have  led  to 
unemployment  being  unnecessarily  high,  sometimes  quantified  to  tens  of  thousands  of 
people. I would like to respond to this criticism as I consider it to be misleading and based on 
oversimplified analyses. 
How much has the target been undershot? 
The first question to ask is by how much the Riksbank has actually missed the target.3 The 
answer to this question is not as obvious as one might think. The inflation target is formulated 
in  terms  of  the  familiar  measure  CPI  (consumer  price  index)  and  says  that  the  CPI  is  to 
increase  by  2  per  cent  per  year.  But  sometimes  there  is  good  reason  to  allow  monetary 
policy  to  be  guided  by  other  measures  of  inflation  than  the  CPI.  This  is  something  the 
Riksbank has long emphasized.4  
One of the most obvious reasons for also looking at other measures of inflation is that when 
the policy rate is adjusted, this has a direct impact on CPI “in the wrong direction” through 
households’ mortgage costs – when the repo rate is increased, interest costs increase and 
this is reflected in higher CPI, and vice versa when the repo rate is cut. Seen over really long 
periods of time this should not matter as the Riksbank’s cuts and raises of the repo rate can 
be expected to offset one another. However, during periods when the repo rate is adjusted 
substantially  and  in  the  same  direction,  there  is  reason  to  consider  these  direct  monetary 
policy effects, as otherwise the Riksbank might be tempted to “chase its own tail” – a policy 
rate  increase  leads  to  higher  CPI,  which  in  turn  leads  to  further  policy  rate  increases  and 
higher CPI, and so on. 
The period with an inflation target has been special in the sense that the repo rate has fallen 
more than it has risen. One important reason for this is that it has been possible to cut the 
rate as confidence in the inflation target has increased and inflation has slowed down. For 
example, in 1995 the repo rate was almost 9 per cent, while three years later it was around 
3 per cent. Since then it has only exceeded 4 per cent for brief periods. 
If one calculates the average inflation rate since 1995 – when the inflation target began to 
apply5  –  with  a  measure,  the  CPIF,  that  excludes  the  direct  effects  of  monetary  policy,  it 
amounts to 1.85 per cent. As CPI inflation during the same period was around 1.5 per cent, 
one can say that 3–4 tenths of the deviation in the CPI from the inflation target is explained 
by the Riksbank having cut the repo rate more than it had raised it during this period. Even 
though  the target  is  specified  in  terms  of  the  CPI,  this  information  is fairly  important  when 
determining how successful monetary policy has been. 
                                                
3  The  Riksbank’s  long-run  target  fulfilment  is  discussed  by  Andersson,  Björn,  Stefan  Palmqvist  and 
Pär Österholm  (2012),  “The  Riksbank’s  attainment  of  its  inflation  target  over  a  longer  period  of  time”, 
Economic Commentary no. 4, 2012, Sveriges Riksbank. 
4  See, for instance, Heikensten, Lars, (1999), “The Riksbank’s inflation target – clarifications and evaluation”, 
Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review, 1999:1, pp. 5–17. 
5  The reason why the inflation target did not begin to apply from January 1993 was that it was realised that the 
large depreciation in connection with letting the krona float would result in a one-off increase in the price of 
imported products and thus a relatively large, but temporary, increase in the inflation rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Favourable developments have held inflation back 
Of course, it is also important to analyse why inflation has undershot the target, even after 
these direct effects of interest rate changes have been excluded. My view is that growth in 
the  economy  has  often  been  surprisingly  high  during  the  periods  when  inflation  has  been 
unexpectedly  low.  The  combination  of  low  inflation  and  high  growth  indicates  that  the 
economy  was  affected  by  positive  changes  on  the  supply  side.  The  Riksbank  and  other 
forecasters  have,  for  instance,  often  been  surprised  by  the  high  productivity  growth  in  the 
Swedish economy. As I see it, it is thus largely unforeseen, but beneficial developments that 
have kept inflation down. It is not, as one might sometimes get the impression in the current 
debate,  a  result  of  the  Riksbank  systematically  putting  on  the  brakes,  thus  pushing  down 
demand and holding back price increases. If this had been the case, the low inflation would 
have gone hand in hand with a much weaker growth in the economy. 
So is this development in inflation a poor result for monetary policy? It is of course possible 
to have different opinions on this. But from what I have said so far, it should be clear that I 
believe  there  are  good  explanations  as  to  why  inflation  has  been  slightly  lower  than  the 
target. The repo rate has been cut more than it has been raised during this period, and there 
have  been  changes  in  the  economy  –  which  have  been  difficult  to  forecast  and  often 
beneficial – that have dampened inflation.6  
To gain  further  perspective,  it  may  also  be  valuable  to  go  back  to  where  I  started,  twenty 
years  ago,  just  before  the  inflation  target  was  introduced.  As  I  observed  earlier,  the  high 
inflation trend at that time was a fundamental problem in the Swedish economy. During the 
decades preceding the crisis of the 1990s, average inflation was almost in double figures and 
varied  substantially  from  year  to  year.  Suppose  one  would  have  claimed  at  that  time  that 
inflation from 1995 and seventeen years onwards would be on average just below 2 per cent 
and much more stable, and that growth during this period would not be lower than before, but 
on  the  contrary  somewhat  higher.  I  am  pretty  sure  that  one  would  have  been  met  with 
considerable scepticism. And very few would probably have characterised a monetary policy 
that contributed to this as unsuccessful.  
This is a rather different picture than the one on which the criticism of tens of thousands of 
“lost jobs” is based. The latter instead appears to view the relatively limited undershooting of 
the  target  as  a  major  failure,  without  any  real  mitigating  circumstances.  It  also  appears  to 
assume  that  the  Riksbank  for  some  reason  has  intentionally  and  systematically  aimed  to 
attain a lower inflation rate than the 2 per cent it has itself set as the target. It is difficult to 
see  the  logic  in  such  behaviour.  And  it  is  definitely  not  something  that  I  recognise  after 
working at the Riksbank at various times over the past fifteen years.  
Wages not necessarily based on incorrect expectations 
There are also other objections to the criticism that monetary policy should have cost tens of 
thousands of jobs. One reason claimed for the unnecessarily high unemployment is that real 
wages,  that  is,  wages  adjusted  for  inflation,  have  been  higher  than  they  would  otherwise 
have  been  if  inflation  had  been  on  target.  In  other  words,  the  Riksbank  is  said  to  have 
“tricked” the social partners into setting wages too high in relation to the inflation that was 
later realised. 
                                                
6  Several  people  have  claimed  that  undershooting  the  inflation  target  has  led  to  unnecessarily  high 
unemployment.  Assarsson,  Bengt  (2011),  “Riksbanken  måste  ta  sitt  arbete  på  större  allvar”  (the  Riksbank 
must  take  its  work  more  seriously),  debate  article  in  the  newspaper  Dagens  Nyheter,  2  May,  2011,  is  one 
example.  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2012),  “The  Possible  Unemployment  Cost  of  Average  Inflation  below  a 
Credible  Target”,  unpublished  article,  (http://people.su.se/~leosven/papers/Phillips.pdf),  tries  to  quantify  the 
number of people unnecessarily unemployed using an estimated Phillips curve. His calculation method implies 
that  the  reasons  for  CPI  inflation  undershooting  the  target  are  of  no  importance  for  the  effects  on 
unemployment. It also means that average CPIF inflation is unimportant in this context. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However, it is far from clear what inflation expectations are used as a base for wage setting. 
In the long run, say five years, expectations are well anchored around the inflation target of 
two per cent. But in the shorter run, expectations vary more and follow actual inflation more 
closely. It may be that wage setting is based on the expectations in the somewhat shorter 
run. Expectations can be measured in different ways that give slightly different results. The 
measure  of  inflation  expectations  that  appears  to  have  the  strongest  link  to  actual  wage 
increases  is  firms’  inflation  expectations  one  year  ahead  from  the  National  Institute  of 
Economic  Research’s  business  tendency  survey.7  According  to  this  measure,  inflation 
expectations  have  followed  actual  inflation  fairly  well.  In  other  words,  the  agents  have  not 
been “tricked”, but have realised that inflation can deviate from the target in the short run. If 
wage increases are based on this measure, then in other words real wages have not been 
too high and unemployment has thus not been “unnecessarily high”. 
Before I move on to the next type of criticism, I would like to emphasise that what I have said 
here should not be interpreted to mean that I wish to make light of inflation undershooting the 
target.  The  Riksbank  should  of  course  do  its  best  to  attain  the  inflation  target  and  I  can 
assure  you  that  we  do.  However,  it  is  not  an  easy  task,  and  I  believe  that  many  people 
understand this.  
Proposal for higher inflation target and target for employment 
Another type of criticism is aimed at the target formulated for monetary policy. It comes in 
slightly different forms, but a common theme is that the inflation target should be raised, and 
that  it  should  be  combined  with  an  explicit  target  for  employment  or  unemployment.  One 
concrete proposal that is put forward is that monetary policy should support a target for an 
employment rate of 80 per cent.8  
The level of central banks’ inflation targets has begun to be discussed internationally as a 
result  of  the  recent  crisis.9  One  argument  is  that  if  the  targets  were  set  slightly  higher,  it 
would make it easier to stimulate economies in deep recession, as it would reduce the risk of 
the policy rate reaching the zero lower bound. This is a relevant argument. Moreover, it is 
probably not the case that an inflation rate of, say, 3 per cent would be more problematic to 
live with than an average inflation of 2 per cent. It is only at considerably higher figures that 
inflation is harmful. 
Difficult to change an established inflation target 
However, it is one thing to set an inflation target for the first time, and a quite different thing to 
raise an existing target. If we go back twenty  years in time, to when the policy of inflation 
targeting  was  introduced,  the target  could  in  principle  have  been  set  at  3  instead  of  2  per 
cent. It is possible that it would have been a little more difficult to make the target credible, 
partly because it should have been higher than actual inflation at the time – which was fairly 
exactly  2  per  cent,  and  partly  because  the  few  central  banks  that  had  begun  targeting 
inflation at that time had chosen targets on or close to 2 per cent. 
But  the  problems  would  most  likely  be  much  greater  if  one  were  to  change  an  already 
established inflation target. There is a risk that, for instance, an increase from 2 to 3 per cent 
could be interpreted as an indication that the target will be raised a little every now and then, 
                                                
7  The analysis in this section is taken from Flodén, Martin (2012), “A Note on Swedish Inflation and Inflation 
University. 
unpublished 
Department 
Economics, 
Stockholm 
of 
Expectations”, 
http://people.su.se/~mflod/files/swedishinflation.pdf 
paper, 
8  See,  for  instance,  the  Left  Party’s  reservation  in  the  Assessment  of  monetary  policy  2010–2011,  Riksdag 
Committee on Finance report 2011/2012:FiU24. 
9  See, 
for 
instance,  Blanchard,  Olivier,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia  and  Paulo  Mauro  (2010),  “Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note February 12, 2010, SPN/10/03. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
when the situation is perceived as problematic. There is even a risk that the nominal anchor 
in  such  a  case  could  come  loose.  Sooner  or  later  expectations  would  adjust  to  the  new 
target, but the adjustment period could prove costly. The central bank might feel forced to 
conduct  a  very  tight  policy  to  convince  the  agents  in  the  economy  that  this  was  indeed  a 
one-off  increase  of  the  target.  So  far,  no  government  or  central  bank  has  made  the 
assessment  that  an  increase  in  the  inflation  target  would  have  sufficient  advantages  to 
outweigh the potential drawbacks. 
Monetary policy only affects employment indirectly in the long run 
When setting a policy target, it is important that whoever is to meet the target can do so on a 
lasting basis. A natural target for a central bank is to keep inflation at a particular level over 
time. The central bank’s ability to govern inflation ultimately depends, somewhat simplified, 
on its ability to affect the amount of money in the economy. It cannot steer inflation with a 
high amount of precision, but still  well enough to ensure that it is on average close to the 
target over time.10  
But  when  it  comes  to  targets  for  employment,  monetary  policy  does  not  have  the  same 
power.  The  best  way  for  monetary  policy  to  promote  a  good  long-run  development  of 
employment is to “keep the house in order”. By this I mean keeping inflation low and stable  
–  supplying  a  nominal  anchor  –  and  in  addition  holding  the  economy  in  balance  by 
dampening 
in  economic  activity.  This  creates  a  good  macroeconomic 
environment where companies dare to invest and hire. The possibility of monetary policy to 
influence the long-run employment rate, the equilibrium level, is thus in all essentials indirect. 
fluctuations 
Employment target not meaningful and potentially counter-productive 
The  long-run  employment  rate  is  essentially  determined  by  factors  beyond  the  control  of 
monetary policy, such as demography and, above all, the functioning of the labour market. If 
these factors together imply that what is possible to attain is a long-run employment rate of, 
say, 75 per cent, it would be meaningless to give the central bank the task of promoting an 
employment rate of 80 per cent. What monetary policy might be able to do in such a situation is 
to make the employment rate temporarily reach 80 per cent by overheating the economy. But 
nothing would be gained by this, as the employment rate would soon return to 75 per cent. 
However,  the  overheating,  in  turn,  could  cause  problems  that  might  be  difficult  to  deal  with, 
such  as  making  inflation  expectations  rise  and  creating  asset  market  bubbles.  Thus,  one 
cannot give the central bank a numerical target for employment that it should strive to attain in 
the same way as an inflation target.11  
It is sometimes claimed that the Federal Reserve is an example of a central bank with an 
employment target. Although the Federal Reserve Act states that the Federal Reserve shall 
“promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate 
long-term interest rates”, this does not mean that it in practice works with a numerical target 
for employment.12  
                                                
10  However, there is a research literature on so-called fiscal dominance that suggests that the central bank may 
experience  difficulty  steering  inflation  if  public  debt  is  too  high.  See,  for  instance,  Leeper,  Eric,  M.  and 
Tack Yun  (2006),  “Monetary-Fiscal  Policy  Interactions  and  the  Price  Level:  Background  and  Beyond”, 
International Tax and Public Finance 13(4), pp. 373–409 and Cochrane, John, H. (2011), “Inflation and Debt”, 
National Affairs 9, Fall 2011, pp. 56–78. 
11  Letting  the  central  bank  itself  determine  the  employment  target  is  no  solution,  either.  As  discussed  in  the 
section on criticism of a lack of clarity, assessing what could be an appropriate target level/equilibrium level 
entails considerable problems. 
12  A  press  release  in  connection  with  the  Federal  Reserve  introducing  an  inflation  target on  25  January 2012 
stated that: “The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the 
structure  and  dynamics  of  the  labor  market.  These  factors  may  change  over  time  and  may  not  be  directly 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One  can  illustrate  the  fact  that  the  long-run  level  of  employment  is  determined  by  factors 
other than monetary policy in different ways. Following the crisis in the 1990s, unemployment 
and  the  employment  rate  have  varied  around  an  apparently  unchanged  long-run  level, 
despite  the  policy  rate  having  been  both  relatively  high  and  very  low  during  this  period. 
Although there is a relationship between monetary policy and the labour market in the short 
run,  monetary  policy  does  not  seem  to  have  influenced  the  labour  market  on  average. 
Despite periods of very strong growth and economic activity, unemployment has never been 
lower than just under 6 per cent, with an average rate of around 7 per cent since 2000. An 
overwhelming proportion of unemployment is thus structural rather than cyclical. This picture 
is also supported by unemployment varying substantially between groups. For instance, it is 
very high among people who do not have upper-secondary school approved grades, as well 
as among immigrants and young people. These groups comprise a relatively large share of 
job-seekers.  Structural  measures  to  enable  these  groups  to  gain  a  foothold  in  the  labour 
market  are  a  better  recipe  than  expansionary  monetary  policy  for  bringing  down 
unemployment. A further indication that long-run labour market developments are governed 
by factors other than monetary policy is that unemployment has varied substantially between 
the countries in the euro area, despite their common monetary policy. 
Trying to place the responsibility for employment with monetary policy and the central bank is 
thus, in my opinion, not very meaningful. It could even be counter-productive as the focus is 
moved from the places where the problems really can be dealt with – the labour market and 
the  political  sphere  –  to  a  place  where  they  cannot.  Sometimes  one  almost  gets  the 
impression that the actual purpose of trying to transfer responsibility for employment to the 
central bank is to avoid having to take the fairly unpleasant decisions that might be needed to 
create  good  conditions  for  employment.  Of  course,  it  would  be  much  easier  if  the 
employment problem merely concerned cutting the policy rate to a low level and keeping it 
there. But it is not that simple.13  
Has monetary policy been unclear? 
Let me now move on to the third type of criticism. It claims that monetary policy has been 
unclear and difficult to comprehend, particularly  in recent years. According to some, it has 
been difficult to understand the motives behind some of the decisions and it has not been 
very clear why the decisions reached were preferable to the alternatives. 
I can have some understanding of this criticism and I will return to this. But first I would like to 
discuss the question of what is meant by a clear monetary policy. It is not self-evident, as we 
shall see, and different people appear to mean slightly different things. 
A theory-based policy is not necessarily clearer 
The academic literature on monetary policy often describes inflation targeting as the central 
bank minimising a so-called loss function. This loss function is a weighted sum of a measure 
of  the  variability  of  inflation  and  the  variability  of  the  real  economy.  The  loss function  can, 
somewhat simplified, be written as  
                                                                                                                                                   
measurable.  Consequently,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  specify  a  fixed  goal  for  employment;  rather,  the 
Committee’s  policy  decisions  must  be  informed  by  assessments  of  the  maximum  level  of  employment, 
recognizing  that  such  assessments  are  necessarily  uncertain  and  subject  to  revision.  The  Committee 
considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments.” 
13  Vredin, Anders, Martin Flodén, Anna Larsson and Morten Ravn (2012), Enkla regler, svåra tider – behöver 
stabiliseringspolitiken förändras? (Simple rules, difficult times – does stabilisation policy need to be changed?) 
Economic  Policy  Group  Report  2012,  SNS  Förlag,  draw  the  conclusion  that  there  is  not  sufficiently  strong 
argument to supplement the Riksbank’s inflation target with an explicit target for unemployment, or for raising 
the inflation target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 where  π  is  the  forecast  for  inflation,  π*  is  the  inflation  target  and  y-y*  is  the  forecast  for 
resource utilisation in the economy. The parameter λ represents the importance the central 
bank gives to stabilising the real economy in relation to stabilising inflation.14  
It is thus a question of finding the interest rate that minimises the squared forecast deviations 
between actual inflation and the inflation target during the forecast period and the squared 
forecasts  for  resource  utilisation.15  This  theoretical  description  has  been  very  useful  in 
developing the policy of inflation targeting. It captures in an intuitive and relatively simple way 
the essence of inflation targeting and it has helped to structure our thinking.16  
However, the step from theory to practice is far from as simple and straightforward as one 
might think. One often gets the impression from the current debate that “clarity” in monetary 
policy  means  that  the  central  bank  should  follow  this  theoretical  description  very  closely. 
Accordingly,  monetary  policy  decisions  should  be  justified  on  the  basis  of  a  detailed 
quantified path for both resource utilisation and the deviation of inflation from the target. 
The expression “nothing is as practical as a good theory” probably applies in many ways, but 
to  be  really  practical  also  requires  that  the  theory  captures  the  central  elements  as  they 
appear in real life and – in particular – that one is aware of its shortcomings and faults. 
Measurement and estimation problems make the step from theory to practice 
difficult… 
One circumstance that very much complicates the step from theory to practice is that while 
the variables in the loss function are well specified in theory, in practice it is far from obvious 
how they should be measured. Resource utilisation, y-y*, can be regarded as a summarising 
measure of developments in the real economy and states how far production resources, that 
is, labour and real capital, are used in relation to the level that is sustainable in the long run, 
or the “normal” level. Unfortunately, it is not possible to directly observe how high the level of 
resource utilisation in the economy is, and nor is there any generally-accepted view of how 
this should be calculated. It is thus scarcely possible to say that a particular policy will lead to 
resource utilisation increasing or decreasing by exactly this or that figure.17  
Sometimes  the  argument  is  put  forward  that  it  is  much  easier  if  one  uses  the  deviation 
between  actual  unemployment  and  long-run  sustainable  unemployment,  or  equilibrium 
unemployment, instead of resource utilisation in the loss function. But I am quite sure that 
                                                
14  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (1997),  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring  Inflation  Targets”, 
European  Economic  Review  41,  pp.  1111–1146  introduced  this  type  of  loss  function  to  analyse  so-called 
flexible  inflation  targeting.  However,  the  behavioural  assumption  that  the  loss  function  (or  very  similar 
variations of it) implies, has a long tradition in analyses of monetary policy (for example, Kydland, Finn E. and 
Edward  C.  Prescott  (1977),  “Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The  Inconsistency  of  Optimal  Plans”, Journal  of 
Political Economy 85, 473–491.)  
15  One can also calculate the mean value of these deviations, what is known as the mean squared gap. The 
mean squared gap for inflation and resource utilisation can then be drawn in as points in a figure; see, for 
instance,  the  article  “A  method  for  assessing  different  monetary  policy  alternatives”  in  the  Material  for 
assessing monetary policy 2011, Sveriges Riksbank. 
16  See, for example, Apel, Mikael, Per Jansson and Lars Heikensten (2007), “The role of academics in monetary 
policy: a study of Swedish inflation targeting”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2007:1, pp. 21–58. 
17  The document “Monetary policy in Sweden 2010”, Sveriges Riksbank, summarises the Riksbank’s monetary 
policy  strategy.  It  is  stated  there  (p.  5)  that  monetary  policy  “in  addition  to  stabilising  inflation  around  the 
inflation target, also strives to stabilise output and employment around long-term sustainable paths”. However, 
this does not mean that policy needs to be pegged to specific numerical estimates of these paths; see the 
continued discussion in this speech. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
anyone who has ever tried to estimate equilibrium unemployment will agree with me that it is 
not much easier than estimating normal resource utilisation or the long-run sustainable GDP 
trend. Unemployment data is perhaps not revised as often and as much as GDP data, but 
this  is  not  the  only  reason  why  estimates  of  equilibrium  unemployment  are  extremely 
uncertain and difficult to use as a basis for economic policy decisions.18  
... as does the fact that more than one person makes the decisions 
However,  the  gap  between  theory  and  practice  is  not  only  about  measurement  and 
estimation problems. Problems of this type  would be difficult enough to handle even  if the 
monetary policy decisions were made by a single decision-maker. But in reality we are six 
individuals  who  decide  on  the  repo  rate.  And  as  these  issues  are  ultimately  a  question  of 
judgement it is up to each member of the Executive Board to make his or her best estimate 
of which measure or measures of the development of the real economy he or she believes 
monetary  policy  should  focus  on  to,  as  it  says  in  the  preparatory  works  of  the  Sveriges 
Riksbank Act, “support the objectives of general economic policy for the purpose of attaining 
sustainable growth and a high level of employment”. 
She or he may also make the assessment that factors other than the forecast for inflation 
and various measures of resource utilisation should in some situations be taken into account 
in  the  monetary  policy  decisions.  This  may  be  a  question  of  paying  attention  to  economic 
developments  in  the  longer  term,  beyond  the  forecast  horizon,  or  risks  that  are  difficult  to 
quantify relating to the financial parts of the economy. 
The  fact  is  that  one  of  the  main  aims  of  having  an  Executive  Board  is  that  its  members 
should have slightly different views on things. When the Executive Board was established in 
1999  the  more  or  less  explicit  aim  was  that  it  would  consist  of  people  with  different 
backgrounds,  experience  and  knowledge.  The  idea  behind  this  “diversification”  is  that 
committees tend to make better decisions than individual policymakers, as a committee can 
“pool” its experience and knowledge.19 And in order to have something to “pool”, the people 
on the committee should of course not be too alike. 
I believe that everyone who has ever been a member of the Executive Board of the Riksbank 
agrees with the general wording that the Riksbank should stabilise inflation around 2 per cent 
and  at  the  same  time  help  to  stabilise  the  real  economy.  This  is  also  the  essence  of  the 
Sveriges Riksbank Act and its preparatory works. However, this does not mean that actual 
monetary policy can be linked to the theoretical description in a simple and very strict way. 
My impression is that among both the present and former members of the Executive board 
there  is  a  lot  of  scepticism  towards  far-reaching  and  strict  parallels  between  theory  and 
practice.  Such  parallels  would  paint  far too  simple  a  picture  of  monetary  policy  and  would 
give the impression that there is a precision and exactness in monetary policy – a possibility 
                                                
18  For a slightly older, but still very readable article, see Rogerson, Richard (1997), “Theory Ahead of Language 
in  Economics  of  Unemployment”,  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  11  (1),  pp.  73–92.  A  more  recent 
reference that is also relevant in this context is Carlsson, Mikael (2012), “Monetary policy and unemployment: 
A conceptual review”, under publication in Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2012:3. The problems with 
basing economic policy on estimated trends and long-run equilibria are illustrated in, for instance, Orphanides, 
Athanasios (2004), “Monetary Policy Rules, Macroeconomic Stability and Inflation: A View from the Trenches”, 
Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking  36(2),  pp.  151–175  and  Orphanides,  Athanasios  and  Simon  van 
Norden (2002), “The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time”, Review of Economics and Statistics 
LXXXIV (4), pp. 569–583. 
19  There is support for this view in research, see for example Blinder, Alan S. and John Morgan (2005), “Are Two 
Heads  Better  Than  One?  Monetary  Policy  by  Committee”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and  Banking  vol.  37, 
pp. 789–812. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
to “fine tune” – that simply does not exist. This would possibly give an illusion of “clarity” but 
would, as I see it, merely be a chimera.20  
The  Riksbank  is  hardly  unique  in  this  respect.  I  have  no  doubt  that  such  scepticism  also 
exists  in  the  monetary  policy  committees  of  other  countries.  As  far  as  I  know,  there  is  no 
central bank that literally conducts and describes its monetary policy in accordance with the 
simple loss function that I showed earlier. The central bank that comes closest is probably 
Norges  Bank,  but  it  too  has  recently  taken  some  steps  away  from  a  too  theory-based 
interpretation of practical policy in terms of the simple loss function.21  
An incorrect estimate of the equilibrium level leads to incorrect policies 
One  of  the  risks  of  a  policy  that  ambitiously  tries  to  stabilise  the  real  economy  around  a 
numerical, long-term target for, for instance, production or employment, is that the estimate 
may be incorrect. If so, this will lead to policy being conducted incorrectly. If the estimate of 
the long-term sustainable rate of production or employment is too high, monetary policy will 
be  too  expansionary,  which  can  lead  to  problems  with  the  nominal  anchor.  It  has  been 
claimed that this is an important explanation of the high rate of inflation in the United States 
during the 1970s, the period of the “Great inflation”. It is claimed that the Federal Reserve 
pursued  a too  activist  stabilisation  policy  at  that time,  based  on  a too-high  estimate  of the 
long-term sustainable rate of production.22  
Before I go on, I would like to emphasise that theoretical research has been valuable for the 
development  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  that  we  have  today  in  Sweden  and  many 
other countries. But in this particular case it feels as though theory is not being used as a tool 
to model and structure reality but rather the opposite; that is, that one tries to adapt reality so 
that it fits the theory. In my world at least this is not the way to proceed if you want to make 
monetary policy clearer. 
A lack of clarity on a more general level? 
There  is  also  a  more  general  criticism  that  the  Riksbank’s  communication  has  not  always 
made it easy to understand exactly why certain decisions have been made and why these 
decisions  have  been  seen  as  being  better  than  conceivable  alternatives.  Here,  as  I 
understand it, it is not a question of the critics lacking explanations in terms of any specific 
loss function, but rather that they feel the Riksbank’s reasoning has not been clear enough 
on a more general level. 
This is a criticism that I understand a bit better. Let me try to explain my view on this. The 
criticism often seems to centre on the debate between the members of the Executive Board 
in recent years, during the recovery from the global financial crisis. Put briefly, a majority of 
the Board members have advocated a somewhat higher repo rate than the minority. I would 
like  to  stress  that  it  has  not  been  a  question  of  huge  differences  –  it  has  not  been  about 
                                                
20  The  economist  who  has  probably  gone  furthest  in  his  criticism  of  fine  tuning  in  monetary  policy  is 
Milton Friedman. In Friedman, Milton (1960), A Program for Monetary Stability, Fordham University Press, he 
writes,  for  example:  “[T]he  central  problem  is  not  to  construct  a  highly  sensitive  instrument  that  can 
continuously offset instability introduced by other factors, but rather to prevent monetary arrangements from 
themselves becoming a primary source of instability”. 
21  See Ejven, Snorre and Thea B. Kloster (2012), “Norges Bank’s new monetary policy loss function – further 
discussion”,  Staff  Memo  No.  11,  2012.  What  Norges  Bank  has  done,  more  specifically,  is  to  introduce  a 
criterion that monetary policy should be “robust”. What this means in practice is that monetary policy should try 
to prevent financial imbalances from arising. 
22  See  for  example  Orphanides  (2004)  in  footnote  18,  who  notes  that:  “The  subtle  policy  change  in  1979 
reflected a shift to more modest but attainable goals. Reducing the excessive emphasis on stabilizing the level 
of economic activity around its uncertain potential and concentrating instead on the inflation outlook for policy 
guidance provided the foundation for stable sustainable growth”. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
whether monetary policy should be expansionary or contractionary, but merely about exactly 
how expansionary it should be. The repo rate has been low ever since the crisis, and it is still 
low.  
One  type  of  criticism  is  that  the  majority  has  not  been  consistent,  but  has  referred  to  a 
number  of  slightly  different  arguments  to  justify  the  somewhat  less  expansionary  policy.23 
There  may  be  something  in  this.  However,  it  is  important  to  remember  here  that  the 
Executive  Board  consists  of  six  individuals  who  have  their  own  personal  opinions.  The 
majority  is  not  in  every  respect  a  united  team  that  shares  exactly  the  same  views  on  all 
matters.  Nor  has  it  consisted  of  the  same  individuals  throughout  this  period.  From  time  to 
time, opinions have been quite divided on a range of issues, but I would say that the main 
dividing  line  between  the  majority  and  the  minority  is  that  the  majority  has  been  more 
concerned about household debt. Many external observers also seem to have interpreted the 
situation in this way. 
Another type of criticism is based on this, but claims that the reasoning of the majority on the 
risks  associated  with  household  debt  has  been  too  vague.  My  perception  is  that  what  the 
critics  seem  to  lack  are  quantifications  of  how  monetary  policy  is  expected  to  affect  the 
situation. I can understand this criticism to a certain extent too. 
It  would  without  doubt  be  desirable  if  we  were  able  to  say,  for  example,  that  a  somewhat 
higher  interest  rate  reduces  the  risk  of  a  dramatic  fall  in  house  prices  in  the  future  by  so 
many per cent, or that a level of household debt of x per cent is problematic while a level of y 
per cent is not. Unfortunately, however, neither the Riksbank nor any other central bank – or 
for that matter the science of economics as such – has reached that point yet. One of the 
lessons  of  the  global  financial  crisis  was  just  this  –  that  we  need  to  deepen  our 
understanding of the workings of financial markets and the links between the financial sector 
and  the  rest  of  the  economy.  Having  said  this,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  these  are  by  no 
means  issues  that  only  came  to  the  attention  of  central  banks  for  the  first  time  after  the 
financial crisis. Over the years, the Riksbank and other central banks have on a number of 
occasions  had  reason  to  consider  how  various  financial  developments  should  affect 
monetary  policy.  However,  these  thoughts  have  been  more  based  on  intuition  than  on  a 
concrete analytical framework. 
Research on these issues has literally exploded in recent years, so hopefully we will make 
some progress in the period ahead. But until a practically useful analytical framework is in 
place,  I  at  least  believe  that  there  must  be  scope  to  put  forward  arguments  without 
necessarily having to be able to translate these into exact probabilities or precise numerical 
effects  on  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  If  we  are  worried  by  certain  developments  we 
cannot,  as  I  see  it,  refrain  from  taking  action  just  because  certain  things  are  difficult  to 
quantify  or  cannot  be  fit  into  a  simplified,  theoretical  or  conceptual  framework  for  how 
monetary policy should be conducted. We cannot take a time-out and wait for research. This 
is an area with enormous potential costs for society. So I think a precautionary principle must 
apply.  
The  Riksbank  is  in  no  way  an  exception  in  this  respect  either.  I  am  convinced  that  the 
monetary policy discussion at most central banks is largely conducted using this type of more 
qualitative argument. I am also convinced that many economic-policy decision-makers in the 
countries that were hit hard by the crisis now regret that they did not act to a greater extent 
on the basis of the concern they may have felt, even though it was difficult to quantify. 
                                                
23  See for example the column by Calmfors, Lars (2012), “Riksbanken måste bli tydligare (The Riksbank must be 
clearer), in the newspaper Dagens Nyheter on 13 September.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
What can we demand of inflation targeting? 
Let me conclude by summarising my view of the scope of inflation targeting – what it can do 
and what we can demand of it. 
As I have already mentioned, the main advantage of inflation targeting is that it provides a 
nominal anchor for the economy – a guideline for decisions on pricing and wage setting. This 
does not mean that economic agents count on inflation being on target at every given point in 
time, but they know that over time it will be close to the target and not get out of hand. As I 
noted  initially,  the  Swedish  economy  lacked  such  an  anchor  20  years  ago.  The  fact  that 
developments have been so favourable since then is probably largely due to the stability and 
order that inflation targeting has created.  
In  addition  to  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable,  monetary  policy  should  help  to  keep  the 
economy in balance by dampening fluctuations in economic activity. However, as I see it this 
should be done by means of what one might call coarse tuning, rather than by means of fine 
tuning.  Our  aim  should  be  to  not  focus  too  much  on  trying  to  fine  tune  the  real  economy 
around uncertain numerical measures of long-term employment, potential GDP or equilibrium 
unemployment. It may appear “clear” to do so but it is an overly simplified representation of 
monetary policy and requires knowledge that we simply do  not have today. In my opinion, 
coarse tuning also means that it may sometimes be necessary to react to risks, even if they 
cannot be quantified within a particular analytical framework.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
