Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Transforming the East Asian insurers – time for action 
now 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
26th East Asian Insurance Congress “Transforming the East Asian insurers – time for action 
now”, Kuala Lumpur, 30 October 2012. 
 the 
industry 
transitioned 
It is my great pleasure to join you this morning at this 26th East Asian Insurance Congress. It 
was almost 24 years ago in 1988 that Malaysia hosted this event. Since that time, the global 
and  regional financial  and  economic  landscape  has  been  dramatically  transformed.  During 
this  period  the  world  has  also  experienced  more  than  a  hundred  financial  crises,  with  the 
recent global financial crisis being the most severe. This has prompted wide ranging financial 
reforms  by  the  international  community  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector. 
The  enhancements  to  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  have  also  had  a  far 
reaching and fundamental impact on how insurers manage risks in their businesses. In this 
highly  dynamic  and  more  challenging  global  environment,  the  insurance  industry  has 
continued  to  evolve  and  develop  with  the  broadening  of  the  product  range  and  greater 
diversification of the distribution system. 
In  Malaysia,  the  insurance  industry,  including  the  Takaful  sector  has  also  progressed 
significantly during this period, both in terms of growth and development. In this more recent 
decade, the penetration rate, as measured by the number of life policies to total population, 
increased  significantly  to  55  percent,  from  31  percent  in  2000.  Total  premiums  to  GDP 
increased  from  4.1  percent  to  4.5  percent  over  the  same  period.  Structural  reforms 
undertaken  has  also 
towards  more  market-based  pricing 
mechanisms  in  key  market  segments,  improved  efficiencies  in  the  insurance  eco-system, 
and  a  strengthened  framework  for  consumer  protection.  These  trends  have  also  been 
reinforced  by  liberalisation  measures  which  aim  to  support  and  catalyse  the  further 
development of the industry. A proposed new legislation for our financial sector is also now 
well advanced and will provide a solid foundation for the insurance industry going forward. 
This event is taking place at a time of significant change and in a period of transition into a 
new  era  for  the  financial  services  industry.  We  can  reflect  on  these  developments  in  the 
industry and take the opportunity to learn from the different experiences in the region. While 
we  face  different  challenges  and  priorities,  the  insurance  industry  in  the  East  Asian 
economies share three important common goals – sustaining growth and performance under 
more  challenging  economic  and  financial  conditions,  strengthening  the  capacity  to  support 
and  drive  economic  transformation,  and  building  resilience  to  withstand  future  shocks  and 
economic cycles. As we turn our minds to these goals, the question before us is: how should 
the insurance industry in East Asia, in the period ahead, respond to these demands? 
In envisioning the future direction of the industry in our own region, it would be constructive 
for us to reflect on the evolution of the modern insurance industry and contextualise it to our 
own prevailing and prospective environment. The modern insurance industry came with the 
maritime  expansion  which  accompanied  cross-border 
the  rapid 
urbanisation  which  saw  significant  human  and  economic  losses  experienced  during  the 
Great Fire of London. This led to the establishment of the first fire insurance company and 
the invention of the building blocks for life insurance as we know it today. Then, as societies 
became  more  affluent,  endowment  and  with-profit  policies  grew  in  significance  as 
instruments for savings. As industrialisation and urbanization intensified, the break down of 
traditional  systems  of  social  protection  prompted  the  expansion  of  insurance  products  that 
covered retirement, accident, medical care and unemployment. 
Throughout the 20th century, business models have continued to evolve in tandem with the 
higher  levels  of  financial  literacy,  rising  consumer  expectations  and  advancements  in 
trade  activity,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
technology. As competition compressed margins, there was a migration beyond tied-agency 
and commission-based distribution models to include fee-based financial advisors and direct 
marketing.  Bancassurance  and  the  participation  of  retailers  in  insurance  distribution  have 
also  allowed  insurers  to  significantly  expand  their  reach  with  lower  cost  structures,  while 
specialisation  along  the  value-chain  enabled  even  greater  efficiencies.  This  more  diverse 
landscape has enabled a much wider and deeper penetration of insurance in the advanced 
economies. 
While  these  trends  are  shaping  the  evolution  of  the  East  Asian  insurance  industry  today, 
several  other  factors  also  need  to  be  taken  into  account.  First  is  the  much  faster  pace  at 
which these forces of change are taking place in East Asia. Second is the significantly more 
demanding regulatory environment in which insurers now operate. And third is the impact of 
climate change. This thus calls for a greater urgency in responding to these developments. 
Allow me to elaborate on these factors given their potential to have an important bearing on 
the industry’s focus and priorities in navigating its future growth path in the region. 
On the first point, the growth trajectory for the demand for insurance products and services in 
East Asia over the medium term will be much higher than the path that history implies. The 
global volume of cross-border trade has almost tripled since 2000. In addition, intra-regional 
trade within Asia is projected to account for an increasingly larger share of this expanding 
world trade. Further liberalisation and greater regional economic and financial integration in 
Asia will reinforce this trend. This presents substantial opportunities for East Asian insurers 
to support the growing trade activities. After decades of strong growth, the Asian region is 
also now the home to a middle income population of 500 million. This number is projected to 
increase by more than six-fold to 3 billion by 2030. The OECD also projects that by 2020, 
Asian consumers will account for 40 percent of global consumption. 
Within Asia, structural reforms have also increased the importance of domestic sources of 
growth. Asia’s rising domestic demand needs to be supported by the development of a much 
broader range of financing options for healthcare, education and retirement. This will result in 
the  reduced  need  for  high  levels  of  precautionary  savings,  which  in  turn  will  contribute 
towards strengthening domestic demand. In addition, with rapid industrialisation, Asia is also 
experiencing an unprecedented rate of urbanisation. Between 1990 and 2010, Asia-Pacific’s 
urban  population  increased  from  29  percent  to  43  percent.  It  is  projected  that  another 
1.1 billion  people  will  be  living  in  cities  over  the  next  20  years,  increasing  the  urban 
population to 55 percent by 2030. 
The  region  will  also  be  faced  with  an  ageing  population  in  the  years  ahead,  with  Asia 
accounting for 62 percent of the global elderly population by 2050. This transition is already 
experienced in countries like Japan, South Korea and Hong Kong. But other countries in the 
region  are  also  converging  at  a  fast  rate.  Fundamental  reforms  in  social  and  economic 
policies  are  now  being  pursued  by  most  governments  in  the  region  to  avert  the  risk  that 
Asia’s  population  will  “grow  old  before growing rich”.  Such reforms  seek to  achieve  higher 
levels of income needed to sustain adequate provisions for welfare as the effects of ageing 
on the workforce and as rising healthcare and pension costs begin to set in. 
During  this  recent  two  decades,  there  has  also  been  a  discernible  shift  towards  voluntary 
private  provision  for  healthcare  and  retirement,  including  defined  contribution  pension 
schemes, given the rapid increase in life expectancy and medical care costs. This trend will 
become more pronounced as the need to broaden the coverage of welfare is taking place in 
an  environment  in  which  fiscal  consolidation  is  being  pursued.  As  of  2009,  the  value  of 
private  pension  funds  in  19  OECD  countries  was  almost  50  percent  of aggregate  national 
income.  Despite 
liabilities  could  be 
underestimated  by  up  to  50  percent  of  2010  GDP.  Efforts  to  close  this  gap  will  need  to 
include measures that result in greater risk sharing between governments, pension providers 
and  individuals,  the  development  of  capital  markets  to  better  support  the  increasing 
longevity, and extending the retirement age to be in tandem with the longer life span. While 
that  global  pension 
IMF  estimates 
this, 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
these trends present enormous opportunities for the insurance industry, it also presents the 
important challenge of building the capacity to support new, larger, more complex and more 
concentrated risks within a much more compressed timeframe. Risk management, product 
development  and  underwriting  capabilities  will  be  particularly  important  at  the  institutional 
level while at the system-wide level, closer attention will be needed to enhance the financial 
safety nets for the protection of policyholders and to avoid economic and social dislocations 
in  the  event  of  large-scale  insurance  failures.  In  the  advanced  economies,  the  insurance 
industry built such capacity over four centuries. Asia will have a much shorter time to achieve 
the same, in order and to ensure that the growth does not outstrip the industry’s capacity to 
manage the associated risks. 
This brings me to the second point which relates to the impact that the global financial crisis 
and the ensuing international regulatory reforms are having on the insurance industry. While 
insurance companies have generally held up well through the crisis, the industry now finds 
itself  at  the  intersection  of  major  regulatory  developments.  The  crisis  has  also  delivered  a 
major  blow  to  confidence  in  financial  institutions.  This  needs  to  be  regained.  Both  these 
factors will have an  important influence on the way  in  which the industry responds to new 
insurance  and  asset  accumulation  opportunities  in  Asia.  We  can  expect  that  the 
characteristics of growth in the industry going forward will therefore differ in some respects 
from the historical experience. 
The  changes  in  the  capital  rules  and  related  accounting  standards  aim to  achieve  a  more 
risk-based  and  market  consistent  valuations  of  insurance  assets  and  liabilities.  While  this 
should improve understanding and accounting for the risks inherent in insurance business, it 
will  also  require  insurers  to  more  carefully  manage  risk  and  capital,  while  recognizing  the 
prospect for increased short-term volatility. Going forward, innovations in insurance solutions 
will also need to take into account the higher regulatory expectations for more transparency, 
stronger  financial  buffers  against  unexpected  losses  and  the  requirements  to  do  more  to 
ensure that products offered are suitable to the different customer segments. Regulators will 
also be applying a much higher level of scrutiny on complex insurance products that increase 
risks  to  financial  stability.  Simplifying  insurance  products  and  institutional  structures,  and 
creating  a  strong  risk  culture  in  which  managing  risks  is  a  shared  responsibility  within 
institutions,  will  be  important  goals  to  ensure  that  the  risks  facing  an  insurer  are  well 
understood and effectively managed. 
The  third  point  concerns  the  far  reaching  implications  of  climate  change  for  the  insurance 
industry.  This  also  calls  for  the  industry  to  pursue  a  different  path  from  what  history  has 
shown  in  determining  the  growth  strategies  for  the  future.  Climate  change  has  been 
described as one of the biggest risks to the insurance industry. The cost of climate change, 
without action, is estimated to be at least 5% of global GDP each year, not to mention its 
significant impact on human society. Some of the effects of climate change are already being 
felt in increased frequency and severity of weather related natural disasters, water scarcity 
and crop failures. Asia’s exposure to climate change effects is also anticipated to increase. In 
2011, Asian countries accounted for 70 percent of 380 billion US dollars in economic losses 
from  natural  disasters,  however  only  a  quarter  of  that  was  insured.  The  recent  floods  in 
Thailand in 2011, was one of the costliest catastrophes in history. As insurance penetration 
rises  across  Asia,  property  insurers  will  face greater  concentration  of  exposures to  natural 
disasters.  Life  insurers  will  also  be  impacted  in  other  ways,  including  higher  incidences  of 
diseases while also experiencing pressures on long term returns on investment. 
The insurance industry therefore needs to be able to manage such exposures as well as act 
as  a  catalyst  for  societies  to  adapt  to  such  climate  change.  Risk  management  systems  in 
particular,  needs  to  be  able  to  capture  and  aggregate  exposures  to  such  event  risks  in  a 
timely  manner.  Also  important  is  to  incentivise  efficient  energy  use  through  innovative 
product  design  and  pricing.  In  addition,  the  industry  needs  to  come  together  to  seek  out 
opportunities  to  partner  with  government  and  non-governmental  organisations  to  facilitate 
improvements in urban planning, infrastructure design and building codes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The integration of environmental and social considerations in insurers’ corporate strategies 
and  operations  will  clearly  become  increasingly  important  to  long-term  sustainability.  This 
must also include a sustained focus on financial inclusion to achieve balanced and equitable 
growth.  Important  is  to  ensure  that  all  households  continue  to  have  meaningful  access  to 
financial products and services and that even for those that currently have financial access 
that  they  do  not  become  financially  excluded  especially  in  an  environment  where  financial 
products and services are becoming increasingly unaffordable or complex. 
It is estimated that up to 4 billion people worldwide require low-cost insurance protection. The 
low-income population in the Asia-Pacific accounts for about 70% of the global low income 
population. The need for protection from illnesses, natural disasters and other perils is more 
acute  for  this  vulnerable  segment.  Although  Asia  now  accounts  for  most  of  the  global 
microinsurance market, covering between 350 to 400 million people the overall participation 
rate is still low due to liquidity constraints in this segment of households, low financial literacy 
and  business  models  that  are  not  inclined  towards  such  low-income  segments.  Innovative 
solutions  and  continued  efforts  to  improve  financial  education  will  be  needed  to  achieve 
greater inroads in this area. 
The trends that are shaping the socio-economic landscape in East Asia suggest continued 
positive growth prospects for the insurance industry. This is despite a more modest outlook 
for  the  global  economy.  Indeed,  the  insurance  industry  will  assume  a  much  larger  role  in 
providing the essential financial underpinnings for economic activity and social development 
in Asia by addressing the wide range of risks that businesses and individuals face in this new 
and  more  challenging  environment.  While  historical  experience  in  the  development  of 
modern  insurance  presents  a  path  for  the  future  growth  of  the  insurance  industry  in  East 
Asia,  there  are  also  other  important  ingredients  for  sustainable  growth  going  forward.  The 
ability of insurers to internalize the new realities of the business and to execute strategies 
that  are  aligned  with  these  realities  will  provide  the  strongest  assurance  for  growth  with 
stability as the industry looks ahead to the future. With a clear view of the important role that 
insurers have in serving and supporting the economy, there is every potential for this to be 
realised. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
