K C Chakrabarty: Strengthening SMEs capabilities for global 
competitiveness 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Interactive Session, organized by the Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Mumbai, 
8 October 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. L Vadera in preparation of the address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri Govind Sankaranarayanan, Member of Banking, Finance and Economics Committee of 
Bombay  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  and  CFO  &  CEO  (Corporate  Affairs)  Tata 
Capital  Ltd.;  Shri  R.  Balaji,  Head,  Strategy  and  Marketing,  Mahindra  Finance;  Shri  Pralay 
Mondal, Senior Group President, Yes Bank; members of the Bombay Chambers, assembled 
guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is, indeed, a matter of great pleasure for me to be present 
here  today  at  this  interactive  session  on  “Strengthening  SMEs  Capabilities  for  Global 
Competitiveness” organized by the Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry and share 
some of my thoughts. The Bombay Chambers, which was established in 1836, is, I am told, 
India’s oldest Chamber of Commerce to serve its members without a break for 176 years. It 
has  more  than  4500  member  companies  with  a  large  proportion  of  them  being  small 
corporates. It has been associated with several historic developments in the city of Mumbai 
and I congratulate the Chamber for its achievements. It is a matter of great privilege for me to 
be  invited  to  address  the  members  of  the  Chamber  and  I  thank  the  Chamber  for  this 
opportunity. 
The  current  economic  situation,  with  political  and  economic  integration  and  technological 
breakthroughs,  warrants  the  need  to  make  our  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (SMEs) 
globally  competitive.  One  of  the  results  of  globalization  is  that  the  costs  of  distance  have 
been reduced dramatically. Businesses can operate in more markets and transactions can 
be done much faster and at lower cost. Similarly, consumers have more insight into where to 
buy the best products and services at the best rates. As a result, even smaller and locally 
orientated businesses have to see themselves in a global context. SMEs have to, now, deal 
with increased competition as a result of globalization. Instead of competing merely with local 
companies,  SMEs  now  compete  with  various  international  competitors,  be  they  MNCs  or 
other SMEs. Competition brings pressures on SMEs to reduce costs, innovate and manage 
knowledge  in  similar  ways  to  large  companies,  often  without  having  surplus  resources  to 
invest for such activities, in a fast changing environment. 
I appreciate the initiative taken by the Bombay Chambers for organizing this session since 
SMEs  play  a  vital  role  in  national  development.  Fostering  a  dynamic  Micro,  Small  and 
Medium  Enterprise  (MSME)  sector  is  seen  as  a  priority  amongst  economic  development 
goals,  in  both  developed  and  emerging  economies.  MSMEs  are  a  primary  driver  for  job 
creation  and GDP  growth. They  greatly  contribute  to  economic  diversification,  exports  and 
social stability. As per data released by the Ministry of MSME, Government of India, there 
are  about  26.1  million  enterprises  in  this  sector.  The  sector  accounts  for  45  per  cent  of 
manufactured output and 8 per cent of the GDP. MSMEs contributed close to 40 per cent of 
all exports from the country and employed nearly 59.7 million people, which is next only to 
the  agricultural  sector.  Equally  importantly,  they  serve  as  a  feeder  line  for  the  large 
corporates of tomorrow as it is from among these small companies that the MNCs and large 
corporates will emerge. There are numerous examples of large corporates of today, which 
began as small business ventures some time back. 
I  firmly  believe  that  the  next  level  of  growth  in  the  economy  will  have  to  come  from  the 
MSMEs.  It  is  this  sector  that  can  propel  India’s  growth  rate  from  around  5.5  per  cent  at 
present to a sustainable 9 plus per cent in the medium-to long-term, which is considered as 
India’s desirable growth rate. In fact, it is not possible to think of a healthy Indian economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
without  a  vibrant  and  healthy  MSME  sector.  However,  this  is  not  possible  without  SMEs 
developing their capabilities to compete at a global scale, and hence, the relevance of the 
topic of today’s deliberations. 
Access to finance 
A.  
The MSMEs primarily rely on bank finance for their operations. For small corporates, access 
to timely and adequate finance is a priority, provided the rates charged are not exploitative. 
Over  the  years,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  credit  extended  to  this  sector  by 
banks. As at the end of March 2012, the total outstanding credit provided by all Scheduled 
Commercial  Banks  (SCBs)  to  the  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises  (MSE)  sector  stood  at 
Rs.5286.17  billion  as  against  Rs.4785.27  billion  in  March  2011  and  Rs.  3622.91  billion  in 
March 2010. Despite the increase in credit outstanding to the sector, the MSME borrowers 
feel  that  the  lenders  are  not  doing  enough  for  the  MSMEs  and  are  catering  more  to  the 
needs of the large corporates. 
Problem faced by banks in lending to MSMEs 
B.  
Commercial banks are reluctant to service MSMEs for a number of reasons, though at times, 
not  based  on  facts.  MSMEs  are  regarded  by  creditors  as  high-risk  borrowers  because  of 
insufficient  assets  and  low  capitalization,  vulnerability  to  market  fluctuations  and  high 
mortality  rates.  Information  asymmetry  arising  from  SMEs’  lack  of  accounting  records, 
inadequate  financial  statements  or  business  plans  also  makes  it  difficult  for  creditors  to 
assess  the  creditworthiness  of  potential  SME  proposals.  Besides,  high  administrative/ 
transaction  costs  of  lending  to  small  amounts  may  not  make  SME  financing  a  profitable 
business. 
To  encourage  commercial  banks  to  lend  to  SMEs,  the  Government  and  Reserve  Bank  of 
India  have  an  important  role  to  play  by  setting  out  a  policy  framework  for  channeling 
adequate funds to the SME sector. SMEs, on their part, need to be more transparent while 
representing their businesses and future plans before bankers so that they gain the trust and 
confidence of creditors to extend finance to them. 
Steps taken by Government of India / Reserve Bank of India 
C.  
Recognizing the important role played by MSMEs in economic development and its sizeable 
contribution to employment and GDP, and realizing that financial access is critical for MSME 
growth  and  development,  Government  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India  are  taking  the  lead  in 
supporting  initiatives  that  improve  access  to  finance.  In  view  of  the  high  level  of  financial 
exclusion in this sector (93%), the drive to universal financial access, including SME finance, 
is no longer a policy choice, but a compulsion. The Reserve Bank of India has intensified a 
number  of  measures  and  endorsed  quantitative  access  targets  over  the  last  few  years  to 
further financial inclusion. Let me very briefly touch upon a few of them. 
With an objective of ensuring uniform progress in provision of banking services in all parts of 
the country, banks were advised to draw up a roadmap to provide banking services through 
a banking outlet in every unbanked village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2012. 
The  Reserve  Bank  advised  banks  that  such  banking  services  need  not  necessarily  be 
extended through a brick and mortar branch but could be provided also through any of the 
various  forms  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  –  based  models, 
including Business Correspondents (BCs). As at the end of March 2012, as reported by the 
State Level Bankers’ Committees of various States/ Union Territories, banking outlets have 
been opened in 74199 villages across the various States in the country. This comprises of 
2493  branches,  69374  business  correspondents  and  2332  other  modes  like  rural  ATMs, 
mobile vans, etc. The process for ensuring coverage of villages with population below 2000 
is underway. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To ensure enhanced credit flow to the sector, in terms of the recommendations of the Prime 
Minister’s  Task  Force  on  MSMEs  constituted  by  the  Government  of  India,  banks  were 
advised  to  achieve  a  20  per  cent  year-on-year  growth  in  credit  to  micro  and  small 
enterprises; with allocation of 60% of the MSE advances to micro enterprises, which is to be 
achieved in stages viz. 50% in the year 2010–11, 55% in the year 2011–12 and 60% in the 
year  2012–13  and  achieve  a  10%  annual  growth  in  number  of  micro  enterprise  accounts. 
The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the achievement of targets by banks on a quarterly 
basis. The matter is followed up with the laggard banks to know their constraints and impress 
upon them the need to devise strategies to gear up the credit mechanism for the sector. 
As the MSE borrowers, especially new generation entrepreneurs, do not have collaterals to 
offer  to  avail  of  bank  finance,  we  have,  in  terms  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Working 
Group  constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  review  the  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme 
(CGS)  of  the  Credit  Guarantee  Fund  Trust  for  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises  (CGTMSE), 
mandated banks, on May 6, 2010, to provide collateral free loans to the MSE sector up to 
Rs.10 lakh, which was increased from Rs. 5 lakh earlier and the banks, in turn, could take 
cover for the collateral free credit facilities under CGS. 
All Scheduled Commercial Banks have also been advised on May 4, 2009, to review and put 
in place an MSE Loan policy, Restructuring / rehabilitation policy and Non-discretionary One 
Time Settlement Scheme for recovery of non-performing loans, duly approved by their Board 
of  Directors.  Banks  were  advised  in  December  2009  to  give  wide  publicity  to  the 
Non-discretionary One Time Settlement Scheme for recovery of non-performing loans for the 
MSE sector by placing it on their website and through other possible modes of dissemination. 
formidable  challenge 
To  address  the  complaints  received  from  various  Industry  Associations/  Chambers  that 
banks  are  not  acknowledging  their  loan  applications,  we  have,  on  January  4,  2012, 
mandated banks to acknowledge all loan applications, submitted manually or online, by their 
MSME  borrowers  and  ensure  that  a  running  serial  number  is  recorded  on  the  application 
form and on the acknowledgement receipt. 
As the lack of financial literacy, operational skills, including accounting and finance, business 
planning,  etc.  represents 
for  MSE  borrowers,  we  have,  on 
August 1, 2012, advised banks to play a more proactive role in the affairs of their MSE clients 
by providing them with financial literacy and consultancy support. For this, banks could either 
separately  set  up  special  cells  at  their  branches,  or  vertically  integrate  this  function  in  the 
Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) set up by them, as per their comparative advantage. We 
have also stated that the bank staff should be trained through customised training programs 
to meet the specific needs of the sector. 
On  the  issue  of  alternate  sources  of  credit,  dedicated  Exchange  for  MSMEs,  marketing, 
technology up-gradation and infrastructure, the PM’s Task Force has examined the issues 
and has made several recommendations to address the bottlenecks. The implementation of 
the  recommendations  in  a  time  bound  manner  is  being  monitored  by  the  Government  of 
India. 
D.  
What more needs to be done? 
Need to relook business processes and strategy and to innovate 
i.  
Globalization is bringing new opportunities and the SME entrepreneurs have to seize these 
opportunities.  For  this,  MSME  entrepreneurs  have  to  have  a  relook  at  their  business 
strategies and innovate. To successfully do so, four major aspects need to be kept in mind. 
Firstly,  MSME  entrepreneurs  have  to  apply  the  discipline  of  innovation  to  identify  and 
develop new business. As rightly pointed out by Peter F. Drucker, innovation requires us to 
systematically 
in 
that  have  already  occurred 
identify  changes 
the  business  – 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
demographics,  in  value,  in  technology  –  and  then  look  at  them  as  opportunities. 
Entrepreneurs  have  also  to  be  prepared  to  face  the  fact  that  new  inventions  or 
product  /  service  is  not  always  successful  in  the  market  for  which  they  were  originally 
designed, but could be successful in a totally different market. He should be on the lookout 
for new opportunities for application of the product instead of focusing on the original markets 
alone.  Secondly,  business  should  pay  attention  to  cash  flows.  Entrepreneurs  believe  that 
profit is what matters most in a new enterprise. But profit is secondary. It is the cash flow that 
matters. A business that grows fast devours cash. Constant investments have to be made to 
just  keep  even.  Thirdly,  when  a  business  grows,  it  is  necessary  to  create  a  management 
team.  Young  entrepreneurs  cannot  pay  to  bring  in  a  management  team.  It  is,  therefore, 
necessary  to  identify  the  core  competencies  of  the  people  working  with  you  so  that  your 
business  is geared  to  seize  the  opportunities  opening  up. This  planning should  take  place 
well in advance. Lastly, when the business is a success, the entrepreneur needs to ask what 
the  business  needs  at  this  stage  and  whether  he  is  concentrating  on  the  right  things.  As 
successful entrepreneurs, they have gained experience and wisdom from their mistakes and 
going forward, it is necessary to ensure that the same mistakes are not repeated. 
 Access to equity capital 
ii. 
Access to Equity capital is a genuine problem. At present, there is almost negligible flow of 
equity  capital  into  this  sector.  Availability  of  sound  equity  capital  base  is  essential  as  it 
enhances the loss absorptive capacity of new ventures. Absence of equity capital may pose 
a  serious  challenge  to  development  of  knowledge-based  industries,  particularly  those  that 
are sought to be promoted by the first-generation entrepreneurs with the requisite expertise 
and knowledge. Most MSMEs, particularly the knowledge based enterprises, when starting 
off, have negative cash flows and no collateral and therefore, find it difficult to access debt 
capital  or  bank  financing.  Venture/  Risk  capital  is  often  a  more  appropriate  financing 
instrument  for  high-growth-potential  and  start-up  SMEs.  Firms  typically  look  for  venture 
capital to provide them with the financing they need, to expand, break into new markets and 
grow  faster.  Thus,  the  ability  of  MSMEs  (especially  those  involving  innovations  and  new 
technologies) to access alternative sources of capital like angel funds/risk capital needs to be 
enhanced  considerably  to  encourage  and  develop  entrepreneurship.  For  this  purpose, 
removing fiscal/regulatory impediments to the use of such funds by the MSMEs should be 
considered  on  priority.  There  is  a  demand  for  a  dedicated  Exchange  for  MSMEs.  In  the 
Union Budget 2012–13 the Finance Minister has announced to set up a Rs.50 billion India 
Opportunities  Venture  Fund  with  SIDBI  to  enhance  the  availability  of  equity  to  the  MSME 
sector.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  PM’s  Task  Force  on  MSMEs,  the  Bombay 
Stock  Exchange  and  the  National  Stock  Exchange  have  also  set  up  separate  dedicated 
exchange / platform for listing and trading of shares of SMEs, making it easier for them to 
raise equity capital. 
Factoring services 
iii.  
Timely  payments  from  customers  will  help  SMEs  in  reducing  their  working  capital 
requirements, leading to lower interest costs, improved profitability and a positive impact on 
the long-term health and sustainability of India’s SME sector. Delays in settlement of dues 
adversely affect the recycling of funds and business operations of the SME units. A study of 
5000  SMEs  by  CRISIL  shows  that  high  quantum  of  receivables  is  an  endemic  problem 
across industry sectors and geographies in the SME space. Smaller SMEs, perhaps due to 
their  lower  bargaining  power,  are  in  a  more  disadvantageous  position  with  weaker 
receivables positions. The CRISIL study estimates that SMEs can enhance profits by at least 
15 percent if they receive payments on time from their large corporate customers. 
It is, therefore, critical to ensure that the small entities are able to raise liquidity against their 
receivables. This problem can be institutionally tackled by factoring, which provides liquidity 
to SMEs against their receivables and can be an alternative source of working capital. World 
over, factoring is a preferred route of accessing  working capital for SMEs and even larger 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
organisations. Some banks and financial institutions in India have already launched factoring 
services and I would urge more banks to offer such services, particularly for the MSMEs. To 
provide a legislative framework for factoring services, the Parliament has recently passed the 
Factoring  Regulation  Bill  that  would  address  delays  in  payment  and  liquidity  problems  of 
micro and small enterprises. 
Access to technology 
iv.  
With the increasing competition, globalization and the uncertainty due to the global downturn, 
it is essential for SMEs to be technology literate. SMEs will have to continuously incorporate 
the  latest  technology  into  their  production  processes  as  well  as  in  their  marketing  and 
management  functions,  to  cut  costs,  gain  efficiency  and  consistency.  There  are  additional 
challenges  to  be  met.  The  influx  of  low-cost  products  from  China  has  made  it  even  more 
difficult for Indian manufacturers to compete solely on the price front. China is considered the 
world’s  manufacturing  backyard,  due  to  its  low  manufacturing  and  labour  costs  when 
compared  to  those  elsewhere.  What  SMEs  need  today  is  knowledge  and  access  to  new 
technology. In fact, innovation and technology are the two tools MSMEs have with them that 
need  to  be  capitalized  fully  to  compete  with  firms  much  larger  in  size.  SMEs  will  have  to 
continuously  strive  to  incorporate  the  latest  technology  into  their  production  processes  as 
well  as  in  their  marketing  and  management  functions,  to  cut  costs,  gain  efficiency  and 
consistency. Let me reiterate that technology should not be adopted just for the sake of it, but 
should be aimed at improving the quality of products and bringing greater productivity and 
efficiency. 
Technology,  however,  does  not  come  free.  The  high  costs  of  installing  and  maintaining 
information systems and recruiting skilled workforce to operate them would be a concern for 
many smaller firms. The new concepts such as cloud computing, which enable collaborative 
sharing  of  resources,  facilitate  even  smaller  firms  to  leverage  on  advanced  technologies. 
Such  arrangements  also  free  up  critical  resources  of  MSMEs,  which  could  be  used  for 
focusing on core activities. MSMEs, therefore, need to be updated on the latest technological 
developments. The Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs recommended several measures 
having  a  bearing  on  the  functioning  of  MSMEs,  viz.,  credit,  marketing,  labour,  exit  policy, 
infrastructure/technology/skill development and taxation. 
Coping with the economic downturn and checking sickness in MSME units 
v.  
The world is presently facing economic crisis due to which economies world over are facing 
slowdown in economic activities. These are, indeed, challenging times for all of us. In order 
to  cope  with  the  downturn,  I  would  urge  upon  the  MSMEs  to  plan  for  the  future  and  be 
transparent in their dealing with the banks. They should approach the banks well in advance 
with their problems and articulate what they specifically want from the banks. Transparency 
in approach is the key. Very often the entrepreneur tends to mix his own transactions with 
that  of  the  business.  They  should  delink  the  two  and  plan  well  in  advance  as  to  what  is 
needed  for  the  business.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  timely  detection  of 
sickness is critical to make the possibility of revival of potentially viable sick units bright. In 
order to hasten the process of identification of a unit as sick, a proposal for modifying the 
extant  definition  of  sickness,  in  line  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Working  Group  on 
Rehabilitation of Sick SMEs set up by Reserve Bank of India, is under consideration of the 
Government of India and Reserve Bank of India. 
Skilled manpower and managerial talent 
vi.  
Human  resource  development  issues  are  fundamental  in  improving  SME  competitiveness. 
The ability of SMEs to adjust to the competitive pressures that come with trade liberalization 
and globalization will depend on the level of skills available domestically. It is, indeed, ironic 
that in a nation of more than a billion individuals, skilled labour is cited as scarce. India needs 
to capitalize on its unique demographic dividend (it has a very large and young workforce). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The Government of India and various State governments have been implementing a number 
of schemes and programs over the years for skill development. The Rural Self Employment 
Training Institutes (RSETIs) are also working in this direction. However, given the growing 
requirements of the MSME sector and the huge ‘demographic capital’ we possess, significant 
efforts  are  still  needed  for  skill  and  entrepreneurship  development.  In  addition  to  the 
initiatives taken by Government agencies, the industry has to contribute to building up a large 
base of appropriately skilled workforce available for employment in MSMEs. There should be 
training programmes by the industry associations to upgrade the skills of the workers and to 
acquaint  them  with  the  skills  compatible  with  the  new  technology.  There  is  a  need  to 
incorporate entrepreneurship training in school curricula. Several studies have cited lack of 
entrepreneurship  skills  as  a  major  shortcoming  for  women  entrepreneurs,  which  can  be 
addressed  by  incorporation  of  entrepreneurship  training  in  secondary  school  curricula. 
Investment needs to be made in a big way on skill and entrepreneurship development. 
Corporate governance 
vii.  
Weak corporate governance of small firms, burdened further with poor availability of crucial 
inputs, has made these firms extremely vulnerable. Good governance practices in SMEs will 
help them grow or attract additional investors. The absence of good corporate governance 
practices makes it difficult for them to access finance from banks or investors. Adoption of 
sound  corporate  governance  by  SMEs  is  indispensable  for  taking  this  sector  to  a  higher 
growth  trajectory.  The  lack  of  corporate  governance  is  attributable  to  lack  of  awareness 
about corporate governance practices and its impact on corporate performance. There is a 
need to educate SMEs about benefits of adopting sound corporate governance practices and 
industry associations have a key role to play in it. 
Role of MSME Associations 
viii.  
The  MSME  Associations  and  Chambers  of  Commerce  have  an  important  role  to  play  in 
stepping up credit to this segment. Asymmetry of information and lack of transparency and 
reliability  of  data  has  been  a  major  concern  for  organizations  dealing  with  MSMEs  world 
over.  The  Associations  need  to,  therefore,  proactively  engage  themselves  in  organising 
workshops  and  training  programmes  for  their  members  to  enlighten  them  about  cash  flow 
cycles, various financial products, accounting practices, etc. In this regard, I would urge upon 
the MSME Associations and Chambers of Commerce to collaborate with banks, NIBM or any 
other training institute in banking and finance, basic accountancy and information technology 
for the benefit of MSMEs. 
Separate umbrella organization 
ix. 
It  is  felt  that  a  centralized  umbrella  organization  providing  focused  attention  to  the 
development of the MSME sector as a whole, including the unorganized sector, may help in 
bringing the sector in proper focus of the policy makers. Although the Ministry of MSME, RBI 
and  SIDBI  have  taken  several  initiatives  in  the  promotion,  financing  and  development  of 
MSMEs  in  the  country,  there  should  be  an  umbrella  organization  for  overseeing  the 
coordinated development of the MSME sector with a view to fully exploit its growth potential. 
This umbrella organization may focus not only on the availability of funds but also provide all 
round  support  including  technological  support,  design  output,  facilitating  raw  material 
supplies, marketing support, etc. 
Conclusion 
The  MSME  sector  is  vital  for  the  nation’s  economic  progress  and  hence,  needs  to  be 
carefully  nurtured  and  supported.  MSMEs  are  the  best  vehicle  for  inclusive  growth  in  the 
country,  to  create  local  demand  and  consumption.  Besides  supporting  employment 
generation  activities,  they  also  act  as  feeder  lines  for  the  MNCs  and  large  corporates  of 
tomorrow. I, therefore, urge all banks and financial institutions to implement our guidelines in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
both letter and spirit to increase the credit flow to this vital sector. I would encourage SMEs, 
on  their  part,  to  be  transparent,  particularly  when  in  distress,  so  as  to  gain  the  trust  and 
confidence of lenders. Besides, SMEs need to constantly innovate, both in terms of products 
and processes and have a wide vision, so that they are able to spot new opportunities for 
their  products/  services.  MSME  Associations  and  Chambers  of  Commerce  also  have  an 
important role to play in this formidable task of building a robust MSME sector by generating 
awareness about good practices. With the concerted efforts of all the stakeholders, I am sure 
that the MSME sector would become globally competitive and offer significant contribution to 
India’s economic development. 
I congratulate the Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry for organizing this interaction 
and  once  again  thank  the  Chamber  for  providing  me  the  opportunity  to  be  present  here 
today. 
Thank You. 
References 
G20  Seoul  Summit  (October  2010),  Scaling-Up  SME  Access  to  Financial  Services  in  the 
Developing World. 
Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) website, Sub-Group on SME Finance, G20. 
The US Agency for International Development – Report on Development of Strategy Options 
for SME Financial Literacy, April 2009, for the South African market of SME’s. 
Report of the PM’s Task Force on MSMEs, January 2010 (Chairman: Shri T.K.A.Nair) 
Report of the Working Group on Rehabilitation of sick SMEs (Chairman: Dr.K.C.Chakrabarty) 
Report  of  the  Working  Group  to  Review  the  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  of  the  Credit 
Guarantee Fund Trust for MSEs (Chairman: Shri V. K. Sharma) 
OECD background document for the Workshop on “Enhancing the Competitiveness of SMEs 
through Innovation” at the Bologna conference, Italy, 2000. 
Paper on Prospects and Challenges of SME’s in India, by Bharath.P, Naveen Rajesh, Moras. 
A.J. Institute of Management (AJIM) Mangalore. 
SMEs in India: Issues and possibilities in times of Globalization by Keshab Das 
“Managing in the Next Society” by Peter F. Drucker 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
