Njuguna Ndung’u: Anti-money laundering and combating the financing 
of terrorism in Kenya 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
Anti-Money  Laundering  (AML)  National  Stakeholders  Forum,  Kenya  School  of  Monetary 
Studies, Nairobi, 4 October 2012. 
 Hon. Oburu Odinga, Assistant Minister for Finance; 
Chief Executives of Commercial Banks;  
Mr. John Wanyela, Chairman, Anti-Money Laundering Advisory Board;  
Eminent Ambassadors;  
Our Development Partners;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I feel honoured and privileged to be with you at the start of this important interactive forum 
that  brings  together  financial  sector  stakeholders  to  deliberate  on  the  important  subject  of 
Anti-Money Laundering and Combating of Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) with an aim of 
creating awareness on AML issues. 
Today I have a humble undertaking, namely of inviting our Chief Guest; the Hon. Assistant 
Minister for Finance to deliver the keynote address and officially open the Forum. But before 
I invite him to the podium, I wish to make a few remarks to bring delegates to speed on the 
status of Kenya on AML/CFT issues. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  let  me  begin  by  extending  a  very  warm  welcome  to  all  our 
participants to the Kenya School of Monetary Studies. The School is working together with 
the Financial Reporting Centre (FRC) with the support of the Danish Government to create 
an extensive AML/CFT programme for the next two years to raise awareness as well as train 
Reporting  Entities,  Law  enforcement  Authorities  and  personnel  in  the  FRC  on  Anti-Money 
Laundering initiatives. As such, today’s forum marks the start of the Danish funded project 
which will run over the next 24 months. The project includes activities whose objectives are 
to raise awareness amongst key stakeholders engaged in the fight against money laundering 
and terrorism financing. 
As you are all well aware, Kenya has made significant strides in protecting the integrity of its 
financial sector from illicit financial crimes. The Government has not only shown a high level 
of  political  commitment  in  overseeing  the  stability  of  the  country’s  financial  sector  but  has 
also been actively engaged in overseeing the implementation of requisite laws and measures 
to ensure that our financial systems are adequately protected against the financial crimes of 
money laundering and the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). 
At  the  Beirut  review  meeting  last  month,  we  argued  that  Kenya  is  caught  up  in  a  triple 
problem of implementing a new constitution and formulating accompanying bills, building and 
safeguarding strong institutions and moving fast on FATF deficiencies. The fourth dimension 
is  that  Kenya  had  to  go  to  war  to  fight  terrorism;  this  is  beyond  financial  risks  but  also 
national sovereignty. 
We need: 
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
Time to finalize all these interlinked issues.  
Capacity building support.  
To adopt, replicate and build a strong FRC and the best model in the world.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And with these Kenya will succeed.  
Whilst  the  focus  of  this  Forum  today  will  be  to  raise  awareness  and  sensitize  you  on 
upcoming programs on issues surrounding AML/CFT, allow me to briefly touch on a number 
of  initiatives  that  have  been  undertaken  by  the  Central  Bank  to  address  some  of  these 
issues.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  is  mandated  to  foster  the  financial 
integrity  of  the  financial  system  in  the  country.  The  Bank  has  continually  enhanced  the 
regulation and supervision of the financial system in order to improve the sector’s integrity. 
As part of our efforts in ensuring appropriate and effective oversight, the central bank first 
issued AML Guidelines in 2000. These Guidelines were revised in 2006 and are currently in 
the process of being reviewed to reflect the prevailing international best practice and to align 
them with the proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2009 (POCAMLA).  
Over the last two years, the Central Bank has issued regular AML/CFT guidelines to financial 
institutions to further support and enhance the implementation of POCAMLA. The guidance 
has  covered  various  issues  such  as  the  operationalization  of  the  AML  Act,  Suspicious 
Transaction  Reporting  and  measures  to  be  adopted  by  financial  institutions  to  combat  the 
financing of terrorism. The Central Bank has also revised the Forex Bureau Guidelines so as 
to  align  these  guidelines  to  POCAMLA.  On  the  Microfinance  front,  the  Microfinance 
Regulations and the Agency Guidelines require Deposit Taking Microfinance institutions and 
their agents to implement AML/CFT measures. All these measures are aimed at ensuring the 
integrity of the financial sector.  
As you may be aware, Kenya is now a leading light in financial inclusion. The systems and 
practices  we  have  put  in  place  to  deepen  financial  inclusion  are  now  considered  as 
acceptable  best  practices  and  are  being  emulated  by  other  jurisdictions.  The  challenge 
before  us  on  this  front  is  to  maintain  the  delicate  balance  between  financial  inclusion  and 
financial  integrity.  By  putting  in  place the  required  measures to  address  money  laundering 
and terrorism financing in the financial sector while at the same time deepening our financial 
markets will therefore enable us maintain this critical balance.  
Kenya  like  other  developing  economies  is  quite  vulnerable  to  money  laundering  and 
terrorism financing due to a number of displacement factors; key amongst them being a high 
volume of cash based transactions, lack of an adequate legal framework and the existence 
of alternative remittance avenues. I am glad to note that the Government of Kenya has taken 
a  keen  interest  on  these  issues  and  has,  and  is  continuing  to  undertake  a  number  of 
initiatives  towards  addressing  these  challenges.  The  Central  Bank,  in  addition  to  the 
initiatives  I  have  just  mentioned,  is  developing  Regulations  to  strengthen  the  money 
remittance sector.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  It  is  my  sincere  hope  that  this  forum  will  contribute  to  a  better 
understanding of the AML/CFT issues affecting the Country and will generate ideas that will 
bring the fight against the organized crimes up to international standards.  
It  is  now  my  pleasure  to  invite  the  Hon.  Assistant  Minister,  Ministry  of Finance,  Dr. Oburu 
Odinga, to address you and to officially open this forum.  
Thank You All. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
