Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 9 October 2012. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a pleasure to be back here in Parliament and in front of your Committee for our regular 
exchange of views.  
• 
As  you  know,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  recently  taken  important 
decisions  to  address  severe  distortions  in  government  bond  markets.  The  ECB 
stands  ready  to  undertake,  under  appropriate  conditions,  what  we  have  called 
outright monetary transactions (OMTs). These provide a fully effective backstop to 
avoid destructive scenarios that might threaten price stability in the euro area.  
Our OMT announcements have helped to support financial market confidence. The 
ECB’s  actions  can  help  to  build  a  bridge.  But  the  bridge  must  have  a  clear 
destination. 
Reaching that destination involves three processes: first, full implementation of fiscal 
consolidation  and  structural  reforms  to  enhance  competitiveness;  second,  full 
implementation  of  financial  sector  reform;  and  third,  completion  of  a  genuine 
economic  and  monetary  union.  The  establishment  of  a  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) is a key step in these processes.  
  Today, I will review economic and monetary developments since July. I will then explain in 
some detail the rationale and modalities of the OMTs. I will end by sharing my views on one 
of the four building blocks of a genuine economic and monetary union, namely the financial 
market union. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
Let me start with the economy. Since our last meeting, the ECB has left its key interest rates 
unchanged:  the  main  refinancing  rate  stands  at  0.75%;  and  the  deposit  rate  at  0%;  the 
marginal lending facility at 1.50%;.  
Economic activity contracted in the second quarter of 2012. Looking ahead, we expect weak 
economic activity in the near term and only a very gradual recovery after that. The risks to 
this outlook are on the downside, mainly related to the tensions in several euro area financial 
markets. 
Average inflation in the euro area stood at 2.7% in September, reflecting indirect taxes and 
high  energy  prices.  It  should  decline  to  below  2%  in  the  course  of  2013.  Underlying  price 
pressures  should  remain  moderate  given  modest  economic  growth  and  well-anchored 
long-term  inflation  expectations.  Risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments  are  broadly 
balanced. 
Our  monetary  analysis  paints  a  picture  consistent  with  price  stability.  In  particular,  the 
underlying pace of monetary expansion remains subdued. Loan dynamics are also subdued 
as a result of weak demand for credit but also restrictions on the supply of credit in some 
euro area countries.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Outright monetary transactions (OMTs) 
2.  
Let me now explain the decision announced by the ECB’s Governing Council in September 
on outright monetary transactions. 
The impact on financial and monetary conditions of past reductions in key ECB interest rates 
differed considerably within the euro area. For example, in some countries, following cuts in 
key  ECB  interest  rates,  the  rates  charged  by  the  banking  system  for  credit  to  the  real 
economy have declined only a little, if at all. In other countries, ECB rate cuts have been fully 
passed through. 
One reason for this difference is that the cost of bank credit to firms is inevitably linked to the 
cost of market funding for the banks themselves. If there are fears about potential destructive 
scenarios, the cost of funding for banks can be affected asymmetrically across the euro area. 
This means that two firms that are otherwise identical and have the same creditworthiness 
have benefited to a different extent from past cuts in key ECB interest rates, merely because 
they are located in different countries.  
It  is  that  distortion  in  financing  costs  that  hinders  the  smooth functioning  of  credit markets 
and the transmission of monetary policy. It is that distortion which keeps some countries in 
what I have previously described as a “bad equilibrium”. And it is that distortion which falls 
clearly within our mandate to address. 
To counter the impairment of monetary policy transmission and to preserve the singleness of 
the ECB’s monetary policy, the Governing Council decided to undertake outright monetary 
transactions.  
OMT  interventions  in government  bond markets  provide  a fully  effective  backstop  to  avoid 
destructive scenarios that might threaten price stability in the euro area. The aim is to ensure 
that the ECB’s monetary policy stance is transmitted more evenly to the real economy across 
euro area.  
The  ECB  will  conduct  OMTs  if  and  as  long  as  countries  comply  with  strict  and  effective 
conditions attached to an appropriate programme via the European Financial Stability Facility 
and the European Stability Mechanism.  
Conditionality preserves the primacy of our price stability mandate and ensures that OMTs 
will  not  compensate for a  lack  of fiscal  consolidation.  Conditionality  in  particular  preserves 
the incentives for governments to continue with economic and fiscal adjustments. And only if 
conditionality is fulfilled will the OMTs be successful in moving an economy towards what we 
might call a “good equilibrium”.  
OMTs  are  ex-ante  unlimited  but,  as  I  have  just  explained,  they  are  not  unconditional.  Exit 
from OMTs would take place once their objectives have been achieved or when there is a 
failure to comply with a programme. OMTs would not take place while a given programme is 
under review and they  would resume after the review period once programme compliance 
has been assured. 
Consistent  with  the  Treaty  prohibition  of  monetary  financing,  the  ECB  will  only  conduct 
transactions  on  secondary  markets,  buying  from  investors  and  not  from  governments. 
Purchases will focus in particular on government bonds with remaining maturities of between 
one  and  three  years.  This  is  in  line  with  the  traditional  focus  of  central  bank  monetary 
operations. 
The ECB will accept the same treatment as private or other creditors with respect to bonds 
purchased in the context of OMTs. And the ECB will be fully transparent on its OMTs. We will 
report weekly on total portfolio holdings, and monthly on the average duration of our holdings 
and the breakdown by country.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial market union 
3.  
Let me now turn to the other topic you have chosen for today’s exchange of views, namely 
the financial market union. 
The  ECB  welcomes  the  European  Commission’s  proposal  for  a  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism,  which  is  very  much  in  line  with  the  statement  of  the  euro  area  summit  of 
29 June 2012. We  are  looking  forward  to  working  closely  with  the  European  Parliament  in 
this  field.  I  am  confident  that  the  excellent  cooperation  we  have  established  so  far  will 
continue with matters of financial supervision. 
Let me here focus on three issues that are key to setting the stage for the new supervisory 
framework  in  the  euro  area: first,  the  principle  of  separation  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial supervision; second, the possible participation of non-euro area Member States in 
the SSM; and third, the accountability framework. 
On  the  first  issue  of  the  separation  of  monetary  and  supervisory  functions,  we  are  not 
entering uncharted territory. Many central banks around the world – including a large majority 
of  the  national  central  banks  in  the  Eurosystem  –  combine  monetary  and  supervisory 
functions. 
Proper  arrangements  to  prevent  monetary  policy  being  inappropriately  affected  by  the 
supervisory role have been devised in several countries. I am confident that we can establish 
suitable arrangements in the euro area, drawing in part on their experiences. 
The  Commission’s  proposal  provides  a  solid  basis  for  achieving  that  goal.  By  having  the 
Supervisory Board carry out all regular supervisory activities performed directly by the ECB, 
we  will  go  a  long  way  towards  avoiding  possible  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  two 
functions. In addition, we are examining internal procedures that would separate the relevant 
work-streams supporting the two functions.  
The  second  key  issue  for  the  supervisory  framework  is  the  possibility  of  non-euro  area 
Member States participating in the SSM. Let us first take a step back and remind ourselves 
that  the  key  reason  why  we  are  building  the  financial  market  union  is  because  of  what  is 
happening in the euro area. We are building it to break the vicious circle between sovereigns 
and banks, the manifestations of which are much more acute and disruptive in a monetary 
union. That is why we need the SSM in the single currency area.  
At the same time, it is clear that we have to create the financial market union while sustaining 
– and even strengthening – the single market. Both the single currency and the single market 
are key pillars of growth and prosperity in Europe. Both should be maintained – indeed, both 
should be enhanced.  
The  ECB  welcomes  the  possibility  of  involvement  of  non-euro  area  Member  States  in  the 
SSM. The participation of additional Member States would provide an even stronger boost to 
the completion of the single market. 
That  being  said,  for  an  entity  such  as  the  ECB,  whose  key  legal  powers  and  key 
decision-making  fora  are  limited  to  the  euro  area,  imposing  obligations  on  –  and  granting 
corresponding rights to – non-euro area Member States raises a number of legal issues. Our 
legal  services  –  together  with  those  of  the  Commission  and  the  European  Council  –  are 
examining closely the possible modalities of participation of non-euro area  Member States 
within the legal constraints of our Statute.  
The third key issue for the supervisory framework is one that I suspect is particularly close to 
your  hearts:  how  the  ECB  will  be  accountable  for  its  supervisory  actions  to  the  citizens  of 
Europe  and  their  elected  representatives.  While  the  independence  of  the  supervisory 
function is important, so is its accountability. They are, after all, two sides of the same coin. 
Given the nature of the tasks of supervision and the need for operational cooperation with 
other  authorities  –  notably  where  fiscal  costs  are  concerned  –  separate  and  robust 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
mechanisms  of  accountability  have  to  be  in  place  to  legitimise  the  high  degree  of 
independence.  The  Commission  proposal  foresees,  in  particular,  that  the  SSM  will  be 
accountable to the European Parliament and the European Council. 
Questions  have  been  raised  about  the  timeline  for  when  we  should  begin  our  supervisory 
tasks. Irrespective of the precise schedule for the performance of supervisory tasks, I believe 
that  it  is  very  important  that  the  Council  Regulation  enters  into  force  as  envisaged  on 
1 January 2013. This would allow us to start the preparatory work as swiftly as possible.  
I  have  discussed  the  main  aspects  of  the  SSM.  But  the  financial  market  union  would  be 
incomplete without commensurate progress towards a common resolution regime. The lack 
of  such  a  regime  has  increased  the  cost  of  bank  failures  for  taxpayers.  It  has  also 
complicated  the  handling  of  bank  failures,  especially  in  cross-border  cases.  A  common 
resolution  regime  –  with  an  independent  European  resolution  authority  at  its  centre  –  is 
crucial for managing crises in a way that is as orderly, effective and efficient as possible.  
Concluding remarks 
4.  
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  euro  area  is  making  good  progress  towards  achieving 
stable  and  sound  foundations.  I  trust  that  in  October  and  subsequently  in  December,  the 
Heads of State or Government will reaffirm their commitment to the irreversibility of the euro 
by agreeing on a long-term vision for our economic and monetary union.  
That  process  has  not  yet  had  a  fully  visible  impact  on  the  everyday  life  of  citizens  in  the 
countries  suffering  most  from  the  crisis.  I  am  well  aware  of  the  hardship  that  the  current 
situation entails for many people, especially those whose job is lost or at risk.  
The adjustment process towards sustainable public finances and a competitive economy can 
be painful in the short term, both politically and economically. Yet, the reforms are necessary 
corrections which will bring countries back on the path of sustainable growth. And they also 
contribute to improve social justice, by fostering tax compliance and limiting rent-seeking by 
vested interests. 
I  am  confident  that  the  euro  area  and  its  currently  weaker  members  will  emerge  from  the 
crisis with stronger and better functioning economies – and that this will be to the benefit of 
all Europe’s citizens. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
