Barry Whiteside: Fiji’s insurance sector and the economy 
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of 
20th anniversary of FijiCare Insurance Limited, Suva, 7 November 2012. 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at 
the 
 The Minister for Health, Dr Neal Sharma 
The Chairman of the FijiCare Board, Mr. Phillip Thomas  
Board Directors 
Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Peter McPherson 
Management and Staff of FijiCare 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Good evening and bula vinaka to you all. 
It is an honor to be here this evening and I thank Philip and Peter for the kind invitation to this 
anniversary  celebration.  Congratulations  to  FijiCare  Insurance  Company  Limited,  for 
reaching your 20-year milestone of service to the people of Fiji.  
FijiCare Insurance Limited  
I thought to begin by sharing a bit of history, especially for some of us who may not know the 
background of FijiCare. 
The Company was formed just over 20 years ago, in 1992, when it took on the operations of 
the  Insurance  Welfare  Society  which,  at  that  time,  used  to  provide  medical  &  term  life 
insurance  to  Public  Service  Commission  members.  Subsequently,  FijiCare  was  licensed 
under the Insurance Act 1998, as a general insurer.  
In  1994,  it  undertook  a  name  change  to  FijiCare  Insurance  Welfare  Society  and  further 
changed its name in 1995 to its current name FijiCare Insurance Limited. We of course all 
know it by the shorter version, FijiCare. 
In the early years, FijiCare grew from strength to strength and diversified its product offerings 
with other classes of insurance – such as workers compensation, public liability and personal 
accident.  As  the  company  gained  more  confidence  in  the  insurance  market  here,  it  took 
further steps and, in 2000, became the first, and to this day, the only licensed underwriter in 
Fiji to be publically listed on the South Pacific Stock Exchange. This effectively means that 
any Fijian can become part owner of an insurance company by buying shares in FijiCare on 
the Stock Exchange. 
Today,  FijiCare  offers  a  full  range  of  insurance  products  from  medical,  term  life,  motor 
vehicle, funeral, workers’ compensation, public liability and personal accident. I understand it 
is also looking into other areas. However, medical and term life still remain the core business 
and it is no secret that the company is one of the leading insurers providing medical cover in 
our country. 
FijiCare also has its very own sophisticated Medical Centre opposite Suva Private Hospital in 
Amy  Street,  along  with  a  list  of  highly  qualified  nominated  doctors  around  Fiji.  It  also  has 
some  of  the  best  pharmacies  as  part  of  its  pharmacy  listing,  enabling  customers  to  get 
quality services. 
While it is the Government’s mission to provide quality and affordable medical services to the 
people  of  Fiji,  despite  the  improvements  made  over  the  years,  we  all  know  not  everything 
can  be  provided  for  locally.  As  such,  evacuation  to  other  countries for specialized  medical 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
treatment remains a norm. On this front, a huge relief is afforded to those covered by medical 
insurance as they are able to access the much needed treatment through insurance. This is 
where companies like FijiCare play an important role.  
Ladies and gentlemen, it is no secret that providing medical insurance is a tough business 
with high net loss ratios. The Reserve Bank’s Insurance Annual Report indicated that the net 
loss ratio for the medical class in 2010 was 78.6%. In other words, for every $1 of premium 
earned,  78  cents  was  taken  up  by  claims  alone,  leaving  the medical  insurers  with  a  small 
margin to foot operating costs and to try to make a profit. The ratio had fallen in 2011, but still 
remains high. 
In  addition  to  this,  medical  costs  overseas  have  increased  significantly  over  the  years. 
However, we note that despite this and tough competition, FijiCare continues to provide this 
essential service to the country.  
FijiCare’s dedication to providing quality and affordable insurance products to the citizens of 
Fiji  is  testament  of  its  mission  that  “Customers  Are  Really  Everything  (CARE)”.  This  is 
evident in the Company’s initiatives towards meeting the needs of all sectors of the economy. 
I say this because your medical products and insurance policies are designed in such a way 
where  you  offer  executive  packages  for  those  that  can  afford  them,  while  also  designing 
affordable packages for the less well off. 
As  you  are  all  aware,  the  Reserve  Bank,  through  the  Insurance  Task  Force  and  National 
Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce,  has  been  driving  micro-insurance  initiatives  for  a  number  of 
years now. We would like to see more people insured against unforeseen losses but, more 
so, people at the base of the income pyramid. In this regard, FijiCare was noted to be at the 
forefront  in  responding  to  our  micro-insurance  initiative.  In  partnership  with  the  Pacific 
Financial  Inclusion  Programme  (PFIP),  the  Company  led  with  the  introduction  of  a  funeral 
policy, the first micro insurance product for Fiji.  
The last 20 years, however, have not all been smooth sailing for FijiCare, and they have had 
their share of ups and downs. Despite the trying years of late, I would like to thank the Board 
and its Management for its perseverence. The fact that FijiCare continues to operate today is 
testament to their resilience and continued confidence in our economy.  
The Fiji economy 
Ladies and gentlemen, please allow me say a few words about our economy. 
The overall economic expansion for this year is expected to remain above 2 percent, largely 
driven  by  the  continued  growth  in  consumption  and  investment  related  activity.  This  is 
evident through higher VAT collections, sales of new vehicles, private sector credit and value 
of work put in place as well as domestic cement sales.  
However while there is ongoing buoyancy in domestic demand, there are obvious risks on 
the external front given the recent downward revisions in global growth.  
Despite  the  increasing  global  uncertainty,  our  monetary  policy  objectives  remain  at 
comfortable levels. Inflation continues on a general downward trend and is expected to fall 
further  to  3.5  percent  by  the  end  of  the  year.  This  is  driven  by  lower  prices  for  food  and 
stability in oil prices. 
Foreign  reserves  are  currently  around  $1.6  billion,  or  sufficient  to  cover  5.0  months  of 
retained imports of goods and non-factor services.  
Given the slowing of the global economy and a stable outlook for our foreign reserves and 
inflation, monetary policy will continue to remain accommodative to provide further stimulus 
for economic growth.  
With this positive outlook the insurance industry can be expected to benefit, in line with GDP 
growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A final point I would venture to make concerns investment possibilities in the field of medical 
care  pertaining  to  “retirement  villages”.  While  talking  to  groups  of  potential  investors, 
including well-off retirees, in Korea and Japan recently, our Fiji delegation found that there 
was  great  interest  to  come  to  live  here  (of  course  golf  and  a  slower  pace  of  life  was 
mentioned a lot). A major hurdle the investors noted, and also admitted by ourselves, was 
the need for quality responsive medical facilities and necessary evacuation as needed. From 
our discussions this is clearly a valuable tourism niche which could be exploited, not only by 
the Government but also by our private sector. I say this because FijiCare is in the business 
now of providing medical facilities. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  FijiCare’s  20th  anniversary  celebrations  this  year  is  evident  of  its 
commitment and perseverance. I congratulate them for achieving this milestone.  
I would like to again thank the FijiCare team for your kind invitation. I reiterate my thanks to 
the Board, management and staff for your support and cooperation with the Reserve Bank’s 
policies and guidelines. I also salute this institution on its 20th anniversary of existence and 
for the role that it has played in Fiji’s economic development.  
Once again, my warm congratulations and all the very best in your future endeavors. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
