Luis M Linde: Brief review of recent developments in the Spanish 
economy 
Testimony by  Mr Luis  M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, before the Senate Budget 
Committee in connection with the draft State Budget for 2013, Madrid, 21 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
This is the first time I am following  the tradition  of the Governor of the Banco de España in 
giving  testimony  to  this  House as part  of  the  debate  on the State Budget.  It is a pleasure 
to do so. 
The  Budget  is  being  debated  this  year  in  a  national  and  international  economic  context 
beset  by  difficulties.  Consequently,  before  analysing fundamental  aspects  of  the  Budget,  I 
think it is appropriate  to briefly review some of the most  significant  recent developments  in 
the Spanish economy.  I will  confine  my comments  to  those  developments  I consider  most 
important for the debate on this draft law. 
The international setting and the euro area 
In  the  current  circumstances,  marked  by  the  need  to  complete  a  series  of  difficult 
adjustments,  the Spanish economy’s ability  to  recover is heavily conditioned  by  the fragile 
external  setting.  On  the  most  recent  projections of  the  main  international  organisations 
and  most  private  analysts,  the  euro  area’s  gross  domestic  product –  and,  therefore,  the 
imports  of  our  main  economic  partners  – will  hardly  grow  next  year. The outlook  for  the 
other  developed  economies  is  not  much  more  favourable  and,  indeed,  the  available 
projections  for  the  emerging  economies,  which  in  recent  years have been  the  main  driver 
of global economic growth, also show a weakening of activity. 
The difficulties  of  definitively  restoring  confidence  in the soundness  of  the Monetary  Union 
continue to  weigh on the lack of momentum  in the euro area. It is widely accepted  that the 
problems  continuing  to  affect  sovereign debt  markets  in the  area and  limiting  its  ability  to 
recover ultimately  stem  from  the slowness  shown  by  certain  economies  in adapting  to  the 
new  reality  of  belonging  to  a monetary  union  and  from  certain  weaknesses in  the  original 
design of European governance. 
Since  the  tensions  emerged,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  what  could  to  some 
extent  be  considered  the  first  phase  of  reform  of  the  euro:  warranting  a  mention  here, in 
any event, are the strengthening of the Stability and Growth Pact, the Excessive Imbalances 
Procedure and the European Semester. At the same time, however, the scope and  depth of 
the  crisis  have  shown the  need  for a  more  far-reaching review,  whose ultimate  aim must 
be  to  achieve  a  “genuine  economic  and  monetary  union”.  The Summit of Heads of  State 
or  Government  of  the  euro  area  in  June  this  year  marked  the  beginning  of  the  second 
phase  of  reform,  which  rests  on  three  basic  pillars:  the  banking  union,  further  fiscal 
integration and greater economic policy coordination. 
As  to  the  ECB,  it  has  contributed to  providing  stability  to  the  euro  area  both  through  its 
more conventional  remit,  i.e. setting  interest  rates, and through  its  less conventional  facet, 
namely  supplying  exceptional  amounts  of  liquidity  through  unorthodox  channels.  But  the 
roots  of the current crisis in the euro area are not of a monetary nature and, consequently, 
monetary  policy  alone  cannot  resolve  those  problems.  Monetary  policy  can,  however, 
provide  more  time  for  the  remedies  aimed  at  resolving  the  underlying  problems to  be 
effective. 
On 2 August the Governing Council of the ECB adopted  a new non-conventional  measure: 
the  so-called  Outright  Monetary  Transactions.  This programme  of  purchasing  government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
debt on secondary markets, subject to compliance with certain macroeconomic conditions, 
aims to  repair the monetary policy  transmission  mechanism, thus ensuring that the  effects 
of  the  expansionary  conventional  measures  adopted from  the  onset  of  the crisis reach 
European households and firms alike, irrespective of their country of residence. 
This ECB decision  has had  a stabilising  effect  on  markets  and  eased the  pressure on  the 
Spanish economy, although financial conditions remain very tight and uncertainty continues 
to weigh on households’ and firms’ spending and investment decisions. 
As stated,  euro area measures should  contribute  to  restoring  the transmission  channels of 
monetary  policy  and,  thereby,  reduce  financial  tensions.  They  should  also  help  to  sever 
the  problematic  public  finances/banking  system  feedback  loop,  a  vicious  circle  which 
contributes  to  prolonging  the  climate  of  uncertainty  and  makes  it  difficult to  resolve  the 
problems  facing  the  euro  area. Nevertheless, it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  scope  of 
these actions  is limited  and  that  definitively  overcoming  the  crisis  in Spain  will  depend  on 
the progress achieved in other domains, including those which depend on our own economic 
policy. 
The Spanish economy 
The challenges facing the Spanish economy are well-known: reducing its high dependence 
on  external  financing,  sustainably  correcting  the  budget  imbalance  and  strengthening  the 
drivers  of  medium-  and  long-term  growth  through  substantial  and  lasting  improvements  in 
competitiveness. Naturally, completing the clean-up and restructuring  of  the  banking  system 
is also a key factor  in this  strategy,  and I will  briefly refer to this later on. 
Significant steps have been taken in addressing these challenges. Nonetheless, the ongoing 
adjustment  of  the  Spanish  economy  is  at  a  delicate  juncture,  since  there  are  no 
perceptible  improvements  in  activity  and  job  creation  because  many  of  the  measures 
taken are structural  and  will  take  some  time  to  work  fully  through.  The growth  outlook  for 
the coming  quarters is still  not  favourable, as shown  by the forecasts  released by  different 
organisations  in the past  few  weeks, which  point  to  a fresh contraction  of  activity  in 2013. 
However, the adjustment  undertaken is essential in laying the groundwork  for a new phase 
of economic growth which will allow a substantial and lasting reduction in the unemployment 
rate.  The  resumption  of  growth  of  the  Spanish  economy  will  depend  above  all  on  our 
perseverance in pushing through the reforms.  
As  I  mentioned  in  my  address  to  the  Spanish  Parliamentary Budget  Committee,  and  as I 
believe  bears  repeating  here, economic  policy  has  to  continue  striving  towards  two  main 
goals:  promoting  competitiveness  and  growth,  and  restoring  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances. I will focus particularly on this second stage of the adjustment. 
Fiscal consolidation 
In the present  circumstances,  ensuring the credibility  of  the process  of fiscal consolidation 
is a priority.  After the heavy slippage  in the deficit  in 2011, it is crucial  to  dispel  doubts  as 
to  the capacity  to  control  the upward  path of public  debt.  Credibility  is the main alleviating 
factor  to  mitigate  the  contractionary  impact,  in the short  run, of  the  necessary adjustment 
measures. 
For  the  consolidation  to  be  credible,  the  expenditure-reducing  and  revenue-enhancing 
measures  have  to  be  well-designed  and  consistent  with  our  chosen  path;  in  addition, 
experience  indicates  that  to  prevent  slippage,  it  is  advisable  to  work  with  a  highly 
conservative  projection  of  public  revenue. When  forecasting  revenue, underestimates  are 
more  acceptable  than  overestimates.  Also,  adequate  early  warning  tools  are  required  to 
detect  in  advance  any  possible  deviations  and  to  make,  where  necessary,  the  required 
corrections in time. The Budgetary Stability Law provides an appropriate tool for controlling 
expenditure.  In  the  area  of  credibility, 
it  is  highly  advisable  to  define  a  multi-year 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
budgetary time  horizon  which  offers  certainty  to  agents  and,  moreover,  to  deploy fiscal 
measures  which  combine  actions  with  a  short-term  impact  and  others  acting  on  the 
sustainability  of  public  finances  in  the  medium  term,  impinging,  among  others,  on  those 
expenditure items most affected by population ageing. 
Regional government finances 
Let  me  begin  my  analysis  of  the  2013  State  budget  by  looking  at  regional  government 
finances. 
Spain  is  today  a  country  characterised  by  strongly  decentralised  public  expenditure.  On 
2011  figures,  central  government  accounted  for  22%  of  total  expenditure,  social  security 
for  32%,  regional  government  for  34%  and  local  government  12%.  Thus,  46%  of  public 
expenditure was by regional and local government. With this structure of public expenditure, 
the setting  of  budgetary  objectives  for the various political  and administrative tiers, on one 
hand,  and  the  monitoring  of  their fulfilment,  on the  other,  are two  sides  of  the same coin. 
Both are fundamental in building the credibility of budgetary policy. 
Let me mention here what  I consider  to  be an extremely significant  advance. At the end of 
October  the Ministry  of Financial Affairs and Public  Administration  began to  publish  for the 
first  time,  as a result  of  the  commitments  made  under  the  Stability  Law,  monthly  data  on 
the  regional  government  budget  outturns.  As  these  figures  become  available  regularly,  in 
accordance  with  the  related  Law,  the  task  of  monitoring  regional government  expenditure 
will be made immensely easier.  This  is fundamental for the timely detection of any slippage 
from stated budgetary objectives and for standing ready to respond appropriately. It  should 
also  be  noted  that  in  the  past  few  weeks  a  good  number  of  regional  governments 
announced their budgets  for 2013, although it is still early to make a full diagnosis of overall 
regional government expenditure. 
These  developments  remedy  some  of  the  weaknesses  in  the  information  available  for 
assessing  the  budgetary  adjustment  scheduled  for  2013.  Even  so,  the  fact  that  the 
presentation  of  the  various  budget  documents  by  the  various governments  is  not  formally 
coordinated  makes  the  work  of  analysts  harder,  given  that,  obviously,  what  matters  from 
the macroeconomic standpoint or for the analysis of public finances is general government as 
a whole. 
The State and Social Security Budget for 2013 
Let me now turn to the essential features of the State and Social Security Budget  for 2013, 
beginning with a reference to the budget outturn in 2012. 
The  budget  deficit  is  being  reduced  this  year  in  very  adverse  economic  and  financial 
circumstances.  Indeed,  as  a  result  of  the  risks  of  possible  slippage,  a  series  of 
supplementary  fiscal  measures  were  adopted  for  the  2012  Budget.  Their  effects  have 
begun  to  be  perceived  only  in 
the  second  half  of  the  year.  Notwithstanding,  on  the 
information available,  the  possibility of  slippage  can  still  not  be  ruled  out.  Meeting  the 
target  will  depend  on  the  numerous  tax  measures  taking  effect  in  the  last  quarter  of  the 
year  ultimately  yielding  the  expected returns,  and  on  that  offsetting the  growth  of  debt 
service payments,  unemployment  benefits  and pensions. Given the importance  of  meeting 
the deficit  target  in 2012, it should  be foreseen that  possible  slippage in certain items may 
be offset with possible adjustments to others. 
The  draft  State  Budget  for  2013  sets  an  overall  general  government  deficit  target,  in 
National  Accounts  terms,  of  4.5%  of  GDP,  in  line  with  European  commitments. That  is 
down from 6.3% envisaged for 2012, excluding from that figure the impact of the measures to 
support  banks  which  must  be  recorded  this  year (amounting to  around  1 pp of GDP). The 
Budget  envisages  that  the  public  debt  ratio  will  increase  from  85%  of  GDP  in  2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
(including  €30 billion  of  FROB debt  due  to  the  drawdown  in  December  of  the  credit line 
agreed with the European authorities) to 91% of GDP in 2013. 
The  fiscal  effort  these  targets  entail  is  highly  ambitious  (around  2 pp  in  terms  of  the 
cyclically adjusted primary deficit), in a setting which will remain difficult. The macroeconomic 
scenario accompanying  the budget  envisages that GDP in real terms will contract  0.5%,  as 
a  result  of  the  2.8%  fall  in  national  demand  which  would  be  partly  offset  by  a  2.3 pp 
contribution by the external sector. The main difference between this macroeconomic setting 
and  that  of  the  IMF  or  the  European  Commission  is  the  lower decline  in gross  capital 
formation projected in the budget. 
Achievement of the targets  set for 2013 may be jeopardised  if tax  receipts  are affected  by 
lower economic  activity.  Expenditure in the State and Social Security Budget  is dominated 
by the interest on government debt, spending on contributory pensions and unemployment 
benefits.  The sharp rise in these items reflects  the increase in debt  and  the higher  cost  of 
new  issues,  demographic  trends  and  the  unfavourable  performance  of  the labour market. 
To  offset  this  expansionary  trajectory,  the  Budget  adopts  an  austere  stance  on  other 
expenditure 
the  remuneration  of  public  employees  and  real 
investment. 
Lastly,  I  must  mention  that  the  Budget  for  2013  saw  the  culmination  of  one  of  the  most 
important agreements  of  the  Toledo  Pact,  namely  the  separation  of  the  Social  Security 
System’s  funding  sources:  on  one  hand,  contributory  pensions,  funded  solely  by  social 
contributions  and,  on  the  other,  non-contributory  supplements  and  non-contributory 
pensions, funded  by  taxes. This separation,  which  began to  be applied  in 2002, will  finally 
be completed  in 2013. 
in  particular 
items, 
The bank restructuring process 
Finally, I would  like to comment  on the bank restructuring  process  under way further to the 
agreement entered into with the European authorities last July. 
Bank  restructuring  is  progressing  as  scheduled.  In  June  the  evaluation  exercise  was 
completed,  enabling  an  estimate  of  the  capital  needs  for  the  whole  system  to  be  made, 
and  confirming  that  they  were  clearly  below  €100 billion;  at  the  end  of  August  the  Royal 
Decree-Law  on  credit  institution  restructuring  and  resolution  was  approved,  constituting  a 
new code  in this  area; at the end of  September  the exercise was completed,  enabling the 
capital  needs for each of the banks participating  in the exercise, which  accounted  for 90% 
of  the  Spanish  banking  system,  to  be  determined;  and,  last  Thursday,  the  Decree  which 
will  regulate the  activity  of  the  Asset Management  Company  for  Assets Arising from  Bank 
Restructuring  (SAREB)  was  approved,  another  key  step  in 
the  implementation  of  the 
programme agreed with the European Commission. 
The analysis concluded  in  September  enabled  the  classification  of  banks  for  restructuring 
purposes  to  be  confirmed.  Previously,  the  banks  without  additional  capital  needs  had 
already been determined  (Group 0) as had the banks controlled  by the FROB (Group 1), to 
use the terminology of the Memorandum of Understanding; this classification was completed, 
dividing  the other  banks  with  capital  needs into:  a) those  with  plans  to  achieve the capital 
levels required using their own  means; and b) those which  will  require State aid to  do  so. 
The  latter  were  requested  to  provide  restructuring  plans  which  are  currently  being 
studied. 
At  the  end  of  this  month,  it  is  planned  to  approve  the  restructuring  plans  of  the  banks  in 
Group 1 (those controlled  by the FROB), and those of Group  2 (the other banks which  will 
require  State  aid)  will  foreseeably  be  approved  before  year-end.  The  restructuring  plans 
envisage  the  transfer  of  assets  to  the  asset  management  company,  which  will  become 
operational  in  December,  and  the  recapitalisation  of  banks  which  need  it.  Each  bank  will 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have a schedule for implementing the measures that it must adopt, and these are expected 
to be completed  in the first quarter of 2013. 
finances  next  year.  Central  government  efforts  would  be  insufficient 
Conclusions 
The  State Budget for 2013 represents a  substantial effort in terms of austerity. The intended 
fiscal  adjustment  is  certainly  very  ambitious,  given  the  ongoing  recessionary  setting  for 
public 
if  not 
accompanied too by the adjustment to which regional and local government have committed. 
From the macroeconomic standpoint, some data show progress is being made in rebalancing 
the  Spanish  economy.  The  bulk  of  the  correction  has  already  been  made  by the  current 
account  and  it  is  close  to  balance  in  2012  which,  foreseeably,  will  enable  it  to  run  a 
surplus  in  2013.  Similarly,  we  can  see  improvements  in  the  competitiveness  of  the 
Spanish economy  both  with  regard to  labour cost  indicators  and productivity.  We forecast 
that  in  2014,  and  measured  by  unit  labour  costs,  Spain  will  have recovered  practically  all 
of the competitiveness lost between 1998 and 2008. 
The correction  of  imbalances  will  be  essential for  regaining  market  confidence.  And  here, 
both  budget  policy  and  further  structural  reforms  will  be  a pivotal  contributing  factor.  The 
year 2013 poses considerable  challenges and difficulties.  If we manage to overcome  them, 
they will put us on the path of economic growth and job creation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
