Benoît Cœuré: Central banking, insurance and incentives 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the ECB conference: “Debt, growth and macroeconomic policies”, Frankfurt, 6 December 
2012. 
 I wish to thank Florian Heider and Oreste Tristani for their contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible 
for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here with you tonight. 
The underlying theme of this conference is the aftermath of the financial crisis. Papers on the implications of debt 
overhang, on the interaction between private and public indebtedness and on the sovereign debt crisis feature 
prominently  in  the  conference  programme.  The  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  which  I  will  focus  on  tonight, 
however,  has  to  do  with  the  changes  in  the  nature  of  monetary  policy  operations.  Central  bank  liquidity  has 
increased  dramatically  over  the  past  few  years.  “Unconventional”  or  “non-standard”  measures  have  been 
deployed  in  all  the  main  industrial  countries.  At  the  ECB, such  measures  have  always  aimed  at improving  the 
transmission of standard policy decisions, but they have assumed different forms over time. In the first phase of 
the crisis, they were mainly aimed at banks with the objective of preventing a collapse of the interbank market. As 
the financial crisis has evolved into a sovereign debt crisis, we have stepped up the size of our operations with 
banks,  and  we  have  also  aimed  at  removing  redenomination  risk  from  government  bond  markets  through  the 
decision on Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
As a monetary policy-maker, I am convinced that these measures were necessary to prevent the financial crisis 
from  having  further  adverse  consequences  on  both  the  financial  system  and  on  the  macro  economy  and 
therefore, ultimately, on medium term price stability. A freezing-up of the interbank market could have caused a 
credit crunch and a downward spiral in asset prices. The money supply would have shrunk. The ensuing collapse 
in  aggregate  demand  would have  put  downward  pressure  on  prices.  A  Great  Depression  scenario  could  have 
occurred. The same scenario could materialise at local level in case of fear that countries could leave the euro, 
and severely hamper our ability to deliver price-stability. 
Thanks to our non-standard measures, central bank liquidity has proved to be an effective insurance mechanism 
against the risk of an economic disaster.  
Providing insurance can, however, generate perverse incentives. Knowledge of the existence of a safety net can 
encourage  imprudent  behaviour.  Concern  about  this  has  been  expressed  in  connection  with  our  new  OMT 
programme, under which we could purchase potentially unlimited amounts of sovereign bonds. By easing market 
pressure on governments, it is argued, ECB interventions could lead to a weakening of fiscal consolidation and 
reform efforts.  
The focus of my remarks tonight is this trade-off between insurance and incentives. I am going to start from the 
general principle of committing to provide partial insurance, which arises from the literature on microeconomics. I 
will then illustrate how our OMT programme and also the parallel plans for a banking union can be interpreted in 
the light of this principle. 
The basic principle: how to commit to partial insurance? 
1. 
The trade-off between insurance and incentives, or equivalently, between ex post efficiency and ex ante efficiency 
is a recurrent theme in microeconomics.1 I will argue that this trade-off is a useful framework for thinking about the 
challenges we face in the euro area. It is a widely studied topic, so we have been able to draw on and adapt 
existing insights when addressing those challenges. 
Why is there a trade-off? Why is ex post efficiency not the same as ex ante efficiency? The reason is that we all 
react to the circumstances in which we operate. If circumstances change, so does our behaviour. Thus, policies 
that  ensure  ex  post  efficiency  are  not  necessarily  efficient  ex  ante,  because  people  react  to  those  policies  by 
altering their own behaviour. Ex post and ex ante efficiency generally do not overlap. 
                                                
1   As so often in economics, the theme can be traced back all the way to Adam Smith’s “The Wealth of Nations” 
in 1776. He describes how tenants underinvest in the land they do not own. Around the same time, in 1740, a 
version of the free-rider problem (a closely related incentive problem) appears in David Hume’s “Treatise of 
Human Nature” (see J.-J. Laffont and D. Martimort, “The Theory of Incentives”, Princeton University Press, 
2002). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Allow me for a moment to be somewhat schoolmasterly and use the example of car insurance to illustrate the 
basic  trade-off.2  Car  insurance  is  obviously  desirable  ex  post,  since  it  is  not  optimal  for  people  to  bear  the 
consequences of a car accident by themselves. We are all more or less risk averse and feel much better when we 
have  such  car  insurance.  Without  it,  some  of  us  would  stop  driving  altogether  if  we  had  to  fully  pay  for  the 
consequences of an accident. Insurance improves ex post efficiency. Mark Twain is credited with saying that: “A 
banker is a fellow who lends you his umbrella when the sun is shining, but wants it back the minute it 
begins to rain”. He describes a world that is not ex-post efficient. 
Let’s now take an ex ante perspective. Carrying an umbrella does not encourage rain, but why drive carefully if 
we never bear the negative consequences of careless driving? Insurance may well encourage imprudent driving. 
In other words, insurance hurts incentives, that is, it reduces ex ante efficiency.  
The  way  to  manage  the  trade-off  between  ex  ante and ex  post  efficiency  is  through partial insurance. We are 
usually not fully insured against car accidents. There is a deductible, a sum that we have to pay out of our own 
pocket if we file an insurance claim – in finance speak: we bear the “first loss”. Moreover, our insurance depends 
on  the  car  we  drive,  our  past  record  of  insurance  claims  and  also  on  whether  it  can  be  shown  that  we  were 
negligent or not. In other words, insurance companies worry about the behaviour that insurance induces. 
The trade-off between ex ante and ex post efficiency is apparent from the fact that if the deductible is too high, it 
may discourage insurance and therefore driving altogether. If, on the other hand, the deductible is too low, then 
drivers  may  become  imprudent  again.  The  same  trade-off  can  be  found  in  other  policy  domains  –  say,  for 
example health care co-payments –, and, as I will argue next, in the relationship between outside investors and 
inside users of funds. 
The case of sovereign debt: insurance and incentives 
2. 
To some extent, a borrower’s income and hence his ability to repay debt is subject to forces outside his control. A 
bank,  for  example,  cannot  perfectly  control  its  cash  flow,  which  depends  on  what  its  competitors  do  and  on 
general  economic  conditions,  among  other  factors.  Similarly,  a  country  cannot  perfectly  control  the  business 
cycle; its income also depends on worldwide conditions that matter for its imports and exports. At any moment in 
time,  there  can  be  mismatch  between  a  borrower’s  income  and  his  expenditures.  Without  access  to  capital 
markets,  without  the  ability  to  borrow,  banks  would  have  to  cut  lending  and  countries  would  have  to  limit  the 
provision of services once their income dropped. The ability to borrow therefore insures against shocks to income 
and ensures the smooth functioning of an economy. Access to capital markets improves ex post efficiency. 
But like car insurers, investors in capital markets worry about perverse incentives. Not so much about imprudent 
driving, but about some other forms of imprudence. A borrower’s income is not only subject to exogenous shocks. 
It is also the outcome of his decisions. Investors therefore worry that providing full insurance against the risk of 
income fluctuations can lead to irresponsible – for example, short-term-oriented – investment or policy decisions.3 
When  financing  sovereigns,  an  additional  and  somewhat  more  fundamental  problem  arises:  the  so-called 
willingness to pay. Governments cannot be forced or be contractually obliged to repay their debt. Investors have 
to rely on the willingness of governments to make repayments, or else stop lending.4] 
It  is  precisely  this  threat  of  the  loss  of  access  to  capital  markets  that  is  analogous  to  the  deductible  in  car 
insurance. It is a form of partial insurance that provides incentives for governments to undertake good policy and 
to repay. While a loss of access means less insurance against income shocks and hence less ex post efficiency, 
it improves ex ante efficiency. 
The trade-off between ex ante and ex post efficiency automatically leads to a commitment problem. Let me go 
back to the example of car insurance. Providing only partial insurance, an insurance company expects drivers not 
to  be  imprudent  so  that  accidents  are  indeed  the  result  of  bad  luck.  But  once  an  accident  has  occurred,  the 
insurance  company  could  conceivably  ignore  the  original  contract  and  fully  reimburse  any  claim.  After  all,  the 
                                                
2  
Indeed,  the  trade-off  between  ex-ante  and  ex-post  efficiency  first  appeared  in  modern  economics  in  the 
context of “moral hazard” in insurance markets (see for example M. Spence and R. Zeckhauser, “Insurance 
Information, and Individual Action,” American Economic Review, 1971). 
3   The incentive problem started to appear in (corporate) finance with M. Jensen and W. Meckling, “The Theory 
of the Firm, Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 
1976; S. Myers, “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1977; and J. Stiglitz 
and A. Weiss, “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review, 1981. 
4   The “contract-theoretic” approach to sovereign debt was pioneered by J. Bulow and K. Rogoff, “A Constant 
Recontracting  Model  of  Sovereign  Debt,”  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  1989;  and  J.  Bulow  and  K.  Rogoff, 
“Sovereign Debt: Is Forgive to Forget?,” American Economic Review, 1989. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
accident was then clearly due to bad luck. Anticipating this “renegotiation” and expecting full insurance after all, 
drivers have an incentive to become imprudent again.5 
In practice, this is not a real problem for car insurance since insurance companies can credibly commit to sticking 
to  the  original  contract  But  what  about  sovereign  debt?  Would  investors  gain  by  nevertheless  refinancing  a 
government with a low probability to repay? Or should they stick to shutting the country out of the market since 
they know that this improves incentives? 
Past  experience  shows  that  sovereign  debt  has  often  been  renegotiated  as  governments  and  investors  find  it 
difficult to commit to a given course of future actions. As this hurts ex ante efficiency and thus leads to a higher 
cost  of  borrowing  for governments,  there  have  been  a  number  of  developments  to make  sovereign  debt  more 
“renegotiation-proof.”  Just  to  give  a  couple  of  examples:  Bonds  started  to  replace  loans  in  the  market  for 
sovereign  debt.  Bonds,  which  are  more  widely  held  and  easily  tradable,  make  sovereign  debt  more  difficult  to 
renegotiate as the number of investors involved increases. Another development is the shortening of the maturity 
of credit in order to exercise the control right (of not refinancing) more often.  
While these trends provide better incentives, they hurt insurance – maybe even excessively so. It may become 
excessively difficult to re-organise sovereign debt and to adapt to new circumstances. One possibility to counter 
the trend is to have collective action clauses (CACs). They offer the possibility of easier renegotiation by lowering 
the threshold for the number of bond-holders to agree to a debt restructuring. Indeed, as of January 1st 2013, all 
new bonds issued by euro area governments will contain such clauses.6  
Private  markets  with  their  various  self-interests  may,  however,  find  it  difficult  to  achieve  a  trade-off  between 
incentives and insurance that is optimal for everyone. In fact, markets can worry so much about incentives that 
they stop providing insurance altogether – in this case markets can freeze-up. And indeed, we have experienced 
numerous  quasi-market  freeze-ups  in  various  segments  of  the  interbank,  credit  and  sovereign  debt  markets. 
When this happens, it is time for the public sector to step in.7 
But  striking  the  right  balance  between  insurance  and  incentives  is  also  a  problem  for  public  authorities.  Full 
insurance produces perverse incentives irrespective of whether it is provided by a private or a public institution. 
One  prominent  example  in  the  case  of  sovereign  debt  crises  is  the  involvement  of  the  IMF.  In  return  for  the 
insurance it provides by lending to countries in difficulty, the IMF usually receives far-reaching control rights to 
maintain  or  re-establish  a  country’s  incentive  for  solid  public  finances.  Without  such  far-reaching  rights, 
interventions must take other forms to provide partial insurance. 
Financial assistance through the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) during the sovereign bond crisis in 
the euro area has also drawn on the experience of the IMF – partly thanks to the involvement of the IMF itself. At 
the ECB we had the insurance-versus-incentives trade-off in mind when designing our new OMT programme and 
in our support of a banking union. 
Before moving to the OMT and the banking union as topical and recent examples of the trade-off between ex-ante 
and ex-post efficiency, let me point out that while this trade-off is particularly stark in crises times, it is very much 
at  the  heart  of  central  banking  in  general.  After  all,  the  trade-off  is  inherent  to  liquidity  provision.  Banking,  by 
making long-term loans and financing them with deposits and other short-term debt, is inherently fragile. Maturity 
transformation exposes banks to liquidity risk.8 The classic postulate of Bagehot, for a central bank to be a lender 
                                                
5   There is by now a vast literation on the issue of whether and under what circumstances contracts can and will 
be renegotiated (for an early contribution see D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, “Moral-Hazard and Renegotiation in 
Agency Contracts,” Econometrica, 1990). 
6   For  an  extensive  analysis  of  these  complex  issues,  see  P.  Bolton  and  O.  Jeanne,  “Structuring  and 
Restructuring Sovereign Debt: The Role of Seniority”, Review of Economic Studies, 2009; and P. Bolton and 
O.  Jeanne,  “Structuring  and  Restructuring  Sovereign  Debt:  The  Role  of  a  Bankruptcy  Regime”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy, 2007, and the references therein. A closely related debate is whether default is costly or 
not for sovereigns in the long term (see for example E. Borenzstein and U. Panizza, “The Cost of Sovereign 
Default,” IMF Working Paper 08/238; and M. Aguiar and G. Gopinath, “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and 
the Current Account,” Journal of International Economics, 2006). 
7   The case for public intervention when markets collapse has been made in the light of the recent financial crisis 
in P. Bolton, T. Santos and J. Scheinkman, “Outside and Inside Liquidity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
2011; F. Heider, M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen, “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market Spreads: The Role 
of Counterparty Risk,” European Central Bank Working Paper 1126, 2009. For public intervention in form of 
asset purchases, see J. Tirole, “Overcoming Adverse Selection: How Public Intervention Can Restore Market 
Functioning,”  American  Economic  Review,  2012;  and  T.  Philippon  and  V.  Skreta,  “Efficient  Interventions  in 
Markets with Adverse Selection,” American Economic Review, 2012. 
8   See D. Diamond and P. Dybvig, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy, 
1983. In fact, it is optimal for ex-ante efficiency to expose banks to liquidity risk, see C. Calomiris and C. Kahn, 
“The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of last resort, but to perform that function at a penalty rate, illustrates both the need for (liquidity) insurance and 
the need to safeguard incentives. In the words of Bagehot: “If the banks are bad, they will certainly continue bad 
and will probably become worse if the Government sustains and encourages them.”9 The art of central banking is 
the art of balancing ex-ante and ex-post efficiency. 
OMTs and committing to partial insurance 
3. 
The purpose of the OMTs is to establish a backstop in the event of negative self-fulfilling market dynamics. We 
designed  this  new  programme  with  features  that  are  in  line  with  an  efficient  trade-off  between  insurance  and 
incentives. 
The first feature is to provide effective insurance against redenomination risk. Under certain conditions, the ECB 
stands  ready  to  intervene  with  amounts  commensurate  with  this  objective.  In  other  words,  the  scope  for  OMT 
interventions in government bonds markets is ex ante unlimited. This feature has been correctly interpreted as a 
commitment. After three months, we can say that it has highlighted the value of commitment. In many countries, 
sovereign yield spreads edged down when the programme was announced. Currently, yields stand at the lowest 
levels since the beginning of the crisis.  
The  second  feature  of  OMTs  is  that  the  insurance  is  partial.  The  objectives  of  the  programme  are  clearly 
delimited. The ECB will only buy bonds with shorter remaining maturities. The ECB does not aim to eliminate all 
spreads  between  sovereign  bond  issuers,  because  sovereign  yields  don’t  have  to  be  identical  in  a  monetary 
union, and market discipline has a role to play. Nor is the ECB willing to purchase any amount of sovereign bonds 
necessary to balance governments’ inter temporal budget constraints. OMTs will remain consistent with a regime 
of  “monetary  dominance”,10  in  which  governments  retain  the  responsibility  of  balancing  their  budgets  over  the 
medium term and the ECB remains free to set interest rate so as to ensure the maintenance of price stability over 
the medium term.  
The final feature of OMTs has to do with setting the right incentives for governments. To qualify for interventions, 
countries  must  have  negotiated  with  the  other  euro  area  governments  a  precautionary  European  Stability 
Mechanism  (ESM)  programme  with  strict  and  effective  conditionality.  Conditionality  serves  to  ensure  that 
governments continue to correct existing economic and fiscal weaknesses when OMTs are activated. At the same 
time,  OMT  purchases  will  not  take  place  while  a  country  programme  is  under  review.  The  ECB’s  actions 
complement, but do not replace, economic and fiscal reform. Incentives also help explain why interventions will 
focus on shorter-term debt. Purchases of sovereign bonds will be suspended, should a country fail to comply with 
its conditionality requirements. Relying on short-term debt strengthens the disciplining power of the right to stop 
our  interventions  at  any  point  in  time.  In  short,  OMTs  strike  the  right  balance  between  ex-ante  and  ex-post 
efficiency, and they are fully compliant with the ECB mandate. 
A banking union and committing to partial insurance 
4. 
The OMTs can, however, only be part of a larger package to solve the European debt crisis, in which not only 
sovereigns but also banks have come under stress. In fact, both banks and sovereigns have been caught in a 
negative feedback loop, with the problems of one feeding on those of the other. 
To break out of this loop, elements of a banking union are currently being discussed. These elements need to be 
considered together and seen in the light of the trade-off between insurance and incentives. 
The  first  element  of  the  banking  reform  is  the  creation  of  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  involving  the  ECB. 
Besides the obvious coordination and information benefits for supervising banking in a financially integrated area, 
and  given  the  risk  of  regulatory  capture  when  the  supervisor  and  the  supervised  are  too  close  to  each  other, 
partially transferring supervisory authority up one level can be seen as a commitment not to renegotiate. It limits 
regulatory  forbearance  (a  form  of  insurance)  and  serves  as  an  incentive  for  sound  risk  management  in  the 
banking  sector.  It  also  ensures  the  singleness  of  banks’  liabilities  in  the  euro  area,  congruent  with  the  single 
monetary policy. Within the ECB, there should be a strict separation between the single supervisory mechanism 
and monetary policy, as a way to safeguard incentives when liquidity is extended. To quote Bagehot once again: 
“any aid to a present bad Bank is the surest mode of preventing the establishment of a future good Bank.”11 
                                                                                                                                                   
1991; and D. Diamond and R. Rajan, “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial Fragility: A Theory of 
Banking,” Journal of Political Economy, 2001. 
9   See W. Bagehot (1873), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, Henry S. King and Co. 
10   See  T.  Sargent  and  N.  Wallace,  “Some  unpleasant  monetarist  arithmetic”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall 1981, pp. 1–17. 
11   See W. Bagehot (1873), op. cit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Once  incentives  are  upheld,  it  is  possible  and  desirable  to  provide  insurance.  Incentive-compatible  insurance 
must,  however,  be  partial.  And  that  is  why  it  is  important  to  add  other  elements  to  complement  the  single 
supervisory mechanism. One such element is a European resolution mechanism. Since a bank’s debt should not 
be insured in full, it should, and in fact will, be possible for banks to fail. Since the beginning of the financial crisis 
in August 2007, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) lists 466 cases in which banks in the United 
States failed.12  
Given the special role of banks as intermediaries, the failure of one bank can have adverse effects on the rest of 
the  financial  system.  Hence,  it  must  be  possible  to  organise  an  orderly  failure.  Otherwise,  failure  is  no  longer 
credible and incentives for solid risk management are undermined. To achieve an orderly resolution of financial 
institutions, especially systemic ones, we need a common resolution regime. The existing legislative proposal for 
a Recovery and Resolution Directive aims at orderly bank resolution, including early interventions, bailing-in and 
bridge financing. A further important element of a credible and efficient resolution mechanism would be a common 
European Resolution Fund. The Recovery and Resolution Directive, together with the European Resolution Fund 
being financed by contributions from the industry, would ensure incentive-compatibility. 
Similarly, the possibility to allow direct bank recapitalisations trough the ESM can be an illustration of incentive-
compatible insurance, provided that it is implemented once a single supervisory mechanism is established, and 
that  any  such  recapitalisation  is  preceded  by  a  burden-sharing  exercise  where  shareholders  and  national 
taxpayers bear the first losses. 
Let me conclude.  
The  euro  area  is  going  through  a  serious  crisis.  For  all  European  policy-makers,  the  crisis  is  a  formidable 
challenge, but also an opportunity to learn from past mistakes and to improve the EMU architecture. I believe that 
a number of decisive steps have been taken in recent months.  
In designing such steps, the interplay of many different factors must be borne in mind. I have emphasised tonight 
that  we  cannot  design  insurance  and  forget  about  its  impact  on  incentives.  When  dealing  with  such  complex 
issues,  we  have  an  unquenchable  thirst  for  guidance  from  economic  research.  Many  of  you  in  the  academic 
community  have  written  extensively  on  the  potential  consequences  of  our  policy  decisions.  Rest  assured:  we 
closely follow your work. We may sometimes disagree with your conclusions, but you will always help us to focus 
our thoughts. 
I wish you a productive day at the conference tomorrow. 
                                                
12   See: http://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html (accessed on December 5th, 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
