Gill Marcus: Why education is important to the South African Reserve 
Bank 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Partners in 
Performance  2012  Celebration  Lunch  at  the  Maths  Centre,  Braamfontein,  12  October 
2012. 
 Good morning to the Board of Trustees, the partners, donors, members and friends of the 
Maths Centre for Professional Teachers.  
It gives me great pleasure to be here today. This is an institution whose work I have long 
admired, ever since I came to know its Executive Director, Ms. Sharanjeet Shan during my 
tenure at the Gordon Institute of Business Science.  
In  my  opinion,  both  Sharanjeet  and  her  team  are  wonderful  examples  of  what  can  be 
achieved when a small group of committed people sets out to make a difference in the world.  
From its humble beginnings in 1985, when it was only a very small outreach project run from 
Auckland  Park  school  under  the  directorship  of  Mrs.  Patchitt,  the  Centre  has  done 
extraordinary work to grow to the impressive organisation that it is today; one that is making 
a  clear  and  important  difference  to  the  teaching,  learning  and  understanding  of  Maths, 
Science, Technology and even entrepreneurship in the country.  
Without question, all of us are stakeholders in the outcomes of the South African education 
system. While the Maths Centre and other NGOs may work more directly in it and on it on a 
daily basis, as South Africans we see the reports and headlines. We know the statistics and 
we  know  the  reality.  We  all  know  how  critical  it  is  to  make  every  effort  to  steadily  fix  the 
education  system,  and  to  ensure  that  NGOs  such  as  the  Maths  Centre,  whose  work  is 
outstanding, act in a manner that renders such support.  
Why is education important to the South African Reserve Bank? This is not only for all the 
reasons  we  are  familiar  with,  but  because,  as  Michael  Spence,  the  recipient  of  the  2001 
Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, has noted, “in a world in which knowledge and 
connectivity are increasingly the basis for value creation, failures in the education system are 
the surest form of exclusion there is.”  
It  is  also  because  the  Bank,  in  fulfilling  its  mandate  of  price  stability,  touches  the  lives  of 
every South African, directly or indirectly, and the greater the financial literacy in a society is, 
the better the understanding of the economy and the more effective is the inclusion in how 
society functions.  
So  bear  with  me  as  I  revisit  some  of  South  Africa’s  educational  facts  and  figures  with 
statistics  drawn  from  the  National  Planning  Commission’s  work.  As  the  NPC  points  out, 
education  is  one  of  the  Millennium  Development  Goals.  It  is  also  a  prominent  feature  of 
South  Africa’s  Constitution.  As  such,  our  education  system,  one  which  encompasses  just 
over 14 million learners, has received significant attention from government:  
• 
Grade R has been made mandatory for children turning five, resulting in a significant 
increase  in  the  participation  rate  of  these  children.  80.9%  were  enrolled  in  2007 
compared to 22.5% in 1996.  
Compulsory education for children aged 7 – 15 has been introduced.  
Almost  6  million  learners  are  fed  nationally  through  the  National  School  Nutrition 
programme.  
The  poorest  40%  of  our  schools  are  exempt from  school fees  and  have  a  no  fee 
policy.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 An  equalisation  of  per  capita  government  expenditure  between  races  has  been 
achieved.  
the  obvious, 
the  risk  of  stating 
the  causes  and  symptoms  of 
But despite this attention, as we all know, and as the NPC Commissioners put it clearly, “the 
system  is  grossly  underperforming.”  They  go  on  to  say  that  “several  comparative  studies 
show that South Africa’s educational outcomes are poorer than many poorer countries. Apart 
from a small minority of black children who attend former white schools and a small minority 
of schools performing well in largely black areas, the quality of education received by African 
learners remains poor. Literacy and numeracy tests are low by African and global standards, 
despite the fact that government spends about 6% of GDP on education and South Africa’s 
teachers are among the highest paid in the world (in purchasing-power parity terms)”.  
At 
this  systemic 
underperformance  are  complex.  Sometimes  they  seem  intractable.  But  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  overstate  the  consequences  since  there  is  a  clear  relationship  between  the 
education that an individual receives and their prospects in life.  
Of  course,  there  will  always  be  exceptional  individuals  who  transcend  this  generally  true 
cause-and-effect  relationship;  those  who,  despite  their  lack  of  education,  make  notable 
successes of their life. Equally, the converse is true; there are many people who, despite all 
the educational opportunities in the world, never realise their potential.  
But for most of us, the relationship between education and success is a reinforcing one, one 
which starts with our socio-economic prospects at birth. It is these prospects which set the 
first potential parameters of our lives. They have a significant impact on our cognitive ability 
in  early  childhood  and  on  the  degree  to  which  the  foundations  of  learning,  including  our 
capacity to be numerate and literate, will be successfully laid.  
In  turn,  these  early  childhood  foundations  have  a  direct  bearing  on  our  educational 
performance in our early school years. These early school years then go on to influence our 
Matric educational achievement. And despite all the limitations of a Matric qualification, it was 
for most of us the key determinant of our ultimate educational achievement. It still is.  
Finally,  more  than  any  other  factor,  it  is  the  quality  of  our  educational  achievement  that 
ultimately affects our labour market performance, not least because it is a large determinant 
of whether we will be able to enter the job market at all.  
And from there, the cycle continues because our ability to enter the labour market – or not – 
then goes on determine the socio-economic situation of our own children.  
This inter-dependency between many causal factors is something that we ignore at our peril. 
This critical early phase is also one that we too often overlook in our relentless focus on pass 
rates  and  one  pass  rate  at  that,  namely  Matric  exam  results.  This  focus,  while  important, 
occurs far too late in the learning cycle of a child.  
Without  question,  Matric  results  are  the  obvious  and  critical  ones  to  measure  and  assess 
ourselves against. It is simply unacceptable that we have such poor matric results in such an 
unacceptably  high  number  of  South  African  public  schools.  It  is  wholly  without  justification 
that  our  statistics  show  that  of  our  university  graduates,  only  22%  of  60  000  students 
graduated  within  the  specified  number  of  years.  With  the  result  that,  to  use  Heather 
Dugmore’s  words,  our  universities  “become  playgrounds  for  those  who  completed  a  sub-
standard matric (instead of) places of higher education established to nurture top academic 
skills”  
But,  as  Professor  Ruksana  Osman,  Head  of  the  Wits  School  of  Education  pointed  out  so 
correctly:  
“To look at the end result, Matric, and declare the public education system is failing without 
attending to the issues in early learning gives us a distorted picture of the schooling system 
as a whole.” She makes it clear that she is arguing “for looking at the teaching and learning 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
input  from  the  earliest  stage  of  schooling  and  not  just  the  final  output  of  schooling  –  the 
matric examination results.”  
This same point has been made by many others and I could not agree more. We need to be 
looking at the whole cycle and many indicators of success or signs of failure. We need to be 
broadening our definition of success to extend beyond just university degrees as an indicator 
and enabler of skills.  
Of the experts who have made this point are Mary Metcalfe, Mark Orkin and Jennie Glennie. 
In a newspaper article earlier this year, succinctly titled “Our pass rate focus is too narrow”, 
they outlined three critical additional indicators of success for education.  
The first is retention. In other words, are learners staying in school for a reasonable amount 
of time? This is not to say that all learners must, or will, finish 12 years of schooling. While 
this is unquestionably the ideal, the reality will always fall short. But how far does the reality 
fall short and for how many learners? Any situation where significant numbers of learners are 
leaving  the  schools  system  at  a  point  before  which  they  have  a  fundamental  and  critical 
mass of skill, cannot consider itself successful.  
The  second  is  quality.  Again,  this  is  a  self-evident  and  common  sense  indicator;  one  that 
speaks  of  meaningful  teaching  and  learning  and  reasonable  proportions  of  good  and 
excellent  marks  within  a  framework  of  high  standards.  Access  to  education  is  of  minimal 
benefit if the quality of that education is at best only marginally better than no education at 
all.  
The third additional indicator of success, over and above Matric pass rates, is equity. When 
education  provides  social  mobility  across  issues  such  as  gender,  race,  income  and  /  or 
geography, it can be judged to be successful. When a lack of equity entrenches, rather than 
transcends, social patterns, the opposite is clearly true.  
Within  this  cycle  of  interdependence,  and  the  debates  around  what  successful  education 
really looks like, quality Maths skills are critical – both as ends in and of themselves as well 
as means to various ends. In the same article I referred to earlier, Mary Metcalfe and her co-
authors  called  Maths  results  “the  litmus  test  of  system  quality  for  the  needs  of  a  modern 
economy.”  
And once again, the results of our litmus test are deeply troubling. While it is true that South 
Africa’s Maths pass rates have remained unchanged over the past few years, given that the 
number of candidates writing Matric Maths has declined, i.e. the denominator has decreased, 
basic  Maths  tells  us  that  the  numerator  must  have  decreased  too  for  this  ratio  to  have 
remained constant. And this is precisely the case.  
The number of maths passes at the 40%-plus level were down from 85 000 to 67 000 for the 
period  2009  to  2011.  Consequently,  we  have  18  000  fewer  matriculants  able  to  enter 
university  programmes  requiring  this  level.  This  decrease  is  compounded  by  marked 
differences between the provinces.  
While  the  pass  rates  of  27%  in  Limpopo  and  20%  in  the  Eastern  Cape  are  deeply 
concerning, there is scant consolation to be had from looking at the best performing areas; 
only  54%  of  learners  in  the  Western  Cape  achieved  Maths  passes  at  the  40%  plus  level 
compared to 45% in Gauteng.  
In defence of Limpopo and the Eastern Cape, however, it should be noted that 47% and 58% 
of  matric  candidates,  respectively,  at  least  attempted  maths.  In  the  Western  Cape  and 
Gauteng, however, it was only 35% and 38%.  
So, as with many things in life, the first and seemingly obvious problem we are presented 
with is not always the right problem and / or the only problem.  
Maths results are a litmus test not only because of the usefulness of maths skills in and of 
themselves but because such skills help develop a number of integrated thinking skills that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
are needed, today more than ever, to navigate a complex and changing world. Of course, 
maths is not the only thing that develops such integrated and integrative skills but it certainly 
helps lay a foundation.  
The  first  of  these  is  creative  thinking  skills.  While  it  may  not  seem  so  to  many  learners 
attempting to tackle an impenetrable calculus or algebra exam question, Maths really does 
help develop creative thinking skills, i.e. the ability to make connections between concepts 
and ideas that seem unconnected and unrelated.  
It was Steve Jobs, the founder of Apple, who said it best: “Creativity is just connecting things. 
When you ask creative people how they did something, they feel a little guilty because they 
didn’t really do it, they just saw something. It seemed obvious to them after a while. That’s 
because they were able to connect experiences they’ve had and synthesize new things.”  
Secondly,  maths  develops  those  problem-solving  skills  that  allow  people  to  recognise  not 
only that a problem exists but also to be clear on what the right problem is, and, from there, 
to devise appropriate means of resolving it. This is a skill that is much more difficult than it 
sounds. Not least because there is a marked difference between the complex problems of 
real life and the exercises we get presented with in text books.  
Thirdly,  maths  helps  develop  decision-making  skills,  i.e.  the  capacity  and  competence  to 
weigh up options and trade-offs between alternatives and, in the face of them, to make the 
best decision you can, at the time that you have to, with the information that you have.  
Finally, it helps develop the visualisation skills that allow us to imagine how things work – or 
could work – by looking at drawings, sketches or schematics.  
These integrative and holistic thinking skills are the ones that, at precisely the time we need 
them  the  most,  are  in  chronically  short  supply.  Not  least  because,  in  a  world  irrevocably 
changed  by  technology,  we  all  too  often  fall  into  the  trap  of  confusing  instant  access  to 
almost infinite information with knowledge itself.  
Clearly, information and knowledge are very different. Just as real education is very different 
from much of the education that gets offered up. Real education is not the rote learning of 
facts  that  many  of  us  were  subjected  to.  Instead,  it  is  the  development  of  all  our  latent 
abilities.  Similarly,  real  education  concerns  itself  less  with  teaching  us  what  to  think  and 
more with teaching us how to think.  
With these kinds of pressures facing all of us, the Reserve Bank is as subject as any other 
institution to the pressure to find positive ways to contribute and meaningfully enhance the 
capacity of our country.  
As  part  of  our  assessing  our  impact  on  stakeholders,  the  Bank  recently  concluded  an 
extensive corporate reputation study. It was the first of its kind that we had undertaken and 
helped us to understand how we are perceived by our stakeholders, what the key drivers of 
our  overall  reputation  are  and  what  critical  improvement  areas  and  areas  of  strength  we 
should address or leverage to further build our reputation. With the baseline now in place, we 
will be able to measure our progress as we proceed.  
The  results  of  the  survey  were  overwhelmingly  positive,  with  the  Bank  considered  highly 
respected  and  credible.  It  was  clear  that  our  stakeholders  trust  and  respect  us.  However, 
their  feedback  also  made  the  important  point  that  the  excellence  that  they  see  in  us  also 
imposes additional obligations on us. Specifically, stakeholders want and need us to engage 
even further with those parts of our society that are facing the most challenges, specifically 
education and the development of our youth.  
This feedback was very much in line with what the leadership of the Bank wanted to achieve. 
We had recognised the need to be more engaging with society and our stakeholders, and as 
part of a number of initiatives had taken a long, hard look at our Corporate Social Investment 
(CSI) policy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Of  course  CSI  is  only  a  small  component  of  a  company’s  overall  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility.  In  the  description  offered  by  the  World  Economic  Forum,  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility  is  “the  entire  contribution  that  a  company  makes to  society  through  its  core 
business activities, its social investment and philanthropy programmes and its engagement 
in public policy.”  
In the context of the current financial crisis, fundamental questions are being asked of central 
banks  around  the  world.  These  questions  go  to  the  heart  of  our  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility. What is the role that central banks should have played in averting the crisis? 
What  is the  role  we  should  play  going forward?  What  is  our  contribution  to  society  and  to 
public policy? What should it be?  
As with education, these are complex, and in some quarters, contested issues. But as these 
debates continue, one of our responses at the SARB has been to institute a new Corporate 
Social Investment strategy based on four principles.  
First of these principles was that the Bank’s CSI policy and activities should be informed. In 
other  words,  our  funding  and  partnership  decisions  should  be  grounded  in  research, 
benchmarking  and  an  understanding  of  the  legislative  and  other  imperatives  that  underpin 
the South African CSI environment, one in which billions are spent every year. Education and 
skills  development  are  universally  accepted  to  be  one  of  the  key  challenges  facing  South 
Africa.  It  is therefore  a critical  area for  support and  investment,  not  only  when  it  comes to 
filling  the  Bank’s  needs  for  skilled  and  trained  employees  but  also  for  meeting  the  many 
challenges South Africa faces.  
Secondly, they should be meaningful. We want to ensure that whatever activities the Bank 
engages  in  are  undertaken  in  such  way  that  there  is  a  real  investment  of  effort  and 
commitment  from  our  side.  This  will  not  only  maximise  benefit  for  the  Bank  but  also  for 
partner organisations and, by extension, for society as a whole. Given the Bank’s unique role 
in the country, as well as its strong base as an institution of knowledge and research, it has a 
unique  opportunity  to  add  considerable  value  to  many  organisations,  especially  those 
working in education.  
Critically too, our activities should be partner orientated. We were adamant that the Bank 
should not seek to “reinvent the wheel”. Instead, it should focus on finding examples of best 
practice  organisations  and  initiatives  and  partner  with  them.  As  and  where  the  Bank  does 
initiate something on its own, this would be the exception rather than the rule and only where 
a unique opportunity, one which by definition only we can fill, presents itself.  
Finally, we agreed that our CSI efforts should be aligned. In other words, we needed to be 
clear that the Bank’s CSI policy should be congruent with the Bank’s role as the central bank 
of  the  country,  its  strategy  and  its  values.  Our  consequent  focus  on  education  is  not  only 
aligned  with  the  Bank’s  culture  but  also  with  its  strategy,  one  which  sees  the  Bank 
increasingly  positioning  itself  as  a  knowledge  institution  with  domestic  and  international 
stakeholders.  
Within our educational focus, there are a number of initiatives that we are very proud of as 
the Bank. These include our partnerships with three of the country’s universities – Rhodes, 
WITS and Pretoria.  
The partnerships with the Centre for Economic Journalism at Rhodes and WITS Journalism 
were  motivated  by  the  recognition  that  the  Bank  should  seek  to  actively  play  a  role  in 
improving  the  level  of  economics  journalism  in  the  country.  Monetary  policy  is  a  complex 
subject and it became of increasing concern a few years ago that the reasoning behind our 
decisions was not always sufficiently understood by the journalists who communicated them 
to the broader public.  
Our work with the Chair of Monetary Policy Economics at the University of Pretoria also aims 
to deepen the understanding of, and research into, the subject and to develop capacity in the 
field in South Africa and the continent.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Our relationship with the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants is also one that we 
think is an important one given that we are working together to find, and nurture, talented up-
and-coming learners.  
At the same time, the generous bursaries that we give to talented students literally provide 
the potential to change the course of such student’s lives.  
But the project that we are particularly excited by this year is the pilot MPC Challenge which 
was  initiated  at  the  end  of  2010.  The  Challenge  was  run  in  conjunction  with  the  Gauteng 
Department of Education and modelled on initiatives run by other central banks around the 
world, including the Bank of England and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.  
The aim of the challenge was threefold. Firstly, to increase understanding in South African 
schools  of  the  role  played  by  monetary  policy  and  of  economics.  Secondly,  to  build 
relationships between the Reserve Bank, schools and learners and, thirdly, to get learners 
and schools excited about the subject of economics.  
Eighty  three  schools  from  across  the  province  were  chosen  to  participate  in  the  inaugural 
challenge.  The  initial  selection  of  schools  was  done  having  reviewed  all  Gauteng  schools’ 
2011  Matric  Economics results.  Only  schools  that  received  at  least  a  90%  pass rate  were 
invited into the inaugural challenge and invited schools represented all income quintiles and 
districts.  
The 56 schools that finally entered needed to select a team of between four and five Matric 
Economics learners. These teams were given data from the Bank’s Research Department to 
interrogate  over  the  course  of  a  few  weeks  in  May  and  June.  At  the  conclusion  of  the 
analysis  period,  each  team  then  submitted  a  1000  word  essay  to  the  Bank.  Team  essays 
followed the same format as the Bank’s Monetary Policy Statement, i.e. analysed local and 
global conditions and concluded with a decision as to what the country’s repo rate should be.  
Reserve Bank economists went through the initial essays and choose 5 finalist teams, who 
were  then  invited  back  to  present  to  members  of  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC). The months of hard work by both Bank staff and learners and schools culminated on 
the  7th  of  August  at  a  function  at  the  Bank  where  Krugersdorp  High  School’s  team  were 
announced  as  the  winners  of  the  inaugural  challenge.  Both  the  team  and  the  schools 
received  cash  prizes,  the  winning  teacher  a  laptop  and  the  team  also  became  eligible  for 
Reserve Bank bursaries.  
If you don’t remember the 7th of August, let me jog your memory by saying that it was the day 
that it snowed in Gauteng. Members of the Bank’s MPC Challenge team are still convinced 
that this  is  less  to  do  with  meteorological  conditions  and  more to  do  with  the fact  that  the 
walls  of  the  Bank’s  Conference  Centre  auditorium  were  resounding  to  the  sound  of  The 
Black-Eyed Peas’ “I gotta feeling” as part of the winners announcement and celebrations. For 
those of you who know central banks, this is about as common as snow on the Highveld.  
The team’s final prize was to come to the Bank on the 20th of September with their teacher 
and school principal, as my guests, to be present at the live MPC decision announcement to 
the media. They then joined members of the MPC at a small function hosted in their honour 
afterwards.  
The challenge really offered a wonderful opportunity to Matric Economics learners and their 
teachers  to make  a  very  abstract  subject  come  alive;  to  step  into  the  shoes  of  the  Bank’s 
Monetary Policy Committee and become central bankers for a few weeks and to be exposed 
to opportunities that might never have occurred to them otherwise.  
In  this  regard,  Matthew  Lester,  a  member  of  the  winning  team  from  Krugersdorp  High 
School, made an indelible impression on me and all the judges of the MPC Challenge at the 
function  after  the  MPC  statement.  In  response  to  the  question  “What  are  you  going  to  do 
after  school?”  he  quite  calmly  and  confidently  informed  us  that  he  was  going  to  study 
economics. While we were all nodding our approval, Matthew followed this up by pointing at 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Brian Kahn, my special advisor, and announcing that, once he finished his studies he was 
“going to join the Bank and then take his job.”  
The feedback from the Gauteng Department of Education, learners, teachers and the Bank’s 
members  of  staff  who  were  involved  was  overwhelmingly  positive;  so  much  so  that  it  was 
clear that we needed to continue  with the Challenge and to take it further. How to do this 
most  successfully  is  being  considered  at  the  moment  and  we  look  forward  to  announcing 
further details as soon as all necessary requirements are finalised.  
In conclusion, the words of one of the Gauteng Department of Education subject advisers we 
worked  with  on  the  MPC  Challenge  bear  repeating  and  remembering  by  all  of  us.  As  she 
said  it,  “it’s  not  about  how  much  we  pour  into  learners  but  how  much  we  plant”.  A  more 
feminine version perhaps of the Greek historian Plutarch’s wise admonition that “the mind is 
not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be lit.”  
Whichever way you say it though, the need to inspire and act was as true 2000 years ago in 
ancient Rome as it is in the world of the 21st century. It is as true for the Maths Centre as it is 
for the Reserve Bank. And it is as true when we work outside our respective organisations 
with our stakeholders as it is when we work within the boundaries of our organisation with 
each other.  
So,  as  we  all  navigate  extremely  challenging  times  –  ones  that  show  no  sign  of  ending  
soon – may we all work together to contribute to fixing the education system, to plant seeds 
of hope and opportunity and to light fires of commitment and ability. Only then will we truly be 
able to deliver on the potential that South Africa holds.  
Thank you.  
References  
http://www.careerkey.org/asp/career_development/thinking_skills.html  
http://www.mcpt.org/about-us/history.html  
http://www.npconline.co.za/pebble.asp?relid=132  
http://psychology.about.com/od/developmentalpsychology/ss/early-childhood-
development.htm  
http://www.timeslive.co.za/opinion/commentary/2012/01/15/our-pass-rate-focus-is-too-narrow  
http://www.wits.ac.za/alumni/news/features/12724/educationsystem.html  
Michael  Spence  (2011)  The  Next  Convergence:  the  future  of  economic  growth  in  a  multi-
speed world. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
