Mario Draghi: EUROPEAN CULTURAL DAYS of the ECB – France 2012 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  for  the  special 
supplement of Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, published on 7 October 2012. 
 This year the EUROPEAN CULTURAL DAYS of the ECB take place for the first time 
under your patronage as ECB President. Why is this cultural initiative important? 
I  was  very  happy  to  take  over  the  patronage  of  the  Cultural  Days  from  my  predecessors 
Jean-Claude Trichet and Wim Duisenberg. With this longstanding project, we aim each year 
to bring some of Europe’s cultural diversity to audiences in the Rhine-Main area and beyond.  
The  process  of  European  integration  involves  not  only  economic  and  political  cooperation, 
but also touches the cultural roots and common values which bind all Europeans together. 
Culture knows no national boundaries. Particularly in times such as the present, it is more 
important  than  ever  to  be  aware  of  our  shared  cultural  heritage  and  to  strengthen  this 
awareness further. On the path towards a common Europe, cultural exchange between the 
Member States plays a key role.  
I  am  very  pleased  that  France  is  the  focus  of  this  year’s  EUROPEAN  CULTURAL  DAYS, 
giving us an insight into the diverse cultural life of another EU Member State.  
What role do art and culture play in your life? 
I can hardly imagine life without art and culture, because they give impulses for new thinking 
and  creativity.  Art  presupposes  both  openness  and  tolerance  and  opens  up  new  ways  of 
seeing things that we should not ignore and which are essential for defining our quality of life 
and  our  future  in  a  positive  way.  Especially  as  we  have  such  busy  calendars,  I  think  it  is 
important to devote time to art and culture – although, unfortunately, I do not always manage 
to find time to do that myself. 
What do you particularly like about the EUROPEAN CULTURAL DAYS? 
The  nice  thing  about  the  Cultural  Days  is  that,  each  year,  we  can  enjoy  a  programme  of 
first-rate cultural events, and they also give emerging talents a chance to perform in front of a 
wide audience. The opening events are particularly exciting in that they give the upbeat to 
several  weeks  of  varied  performances.  The  programme  is  the  result  of  the  creativity  of 
artists, the support of many partners and sponsors, and the commitment of staff both at the 
ECB and the NCB of the theme country.  
I  very  much  enjoyed  last  year’s  opening  concert  by  the  Orchestra  Mozart  from  Bologna, 
conducted  by  Claudio  Abbado,  and  I  am  also  very  much  looking  forward  to  this  year’s 
opening  concert  by  one  of  France’s  most  renowned  baroque  ensembles,  Les  Talens 
Lyriques.  
This is the tenth year of the EUROPEAN CULTURAL DAYS. What do you think makes 
this cultural initiative a success? 
Without  the  support  of  our  longstanding  partners  and  sponsors,  not  to  mention  our  loyal 
audiences,  such  an  initiative  would  be  difficult  to  bring  to  fruition.  Our  well-established 
partnerships  with  the  City  of  Frankfurt,  reliable  sponsors,  local  cultural  institutions  and  our 
media partner hr2-kultur have enabled us for many years to present a unique insight, each 
autumn, into the contemporary culture of a different EU Member State.  
Two years ago, together with our longstanding partner, the City of Frankfurt, we began a new 
project:  the  charity  concert  of  the  EUROPEAN  CULTURAL  DAYS.  Under  the  heading  “A 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
concert  for  you”,  artists  perform  for  a  good  cause;  this  year’s  concert  will  be  given  by 
musicians  from  “Le  Cercle  de  l’Harmonie”.  Entry  to  the  concert  is  free,  but  audience 
members are asked to give donations for a selected Frankfurt-based charity. This year, we 
will be supporting the work of “DIE FRANKFURTER LESEPATEN”, whose volunteers help 
primary  school  children  from  various  cultural  backgrounds  aged  6  to  10  years  to  learn 
German. In choosing this charity, we would like to promote language acquisition – one of the 
most important factors for integration – and tolerance towards other cultures. This is in line 
with the underlying principle of the EUROPEAN CULTURAL DAYS: “Unity in Diversity”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
