Norman T L Chan: Global deleveraging – the right track 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Hong Kong Economic Summit 2013, Hong Kong, 10 December 2012. 
 At  this  very  same  forum  last  year,  I  put  forward  my  view  that  excessive  leveraging,  or 
over-borrowing,  in  major  industrialised  countries  was  the  root  cause  of  both  the  global 
financial crisis and the more recent sovereign debt crisis plaguing Europe. Today, I’d like to 
expound my view on this very important issue. 
As you may recall, I pointed out that during the period between mid-1950s and early 1980s, 
the  total  debts  of  households,  businesses  other  than  financial  institutions  and  the 
government  in  major  industrialised  countries  remained  relatively  stable  at  about  150%  of 
GDP. However this ratio kept increasing after the 1980s, reaching an alarming 320% even 
after the outbreak of the global financial crisis. 
As we all know, it is wonderful to have a credit line to meet our funding needs. We can use it 
to pay hefty tuition fees for our children studying abroad. We can use it to meet emergency 
needs, such as footing medical bills for a family member suddenly fallen ill. But more often 
than  not,  people  borrow  to  fulfil  their  desire  to  consume,  or  to  finance  their  property  and 
equity  purchases.  In  the  case  of  companies,  loans  may  be  crucial  to  their  business 
expansion plan, which would hopefully increase sales. On the government level, borrowings 
would really be handy when it wants to keep up public expenditure and to enhance welfare 
payments, healthcare and the military. This would not only improve the standard of living and 
employment, but also help boost national power and speed up economic growth. 
The list of wonders that borrowed money can bring goes on, but we almost forget there is a 
catch, that is, debts must be repaid somehow some day; and the higher the interest rates, 
the more we will have to pay back over time. For individual borrowers, except for those with a 
handsome pay rise, they can only hope to pay off earlier debts by reducing consumption in 
the  days  ahead.  Well-run  enterprises  should  have  no  problem  servicing  their  debt  if  their 
business  expansion  financed  by  loans  does  indeed  enhance  their  productivity  and 
competitiveness. Likewise, heavily indebted governments will be able to service their debts 
only when they have sustained economic growth and rising tax revenues. In other words, the 
ability  to  repay  debt  hinges  on  increased  productivity  and  improved  income,  or  otherwise, 
reduced future spending and increased savings.  
But despite the substantial GDP growth in major industrialised countries in the past 30 years, 
debts in these countries have piled up concurrently at an even more alarming rate. Advanced 
economies  from  across  Europe  and  the  US  to  Japan  have  all  sought  to  boost  economic 
prosperity,  standard  of  living  and  employment  with  ever  more  borrowings  and  increased 
consumption and public spending. To me, this seemingly euphoric approach to growth was in 
fact  driving  their  countries  into  a  “debt  abyss”.  That  was  clearly  unsustainable.  Indeed  it 
presented great risks to global financial and economic stability. For too long a time, the “deep 
abyss”  –  a  danger  masked  by  financial  innovation  and  market  failure  –  has  gone  largely 
unnoticed. In a convoluted twist of logic, some even commended debt-for-prosperity as being 
one of modern finance’s greatest contributions to the well-being of mankind. 
Then the crisis hit in 2008. Only then did the millennia-old wisdom of “Don’t Spend Beyond 
Your  Means”  suddenly  dawn  on  the  folks.  Meanwhile,  as  the  financial  markets  acted  to 
correct  their  excessive  tolerance  for  over-borrowing  by  households,  businesses  and 
governments,  market  failure  began  to  be  rectified.  I  explained  last  year  how  excessive 
leveraging became the root cause of the global financial crisis and the turmoil that followed, 
and the only solution  was to deleverage or cut debt. Deleveraging is an extremely difficult 
and  painful  process,  resulting  in  job  losses,  pay  cuts,  bankruptcies,  and  reduced  public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
services and social welfare. The standard of living stalls if not declines. My view is that for all 
the suffering and pain necessitated by the process, this is the only way to put global finance 
and growth on its right track. There is no alternative cure, unfortunately. 
My theory of excessive  leveraging being the main culprit of the financial crisis may not be 
shared  by  everyone.  But  make  no  mistake  –  deleveraging  is  now  a  cold  and  hard  fact  of 
reality in many advanced countries. Let’s look more closely at the sectors involved: 
(1) 
Households: Take the US as an example. We all know that the Americans are quite 
used  to  spending  on  credit.  But  we  should  note  in  particular  that  the  growth  in 
US household  debts,  which  doubled  between  2000  and  2007,  had  been  driven 
mainly by more and more people looking to buy a house on mortgage. This trend 
has in turn caused house prices to double in a short period unseen before. Looking 
further back, the ratio of average debt to after-tax income of the US households had 
remained at 80% in the past 50 years. But it shot up to a peak of 130% in end-2007 
and has been on a downward trend following the burst of the US property bubble, 
falling to the current level of 109%. Forced to cut debt but with rather subdued pay 
rises, many  US  households  have  no  choice  but  to  lessen  their  spending.  It  is  still 
uncertain  whether  this  process  of  deleveraging,  i.e.  increased  savings  and 
decreased spending combined, will continue. But the one thing we are certain about 
is  that  this  will  be  a  major  factor  affecting  consumer  demand  in  the  US.  Over  in 
Europe, many countries are similarly beset with huge debts. Despite the prevailing 
low  interest  rates,  efforts  to  cut  debt  have  to  be  kept  up,  which  can  restrain 
consumption and impede short-term growth. 
Corporates:  Corporates  have  always  sought  to  increase  profits  by  using  loans  to 
increase investment and expand operations. When the economy continues to boom, 
revving  up  demand,  increased  leveraging  looks  like  an  enterprising  approach  to 
increase  profits.  But  once  circumstances  shift,  companies  building  up  a  mirage of 
prosperity  after  years  of  reliance  on  loans  will  suddenly  find  themselves  mired  in 
massive  debts.  This  is  what  we  have  witnessed  across  the  major  industrialised 
countries. Though the debt levels of businesses differ from country to country – with 
those  in  Spain,  the  UK  and  France  among  the  highest,  it  is  obvious  that  they  all 
have no alternative but to reduce debt when demand has ceased to grow rapidly as 
before.  Those  that  are  not  healthy  enough  financially  might  even  have  to  go 
bankrupt. 
Banks: When we talk about deleveraging or cutting debt, we must also look at the 
role played by banks in the process. Of course, banks are not the sole provider of 
credit. Capital markets and the shadow banking sector are indeed among the other 
sources  contributing  to  the  rapid  expansion  of  credit  in  the  past  two  decades. 
However,  the  banking  sector  is  beyond  doubt  the  key  player  leading  the  major 
industrialised  countries  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  debt  abyss.  When  the  global 
financial crisis finally hit in 2008, many large international banks fell into complete 
disarray, sending governments to their rescue with huge amounts of public funds. 
After  this,  the  Group  of  Twenty  (G20)  decided  to  reform  the  banking  system.  A 
series of regulatory measures are introduced by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, aiming to strengthen the quality 
and quantity of capital requirements for banks. Basel III will take effect in January 
2013, and a more stringent Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Leverage Ratio will be put 
in place. Besides, the FSB has requested additional capital requirements and more 
stringent  regulatory  oversight  on  global  systemically  important  banks.  To  address 
moral  hazard  in  banks  which  are  considered  “too  big  to fail”,  they  are  required  to 
establish a so-called “living will” and recovery and resolution plan. I do not intend to 
go into details about these measures. But I would like to point out that from now on 
banks  will  require  more  capital  and  more  liquid  assets  for  their  financial 
intermediation activities, and that this is going to reduce their credit-creating ability. 
(2)  
(3)  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(4)  
This  will  inevitably  drive  up  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  individuals,  companies  and 
governments alike, thereby adding impetus to the process of deleveraging and debt 
reduction in the major industrialised countries. 
Government:  It  is  now  apparent  that  many  major  industrialised  countries  have 
over-borrowed. The problem has been exacerbated by the global financial crisis in 
2008.  Following  a  prolonged  period  of  incubation  by  market  failure,  the  European 
debt  crisis  was  finally  precipitated  by  Ireland  and  Greece.  The  crisis  has  since 
remained unresolved, and has even spread to core countries like Spain and Italy. 
Other countries of the European Union, including the UK and France, are faring not 
much better, though the markets have been more accommodative of their plight so 
far. The whole Europe is in fact mired in the “debt abyss”. For all the hard efforts by 
the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  to  minimise  the  risk  of  a  total  euro  collapse, 
President of the ECB, Mr Mario Draghi, once said that these were merely attempts 
to  buy  time,  so that  the  euro  zone  countries  could  implement fiscal  and  structural 
reforms. Hopefully the markets would be convinced that these reforms would help 
those countries reduce government debt and regain competitiveness.  
As regards fiscal reforms, the EU agreed on and signed the Fiscal Compact in March 2012. If 
implemented,  the  European  countries  concerned  will  have  to  pursue  rigorous  deficit 
reduction  plans  and  lower  their  total  sovereign  debt  to  GDP  ratio  to  60%  or  below 
within  years. Take Italy as an example. It will have to keep on reducing its government debt 
by  an  amount  equal  to 3%  of  GDP  annually  for  the  next  twenty  years  so  as  to  reduce  its 
current  debt-to-GDP  ratio  of  120%  to  the  target  of  60%.  This  shows  how  formidable  and 
painful  it  will  be  for  the  European  countries  to  re-establish  fiscal  discipline.  The  short  to 
medium term economic outlook for Europe is hardly optimistic. What I would like to point out 
here is that implementation of the Fiscal Compact will lead to significant deleveraging by the 
various European governments. 
Although  the  US  may  fare  better  than  Europe,  its  economy  is  heading  towards  the  “fiscal 
cliff”. Similar to Europe, it is also necessary for the US to make significant cut in expenditures 
in the medium to long term in order to regain fiscal balance and discipline. The situation in 
Japan  is  even  more  worrying.  Public  debt  in  Japan  has  now  exceeded  200%  of  GDP, 
excluding  civil  service  pension  and  other  contingent  liabilities.  Currently,  the  market  is  not 
concerned about Japan’s repayment ability as it is believed that the Japanese government 
will  continue  to  address  the  ever-increasing  deficits  by  maintaining  an  exceptionally  low 
interest  rate  environment.  However,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  market  was  treating  the 
European  countries  in  the  same  way  until  recently.  Once  market  sentiment  changes,  the 
situation can take a sharp turn and it would be very difficult to arrest a deteriorating trend. 
In  addition  to  the  pain  brought  about  by  deleveraging,  I  would  also  like  to  talk  about  the 
different forms of “quantitative easing” implemented by the various central banks. Why did 
these  economies  implement  “quantitative  easing”?  If  we  agree  that  the  root  cause  of  the 
global financial crisis is excessive leveraging, then the only solution would be deleveraging. 
However, in reality, the  process of deleveraging is just too painful. “Quantitative easing” is 
able to provide the much desired relief for everyone, be it a household in negative equity that 
has  overstretched  itself,  an  over-expanded  enterprise  or  a  government  faced  with  social 
unrest as a result of the stringent measures it is forced to implement. Yet, quantitative easing 
is the exact opposite of deleveraging. Quantitative easing aims at: 1. reducing the interest 
burden of highly leveraged individuals, enterprises and governments, and 2. propping asset 
prices,  lessening the  negative  wealth  effect  or  even  trying  to  create  positive  wealth  effect, 
enhancing  people’s  confidence  so  that  they  will  be  more  willing  to  spend,  and  increasing 
employment. 
However, quantitative easing is not a panacea. In the past three years, quantitative easing 
had  limited  stimulating  effect  on  the  real  economy.  There  are  several  reasons.  First, 
household deleveraging has reduced households’ propensity to consume, particularly for the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
lower income households. Secondly, with interest rate close to zero in the US, and the cost 
of current consumption already very low relative to future consumption, further interest rate 
cuts would have little effect in stimulating households to bring forward future consumption. 
Thirdly,  regulatory  reform  and  economic  uncertainty  are  restraining  banks’  ability  and 
incentive to lend. And we must not forget there is a price to pay for implementing quantitative 
easing, the interest income of depositors, including investment funds and retirees, is greatly 
reduced. Asset markets supported by an artificially low interest rate environment rather than 
economic  fundamentals  will  skew  resources  allocation  in  society  from  expanding  the 
productive  sectors  to  pursuit  of  asset  price  appreciation.  Such  a  shift  will  easily  lead  to 
investment  mismatch,  thereby  eroding  medium to  long  term  productivity  growth  as  well  as 
growth  potential  of  the  economy.  In  addition,  the  more  sizable  and  prolonged  quantitative 
easing  becomes,  the  more  difficult  and  riskier  will  be  the  exit  plan.  Central  banks  should 
realise that there is not much they can do. In order to solve the structural imbalances built up 
in the past two decades, we must get to the bottom of the problem. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  up  until  2008,  the  industrialised  countries  and  various  emerging 
economies had been enjoying a golden period of development which lasted for two to three 
decades. Income levels and living standards continued to rise. Some academics call this a 
period  of  “Great  Moderation”.  However,  no  one  is  sure  why  life  during  this  period  was  so 
easy. Some say that this is due to technological and financial innovation of modern society, 
the  so-called  “paradigm shift”. We  should  now  be  awakened  to  the  reality  that  this golden 
period  was  probably  underpinned  by  little  more  than  excessive  debts,  and  is  in  fact 
unsustainable. 
If  the  major  industrialised  countries  will  have  to  undergo  deleveraging  in  the  foreseeable 
future,  how  will  the  global  economy  evolve?  I  think  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  following 
situations will emerge: 
(1) 
The  more  a  country  is  indebted,  the  more  deleveraging  it  has  to  undergo.  It  is 
inevitable  that  economic  growth  and  employment  will  be  weak  and  the  living 
standards in some places where the problem is more serious may even deteriorate. 
Some  advanced  and  many  emerging  economies  do  not  need  to  bear  the  pain  of 
deleveraging due to their low level of debt. However, as other advanced economies 
have  to  undergo  deleveraging,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  go  back  to  the  “good  old 
days”  with  everybody  enjoying  a  prosperous  economic  development.  Countries 
around 
their  productivity  and 
competitiveness  so  as  to  capture  a  bigger  share  in  the  international  trade  arena 
where growth has slowed down. More importantly, major emerging economies, such 
as China, India, Brazil and Russia, would have to try their best to expand domestic 
demand and carry out reforms to improve productivity, so as to reduce their reliance 
on exports to the advanced economies and to achieve slower, yet more balanced 
and sustainable economic growth. 
the  world  will  have 
to  enhance 
to  strive 
(2) 
Another question  we  would  like  to  ask  is:  what  will  the  global  asset  market  be  heading?  I 
wish I have a crystal ball. All I can do is to make some assumptions and analyse different 
possibilities. 
(1) 
The first possibility builds on the assumption that the process of global deleveraging 
is  not  affected  by  quantitative  easing.  Under  these  circumstances,  if  asset  price 
inflation is driven by excessive leveraging, in theory, asset prices might drop first in 
search for a new equilibrium, and then stabilise at that point. Subsequently, asset 
prices  will  resume  rising  alongside  economic  recovery  and  a  rebound  in  people’s 
income. 
The second possibility is that quantitative easing produces the desired results. Asset 
prices go up, stimulating consumption, and employment improves significantly as a 
result.  This  buys  time  for  the  relevant  authorities  to  carry  out  reforms  to  enhance 
productivity so that, ultimately, asset price increases will be supported by economic 
(2) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(3) 
fundamentals. This is, of course, a very desirable scenario as global economy will 
return  to  its  normal  growth  path.  I  surely  hope  that  this  will  be  what  eventually 
happens. 
What  bothers  me  however  is  the  third  possibility,  under  which  the  process  of 
deleveraging is disrupted by quantitative easing, leading to sharp increases in asset 
prices in the first place. Yet, since such increases are not supported by economic 
fundamentals,  any  increase  in  wealth  will  be  seen  as  transient.  As  a  result, 
households are unwilling to increase spending and in the end, the real economy fails 
to rebound. If inflationary pressure builds up alongside asset price increases, central 
banks  may  consider  exiting  the  market  and  raise  interest  rates.  When  economic 
performance,  inflation  or  monetary  policy  falls  short  of  market  expectation,  asset 
prices might drop sharply and remain volatile.  
I am not sure which of these three scenarios will happen or whether a fourth scenario will 
emerge, as the current situation is something we have never experienced before. However, 
what I am certain is that since the outlook for macro economic and financial environment is 
very  uncertain,  it  is  highly  possible  that  we  will  continue  to  see  large  fund  inflows  and 
outflows as well as sharp fluctuations in the financial markets. Therefore, I would like to take 
this opportunity to ask everyone to stay alert to the risks ahead and be aware that the current 
environment is highly abnormal and uncertain. We should all take precautionary measures 
and  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  problem,  learn  from  others’  experiences  and  avoid 
overstretching ourselves. Otherwise, we may find ourselves being trapped in the debt abyss 
with no way out. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
