Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Opportunities facing Islamic finance and challenges in 
managing capital flows in Asia 
Outline  of  special  address  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  8th World  Islamic  Economic  Forum,  Johor  Bahru,  Malaysia, 
4 December 2012. 
 The Prime Minister of Malaysia, His Excellency Dato’ Sri Najib Tun Razak  
The President of Comoros, His Excellency Ikililou Dhoinine  
The President of the Islamic Development Bank, His Excellency Ahmad Mohamed Ali 
Chairman of the World Islamic Economic Forum Foundation Tun Musa Hitam 
Ministers and distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction  
It is my pleasure to be here today and have the opportunity to share some thoughts.  
Let  me first  congratulate  the WIEF  on  the  progress  it  has  made  in  establishing  itself  as  a 
leading international forum for economic leaders and opinion shapers from a broad range of 
countries  to  discuss  issues  of  interest  in  Islamic  Finance  and  related  themes  in  global 
finance. 
The  theme  of  the  Forum,  “Changing  Trends,  New  Opportunities”  is  particularly  relevant. 
Allow me to first offer a brief perspective on opportunities facing Islamic finance. I will then go 
on to talk about the challenges we face in Asia in managing capital flows in the aftermath of 
the Global Financial Crisis.  
Islamic finance: opportunities for growth  
The Islamic finance industry is estimated to have grown by some 19% per year since 2006 – 
to  record  nearly  US$1.3  trillion  of  total  shariah  compliant  assets  in  2012.  But  there  is  still 
considerable scope for its development: 
• 
• 
Islamic finance presently forms less than 1% the global financial industry. 
For  a  large  number  of  countries,  even  in  jurisdictions  with  substantial  Muslim 
populations,  Islamic  finance  currently  constitutes  less  than  5%  of  their  financial 
sector.1 
And despite a record level of sukuk issuance in 2012, the industry as a whole is still 
largely concentrated on the banking sector.2 There is much ahead in the journey to 
develop Islamic capital markets and the takaful (Islamic insurance) industry. 
 I believe the next 10–15 years offer significant opportunities for the growth and diversification 
of Islamic finance. Let me highlight the reasons to be optimistic about its prospects: 
                                                
1   Based on surveys of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB)’s members. 
2   The Islamic Finance Mar 2012 report by the UK Islamic Finance Secretariat, a private sector industry body, 
estimated  that  the  banking  sector  accounted  for  93%  of  the  global  Islamic  finance  industry,  with  capital 
markets at 5% and Takaful at 2%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   First,  Islamic financial  institutions  have  in  the main  escaped  significant damage  in 
the global financial crisis. They are well-placed to grow, at a time when many of the 
global  banks,  especially  the  European  banks,  are  deleveraging  or  focusing  on 
consolidating their balance sheets. 
Second, Islamic finance has much potential to diversify into new growth areas such 
as trade and infrastructure financing in Asia and the emerging markets.  
- 
These new areas will allow Islamic banks to reduce their exposure to the real 
estate  sector,  and  to  take  advantage  of  the  stronger  growth  potential  of  the 
emerging  market  economies.  There  are  gaps  to  be  filled  in  structured  trade 
finance  and  in  funding  for  infrastructural  projects  as  the  emerging  markets 
grow, and as global finance consolidates. 
Third, Islamic finance can also seek to meet the increased demand for simpler and 
more  transparent  products  and  ‘back-to-basics’  finance.  Investors  are  now  much 
more  circumspect  about  complex  products  and  their  risks.  The  crisis  taught 
investors worldwide not only about the damage they can face from the risks that are 
known and unsurprising, but of the risks of ‘what we do not know’. Islamic finance, 
with its focus on transparency, price certainty and risk-sharing, can ride this wave of 
demand for simpler and more basic investments. 
However, Islamic finance will have to overcome a few important challenges in order to grow 
its share in global finance and contribute to cross-border finance. These include the need to 
reduce fragmentation in Islamic finance markets due to differences in accepted standards of 
Shariah  compliance  between  regions,  jurisdictions,  and  in  some  cases  even  domestically 
within  jurisdictions. This  has  hampered the flow  of  liquidity  between  jurisdictions,  and  is  in 
part why there is yet no Islamic equivalents to the international money and bond markets.  
There  is  considerable  progress  being  made  to  address  these  challenges.  Bodies  such  as 
AAOIFI,3  IDB’s  Islamic  Research  & Training Institute,  and  Malaysia’s  International  Shariah 
Research  Academy  (ISRA)  have  made  significant  efforts  to  narrow  the  differences  in 
acceptability  of  Shariah  compliance.  The  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  in 
conjunction  with  international  standards  setting  bodies  such  as  the  Bank  of  International 
Settlements (BIS), IOSCO4 and IAIS5 and various regulators from Islamic and conventional 
jurisdictions, are also formulating international standards and best practices for the industry.  
Islamic  finance  is  also  seeing  increasing  interest  in  Asia.  We  are  seeing  financial 
institutions  leveraging  on  the  strengths  and  expertise  that  have  been  developed  in 
both  Islamic  and  conventional  financial  markets.  This  is  expanding  the  range  of 
Shariah-compliant  products  and  allowing  the  Islamic  finance  industry  to  tap  on  broad  and 
deep investor pools globally and in Asia.  
• 
Malaysia  is  widely  recognised  as  a  leader  in  Islamic  finance,  in  particular  for  the 
issuance of sukuks. 
Islamic finance is also seeing growing interest in other Asian financial centres such 
as Singapore, Hong Kong and Tokyo. 
Just recently in mid-November 2012, institutional and private investors in Singapore 
and HK were the largest investors in the US$15.5 billion global sukuk issued by the 
Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank (ADIB). 
                                                  
3   AAOIFI is Accounting & Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions 
4  
5  
International Organisation of Securities Commissions 
International Association of Insurance Supervisors 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Between  our  two  countries,  we  are  seeing  Malaysian  banks  collaborating  with 
Singapore corporates and financial players to structure S$ denominated corporate 
sukuk  programmes.  And  Singapore-listed  companies  are  venturing  out  to  tap  the 
Ringgit sukuk market in Malaysia. These are trends that we are keen to encourage.  
To  repeat  therefore, I  am  optimistic  that  we  can  realise  the  significant growth  potential  for 
Islamic finance in the next 10–15 years. 
Managing the challenge of capital flows in the post-crisis era 
Let me move on now to say a few things about the challenges that many in the emerging 
world  face  in  managing  capital  flows,  particularly  in  the  face  of  the  extremely  low  interest 
rates being set in the advanced economies (AEs). 
We are in an unprecedented situation. Interest rates are expected to stay extremely low in 
the US and much of the advanced world for a few years, reflecting decisions by their central 
banks  to  keep  monetary  conditions  highly  accommodative  until  their  economies  resume 
normal growth. There is debate among economists on how effective these activist monetary 
policies, such as the US Fed’s QE3 strategy, will be  in reviving entrepreneurial spirits and 
private investments. If the strategy succeeds and the US economy recovers, it will be a plus 
for Asia as well. 
In the meantime, however, there are significant implications for emerging market economies, 
as  global  investors  search  for  better  returns  –  better  than  the  near-zero  rates  they  get  on 
cash and treasury bills. With large amounts of liquidity now moving between markets, 
short-term shifts in investor sentiment leads to volatility in capital flows. We have seen 
how  a  shock  in  the  European  periphery  can  send  money  that  was  invested  in  emerging 
markets rushing back to the US or other safe havens. 
To be clear about it, there is a lot that is good about capital flows, including even short term 
flows.  They  add  liquidity  to  markets,  by  bringing  more  buyers  and  sellers  together. 
However, we know too that capital inflows can also be too much of a good thing. They can 
lead to asset prices, or exchange rates, becoming disconnected from fundamentals. 
And the sudden withdrawal of capital from emerging economies when investors switch from 
‘risk on’ to ‘risk off’ in their portfolios can be destabilising.  
As I mentioned, the current global condition is unprecedented. The policy responses in the 
advanced countries too are without precedent. Globally therefore, we need some humility in 
understanding the  benefits  and  costs  of QE3  and  easy  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced 
countries. But it will be wise to strengthen our policy toolkits in Asia, so that we can 
deal with unpredictable and often excessive capital flows. 
There are some lessons that come out of our experiences in Asia and elsewhere, and policy 
responses that we can learn from each other. I will mention three sets of policy responses 
that will inevitably have to figure in our toolkits.  
First, there is much sense in curtailing volatility in the exchange rate over the short-term. The 
costs of volatile and uncertain exchange rates are high in small open economies especially – 
which  is  what  most  of  our  ASEAN  economies  are.  Accordingly,  Malaysia,  Singapore  and 
several other Asian countries have not felt comfortable leaving their exchange rates entirely 
to market forces. Their central banks, within each of their monetary policy frameworks, have 
sought to instil a focus on longer term fundamentals.  
There is merit in allowing exchange rates in Asia’s emerging economies to appreciate 
gradually over the long term, reflecting their more rapid growth. If we resist these long term 
trends, we are likely to see more inflation in our economies. But some stability in the short 
term is wise.  
Second, macro-prudential policies are now an important part of the policy tool kit. Many 
Asian countries have introduced new macro-prudential measures to try and avoid bubbles in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
their  property  markets  over  the  last  two  years.  Malaysia  brought  in  stricter  limits  on 
loan-to-value ratios on housing loans. Singapore and Hong Kong have done similarly, and 
have  introduced  additional  stamp  duties  or  transaction  taxes  to  discourage  speculative 
demand for residential properties.  
targeted  administrative  and  prudential  measures  are  not  conventional 
These 
macro-economic tools. But they are likely to remain part of our policy toolkit, at least for 
the foreseeable future, given the real risks to macro-economic stability that an environment 
of very low global interest rates poses. 
A third and more fundamental strategy has to focus on building greater depth in Asia’s 
capital markets, while ensuring that our banking systems remain sound. A good example of 
this strategy is in fact in Malaysia. Bank Negara’s Financial Sector Blueprint II (2012–2020), 
released as part of the government’s Economic Transformation Programme (ETP), will build 
on  the  solid  foundations  of  Malaysia’s  financial  system,  including  developing  a  deep  and 
vibrant bond market. 
The  banks  in  several  leading  Asian  countries,  including  Malaysia  and  Singapore,  are 
generally  well-managed and well-capitalised. They  were a source of strength for us during 
the  global  financial  crisis.  However,  Asia’s  capital  markets,  and  especially  the  corporate 
bond markets,  need  much  more  depth. Broader and deeper capital markets will allow 
investors to invest for the long term while hedging against risks. They will help us meet 
the growing infrastructural and other long term investment needs of the region.  
This is therefore a very important priority in the region, and there is in fact significant scope 
for future development of Asian capital markets. Regulators are working to harmonise rules 
and  market  practices  across  the  region,  such  as  issuance  procedures  and  settlement 
standards. We also need to develop the securitisation markets, with appropriate safeguards, 
so that banks can recycle their capital. 
More too is being done to boost linkages between our markets and economies. We have to 
pool liquidity across our markets, so as to add depth to the Asian capital market. An example 
is  how  the  Malaysian  stock  exchange,  Bursa  Malaysia,  the  Singapore  Exchange  and  the 
Stock Exchange of Thailand recently launched an ASEAN Trading Link. 
We are also cooperating to encourage financing for infrastructure projects in the region. The 
ASEAN Infrastructure Fund (AIF), an initiative that was led by Malaysia, is a good example. It 
will pool resources, knowledge and experience among ASEAN governments and the Asian 
Development  Bank  (ADB)  for  loans  to  sovereign  or  sovereign-guaranteed  infrastructure 
projects.  The  Fund  will  also  issue  bonds,  so  as  to  bring  in  private  sector  and  institutional 
investors.  
Another example of such cooperation in the region is the Credit Guarantee and Investment 
Facility (CGIF) amongst the ASEAN+3 countries, which aims to help companies in ASEAN+3 
countries  raise 
the 
governments’ guarantees on their corporate bonds, thereby reducing risk for bond-holders.  
Projects  such  as  Iskandar  Malaysia  are  also  a  prime  example  of  how  intra-regional 
investments can be encouraged, and how countries in our region can develop competitive 
strengths jointly.  
• 
Iskandar  Malaysia’s  performance  has  been  impressive  –  poised  to  exceed  its 
targeted RM100 billion investment mark by the end of this year. 
I  am  glad  there  is  good  progress  on  the  joint  venture  by  Temasek  Holdings  and 
Khazanah  Nasional,  Pulau  Indah  Ventures  Sdn  Bhd  to  co-develop  two  separate 
sites in Medini.  
Other significant projects include a S$1.5 billion integrated eco-friendly tech-park by 
Ascendas and Malaysia’s UEM Land Berhad in Nusajaya (one of the five flagship 
investment  by  providing 
infrastructure 
financing 
term 
long 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
 zones  in  Iskandar).  Once  completed,  the  park  will  accommodate  a  range  of 
industries including electronics and precision engineering. 
Just in the last month, we have seen other significant investment commitments in 
Iskandar reported by Singapore companies. 
 Iskandar Malaysia will enhance the complementary space between our two economies. It is 
a win-win. To ensure continued progress in Iskandar, Singapore and Malaysia will continue 
to  take  steps  to  improve  connectivity,  cross-border  trade  facilitation,  and  immigration 
processes. 
Conclusion 
I would like to conclude by emphasising once again that I am basically optimistic about the 
prospects  in  our  bilateral  and  regional  cooperation.  We  face  many  challenges  in  this 
post-Global Financial Crisis era. But the opportunities for us in Asia are intact, and our ability 
to cooperate with each other to achieve our full potential as a region is an asset for all our 
countries.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
