Daniel Mminele: South Africa and the G-20 – challenges and 
opportunities 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
G-20  Study  Group,  “South  Africa  and  the  G-20  –  challenges  and  opportunities”,  Southern 
Sun Pretoria, 31 October 2012. 
 Introduction  
1. 
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen.  
Thank  you  to  the  South  African Institute  of International  Affairs and  the Centre for  Human 
Rights  at  the  University  of  Pretoria  for  the  kind  invitation  to  participate  in  this  study  group 
meeting. I have been asked to introduce today’s discussion by sharing some thoughts with 
you on the G-20, insofar as South Africa, including the central bank, has thus far experienced 
and shaped our relationship with this global forum. I have no doubt that there is a lot to learn 
from  each  other  on  this  topic,  and  I  look  forward  to  the  discussion  later  and  to  the 
contributions from the discussants sitting on the panel with me.  
G-20 and its participation structures  
2.  
As much as you may all be quite familiar with the G-20, I thought it best to start with a brief 
review  of  the  forum,  so  as  to  better  place  the  discussion  in  context.  Established  in  1999, 
comprising 19 countries and the European Union, the G20 was initially a forum of Finance 
Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors.  The  group  was  created  in  response  to  the  Asian 
financial  crisis  of the  late  1990s,  and  as  reflected  in  its  founding  mandate,  its  role  is  “...to 
prevent  another  regional  or  global  financial  crisis”  through  the  involvement  of  systemically 
relevant  advanced  and  emerging-market  economies  in  discussions  relating  to  the  global 
economy and global economic governance. 
Since  inception,  G-20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  have  met  annually, 
however, in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008 it was recognised that given the 
enormity  of the  crisis, coordination  at the  highest  level  of  member  countries  was  required, 
and this resulted in the forum starting to meet at Heads of State/Heads of Government level, 
with  the  first  so-called  Leaders’  Summit  convened  in  Washington,  D.C.  by  US  President 
George  Bush.  As  you  are  aware,  six  more  such  summits  followed,  with  the  most  recent 
taking place in June this year in Los Cabos. At the 2009 Pittsburgh Summit, G-20 Leaders 
declared  the  G-20  the  premier  forum  for  international  economic  co-operation,  effectively 
replacing  the  G-7  which  comprised  only  the  advanced  economies.  This  move  was  in 
recognition of the critical role emerging-market economies could play in driving global growth 
and their potential to provide resources for global financial stability and contribute to in crisis 
prevention and resolution initiatives.  
The  G-20  has  no  permanent  secretariat  of  its  own,  and  the  G-20  chair  rotates  among 
members, selected from a different regional grouping of countries each year. The incumbent 
chair establishes a temporary secretariat for the duration of its term, co-ordinates the group’s 
work and hosts its meetings.  
The  work  of  the  G-20  is  organised  in  two  main  streams  or  tracks:  the  so-called  “Sherpa 
track”, which prepares for the Leaders’ Summits, and the “Finance track”, which prepares for 
Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors’  meetings.  The  Leaders’  Summits  are 
attended  by  the  Heads  of  State,  Finance  Ministers  and  Foreign  Affairs  Ministers.  Central 
Bank Governors do not generally participate in the Leaders’ Summits, but in some instances 
do  form  part  of  the  government  delegation.  G-20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors meetings, as well as Leaders’ Summits provide political guidance and direction on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  key  focus  areas  of  the  G20  work  programme.  Work  of  a  technical  nature  is  normally 
undertaken  by  G-20  working  groups  and  study  groups,  as  well  as  key  international 
organisations  and  standard  setting  bodies,  providing  regular  interim  reports  to  Finance 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors in the build-up to the Leaders’ Summits. The dialogue, 
especially  under  the  Mexican  Presidency,  has  been  broadened  to  include  a  multitude  of 
consultative  fora,  such  as  the  so-called  B20  (global  business  leaders  from  member 
countries),  G20YES  (Young  Entrepreneurs  Summit),  Think20  (academia  and  think  tanks), 
Y20 (Youth Forum), L20 (trade unions from member countries), as well as meetings of G-20 
Agricultural and Trade Ministers. Essentially we are now looking at the G-20 being a forum 
which addresses wide range of economic, financial, social and cultural issues.  
The agenda of the G-20  
3. 
The Presidency of the G-20 in a particular year develops its agenda in consultation with the 
other  members  of  the  forum.  The  G-20  Troika,  consisting  of  the  past,  current  and  next 
presidency  of  the  G-20,  plays  a  major  role  in  this  regard.  The  Agenda  of  the  G-20  has 
evolved over the years, although the focus has remained broadly unchanged since the 2008 
global financial and economic crisis. Much of the work in the G-20 has since revolved around 
three key areas, namely:  
a.  
Policy  coordination  between  members  in  an  effort  to  achieve  global  economic 
stability and sustainable growth;  
Promoting global financial regulation to reduce risks and prevent future crises; and  
Reform of the international financial architecture/international monetary system.  
b.  
c.  
Other areas of focus are development issues, commodities, and climate finance.  
A  number  of  working  groups  have  been  formed  since  2008,  and  South  Africa  has  been 
nominated  to  co-chair  some  of  these  working  groups,  such  as  the  Reform  of  the  IMF, 
Development, Financial Inclusion and the Climate Finance Study Groups. South Africa also 
participates in all the working groups, contributing to the discussions and putting forward our 
country positions and views and to ensure that our positions are captured in meetings of the 
Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors,  and  at  Leaders’  Summits.  Although  G-20 
documents have no legal status, they serve as binding statements for members, and are a 
basis for further work.  
I thought I would briefly give you a flavour of how the work of the G-20 has evolved over the 
years, although much more detail is available on the G-20 website. Leaders’ Summits are the 
key agenda setting fora, and I will touch on some of the key milestones in this regard.  
The first G-20 Summit in 2008, held in Washington D.C. during the very early stages of the 
global financial crisis, was primarily focused on G-20 co-operation, strengthening economic 
growth, dealing with the financial and economic crisis, and laying the foundation for stricter 
financial regulation. There was also recognition of the need to reform the IMF, World Bank 
and other Multilateral Development Banks (MDB) and the need to resist trade protectionism 
and  work  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  Doha  Round.  During  the  London  Summit  in  April 
2009, the focus turned towards co-ordinated fiscal and monetary stimulus measures to avert 
the threat of global depression. Leaders also agreed on additional resources for the IMF and 
MDBs  to  assist  countries  weather  the  financial  crisis,  and  resources  of  up  to  US$1  trillion 
were provided to the IMF. The FSB was established as a successor to the Financial Stability 
Forum  (FSF)  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  with  key  emerging-market 
economies  represented  on  the  Board,  which  was  a  departure  from  the  FSF  which 
represented  only  advanced  economies.  In  September  that  same  year,  at  the  Pittsburgh 
Summit, Leaders agreed on the implementation of a Framework for Strong, Sustainable and 
Balanced Growth.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
By  the  June  2010  Toronto  Summit,  fears  were  escalating  over  the  fiscal  health  of  various 
advanced economies, and advanced deficit economies agreed to at least halve fiscal deficits 
by 2013, and stabilise or reduce sovereign debt ratios by 2016. These commitments included 
on-going  structural  reform  across  all  G-20  members  to  rebalance  and  strengthen  global 
growth. An agreement to conclude work in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision on 
a  new  global  regime  for  bank  capital  and  liquidity  was  also  reached.  In  November  2010, 
Leaders adopted the Seoul Action Plan which outlined the actions that members committed 
themselves  to  implementing  to  kick-start  global  growth,  and  the  Seoul  Development 
Consensus  for  Shared  Growth  which  relates  to  commitments  by  members  to  support  the 
global  development  agenda,  including  contributing  towards  achieving  the  Millennium 
Developments Goals.  
At  the  June  2012  Los  Cabos  Summit,  Leaders  pledged  over  US$450  billion  in  financial 
resources  to  boost  the  IMF  firewall.  The  European  sovereign  debt  and  banking  crisis  has 
received  much  attention,  with  the  spillover  effects  to  other  member  countries  in  a  globally 
interconnected world taking centre stage, and the need for policy makers in Europe to take 
decisive  and  credible  action  featuring  strongly.  Much  of  this  focus  on  short-term  crisis 
management  measures  have  unfortunately  come  at  the  expense  of  progress  on  other 
important  medium-term  objectives  of  the  G-20.  As  we  near  the  end  of  the  Mexican 
Presidency, the next key decision on the IMF quota formula needs to be taken, which I will 
come back to later. Under the Mexican presidency in 2012, an impact study of Basel III on 
emerging-market  economies  was  conducted,  and  financial  access,  innovative  sources  of 
financing and addressing corruption have also been adopted as Agenda items.  
In  2013,  Russia  takes  over  the  Presidency  of  the  G-20.  We  await  further  details  on  the 
Agenda, which we hope will be more focused and concentrate on the three main issues of 
global growth, regulation and the international monetary system.  
Opportunities and challenges of South Africa’s participation in the G-20  
4.  
South  Africa’s  membership  of  the  G-20  provides  enormous  opportunities.  As  a  small  and 
open economy, South Africa has an interest in seeing the G-20 Agenda succeed because of 
our  level  of  interconnectedness  within  the  global  economy.  As  the  only  African  country 
represented in the G-20, this membership provides South Africa with the space to influence 
key international policies that could have an impact on our own economy, the region and the 
continent  as  a  whole.  As  the  sole  African  representative  at  the  table,  South  Africa  also 
endeavours to highlight regional and continental issues, albeit without any formal mandate. 
Our  network  of  contacts  from  our  interactions  in  various  G-20  formations  provides  great 
opportunities to leverage these to advance various other objectives and to enhance South 
Africa’s international profile and reputation.  
The key players to ensure meaningful participation in deliberations at G-20 meetings with the 
view to influence outcomes in line with South Africa’s and Africa’s development and growth 
priorities  are  the  Presidency,  the  Department  of  International  Relations  and  Cooperation 
(Dirco),  the  South  African  National  Treasury,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (the  Bank), 
with  the  support  of  various  other  governmental  departments  and  the  Cabinet.  The 
Presidency,  Dirco  and  the  National  Treasury  normally  play  the  leading  role  on  behalf  of 
South Africa in the forum, while the Bank plays a meaningful role in its areas of expertise, 
particularly on financial and regulatory matters.  
Domestically, South Africa consults with a number of stake holders, including NEPAD, civil 
society including NGOs, and the academia. Regionally, the Group of Ten African Countries 
(the C10) was formed in 2009 in order to solicit views and opinions from countries across the 
continent on how the G-20 may address their concerns. It has to be admitted, however, that 
the consultation process could be more effective, and that more could be done to strengthen 
these initiatives and to ensure that they work as intended. Hence, a key challenge for South 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Africa is to identify key priority areas where it could influence the G-20 policy and agenda for 
the benefit of the country and region.  
Another challenge is to ensure that as South Africa’s role grows internationally, and we are 
more  and  more  recognised  as  an  important  voice  at  the  table,  we  are  able  to  commit 
sufficient resources to be able to respond appropriately. In order to address this challenge, 
the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  currently  in  the  process  of  setting  up  a  dedicated 
international economic relations and policy department.  
South Africa chaired the G-20 in 2007, and focused predominantly on IMF quota and voice 
reform. As a result of South Africa’s efforts, together with other members of the G-20, the 
2008  quota  and  voice  reforms  of  the  IMF  were  adopted.  Significant  deadlocks  were 
overcome  during  deliberations  among  the  G-20  members,  most  importantly  agreeing  to 
include Purchasing Power Parity as a component of GDP in the quota formula, which paved 
the way for several emerging-market countries to gain from the future quota reforms. Hence, 
South Africa, alongside Australia, was asked in 2010 to co-chair the G-20 Working Group on 
IMF reform. In this regard, South Africa and Australia played a key role in guiding the IMF’s 
governance reform programmes. A key challenge for South Africa, however, will be to ensure 
that while it supports the reform agenda of the IMF, it does not end up, together with Africa, 
being net losers in this reform process. This remains a major obstacle for the country in this 
year’s G-20 discussions, as we near the conclusion of the Fourteenth Review of the quota 
formula. The issue of a third chair for Sub-Saharan Africa in the IMF executive board is a 
clear example of the difficulty the Continent faces in IMF governance deliberations.  
As  a  member  of  the  BRICS,  South  Africa  also  has  the  opportunity  to  align  some  of  its 
positions with those of its BRIC partners, while gaining support from BRIC for its positions 
within the G-20. However, this is easier said than done, because even among the BRICS, 
positions  are  not  always  aligned. Whilst  on  the  subject  of  alignment,  although  the  G-20  is 
essentially  a  grouping  of  the  G-7  plus  systemically  important  emerging-market  economies 
and  Australia,  there  is  no  natural  alignment  of  groups  within  the  forum.  It  has  become 
necessary to move away from the traditional views of alliances that address issues along the 
lines of North/South or advanced versus emerging/developing countries, etc. to alliances that 
are  outcomes  based  and  follow  specific  interests  as  regards  various  agenda  items. 
Depending on the issue at hand, South Africa aligns itself with different groups to ensure that 
decisions on key issues reflect our country’s best interest. With regard to quota and voice 
reform  in  the  IMF,  for  example,  South  Africa  is  mostly  aligned  with  emerging-market 
economies.  However,  with  regard  to the financial  transactions  tax  that  was  mooted  by  the 
Europeans, South Africa opposed this proposal and was supported by a few other advanced 
economies. South Africa is aligned with advanced economies on the issue of climate finance, 
while other developing countries generally feel that this issue is best addressed at the United 
Nations.  The  challenge  for  South  Africa  is  to  formulate  its  positions  carefully,  taking  into 
consideration  country  circumstances,  and  partner  with  countries,  be  it  emerging-market  or 
advanced countries, to push forward these positions.  
Prospects for South Africa within the G20  
5.  
South  Africa  has  the  potential  to  contribute  significantly  to  the  Growth  and  Development 
Agenda of the G-20, with a particular focus on low-income countries and sub-Saharan Africa. 
In  2010  the  G-20  Leaders  declared  in  Toronto  that  “Narrowing  the  development  gap  and 
reducing poverty are integral to our broader objective of achieving strong, sustainable and 
balanced growth and ensuring a more robust and resilient global economy for all.”1 
                                                
1   Toronto Declaration, June 26–27, 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
At the Toronto Summit, the G-20 Leaders confirmed the inclusion of development as a key 
agenda topic at the Seoul Summit and agreed to establish a Working Group. In 2010 South 
Africa,  alongside  Korea,  was  nominated  to  co-chair  the  G-20’s  Working  Group  on 
Development,  which  sought  to  address  issues  of  significant  importance  to  the  African 
continent, in particular infrastructure development. In 2011, South Africa was included as the 
co-chair  of  this  group  together  with  Korea  and  France. While  development  issues  are  not 
prominent on the G-20’s Agenda, South Africa together with Korea, provided the necessary 
leadership when it was decided to include development issues on the G-20’s Agenda.  
South  Africa  could  use  this  process  to  position  itself  strongly  in  the  G-20  discussions  on 
growth and development, to focus on the underdevelopment of various regions in the global 
economy, including sub-Saharan Africa, and promote these discussions on the global policy 
agenda.  
As part of the G-20’s focus on financial inclusion, South Africa and Germany co-chaired the 
SME  finance  sub-group,  with  the  focus  to  crowd-in  the  private  sector  by  incentivising  it  to 
develop  innovative  ways  of  financing  SMEs  through  a  G-20  SME  Challenge  launched  in 
Toronto.  In  2012,  South  Africa  remained  actively  involved  in  this  area  together  with  the 
United  States.  While  South  Africa, 
together  with  other  emerging-market  countries, 
acknowledges that it still has a long way towards improving financial inclusion in the country, 
the fact that it is encouraged to play a leading role in this endeavour within the G-20 could 
help it to expedite financial inclusion policies in the country.  
South Africa has a strong financial sector, and has used this to its advantage to contribute to 
G20 discussions to highlight its experience. In this regard, South Africa together with other 
emerging-market  countries  put  in  a  concerted  effort  highlighting  the  potential  unintended 
consequences of some of the Basel III proposals, without detracting from its firm commitment 
to  implementing  regulatory  reform.  Working  together  with  peers  within  the  G-20,  a  review 
was done of potential unintended consequences of financial regulations on the economies of 
emerging-market countries, and a number of changes were proposed to the address some of 
these  unintended  consequences.  South  Africa  will  continue  to  utilise  its  experience  in  the 
area  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision  to  influence  the  outcomes  of  financial  reform 
initiatives.  
South Africa is actively promoting reform measures that enhance the credibility of its financial 
system,  while  promoting 
fairness  and  global  accountability  and 
harmonisation  of  financial  regulations  across  jurisdictions,  as  well  as  to  ensure  that 
commitments agreed upon at a global level are implemented locally as appropriate. Its efforts 
to implement Basel III regulations including twin peaks regulatory reform measures underline 
these endeavours.  
South  Africa’s  participation  in  the  G-20  helps  leverage  its  voice  and  effectiveness  in  other 
international  standard-setting  bodies  such  as  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  Basel 
Committee on Bank Supervision; the Committee of Insurance, Securities and Non-banking 
Financial  Authorities,  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  and  the  International  Association  of 
Deposit Insurers.  
We have also been supportive of the efforts to strengthen the financial position of the IMF, as 
reflected  by  our  inclusion  in  the  IMF’s  New  Arrangements  to  Borrow  Initiative  (NAB)  and 
US$2 billion loan made available towards strengthening the IMF firewall. However, the IMF is 
a  quota  based  institution  and  there  is  a  general  recognition  that  the  current  IMF  quota 
formula, while an improvement on previous formulas, remains flawed in that it does not fully 
recognise  the  changing  economic  weight  of  emerging  market  and  developing  countries.  I 
have already touched on this issue earlier, but would like to reiterate that any shift in quota 
shares that may benefit specific emerging and developing countries should not come at the 
expense of other emerging-market and developing economies, and it is important that South 
Africa ensures the protection of its quota share.  
the  principles  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Finally, South Africa and France have been appointed to co-chair the study group on climate 
finance. G-20 countries are divided on whether this issue should be considered in the G-20 
forum,  or  be  addressed  within  the  United  Nations  under  the  so-called  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). No matter what the final decision will 
be, South Africa is in this instance considered to be a credible broker to hear the views of the 
opposing parties, which enhances the stature of the country in the forum.  
Challenges for the G-20 as a forum  
6. 
The G-20 as a forum has the potential to contribute significantly to global dialogue and policy 
debate.  Of  late,  it  seems  that  the  forum  has  moved  beyond  its  teething  problems  and 
idealism  as  a  forum  for  co-operation  and  co-ordination,  towards  being  viewed  as  an 
institution where process issues are becoming more prominent and actions more difficult to 
agree on or to implement.  
At the start of the global financial crisis, there was significant co-operation and co-ordination 
within  the  G-20,  however,  many  G-20  countries  have  since  become  increasingly  inwardly 
focussed and critical of the policies of other members of the forum. This was particularly so in 
the  aftermath  of  the  implementation  of  quantitative  easing,  which  had  repercussions  for 
capital inflows and currency appreciation in emerging-market countries. Advanced countries 
have  countered  that  some  emerging-market  countries  were  accumulating reserves  beyond 
what  was  needed  for  economic  reasons,  which  has  contributed to  weaker  exchange  rates 
than was dictated by economic fundamentals.  
Another  challenge  for  the  G-20  relates  to  its  increasing  number  of  meetings  alongside  an 
ever  growing  agenda,  which  has  led  some  members  to  question  the  validity  of  so  many 
meetings and the ability to focus with such a wide ranging agenda.  
While the G-20 as a group makes up about 80 per cent of global trade and global GDP, it 
consists of only 19 countries, which effectively excludes more than 160 countries. Only one 
African country is represented in the forum. The Nordic countries in particular are very critical 
of the group, given that the regulatory policies adopted by the G-20 through the FSB and the 
Basel  Committee  affect  them  directly.  Hence,  the  G-20  needs  to  do  significantly  more 
outreach to obtain the views of countries that are not in the forum, but that are affected by 
G-20 policies.  
Recently, some G-20 countries asked whether a permanent G-20 Secretariat for the group 
should be formed. This is, however, unlikely to be easily accepted as countries tend to use 
the opportunity to host the G-20 forum to showcase their countries.  
Conclusion  
7. 
While the expansion of the agenda and the role of the G-20 in the global economy are seen 
as an opportunity by some and a threat by others, South Africa will continue to focus on key 
issues of particular concern to both the country and the region.  
The  G-20  has  been  relatively  successful  in  promoting  regulatory  reform,  and  South  Africa 
was a keen participant in this process, recognising the importance in providing stability to the 
global financial system, but also understanding the domestic challenges posed as a result. 
Furthermore, South Africa continues to argue at the G-20 and other forums that the cost of 
the  new  regulatory  framework  to  African  countries  should  be  recognised  and  that  these 
countries should be supported in strengthening the financial systems.  
The G-20 up to now has been less successful in implementing the Action Plans that it has 
adopted  to  foster  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  The  co-operation  that  was 
present  at  the  start  of  the  crisis  has  faded  somewhat  and  home  bias  and  political 
considerations  play  a  key  role  in  preventing  countries  from  adopting  the  needed  reforms. 
Negative feedback loops between sovereign debt, banking sector problems and slow growth 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have  also  played  a  role  in  delaying  the  implementation  of  medium  term  plans,  including 
structural reform. This has increased the risk of credibility loss for the G20, especially given 
that previously the G20 was able to demonstrate political will and decisive action.  
The G-20 played a pivotal role in advancing the reform agendas of the international financial 
institutions,  particularly  that  of  the  IMF,  while  also  helping  to  strengthen  the  IMF  financial 
position.  
Finally, there have been concerns expressed about the growing G-20 agenda, particularly as 
it relates to issues that are considered to be the domain of organisations such as the United 
Nations (particularly on climate change issues). South Africa, while recognising this difficulty, 
supports  an  agenda  that  also  focuses  on  development  issues  and  climate  finance  is 
considered in this light.  
Even when one accepts that there may be legitimacy and credibility problems from time to 
time,  the  G20  has  evolved  into  a  very  powerful  forum  for  international  cooperation  and 
coordination, and if South Africa can carefully define its priorities, and continues to leverage 
its seat at the table, the country only stands to benefit from its participation in the G20.  
Thank you.  
References:  
Various  G-20  Communiqués  and  Leaders’  Declarations  available  on  the  G20  website: 
www.G20.org.  
Bradlow,  D.  Positioning  Africa  for  a  Role  on  Global  Economic  Governance,  Sunday 
Independent, June 2012.  
Draper,  P.  The  Financial  Crisis  and  G20  Summitry:  Decoding  (South)  African  Positions,  A 
workshop hosted by the South African Institute of International Affairs, March 2009.  
German Development Institute. The G20: Its Role and Challenges, Briefing Paper, 16/2011.  
Jokela, J. The G20: A Pathway to Effective Multilateralism? April, 2011.  
Wade, R. Emerging World Order? From Multipolarity to Multilaterism in the G20, the World 
Bank and the IMF, Politics and Society, August, 2011.  
Woods N, Global Governance in the Aftermath of the Financial Crisis: A New Multilateralism 
or the Last Gasp of Great Powers? Global Policy Volume 1, Issue 1, January, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
