Masaaki Shirakawa: Lessons from the global financial crisis – Asian and 
global perspectives 
Remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  International 
Council Meeting of the Bretton Woods Committee, Tokyo, 13 October 2012. 
 It  is  an  honor  to  be  a  part  of  this  esteemed  panel.  With  the  hope  of  stimulating 
further  debate,  I  would  like  to  discuss  three  lessons  from  the global financial crisis and 
the resulting challenges they present. 
First,  in  this  globally  interconnected  world,  nothing  is  purely  regional  anymore.  A  global 
perspective is crucial. 
When  the  euro  area  crisis  was  initially  brewing  a  couple  of  years  back,  there  was 
reluctance from our European colleagues to discuss it as an issue with  global  implications. 
The  euro  area  economy  was  recovering  and  it was argued that the current account of the 
euro area as a whole was balanced and that intra-area imbalances were manageable. It was 
presented  as  a  regional  problem  with  regional  solutions. We  all  know now that this was 
not  the  case. The  euro  area  crisis  has  impacted  global growth  through both  trade  and 
financial  channels,  probably  in  a  much larger way  than initially  expected. Resolving the 
euro area  crisis has become a key agenda item for the G20, and the IMF is playing a key 
role together with the euro area core countries towards its resolution. 
To  give  another  example,  when  economic  growth  decelerated  in  the  advanced  economies 
last year, there was hope that the emerging economies, especially  those  in  the  Asia  would 
pick  up  the  slack. Asian  economies provided  approximately  40%  of  global  growth  in  2011 
and  their  share  in global exports was more than 30% in 2011. This, however, did not mean 
they were immune from the slowdown of the European economy. Weakness in Europe has 
impacted  Chinese  exports,  and  through  the  regional  supply  chain,  exports  and  growth 
have  been  impacted  broadly throughout  Asia. The  IMF,  in  its  Regional  Economic  Outlook 
published  yesterday,  points  out  that  two-thirds  of  emerging  Asia’s  exports  are  linked  to 
demand  from  Europe  and  the  United  States,  and  Fund  has  reduced  its growth outlook for 
Asia in  2012 from 6.0% to 5.4%, and that of 2013 from 6.5%  to  5.9%  respectively. They 
have  also  noted  that  this  estimate  is  based  on  the  premise  that  conditions  in  Europe 
improve  gradually and  that the fiscal cliff in the United States will be avoided. Considerable 
downside risks remain. 
The second lesson is that putting one’s house  in order is an essential prerequisite  condition 
for  each  country to achieve sustainable  growth, but not a sufficient condition. 
In  formulating  macroeconomic  policy,  the  traditional  emphasis  was  to  ensure  domestic 
stability  or  to  put  one’s  house  in  order. However,  the simple sum of each country’s policy 
actions  may  not  necessarily  achieve  an  optimal  outcome  at  the  global  level.  Although 
policy-makers in each country may be acting rationally from its own individual perspective, 
collectively there is the risk of a fallacy of composition. 
Currently,  many  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  have  entered  the  realm  of 
unconventional  monetary  policy  such  as  the  purchase  of  various types of assets to spur 
growth  and  to  buy  time  as  the  sectors  of  the  economy  go  through  balance-sheet  repairs. 
However, as the domestic monetary transmission mechanism is constrained, there may also 
be  unintentional  cross-border  spillover  effects,  such  as  increases  in  capital  inflows  to 
other countries. The effects could also feedback to the originating country. 
Meanwhile,  central  banks  in  emerging  economies  have  also  shifted  toward  monetary 
accommodation or relaxed recent tightening moves. These steps  are  necessary  to  support 
growth.  But  what 
this  global  monetary  accommodation  ultimately  means  for  global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
commodity  prices  and  inflationary  pressures,  and  as  a  result  to  global  macro-economic 
stability, is something that will likely require close monitoring. 
Another  dimension  would  be  the  tendency  to  focus  on  external  demand  to spur  domestic 
growth.  This  is  a  natural  reaction  when  domestic  demand  is  fragile.  When  the  global 
economy  as  a  whole  is  growing  rapidly  this  would  not  be  an  issue,  but  when  global 
growth  is  weak,  this  could  mean taking away possible opportunities from other economies. 
If  rapidly  growing  emerging  economies  were  to  succumb  to  the  temptation  to  resist  the 
appreciation of one’s currency, this could be counterproductive from a global perspective. 
The  third  lesson  is  that  although  measures  taken  by  central  banks,  both individually and 
collectively, have been successful in stabilizing the economy and the financial system during 
the crisis, policy-makers, including central banks, cannot be complacent. 
For example, the ECB’s OMT has  significantly taken away tail risks in the euro  zone. This 
respite  is  probably,  nonetheless,  only  temporary  and  this  opportunity  must  be  used  to 
fundamentally  resolve  the  root  causes  of  the crisis within the euro area. 
Another example would  be the central bank swap lines which were  introduced  during  the 
height  of  the  crisis  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  still  function  as  a 
backstop  to  maintain  stability  in  global  interbank  markets.  The  swap  lines  substantially 
reduced  stress  in  the  interbank  funding  market  for  foreign  currencies.  The  flexibility  that 
central  banks  have  to  act  when  necessary,  and  to  introduce  measures  as necessary, is 
a powerful framework in times of crisis. However, they are not permanent in nature and do 
not resolve the possible risks arising from global imbalances and volatile capital flows. 
The  liquidity that  central  banks  provide can be quite  effective in  alleviating the  pain  of  the 
adjustment  process,  or  temporarily  stabilizing  the  situation in  times  of  stress. The  key  is 
to  use  this  temporary  respite  to  initiate  a  positive  cycle  of  fundamental  reforms  which 
will  provide  the  foundation for strong, sustainable and balanced growth. 
I have presented what I believe to be three lessons from the global financial crisis. How could 
they be seen from both an Asian and global perspective? 
First,  putting  one’s  house  in  order  does  remain  a  key  objective  for  all  countries. 
Sound  macro-economic  policies  will  continue  to  be  of  utmost importance. 
Second,  in  putting  one’s  house  in  order,  policy-makers  need  to  be  conscious  of  the 
cross-border  spillover  effects  and  the  ensuing  feedback effects  on  their  own  economies. 
Such  elements  in  their  totality  will  need  to  be  internalized  within  the  decision-making 
process.  Such  considerations  will  be  important  not  only  for  macro-economic  policy,  but 
also  macro-  and  micro-prudential policies. Prudential  rules to stabilize a financial system in 
one  jurisdiction  could  push  business  across  borders  or  influence  global  capital  flows. 
Furthermore,  extra-territorial  application of  domestic  rules,  in  spite  of  its  good  intentions, 
could  have  unintended negative consequences for the stability of financial systems of other 
countries. 
Third,  regional  frameworks  such  as  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  can  play  a  vital  role  in 
maintaining  financial  stability  in  the  region.  It  reflects  the  unique  characteristics  of  the 
region and provides strong incentives to countries  in  the  region  to  work  together. At  the 
same  time,  it  does  not  replace  existing  international  financial  arrangements,  but  rather 
supplements  them.  Furthermore,  the  stability  of  the  Asian  region  naturally  has  global 
implications.  Thus,  the  regional  surveillance  provided  by  the  ASEAN+3  Macroeconomic 
Research Office, AMRO, together with the global surveillance provided by the IMF will both 
play a pivotal role in the effective operation of the Chiang Mai Initiative. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
