Nils Bernstein: Developments in the world economy, the Danish 
economy and in its mortgage credit system 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 26 September 2012. 
 Growth in the world economy was weaker than expected in the 1st half of 2012 and declined 
further over the summer. It now looks as if global growth this year and next year will be lower 
than expected in the spring. Not only the European economies have slowed down, but also 
major  emerging  economies  such  as  Brazil,  China  and  India  –  which  have  until  now  been 
surprisingly resilient to the crisis. 
This  development is  reflected in  world  trade,  which  has  flattened out  since  the  turn  of  the 
year. According to the press, the WTO assesses annual growth in world trade at only 2–3 per 
cent at the moment. This is a clear indication that things are not going too well. 
The problems in southern Europe still constitute the greatest uncertainty factor. 
The debt crisis has been weighing down the world economy since early 2010. Many initiatives 
have been taken – by the member states in question, by the euro area as such and by the 
IMF. But it has proved to be difficult to come up with effective solutions. 
The good years of the last decade were only to a limited extent used to build up buffers. So 
when the crisis erupted, many countries had little resilience, and the need for consolidation 
soon became evident. Uncertainty about US fiscal policy is another risk factor. 
At  a  time  with  weak  domestic  demand  and  low  confidence  in  the  private  sector,  many 
countries are compelled to pursue tight fiscal policies due to large government deficits and 
debts. These countries are  to  a  large  extent  paying for  the  sins  of  the  past.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  should  also  be  emphasised  that  consolidation  is  underway,  especially  in  many 
European economies, and medium-term strategies to ensure fiscal sustainability are in place. 
Combined with the most recent initiatives from the European Central Bank, this should help to 
bring  down  interest  rates,  and  hence  funding  costs,  to  a  manageable  level  in  debt-ridden 
EU member  states  such  as  Spain  and  Italy.  Among  the  member  states  subject  to 
IMF programmes, Ireland  has  made  the  most  progress  towards  economic  recovery  and  is 
now,  once again, able to borrow  in the  international financial markets at affordable interest 
rates. 
Neither  the  USA  nor  Japan  has  adopted  a  medium-term  fiscal  plan  –  that  is,  a  plan  for 
reducing the growing debt in the long term. 
The  weak  economy  pushes  up  unemployment  in  many  countries.  Total  euro  area 
unemployment now exceeds 11 per cent of the labour force. But there are wide variations, 
from 5 per cent and falling in Germany to 25 per cent and rising in Spain. Weak activity and 
anchored inflation expectations mean that underlying inflationary pressures are low in most 
member states. 
I am pleased to note that the European debt crisis is being addressed through a combination 
of  national  measures  and  support  from  the  community.  After  all,  the  many  summits  and 
ministerial meetings show that the relevant member states are not left to fend for themselves, 
taking initiatives that could be detrimental to others. 
Furthermore, we should not underestimate the highly developed cooperation between central 
banks and supervisory authorities worldwide – ranging from specific, coordinated measures 
to the development of rules and exchange of experience. This provides useful transparency 
as a basis for our own decisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Obviously, Denmark is  not  unaffected by  events in  the  rest  of  the  world.  There is  a  direct 
impact via trade, as well as an indirect impact via expectations for the future. 
Economic  activity  in  Denmark  has  stagnated  over  the  last  18  months.  The  reason  is  that 
consumers and firms still keep a tight rein on spending. The consumption ratio is low and the 
investment  ratio  even  lower,  while  the  savings  surplus  is  unusually  high.  This  should  be 
viewed against the backdrop of considerable loss of wealth in the wake of the financial crisis, 
which has  by  no  means been restored. Add  to this a  subdued  trend in  disposable income 
and, not least, low consumer and investor confidence. The high household savings entail a 
large consumption potential, which can be unleashed when confidence returns. Exactly when 
this will happen is difficult to predict. 
In our most recent forecast, we assume that private consumption will pick up a little over the 
coming year. On the basis of a very weak 1st half, we estimate output growth at only 0.3 per 
cent this year, rising to just over 1.5 per cent p.a. in 2013 and 2014. But this will all depend on 
when confidence is restored and the private sector begins to convert some of its savings into 
consumption  and  investment.  Presumably  the  situation  in  the  housing  market  will  have  to 
improve first. 
Since Statistics Denmark began to publish monthly statistics of house prices last autumn, the 
figures initially published have consistently been a little lower than the final figures. With this in 
mind, we have seen a stabilisation of prices over the last six months – and the first tentative 
signs of improvement. The supply of homes for sale has decreased considerably in the last 
nine months, and although this does not reflect higher turnover, it may well help to stabilise 
prices. In our forecast, we assume that the tide will turn in the 2nd half of the year, and prices 
will begin to rise moderately. Prices are estimated to be slightly below their equilibrium level, 
based on the current low interest rates. The future development in prices is subject to much 
uncertainty. 
Interest rates on  home loans  are presumably lower in Denmark than  anywhere  else at the 
moment. The low interest rates generally help to buoy up the housing market. For buyers this 
means that with a fixed-rate loan the “housing burden” is now below its long-term average. If 
they opt for a variable-rate loan instead, the housing burden is very low at present. This is 
likely to attract more buyers. 
 If  we  take  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  the  Danish  economy  and  compare  ourselves  with  other 
countries, we can see, on the one hand, that we are not among those most severely affected 
by the crisis. On the other hand, we too need to fix a few problems. 
Our financial sector is undergoing an adaptation process in response to the financial crisis. 
New rules have been introduced, and the defences have 
been strengthened. Structural developments are affecting the sector and will do so for some 
time to  come. As  I  see it,  a  serious  and targeted effort is  being  made, and  the sector  will 
emerge from this process  strengthened –  so that it  will take more to shake its foundations 
next time a crisis hits us. But we have some way to go. Bad loans still dampen earnings. 
Danish firms are challenged by weak demand, a high level of costs and a trend in productivity 
which  is  on  the  low  side  in  an  international comparison. If  the  output gap,  i.e.  the  excess 
capacity  in  the  Danish  economy,  is  to  be  closed,  these  issues  must  be  addressed.  This 
cannot  be  achieved overnight. The  business  sector focuses  much  on  what  others  can  do, 
including on borrowing options. I am fully aware that some firms have difficulty in convincing 
their banks that it makes sense to lend them more money. But in general, firms are saving up 
and do not see finances as an impediment to production. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I  would  also like to make it  clear that, in  Danmarks Nationalbank’s opinion,  the framework 
conditions  for  funding  the  corporate  sector  should  be  based  on  market  solutions.  Such 
solutions  do  not 
include  government-guaranteed  corporate  bonds.  The  government 
guarantee  given  to  the  banks  was  a  very  extraordinary  measure  aimed  at  preventing  the 
collapse of the financial sector following the failure of Lehman Brothers. 
The public sector has also been affected by the slowdown after the financial crisis. Reforms 
that  will  not  only  balance  the  government  budget  in  the  short  term,  but  also  ensure  the 
sustainability of our finances in the slightly longer term, are underway. It is not surprising that 
politicians are facing increasing challenges at a time when unemployment has risen. But it is 
important to stay the course. We have already made much progress along the path of reform 
in  Denmark.  The  best  way  to  help  our  weakest  citizens  is  by  laying  the  foundations  for 
long-term job creation. 
Turning to the households, we can see that debt as a ratio of income has declined in recent 
years  as  a  result  of  consolidation.  All  the  same,  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  Danish 
households’ gross debt is high in relation to their income – both in a historical perspective and 
by international standards. 
To  examine  whether  the  households’  large  gross  debt  is  a  problem  for  the  economy, 
Danmarks Nationalbank and the Ministry of Business and Growth have collected an extensive 
and detailed data set that makes it possible to  analyse the housing market, and especially 
home financing, at family level. 
I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  sector  for  its  contribution to  this  unique  data  set.  The 
analyses have not been completed, but various patterns are emerging. 
If families are grouped by income after tax, the 20 per cent with the highest incomes account 
for  more  than  half  of  the  families’  aggregate gross  debt.  The  50  per  cent  with  the  lowest 
incomes account for only 14 per cent of the gross debt. So the overall impression is that in 
general the families with debt also have incomes to service it. Furthermore, households with 
debt  are  usually  also  those  that  hold  the  most  assets  besides  their  homes,  i.e.  financial 
assets and pension savings. 
Basically,  this  is  reassuring,  but  new  preliminary  analyses  represent  a  dark  cloud  on  the 
horizon. 
We have examined whether families that have opted for deferred-amortisation loans use the 
lower monthly payments to reduce other – often more expensive – debts, as we have often 
heard from those assembled here today. Some of the families do, but unfortunately they are a 
small minority. 
In  addition,  more  than  half  of  the  families  with  deferred-amortisation  loans  exceed  the 
loan-to-value threshold of 80 per cent of the property value. So in many cases young families 
who already have limited liquidity at their disposal will have to start repaying their loans when 
the current period of deferred amortisation expires. Are they aware of that, I wonder? 
The  data  shows  that  the  widespread  use  of  mortgage  loans  with  100  per  cent  deferred 
amortisation has been a very bad idea – since the system only operates smoothly if house 
prices continue to rise. 
Finally,  our  preliminary  analyses  show  that  households  with  deferred  amortisation  have 
higher gross debt, both in nominal terms and relative to income, than households opting for 
loans with amortisation. And  there is a tendency for these families also to have more debt 
before they take out the deferred-amortisation loans. 
 In  recent  years,  I  have  raised  a  few  concerns  about  the  continued  stability  of  the 
mortgage-credit sector  in  view  of  the  major  changes  that  have  taken  place  within  the  last 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
10 years.  I  know  you  are  also  aware  of  these  issues  and  are  addressing  them,  but 
nevertheless, we still have a long way to go in some respects. 
Firstly, deferred amortisation has made it possible for people to borrow more without having 
to pay more per month. This has contributed to large house prices rises and increased the 
vulnerability of borrowers and mortgage banks. 
Against this background, I welcome the initiative by the Minister for Business and Growth to 
introduce  a  code  of  good  practice,  so  that  consumers  are  offered  variable-rate  or 
deferred-amortisation mortgage loans only if they would be able to service a fixed-rate loan 
with amortisation. But the question is whether this will be a binding restriction, since I am told 
that you have previously introduced a similar rule yourselves. Time will show. 
I am also pleased to note that the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority has decided to set 
up an expert group to look into the possibilities of dampening strong house price fluctuations. 
This will be a foretaste of  the macroprudential  work to be carried out by the new Systemic 
Risk  Council.  In  connection  with  the  study  of  the  Danish  housing  market,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank pointed out that the strong impact of house price fluctuations on the economy is 
inexpedient.  At  the  time,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  indicated  a  need  to  dampen  future 
fluctuations by restoring the link between property value tax and current house prices and by 
phasing out access to deferred-amortisation mortgage loans for owner-occupied dwellings. I 
think you know what I mean. 
Secondly, the need to pledge top-up collateral for  covered bonds  when  property prices fall 
has  given mortgage banks  an  extra obligation. This can be  a  challenge if  new  loans have 
been granted right up to the 80-per-cent threshold, especially if these loans are with deferred 
amortisation. At the same time, the rating agencies are imposing extra collateral requirements 
on the mortgage banks. 
The working group on top-up collateral under the auspices of the Ministry of Business and 
Growth was established after Danmarks Nationalbank had pointed out the risks related to the 
need  for  top-up  collateral.  This  group  is  to  explore  the  opportunities  for  handling  this 
requirement in an appropriate way. In this connection it is positive that the mortgage banks 
have taken specific initiatives and proposed solutions. 
My third concern is the surge in adjustable-rate loans. I am not referring to the fact that the 
rate of interest may vary over the term of the loan, but to the way these loans are structured. 
This has created a refinancing risk because 30-year mortgage loans are based on short-term, 
often 1-year, bonds. 
If a short rate fixation period is desired, the best option would be to discontinue the 1-year 
bonds in favour of, say, genuine variable-rate loans with longer maturities. Alternatively, if the 
auctions of the underlying bonds are spread, the refinancing risk becomes less concentrated. 
We  have  called  attention  to  this  issue  several  times.  In  2009,  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
concluded an agreement with the mortgage-credit sector to spread the refinancing auctions 
over  the  year.  A  number  of  initiatives have  been  taken  in  the  three  years  since  then.  For 
example, new adjustable-rate loans are no longer offered with refinancing in December, and 
some  mortgage banks  have  offered  their  borrowers  to  reschedule their  refinancing free  of 
charge.  However,  the  figures  show  that  several  mortgage  banks  have  in  fact  made  little 
progress. The volume of refinancing in December is still far too high. That is not satisfactory. 
So  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  encourage  the  mortgage  banks  to  exploit  the  options 
available.  These  might  include  drawing  attention  to  loan  types  that  are  less  vulnerable  to 
refinancing, or  introducing differentiated administration  margins  to  give  borrowers  the  right 
incentives. 
I suggest that we make a shared commitment to reduce the volume of deferred-amortisation 
loans  and  adjustable-rate  loans  with  very  frequent  refinancing  –  and  especially  loans 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
combining the two – within a few years. And we should also seek to spread refinancing of the 
remaining short-term bonds evenly over at least three annual dates. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Danish  mortgage-credit  sector  is 
systemically important. You are already subject to special legislation aimed at underpinning 
confidence  in  the  mortgage-credit  system  at  all  times.  The  committee  on  systemically 
important financial institutions will be presenting its final report at the end of the year. I find 
that  the  SIFI  committee  provides  a  good  opportunity  to  perform  a  service  check  to  see 
whether  this  legislation  ultimately  contributes  sufficiently  and  adequately  to  protecting 
mortgage bonds, also in connection with the new loan types. 
This is the last time I have the privilege of addressing this assembly. So I would like to give 
you some advice – free of charge – or should we say without any fees? 
For generations, Danish mortgage credit has been characterised by safety and predictability, 
often the same services – year after year – no surprises – a bit boring, in fact! 
I think you would be doing yourselves and your customers a service if you strove once again 
to make mortgage credit a bit more boring – it should not be all that difficult. 
Thank you for your attention and thank you to the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks for 
our smooth cooperation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
