Jens Weidmann: Sound public finances for a stable monetary union 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Institute for 
Law and Finance, Frankfurt am Main, 12 December 2012. 
  Introduction 
1. 
Professor Baums 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for your invitation. I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to 
you  today  at  the  Institute  for  Law  and  Finance.  There  are  many  transmission  channels 
between the “House of Finance” and the Bundesbank. The lively exchange of ideas between 
the two institutions has proven to be exceptionally fruitful, and it gives me great pleasure to 
further strengthen this dialogue today. 
I will, however, resist the temptation to speak about “regulatory and fiscal policy aspects of 
the  change  of  course  in  energy  policy”.  Fascinating  though  this  subject  may  be,  giving  a 
qualified lecture on this topic might ask a little too much of the central banker standing before 
you.  And  after  all,  it  is  the  Bundesbank  itself  that  regularly  warns  against  too  much  being 
asked of central banks. 
These  warnings  normally  centre  around  central  bankers’  traditional  fears  about  an 
excessively  close  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  Mervyn  King, 
Governor of the Bank of England, once summed up these concerns in slightly exaggerated 
terms by saying: “Central banks are often accused of being obsessed with inflation. This is 
untrue. If they are obsessed with anything, it is with fiscal policy.” 
But  where  does  this  “obsession”  come  from? Why  does  escalating  government  debt  pose 
problems for monetary policy? The reasons for this are not immediately apparent. After all, 
monetary policy – in the industrial countries, at least – is usually independent and equipped 
with a clear mandate to safeguard price stability. One could, therefore, incorrectly conclude 
that unsound public finances are not relevant to monetary policy. 
However, a closer look reveals that monetary policy is reliant on fiscal policy with regard to 
safeguarding  price  stability.  Escalating  public  debt  inevitably  drives  prices  higher.  But 
growing  government  debt  can  still  pose  a  threat  to  price  stability  even  before  it  begins  to 
spiral out of control. 
Furthermore,  a  host  of  empirical  studies  suggest  that  high  levels  of  public  debt  dampen 
growth  over  the  long  term.  Seen  from  this  angle,  the  prevailing  situation  in  the  euro  area  
– but also in other industrial countries such as the United States and Japan – might lead one 
to  assume  that  there  is  a  broad  consensus  in  favour  of  rapidly  and  resolutely  reducing 
budgetary deficits. 
Yet critics raise a number of objections to these arguments. First, they claim that the risks to 
price  stability  in  the  current  environment  are  not  acute,  that  inflation  rates  are  low  and 
inflation expectations are still firmly anchored. Second, they warn that rapid consolidation in 
these countries would set off a cyclical downward spiral – they would “save themselves to 
death”, as it were. 
Bearing this in mind, I would therefore like to focus on three topics in a little more detail: first, 
the  importance  of  sound  public  finances  for  price  stability;  second,  the  preconditions  for 
sound  public  finances  in  the  monetary  union;  and  third,  the  cyclical  effects  of  fiscal 
consolidation.  
To begin with, let us consider why monetary policy can only be successful in the long run if 
public finances are sound. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The importance of sound public finances for monetary policy 
2. 
High levels of government debt make it difficult to safeguard price stability in more ways than 
one.  As  I  have  already  indicated,  an  excessive  debt  level  can  cause  growth  impetus  to 
slacken over the long run as the increased public borrowing requirement pushes up interest 
rates, making investment more expensive and thus diminishing growth. 
If the central bank does not identify this slowdown in growth in good time, its monetary policy 
stance will be too expansionary and thus ultimately raise the spectre of inflation. But even if 
the  central  bank  does  correctly  identify  the  deceleration  of  growth,  it  might  come  under 
mounting  pressure  to  adopt  an  excessively  expansionary  monetary  stance  in  order  to 
stimulate  the  economy  and  thus  maintain  the  usual  rates  of  expansion.  The  longer  the 
central bank tries to use monetary policy means to mask the structural slowdown in growth, 
the less credible it becomes in terms of its price stability objective. This can send inflation 
expectations higher and ultimately fuel inflation.  
However, a structural slowdown in the growth outlook is not the only problem that excessive 
public debt holds in store for monetary policy. If a government has already racked up high 
levels of debt in economically good times, fiscal policy can no longer fulfil its role as a buffer 
when  a  crisis  occurs.  Under  normal  circumstances,  fiscal  policy  measures  can  stabilise 
aggregate demand during a cyclical downturn, for example via unemployment benefits or an 
automatically falling tax burden. This path is not available if such fiscal policy measures call 
the sovereign’s solvency into question. This applies not only to the traditional countercyclical 
fiscal stimulus measures I have just mentioned, but also to cases where the crisis has hit the 
banking  system  and  government  support  is  essential  to  prevent  credit  institutions  from 
collapsing. If fiscal policy cannot provide this support, the central bank may, in the last resort, 
be forced to prop up the banking system. These measures considerably increase the central 
bank’s balance sheet risks and might thus impair the credibility of monetary policy.  
A high level of public debt can increase the pressure on monetary policy not only to provide 
an economic stimulus or to step into the breach in the event of a crisis, but also to generally 
ease  the  financing  conditions  for  government.  The  monetary  policy  measures  that  can  be 
deployed  in  this  case  range  from  interest  rate  cuts  to  bond  purchases  through  to  direct 
monetary financing by the central bank. 
Government  interest  expenditure  depends  not  least  on  the  interest  rate  level  and  thus  on 
monetary  policy.  If  a  country  is  only  growing  at  a  slow  pace  but  has  already  run  up  high 
deficits and debt levels, its interest costs must be kept below a certain threshold, or else the 
government debt ratio could explode. If the sovereign then – for the purpose of maintaining 
its solvency – obliges the central bank to set a lower interest rate than price stability would 
require,  demand  would  rise  too  quickly,  thus  leading  sooner  or  later  to  inflation.  Among 
economists, this state of affairs is known as a regime of “fiscal dominance”: interest rates are 
no  longer  set  on  the  basis  of  what  is  needed  to  safeguard  price  stability  but  are  geared 
instead to the government’s need to lower its financing costs. 
Providing economic stimulus, taking on fiscal policy tasks in a crisis, financing the sovereign: 
the pressure that unsound public finances exert on monetary policy comes in many different 
guises. To resist these influences, legislators conferred a high degree of independence on 
central banks. This came in response inter alia to the experience of the 1970s and 1980s, a 
period  in  which  oil  price  shocks  posed  a  major  challenge  to  monetary  policy.  It  became 
evident that countries with independent central banks had significantly lower inflation rates 
than  those  in  which  central  banks  followed  politicians’  instructions  –  while  simultaneously 
achieving equal or even higher levels of growth.  
What  we  learned  back  then  was  that  price  stability  does  not  run  counter  to  economic 
prosperity but complements it. This has proved to be one of the key economic policy lessons 
of  the  past  thirty  years.  The  decision  to  make  central  banks  independent  of  government 
instructions  was  a  resounding  success  in fighting  inflation.  And the  level  of  public  debt  no 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
longer appears to have influenced inflation levels over the past few decades, at least in the 
industrial countries. 
Yet to conclude from this that an independent monetary policy alone is a sufficient condition 
for stable money would, in my view, be premature, if not to say naive. For if a sovereign runs 
up  so  much  debt  that  the  burden  soon  becomes  unsustainable,  the  central  bank  comes 
under much greater pressure. This can raise concerns as to whether the central bank is truly 
independent  and  can  undermine  its  credibility  –  even  if  it  has  not  yet  actually  changed  its 
monetary  policy  course.  Once  the  first  doubts  emerge  as  to  whether  monetary  policy  can 
assert  its  independence,  the  central  bank  runs  the  risk  of  losing  control  over  inflation 
expectations, and thus over inflation itself.  
At  this  point,  sceptics  like  to  raise  the  objection  that  high  inflation  expectations  do  not 
necessarily  imply  rising  inflation  rates,  claiming  that  only  expanding  demand  can  fuel 
inflation. However, inflation rises as soon as inflation expectations increase, even if demand 
does not go up per se.  
The wage-setting process is a good illustration of how this mechanism works. Wages cannot 
normally  be  changed  at  any  point  in  time  but  are  usually  set  on  a  given  date  for  a  given 
period.  Employees  therefore  take  account  of  anticipated  price  developments  when 
negotiating their wages in order to prevent their earnings from deviating too strongly from a 
suitable level during the subsequent period in which they cannot renegotiate their wages. If 
they overestimate inflation, their wages would be too high and they would not be competitive. 
If they underestimate inflation, they would lose real income and their purchasing power would 
shrink as a result. Inflation expectations are thus factored into today’s wages and thus into 
today’s  prices  as  well.  DE-anchoring  inflation  expectations  can  therefore  lead  directly  to 
higher inflation.  
Recent research findings1 suggest that it can take some time for a central bank that has a 
credible  track  record  to  forfeit  its  credibility.  Indeed,  this  is  a  process  that  could  well  last 
several years.  
However,  once  a  central  bank  has  lost  its  credibility,  inflation  expectations  may  surge 
dramatically.  Bringing  them  back  under  control  can  be  both  time-consuming  and  costly  for 
the economy. 
Preconditions for sound public finances 
3. 
Sound public finances thus remain a necessary precondition for price stability. And ensuring 
sound public finances is even more crucial in the monetary union. This is because one of the 
fundamental  problems  of  a  monetary  union  featuring  decentralised  fiscal  policies  is  that 
member states have a greater incentive to incur debt. When government debt in one country 
rises,  the  consequences  are  spread  across  the  entire  monetary  union  and  are  thus 
effectively diluted – for example, via rising interest rates for all of the member states. This 
makes incurring higher deficits more attractive to each individual country. 
To counteract this moral hazard, the European monetary union was placed from the start on 
a  stability-oriented  foundation.  In  addition  to  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing,  this 
foundation is underpinned by the strict deficit rules enshrined in the Stability and Growth Pact 
and the no bail-out principle with regard to other member states.  
So long as the no bail-out principle maintains its credibility, it sends an important signal to the 
financial markets. If investors believe that they themselves could face potential losses, it was 
assumed that they would demand higher interest rates in return for the increased risk. The 
guiding principle of monetary union was therefore based on individual responsibility: both on 
                                                
1   Bianchi, Francesco, and Leonardo Melosi (2012), Dormant Shocks and Fiscal Virtue, Duke University, mimeo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the part of the member states, by assuming individual responsibility for the consequences of 
their  policies,  and  on  the  part  of  the  financial  market  agents,  by  assuming  individual 
responsibility for the consequences of their investment decisions. 
Despite  these  rules,  however,  member  states’  borrowing  has  not  been  effectively  curbed 
since the introduction of the euro. In fact, quite the opposite has happened. With regard to 
the Stability and Growth Pact, the rules were not only circumvented but also actively bent. A 
key shortcoming was that a majority of all member states had to vote to impose sanctions on 
countries which exceeded the deficit limit. 
A  second  problem  was  that  the  financial  markets  did  not  exert  the  expected  disciplining 
effect. Investors tolerated the fiscal and economic policy failures of several member states 
for far too long, either because they overlooked the growing risks or because they did not 
see the no bail-out policy as being credible. 
The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that,  in  the  case  of  the  no  bail-out  policy,  a  key  factor  was 
underestimated,  namely  contagion  effects  via  the  member  states’  financial  systems.  The 
introduction of the euro led to an intensified integration of the financial markets. But the crisis 
has shown that this is not always a blessing, as the probability of contagion effects increase 
significantly across closely interconnected financial markets. This means that when a crisis 
occurs, not providing assistance can prove very expensive. Financial assistance, at least in 
the  short  run,  seems  to  be  the  lesser  evil,  especially  where  banks  have  already  been 
weakened on account of past failures and the financial and economic crisis. 
In spite of this, many of the considerations which shaped the construction of the monetary 
union at the end of the 1990s essentially still remain valid. Fiscal rules can certainly play an 
important  role  in  reducing  the  incentive  to  run  up  debt  –  at  least  where  governments  are 
bound by them. A number of measures have been taken since the outbreak of the crisis to 
improve these rules. The reform of the Stability and Growth Pact has made it much harder to 
undermine the deficit rules. And the Fiscal Compact additionally strengthens the excessive 
deficit procedure and anchors the rules for pursuing a sound budgetary policy at the national 
level. It now remains to be seen how these new rules will be put into practice. 
For experience shows as well that, in addition to rules, a stability-oriented policy approach 
also calls for a fundamental consensus both among politicians and the general public which 
upholds and protects these rules. There is also reason to fear that the crisis measures have 
tended to further amplify the aforementioned incentive to incur debt. This can be attributed to 
the  fact  that  while  risks  have  been  extensively  mutualised  in  the  wake  of  combating  the 
crisis, the control over fiscal policy still remains in the hands of each country. This divergence 
of liability and control makes it even easier to shift the consequences of unsound fiscal policy 
onto others. 
Essentially, there are two conceivable approaches to realign liability and control and, in doing 
so, to create a stable monetary union. The one is to take a quantum leap towards a genuine 
fiscal union, featuring an extensive transfer of budgetary policy sovereignty to the European 
level. The other is to try to reassert the principle of individual responsibility, which is the basis 
of the Maastricht Treaties, in practice. To overcome the remaining weaknesses of monetary 
union,  further  integration  would  be  required  in  this  case,  too,  though  it  would  be  less 
extensive than in a fully-fledged fiscal union. 
Unfortunately, it must be said that currently neither of these two approaches is being pursued 
resolutely. Taking the path of fiscal union would require countries to surrender a substantial 
amount of their sovereignty. However, such a significant increase in integration lacks majority 
support  in many  member  states.  In fact, I  have  noticed  that  it  is  precisely  the  people  who 
most  vociferously  call  for  mutual  liability  are  the  ones  who  most  vehemently  reject 
transferring national decision-making powers to the European level. 
A  crucial  requirement  of  the  second  option  –  returning  to  a  system  of  national  fiscal 
responsibility – is that solvency risks are not extensively mutualised and that financial market 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
players bear the risks of their investment decisions themselves. This would lead to financial 
market  discipline  playing  an  even  greater  role.  However,  with  a  view  to  a  future  stable 
regulatory  framework,  it  is  not  helpful  that  decisions  have  been  made  that  weaken  this 
disciplinary effect. 
Regardless of which path monetary union takes, it must be ensured that, in future, budgetary 
imbalances of one country do not automatically jeopardise financial stability. Otherwise, other 
countries would feel compelled to use all means necessary to prevent a sovereign insolvency 
for  the  sake  of  safeguarding  financial  stability,  so  that  a  disciplining  effect  on  fiscal  policy 
would be unlikely from the outset.  
For  this  reason,  too,  a  resilient  financial  system  is  central  to  a  stability-oriented  monetary 
policy and a functioning monetary union. A well-structured banking union, which severs the 
problematic ties between sovereigns and banks, can make an important contribution to this. I 
could easily speak about banking union for another half an hour, but I will leave it at that for 
now.  
Instead,  I  would  like  to  sum  up  this  issue  as  follows.  Price  stability  requires  sound  public 
finances,  and  sound  public  finances  call  for  a  coherent  framework  for  monetary  union. 
However, the question of designing the overall framework does not solve the problem of the 
current deficits. 
Consolidation versus growth 
4. 
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  a  number  of  euro-area  countries  have 
introduced steps to consolidate their budgets. Critics, such as the American economist Paul 
Krugman,  caution  that  such  consolidation  will  cause  more  harm  than  good  in  the  present 
circumstances. In order to reduce the deficit, he argues, countries either have to cut public 
spending or increase taxes. But , he adds, both of these measures are the wrong remedy in 
the  light  of  the  current  economic  slowdown  as  they  would  further  dampen  the  already 
weakened aggregate demand and hence trigger a downward economic spiral.  
This debate has gathered further momentum following a study performed by the IMF2 on the 
size of fiscal multipliers in the crisis. This multiplier indicates how strongly economic growth 
reacts to  a  change  in  budgetary  policy.  The  IMF’s  study  arrives  at  the conclusion  that  the 
multiplier  amounts  to  approximately  1.7  and  is  thus  larger  than  originally  assumed.  This 
would imply that growth losses would be much greater than the consolidation savings. In this 
case, budgetary consolidation would actually trigger a downward spiral. 
However,  the  IMF’s  findings  are  disputed  among  economic  researchers.  The  sceptics 
criticise,  first,  the  small  number  of  observations  and,  second,  the  high  dependency  of  the 
results on the choice of countries in the sample. Furthermore, the situation in the individual 
countries  is  likely  to  vary  greatly,  but  this  variation  is  not  sufficiently  accounted  for  in  the 
IMF’s cross-section analysis. 
There is no disputing that austerity measures can impede growth in the short term. But it is 
equally 
is  simply 
unsustainable. I therefore believe that there is no alternative to resolute consolidation. This is 
the  logical  consequence  of  the  fact  that  this  crisis  is  essentially  a  crisis  of  confidence.  In 
order to restore confidence in public finances, fiscal policymakers must now show that they 
are  able  and  willing  to  improve  their  structural  budgetary  position.  Although  fiscal 
consolidation is hard, it is unavoidable in a debt crisis – constantly deferring the necessary 
measures will only increase uncertainty and thus likewise dampen growth. And a deliberately 
the  countries  concerned 
the  debt  situation 
indisputable 
that 
in 
                                                
2  
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
protracted  consolidation  of  public  finances  would  also  make  it  harder  to  maintain  political 
support. 
Incidentally,  the  way  in  which  consolidation  is  carried  out  also  plays  an  important  role  in 
determining  how  quickly  a  country  returns  to  healthy  growth  rates.  Studies3  show  that 
countries  which  reduce  their  deficit  by  cutting government  expenditure sustain  significantly 
smaller growth losses than countries which do so by increasing taxes. The rationale behind 
this is that many measures such as streamlining the administrative apparatus or privatising 
state-owned enterprises not only yield potential savings for the public sector but could also 
improve macroeconomic productivity.  
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The high level of public debt is one of, if not the, greatest economic policy challenge of our 
time.  This  applies  also,  and  especially,  to  monetary  policy.  Sound  public  finances  are  a 
precondition for a stable currency, a precondition that monetary policy cannot create itself. 
In order to ensure sound public finances in the euro area over the long term, the architecture 
of monetary union has to be further developed in a coherent manner. In doing so, particular 
attention must be paid to keeping liability and control in harmony. And it is crucial that such a 
culture of stability is actively embraced by both policymakers and the general public. 
Consolidation  and  growth  do  not  conflict  with  one  another.  Instead,  the  one  is  the 
precondition for the other. 
To say it in the words of the American economist Paul Romer: “A crisis is a terrible thing to 
waste”.  That  puts  it  in  a  nutshell.  If  Europe  resolutely  executes  the  necessary  reforms, 
monetary union will end up stronger. Of this I am certain.  
Thank you. 
                                                
3   Alesina,  Alberto,  Carlo  Favero,  and Francesco  Giavazzi  (2012),  “The  output  effect of  fiscal consolidations”, 
Harvard University. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
