Andrew Bailey: Prudential regulation – challenges for the future 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director of the Bank of England, at the University of 
Edinburgh Business School, Edinburgh, 4 October 2012. 
 It is a great pleasure to be in Edinburgh again and to have the opportunity to set out progress 
on  the  reform  of  financial  regulation  as  we  approach  the  formal  introduction  of  the  new 
arrangements.  Scotland is  home to a very important financial services industry for the UK 
and Europe and although it may at times seem like the changes taking place in regulation 
appear through London and Whitehall bubbles, they are clearly as relevant to you as they are 
to your counterparts in the City of London and Canary Wharf. All of us witnessed the costs 
associated with the failures of banks. We have learnt the lessons of that experience and that 
is why the reforms we are making to the way we regulate will affect us all and will create a 
system that is safer and stronger for every part of the UK. 
One thing I should emphasise is that this is a reform of the whole of financial regulation.  I 
say that because it is easy to conclude from observation of the issues we face as regulators, 
and the public debate, that we are just dealing with reforming the regulation of banks.  That is 
not the case, and what we are doing is not about dragging the rest of the financial services 
industry into reform to solve a problem that is in essence only about the banks.  We have to 
design a system that works effectively for all sectors of the industry. 
On that theme, I would like to start by reflecting for a few moments on the lessons of history. 
My  main  theme  is  that  I  think  integrated  regulation  –  by  which  I  mean  regulation  which 
combines Prudential and Conduct of Business in one regulatory body with single teams of 
supervisors covering both – has not worked as effectively as it would need to do, for reasons 
that are deep-seated in the structure. 
I think there are a number of closely related reasons for this.  First, on a rather practical point, 
I think it is hard for a single organisation to balance, particularly during a period of crisis, a 
wide range of very demanding issues which are individually rightly of great concern to the 
public and can come from anywhere in a landscape of around 25,000 authorised firms. 
Second, I think the evidence suggests that, over the last 15 years, there have been periods 
when  either  conduct  or  prudential  supervision  has  been  more  in  the  ascendancy  to  the 
detriment of the other.  In the years leading up to the start of the crisis there was a dearth of 
prudential supervision, but I am quite prepared to acknowledge that there have been periods 
where the opposite has been true.  My point here is that I don’t think the system of integrated 
regulation demonstrated the ability to deliver a stable equilibrium of conduct and prudential 
supervision. 
Third, there is something of an inbuilt tendency within integrated regulation to play down the 
active  debate  of  issues  where  conduct  and  prudential  regulators  find  themselves  with 
potentially conflicting objectives.  Of course, it can be said that the “twin peaks” approach that 
we are introducing could lead to endless debate and no outcomes.  My own view is that that 
is not correct, and that the benefits of clarity in defining the objectives of the PRA and the 
new Conduct Authority, the FCA, will dominate any other consequences. 
There are several important reasons why reform of financial regulation will, in my view, be an 
important  step  forward,  starting  with  establishing  very  clear  public  policy  objectives  for 
financial regulation to which we, as the regulators, are fully committed. 
For both banks and insurance companies, the PRA will have the objective of promoting the 
safety and soundness of firms.  Consistent with  this objective, it  will focus on the potential 
harm  that  firms  can  cause  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  the  UK.  We  define  a 
stable financial system as one that is resilient in providing the critical financial services that 
the economy needs.  And this supply of services is a necessary condition for a healthy and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
successful  economy,  as  demonstrated  by  the  costs  imposed  by  the  financial  crisis  on  the 
public and society at large. 
For insurance companies, the PRA will have the second objective of contributing to securing 
an  appropriate  degree  of  protection  for  those  policyholders.  Why  do  we  need  a  second 
objective  for  insurance?  For  me,  it  rightly  emphasises  that  in  taking  out  some  forms  of 
insurance policies, the public can become locked into very long-term contracts, much longer 
often  than  is  the  case  in  banking  with  deposit  contracts.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  the  public 
interest I think justifies a second objective for insurance, which is more directly targeted at 
the situation of individual policyholders. 
In contrast as bank deposits are redeemable on demand at par value, and as banks lend the 
deposits at longer maturities, so they are inherently fragile and vulnerable to contagion, so 
protecting the system protects depositors. 
There are a number of important points in this description of the PRA’s objectives.  First, the 
emphasis on  economic well-being  as  an  ultimate  goal aligns  the  supervision  of banks  and 
insurers more closely to the field of macroeconomic policy.  This is in line with the definition 
of  “financial  stability”  as  the  continuity  of  supply  of  critical  financial  services  which  are 
important to the functioning of the economy.  Three services stand out here: the provision of 
payment services including access to funds; credit extension; and, risk transfer. 
This definition is critical to clarifying the public interest-objective in a stable financial system, 
and  that  this  public  interest  can  diverge  from  the  private  interest  of  a  firm  in  profit 
maximisation without reference to the public interest.  One of the biggest lessons I take from 
the financial crisis is the need to ensure that the boards and management of firms appreciate 
and  act  consistent  with  the  public  interest.  To  achieve  this  end,  we  need  a  much  better 
definition of the “public interest”, which will come from the legislation. 
The second important point regarding the meaning of the PRA’s objectives is that it will not 
be the PRA’s role to ensure that no firm fails.  Rather, the PRA will seek to ensure that any 
firm it regulates that does fail should do so in a way that avoids significant disruption to the 
supply of critical financial services. 
Nevertheless, failure  is  not  without  cost  and  there  is  inherent  uncertainty  about  whether  a 
firm  can  fail  without  damaging  the  financial  system  and  the  supply  of  critical  services. 
Consequently, the PRA will expect a given level of resilience to failure from all firms. Now, I 
recognise that we have  a lot to do still on resolution planning to be comfortable about our 
objective  of  avoiding  a  “no  failure”  regime.  For  large  banks,  we  are  making  progress  on 
resolution planning, and this world is different to five years ago, but we are not there yet by 
any  means.  I  have  a  background  in  resolving  banks,  and  I  regard  having  the  capacity  to 
resolve failed large banks – including the largest – as the Holy Grail of resolution. 
Unlike the legendary Holy Grail, I think there is a good reason to believe that the objective of 
being able to resolve large banks that fail can be within our grasp. 
But  the  challenge  of  resolving  PRA-regulated  firms  goes  beyond  banks.  Insurers  raise 
exactly the same issue of continuity of provision of critical financial services.  Moreover, in a 
line of business such as with-profits life, the business model involves pooling many vintages 
of long-term contracts in a single fund for the benefit of policyholders.  A typical resolution 
involves run-off over a long period, which remains a sensible approach.  But the public policy 
interest is reasonably directed towards ensuring a process of resolution, which is fair to those 
various  vintages  and  more  broadly  which  allows  more rapid  payout  to policyholders,  since 
the current arrangements can involve long delays and pressure for policyholders to accept 
lower  payouts  in  return  for  greater  speed.  This  is  a  different,  but  nonetheless  important, 
public policy interest in orderly resolution. 
I am very clear that when firms mess up, they should be allowed to fail, and by doing so they 
are  putting  at  risk  the  money  of  their  shareholders  and  if  necessary  after  that,  those  who 
provide  debt  funding  according  to  levels  of  seniority.  But  I  am  also  very  clear  that  really 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
achieving  the  objective  of  avoiding  a  no  failure  regime  requires  a  fundamental  change  of 
mindset  both  inside  the  PRA  and  in  society  more  broadly.  Fear  of  failure  is  an  important 
conditioner  of  behaviour  in  a  financial  regulator,  and  achieving  a  change  on  this  front 
depends on establishing a wide acceptance of our approach that orderly failure that does not 
compromise our public policy objectives is an acceptable outcome. To be clear, we should be 
criticised  where  failure  compromises  those  objectives  and  we  could  have  taken  steps  to 
avoid it, and we will be required to report on such failures.  But if failure is orderly, and does 
not compromise our public policy objectives, the responsibility should rest with the board and 
management for failing to serve the private interest of their shareholders and creditors. 
Last on the theme of failure, having firms that are either too big or too important to fail is bad 
for competition in the industries that we regulate.  An industry where exit is too difficult is one 
where entry is likewise inhibited.  Put simply, if we don’t know how to deal with a failed firm, 
we will inevitably set a higher barrier to entry.  This is what we see in the banking industry. 
Embedding resolution into the public policy objectives of financial regulation matters for two 
reasons  relevant  to  competition: first,  because,  to  repeat,  exit  enables  entry;  and,  second, 
because if, as we will, we require new entrants to satisfy us on their resolvability in order to 
be  authorised,  we  can  lower  the  barriers  and  costs  of  opening  for  business.  We  have 
already started to put this new approach into operation. 
Resolution of failed firms consistent with the public policy objectives is one key plank of the 
new  approach  to  financial  regulation.  Another  key  plank  concerns  the  macro-prudential 
approach to regulation.  The legislation will establish the Financial Policy Committee (FPC), 
charged with the primary objective of identifying, monitoring and taking action to remove or 
reduce  systemic  risks  with  a  view  to  protecting  and  enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  UK 
financial system. In June, the Chancellor announced that the government would amend the 
Bill  to  give  the  FPC  a  secondary  objective  so  that  subject  to  being  content  on  the  first 
objective, it should support the economic policy of the government, including its objectives for 
growth and employment.  Currently, the FPC is acting in an interim capacity to undertake, as 
far as possible, the future statutory FPC’s macro-prudential role. 
Macro-prudential regulation is focused on protecting the financial system as a whole.  In a 
very “big picture” sense, there is nothing new about this activity.  The problems of the last five 
years have emphasised the close links between the health and behaviour of banks and the 
condition  of the  economy.  This  is  a  lesson of  history,  and  one that  should  not  have  been 
forgotten.  But, forgotten it was. 
At present the FPC is pursuing two important objectives: seeking to increase the resilience of 
the UK banking system, including to the threats emanating from the euro areas; and, subject 
to being content with the path towards greater resilience, supporting the creation of credit in 
the UK economy. 
I am in no doubt that if banks take reasonable steps to enhance their resilience, they will be 
better  placed  to  sustain  the  availability  of  credit  to  the  economy  by  lowering  their  cost  of 
funding and reducing their vulnerability to unanticipated events. 
Macro-prudential regulation takes a system-wide view of the risks we face and the buffers of 
capital  and  liquidity  that  banks  should  hold  against  possible  stress  events.  This  is  very 
clearly the resilience objective for the system, to which the FPC attaches great weight. Banks 
in the UK have made substantial progress over the last four years in building that resilience, 
from of course a very low base.  We believe that there is further to go on capital, and the 
FPC has set this position out, but in doing so we should not forget the distance that has been 
travelled.  We  should  also  remember  that  more  capital  cannot  be  conjured  from  thin  air, 
particularly as there are at present quite severe constraints around the rate of return earned 
by banks due to low interest margins and redress for past misdeeds on conduct issues. 
Credit growth in the UK economy continues to be weak. The latest Bank of England credit 
conditions  survey  indicates  early  signs  of  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  mortgage  lending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
available  to  households,  though  much  less  evidence  of  a  change  in  credit  conditions  for 
businesses.  But  it  is  very  early  days  for  the  recently  announced  policy  measures  –  in 
particular the Funding for Lending Scheme – which are intended to have a positive impact on 
domestic credit conditions. 
So,  we  can see  a  picture  of gradually  improving resilience  in  the  banking  system  but  with 
further to go, but also credit growth which remains weak.  In that context, and recognising the 
balance of objectives within macro-prudential policy, the FSA has taken a number of steps. 
We  have  allowed  banks  to  reduce  the  capital  buffers  they  hold  over  the  minimum 
requirements in line with new lending to the UK economy.  Our view here is that a reduction 
in  the  risk  arising  from  this  new  lending  caused  by  an  improvement  in  credit  conditions 
should  offset the  risk from  lowering capital  buffers.  If  such  extra  lending  boosts economic 
growth,  it  will  enhance  resilience  in  the  financial  system.  Likewise,  we  have  altered  our 
guidance to banks on the liquid asset buffers that they need to maintain.  This reflects the 
Bank of England’s stance on the potential access of banks to liquidity from the Bank, and a 
wider  desire  to  reduce  the  incentives  for  banks  to  hold  excessive  liquid  asset  buffers  for 
precautionary reasons.  This, too, we hope will support credit availability. 
It  is  too  soon  to  assess  the  impact  of  all  these  changes  on  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system and on credit creation.  We will monitor the results of these actions very carefully, and 
we will be prepared to amend our judgements in the light of experience.  The key point here 
is that we are applying judgement to our decisions on regulation and within a framework that 
quite  explicitly  defines  and  seeks  to  balance  our  objectives  of  resilience,  the  primary 
objective, and, subject to that primary objective, supporting credit conditions and economic 
activity. 
To be clear, in this world of judgement-based regulation, we will not get all the calls correct, 
not least because the future is uncertain.  But, I am a lot more comfortable that we have a 
framework in which  we  can apply judgement more consistently and be held to account for 
those judgements in a more open way. 
There is one further element to the package of reforms, namely the measures proposed by 
the  Commission  chaired  by  Sir  John  Vickers,  which  the  government  intends  to  place  into 
legislation in the near future.  I fully support the Vickers proposals.  The key plank of this is to 
ring-fence  commercial  from  investment  banking  and,  in  doing  so,  define  the  scope  of 
commercial banking that can be inside the ring-fence.  This will be a major structural change 
for the banking system, and will have important implications for us as regulators. There are 
two key points for me in the Vickers reforms. First, in the last ten years or more, the nature of 
investment  banking  has  changed  to  include  a  much  larger  element  of  proprietary  position 
taking.  The incentives and risks of this activity are quite different from commercial banking, 
and  I  do  not  believe  that  the  two  should  be  mixed  in  the  same  legal  entity.  Regulators 
around  the  world  have  struggled  to  regulate  this  mixture,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  even 
though we have raised the cost of doing investment banking business through changes to 
the regulatory regime. 
Second, in a world where we will not accept banks being too big or complicated to fail, it is 
sensible to be able to resolve commercial and investment banks separately, and to achieve 
this we need the ring-fence approach.  This will support the continuity of provision of financial 
services. 
In  conclusion,  we  have  a  very  big  programme  of  reforms  under  way,  with  the  central 
objective  that  we  must  not  let  a  financial  crisis  of  this  scale  happen  again.  The  reform 
programme is founded on very clear public policy objectives.  We are absolutely committed to 
the  reform  programme  and  knitting  together  the  various  parts.  We  expect  financial 
institutions to abide by the spirit of it too.  There are big changes in what we are doing, and it 
is an exciting time to be putting these changes into effect.  We will get a much clearer focus 
from  splitting  prudential  and  conduct  regulation  for  banks  and  insurers,  from  introducing 
macro-prudential  regulation  to  help  to  protect  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  and  from 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
focusing  our  regulation  on  applying  judgement  in  a  transparent  way.  Firms  that  mess  up 
should, and will, be allowed to fail, but it must not be at the cost of damaging the financial 
system and economy.  Ringfencing commercial and investment banking will help to achieve 
that objective.  And, out of these reforms I hope we can encourage a banking system that is 
more  open  to  competition  and  serves  the  public  more  effectively  and,  more  broadly,  a 
financial system that delivers the public policy objective of financial stability. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
