Andrew Bailey: The future of banking regulation in the UK 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Bailey,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  British 
Bankers’ Association Annual Banking Conference, London, 17 October 2012. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here this morning.  I am going to talk about what has become the 
hot topic of the time, namely the role of bank regulation in macroeconomic policy.  But before 
I do so, just a few words on progress towards creating the new system of regulation in the 
UK.  The Treasury announced on Monday that they expect that the new regime will formally 
come into existence at the start of April next year. I expect that the PRA’s new home, near to 
the Bank of England in Moorgate, will be occupied by our supervisors shortly before then. 
On Monday, we published two important documents on the PRA’s approach to supervision, 
covering banks and insurers respectively.  Next Monday, we are holding conferences at the 
QE2 Centre, covering banks in the morning and insurers in the afternoon.  Please do come 
along.  You can access the documents now on the Bank of England and FSA  websites.  I 
should add that Martin Wheatley and his colleagues in the FCA-to-be have also issued an 
approach document this week and are holding a number of events too.  We are doing our 
best to keep you entertained! 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  issues  around  bank  regulation  and  macroeconomic  policy.  The 
financial crisis has emphasised the close links between the health and behaviour of banks 
and  the  state  of  the  economy.  We  are  remembering  a  very  uncomfortable  lesson  from 
history  that  should  not  have  been  forgotten.  But,  forgotten  it  was.  We  have  a  very  big 
programme of reforms under way, with the central objective that we must not let a financial 
crisis of this scale happen again. At the heart of this programme we are trying to knit together 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  in  both  its  macro-  and  micro-prudential  forms, 
something  that  has  not  been  done  properly  for  a  long  time.  I  say  that  quite  deliberately, 
because such coherence was not present prior to the reforms of 1997, so this is more than a 
change to recent arrangements. 
The  new  macro-prudential  approach  to  financial  stability  will  see  the  establishment  of  the 
Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC),  charged  with  the  primary  objective  of  identifying, 
monitoring and taking action to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view to protecting and 
enhancing the resilience of the UK financial system.  In June, the Chancellor announced that 
the government would amend the Bill to give the FPC a secondary objective so that, subject 
to  being  content  on  the  first  objective,  it  should  support  the  economic  policy  of  the 
government, including its objectives for growth and employment.  Currently, the FPC is acting 
in  an  interim  capacity  to  undertake  as  far  as  possible  the  future  statutory  FPC’s  macro-
prudential role. 
These  two  objectives  contain  the  same  “subject  to  that”  language  used  in  1997  in  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  objectives.  It  means  that  there  is  a  hierarchy  of  objectives 
which the FPC must observe.  But, two further points are relevant here.  First, resilience and 
economic growth interact, so they are not fully independent.  An economy that displays stable 
growth  is  more  likely  to  have  a  stable  financial  system,  and  vice  versa.  Second,  policy  is 
necessarily forward-looking, in that we are concerned with stability and growth in the future, 
since today’s outcomes are so to speak, “baked in”.  This means that, in thinking about the 
hierarchy  of  objectives,  in  my  view  we  have  to  take  a  forward-looking  assessment  of  the 
probability of success, rather than saying we should complete one and then do the other. 
Financial stability is more complicated than monetary policy in at least one respect, namely 
that it does not reduce to a single target expressed as a number.  Rather, it comes in the 
form of recommendations, in the plural, expressed as words.  You would think that as central 
bankers  and  public  officials  we  should  love  that,  spending  our  time  crafting  language  in  a 
form that only we really understand.  Let’s not get carried away here – there is a danger that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
by doing so we create uncertainty about our intentions.  This danger of creating uncertainty 
exists because we are finding our way in a new and difficult area of policy.  I want to try to 
cast more light on the issues here.  But,  I would note that, in the history of monetary policy, 
regime changes have had to deal with the challenge of crafting communication that avoids 
creating more uncertainty. 
We have two, hierarchical, objectives:  simply put, the resilience of the financial system, and 
the objective of encouraging growth (the counter-cyclical objective).  These two can point in 
opposite directions, for instance in terms of banks’ ratios of capital to assets. The FPC has 
recommended that banks should strengthen their buffers of capital. 
What is meant by this?  Let me tell you what we have concluded, and what we have not yet 
concluded.  We are in a quite extended transitional phase, whereby the capital buffers of the 
banks are being increased to the Basel III levels.  This process has around six years to run 
on the transition timetable.  The FPC has recently said that it thinks banks should take steps 
to build up those buffers more rapidly than most firms have done recently under the Basel 
transition policy. (I say “most” because some firms have already made the transition.)  But, 
we are not defining this objective as requiring banks to reach a level such as a 10% Core 
Tier One ratio in the next year or so on the new Basel III measure.  Why not?  It would run 
the big risk of encouraging banks to reduce their loan books – in other words, it would affect 
the interaction of our two objectives, or incentivise the banks to reduce/”optimise” their risk 
weights.  We  are,  instead,  defining  the  growth  of  capital  in  terms  of  the  increase  in  the 
nominal stock of Core Tier One,  or equity, capital.  This makes it easier to find a transition 
path that allows more capital and more new lending to co-exist. 
But,  this  begs  three  big  questions:  by  how  much  do  we  want  to  see  the  nominal  capital 
bases of banks grow in short order;  why do we want this to happen;  and what form do we 
want the capital to take?  The first two of these questions, how much and why, are best taken 
together.  Here,  in  my  view,  we  face  uncertainty  that  we  have  to  find  a  way  to  resolve 
adequately.  What  we  have  done  so  far  is  to  ask  the  major  banks  to  try  to  maintain  the 
projected growth of nominal Core Tier One capital over the next 18 months, according to the 
projections for this growth that they provided to us earlier this year.  This  is, their Basel III 
transition path. 
In order to go beyond that path,  we have to ask why we want to do so?  In my view, there 
could  be  at  least  four  reasons  why  new  lending  by  banks  might  be  restrained  by  lack  of 
capital as represented by low price to book ratios.  First, there is a possible shortfall in asset 
values  relative  to  their  book  values,  which  is  exacerbated  by  the  accounting  standards 
preventing  provisions  being  taken  against  expected  future  losses.  Second,  there  could  be 
inadequate capital to protect against tail risks, most obviously  a disorderly break-up of the 
euro area, which has negative consequences for banks and their valuation.  Third, the impact 
of higher funding costs and the constraints on the ability of banks to re-set rates on longer 
maturity assets could mean that banks cannot earn the previously expected rate of return on 
them, which, like the first reason, is amplified by widespread loan forbearance, in both the 
household and corporate books.  And, fourth, there could be a market value adjustment to 
reflect more structural uncertainty about the future business model of banks, for instance due 
to uncertainty about the final shape and impact of regulations, for instance the likely cost of 
implementing the ring-fence. 
Any of these four could contribute to the market value of banks’ capital being less than the 
book value of tangible equity capital.  This is not currently true for all banks, but among the 
UK banks, more often than not, they are valued by the market at quite a sizeable discount to 
book  value.  If  the  market  value  diverges  from  the  tangible  book  value,  we  know  that 
investors are likely to be at least unsure that a firm’s net assets are valued correctly in the 
published accounts.  Consistent with this, we can see that in their published accounts, banks 
are placing a fair value on some of their assets which is below the book value. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This evidence, while informative, does not, for me at least, get to a conclusion on the need to 
add more nominal capital, or more particularly how much capital to add.  To do that, we need 
to know more  about the  contribution  of these  various  possible  causes  of  market  values  of 
banks’ capital, and that must be the key next step in the work.  On this, I would ask for the 
insights of banks themselves and analysts, because as I always say, I know one thing for 
sure, we don’t have a monopoly of wisdom, and this is a tough question. 
But, it is a key question, because the danger of a very slow resolution of the capital gap is 
that new lending to the economy is seriously restrained.  This is the Japanese threat, based 
on  the  recent  history  of  Japan,  and  the  basis  of  the  argument  that  a  more  aggressive 
approach to re-capitalising banks will create more support for new lending.  Moreover, it does 
illustrate  why  we  see  a  close  interaction  of  the  FPC’s  two  objectives,  of  resilience  and 
growth.  I need to see more evidence and analysis of why market values of banks’ capital are 
low before I can determine  what and how much needs to be done.  This is the immediate 
task ahead because we need to do all we can to clear up uncertainty here. 
Before going on, let me deal with two points that are related to this argument.  First, it is said 
that this stance on capital is unnecessary because banks have stronger capital positions now 
than they did in the height of the crisis.  This statement on the capital position now relative to 
the past is true but on its own that part does not tell us whether they have enough capital 
now.  UK  banks  have  made  substantial  progress  over  the  last  four  years  in  building  their 
resilience, but from a low base, it has to be said.  There is further to go, but we should not 
forget the distance that has been travelled. 
The second point I want to deal with here concerns forbearance, namely the extension by 
banks of a variance in the terms of loans, which involves forgiveness of various forms.  It is 
easy to imply that forgiveness is a bad thing, turning Japanese in the unfortunate sense of 
that term.  Rather, we should deal with the consequences of forgiveness, not prevent it. The 
reason for that is because forgiveness has a very good side to it, namely that fewer jobs are 
lost and fewer homes re-possessed where it takes place.  And we can see evidence of both 
of  these  in  the  latest  recession  relative  to  previous  ones.  Let  me  say  something  unusual 
now: I think that the banks deserve a thank you for the way in which they have sought to use 
forbearance.  When I was Chief Cashier of the Bank of England, I was responsible for our 
work on the so-called London Approach whereby we seek to use our powers of persuasion to 
facilitate company re-financings which are in difficulty.  That brought me into regular contact 
with  the  corporate  loan  restructuring  bankers  and  I  was  always  impressed  by  their 
commitment  to  helping  companies  in  trouble.  Sometimes  the  medicine  could  be  hard,  but 
there are many companies around today that would otherwise not be employing people. 
Now, I said earlier that we need to understand more not only about the size and cause of the 
capital  gap  but  also  how  best  to  fill  it.  The  choice  of  solutions  matters  because  it  can 
influence  subsequent  lending  behaviour.  It  is  often  said  that  raising  new  capital  dilutes 
existing shareholders.  That is not really true in a literal sense if existing shareholders have 
written down the market value of the capital they own.  But is true in the sense that it dilutes 
their  claim  on  any  future  upside  to  the  current  market  value  reflecting  the  inevitable 
uncertainty about the future.  This would be the effect of raising new equity.  An alternative 
could  be  to  raise  the  capital  in  the  form  of  contingent  equity,  or  “Co-Cos”  for  short.  The 
attraction of this is that existing shareholders will retain some of any upside, though they will 
pay via lower returns for the risk premium on the cost of Co-Cos.  I am quite attracted to Co-
Cos, but we need to think through whether they will create the necessary incentives to new 
lending.  I should add that, while we are seeking to discourage banks from deleveraging in 
the  form  of  lending  to  the  real  economy,  we  are  not  against  releasing  existing  capital  to 
support  new  lending  where  that  capital  is  currently  tied  up  in  non-core  assets,  which  can 
either  be  sold  or  run  off  because  they  are  not  needed  on  the  balance sheets  of  banks  to 
support the real economy, such as trading book proprietary assets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Finally on this subject, let me briefly describe what we have done so far.  The government 
and the Bank of England have introduced the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS).  FLS is in 
large part a response to developments in financial markets, notably the increase in the cost 
of bank funding which was, inevitably, being passed on in the form of higher costs of lending. 
In the twelve months up to the middle of this year, business lending and mortgage rates rose 
and the evidence we had suggested that there was an accompanying tightening in the terms 
and conditions of new lending.  The Bank of England’s Credit Conditions Survey suggested 
that household secured lending and corporate lending rates were expected to rise further and 
all of this on the back of two years of flat GDP growth and three years of broadly flat credit 
growth to households and business in the UK.  This was notwithstanding the MPC’s action on 
quantitative easing.  FLS is designed to provide banks with medium-term funding at a more 
reasonable cost, with incentives that reduce the cost if banks lend more. This should improve 
credit creation in the economy through lowering rates on new lending, but to some degree it 
may also enable banks to improve their net interest margins and thus build more capital.  At 
the  same  time  the  FLS  was  introduced,  the  Bank  of  England  signalled  its  willingness  to 
enhance its provision of liquidity insurance through the activation of the Extended Collateral 
Term Repo Facility. 
For  its  part,  recognising  the  need  to  balance  macro-prudential  objectives  in  the  way  that  I 
described  earlier,  the  FSA  has  taken  two  steps.  We  have  allowed  banks  to  reduce  the 
capital buffers they hold over the minimum Pillar One requirements in line with new lending 
that is consistent with the objectives of FLS, though to be clear, we do not require banks to 
use FLS to get this benefit.  Our view here is that we have enabled the use of the additional 
capital buffers built up since the height of the crisis by anticipating what will be in the future 
their  partial  use  as  the  Basel  III  counter-cyclical  buffer.  What  we  have  done  on  capital  is 
consistent  with  the  intent  of  Basel  III.  Last  year,  the  major  UK  banks  had  total  so-called 
Capital Planning Buffers of just under £100bn, so we could see a change in the course of 
credit creation by those banks without going far into the buffers. 
I  want  to  develop  this  point  a  bit  more  because  it  has  a  broader  relevance.  One  of  the 
features of the Basel arrangements which is insufficiently appreciated is that, since the outset 
of  the  Basel  Capital  Accord  in  the  1980s,  there  have  been  three  pillars  to  the  framework. 
Pillar 1 is the rules on capital adequacy.  Pillar 2 is where supervisory judgement is applied to 
overlay the rules.  And Pillar 3 is the requirement for transparency in order to enhance market 
discipline.  Since 2008, Pillar 1 capital in the major UK banks has increased from £151bn to 
£186bn.  Pillar 2 capital, in all, increased during the same period from just under £20bn to 
£150bn, of which the £100bn I mentioned is part.  Put simply, in the regime up to 2008, there 
was no judgmental overlay of capital buffers, now there is such a buffer. There are two very 
important points on Pillar 2 capital. First, when I read commentaries which go something like: 
“You wouldn’t believe how low Bank X’s modelled risk weights on, say, mortgages are”.  I do 
note that the commentator can only observe the Pillar 1 capital requirement.  They are not 
observing  the  judgmental  overlay  in  in  Pillar  2  which,  as  you  can  tell  from  the  numbers  I 
quoted, has gone up.  The trouble is, this tends to suggest that Pillar 3 transparency is not 
working as it should do.  This is all I am going to say today on models and RWAs, I will save 
that for another day. 
The second point on Pillar 2 is that, having built it up, we think that we can allow a relatively 
small part to be used to support the second objective of the FPC.  Now, in terms of how we 
justify  this,  given  the  hierarchy  of  objectives  that  I  described  earlier,  I  believe  that  it  is 
important  to  look  at  the  interaction  of  resilience  and  lending  as  I  set  out.  I  think  it  is 
reasonable to conclude, and the FPC supported this action, that a reduction in the risk arising 
from this new lending caused by an improvement in credit conditions should help to offset the 
risk from lower capital buffers.  In other words, if such extra lending boosts economic growth, 
it  will  enhance  resilience  in  the  financial  system.  This  means  that  while  banks  will,  where 
needed, have to hold some capital above the Basel III transaction path for the reason that I 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
set  out  earlier,  the  FSA  is  allowing  those  banks  that  increase  lending  to  a  lower  Pillar  2 
capital buffer to recognise the benefits of such lending. 
I should add that the FSA has also altered its guidance to banks on the liquid asset buffers 
they need to maintain.  This reflects the Bank of England’s stance on the potential access of 
banks to liquidity from the Bank, and a wider desire to reduce the incentives for banks to hold 
excessive  liquid  asset  buffers  for  precautionary  reasons.  This  action,  too,  has  been 
endorsed by the FPC, and I hope it will support credit availability. 
In  conclusion,  I  have  tried  this  morning  to  set  out  how  we  are  thinking  about  and  then 
applying macro-prudential policy, going back to first principles.  This is a new field, and as I 
said earlier, please bear in mind that in the early days of the low inflation monetary policy 
regime in many countries, it took time to refine the communication.  But, beyond that, we also 
need to fill in what for me is the big gap at present, namely how we explain and calibrate the 
resilience objective in terms of capital.  The FPC will focus on this at its next meeting. 
It  is  therefore  too  soon  to  assess  the  impact  of  these  changes  on  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system  and  on  credit  creation.  We  will  monitor  the  results  of  these  actions  very 
carefully, and we will be prepared to amend our judgements in the light of experience.  The 
key point for me is that we are applying judgement to our decisions on regulation and within a 
framework that quite explicitly defines and seeks to balance the objectives of resilience, the 
primary  objective,  and,  subject  to  that  primary  objective,  supporting  credit  conditions  and 
economic activity. To be clear, in this approach of judgement-based regulation, we will not 
get  all  the  calls  correct,  not  least  because  the  future  is  uncertain.  But,  I  am  a  lot  more 
comfortable  that  we  are  building  a  framework  in  which  we  can  apply  judgement  more 
consistently and be held to account for these judgements in a more open way. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
