Charles S R Chuka: Financial and economic challenges for Malawi 
Address by Mr Charles S R Chuka, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the Bankers 
Association Dinner and Dance, Blantyre, 8 September 2012. 
 The  President,  Bankers  Association  of  Malawi,  Mr.  William  Chatsala  and  your  Executive 
Committee 
Chief Executive and Management of Banks and Other Financial Institutions  
The Vice Chancellor, Dr Emmanuel Fabiano 
The Principal of Polytechnic, Dr Grant Kululanga 
The CEO, Bankers Association of Malawi, Mrs. Nkungula, 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  very  delighted  to  be  part  of  this  colourful  occasion.  And  so  I  want  to  thank  you, 
Mr President,  for  the  invitation  to  partake  in  the  dinner  that  is  soon  to  be  served.  It  is  the 
dining and wining part that I came for but I can also well appreciate why you would want me 
to say something, albeit short. I therefore intend to be very brief in my remarks. 
Mr president, ladies and gentlemen 
Let  me  start  by  applauding  BAM  executive  management  for  being  foresighted  in  fostering 
discussions  and  debate  on  issues  that  affect  the  banking  industry  and  thus  the  entire 
economy. It is through occasions like this one that the financial and banking experts in this 
country can make enormous contribution to the policy making process. I can assure you that 
we – the Reserve Bank of Malawi team – do carefully listen to sentiments expressed in our 
consultations as well as the media. 
I must admit there are public sentiments that we prefer to ignore. Allow me to give you some 
examples.  First,  on  August  14 The  Nation  carried  a  story  “Banks  Borrow  K0.8  trillion  from 
RBM”.  That  was  for  the  month  of  July,  meaning  the  RBM  went  away  with  K1.4  billion  in 
interest.  Obviously,  the  so  called  banking  liquidity  crisis  was  going  to  get  worse  with 
borrowing from the Discount Window. Well, the truth of the matter is that the K25.9 billion 
daily average was a rolling figure and not to be treated as separate borrowings. 
Today  it  was  the  turn  of  Daily  Times  which  carried  the  title  “Scrap  off  floating  exchange 
regime”,  the  argument  being  it  makes  planning  difficult.  Well,  I  hope  that  IBAM  members 
made more money  when the Kwacha  was fixed. My sense is that planning meant nothing 
then  in  the  absence  of  hard  currency  in  the  banks.  I  think  that  IBAM  members  stand  a 
greater chance than hitherto to make more money. 
At the same time, however, I want to agree that achieving stability remains the overarching 
goal for the Reserve Bank of Malawi. I am referring to stability that will be sustained and not 
temporary – so businesses can plan better with much longer time horizons than was possible 
before the floatation of the Kwacha. 
Mr president, ladies and gentlemen 
As a listening organization, there is something we must clarify though. The 49% devaluation 
and  the  subsequent  (15%)  depreciation  of  the  Kwacha  has  increased  prices  but  not  by 
64 per  cent.  The  real  effect  of  currency  adjustments  comes  through  the  rate  of  inflation  – 
that’s what measures the average change in prices and thus the loss in purchasing power for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the nation as a whole. This explains the acceleration of inflation from 12.4% in April to 21.7% 
in July. By the way, urban inflation rose from 15.5% to 25.1% during the period. We estimate 
inflation to be between 21% and 24% by end-year with an average of between 17.5% and 
19.8%  for  the  year.  Thus,  when  all  companies  come  to  review  salaries  in  January  2013, 
adjustments in salaries will not exceed the average inflation unless that particular company 
has  made  huge  profits.  Adjustments  effected  during  this  year  will  be  taken  into  account 
accordingly. 
It is therefore quite instructive of the nature of and motivations in our public discourse to hear 
the kind of salary increases that some of our esteemed institutions and social advocates are 
calling  for.  I  very  much  hope  that  the  employers  will  be  standing  and  the  workers  will  still 
have their jobs when all the demands are met. Ask the person who has no job how life is like. 
If  in  its  wisdom  the  government  succumbs  to  the  demands  of  our  public  institutions,  the 
results  are  not  hard  to  contemplate.  First  of  all,  there  is  a  limit  to  the  ratio  of  wages  and 
salaries  to  the  total  recurrent  budget.  Anything  beyond  that  limit  is  unsustainable  and  the 
government will one day be forced to reduce its establishment. Unless substantial cuts are 
made in other budgetary lines to cutter for the unplanned salary adjustments, the 2012/2013 
budget  will  become  very  difficult  to  implement,  domestic  borrowing  will  increase,  and  with 
that pressure will mount on the Kwacha exchange rate and interest rates. The result will be 
higher inflation and continuous loss of purchasing power for wage earners. The country could 
enter into a vicious circle which could be even harder to break. Of course few people would 
believe that – after all things in Malawi have never become that bad, except to remember 
that we remain among the poorest of nations after nearly 50 years of independence. 
Mr president, ladies and gentlemen 
I very much hope that in our life time we will all manage to build an economy in which all 
citizens  will  have  the  opportunity  to  fully  participate  in  the  generation  of  income  and 
enjoyment of fruits of their labour. Public discourse will be about how to sustain development 
and the welfare of all citizens. 
We  will  have  dispensed  with  windy  and  inconclusive  debates  on  the  negative  impacts  of 
devaluations and high interest rates on the man in the street. Labour relations will be more 
constructive than destructive – employers and employees will be discussing how to improve 
productivity so that their company can beat the competition and all staff can get bonuses. 
The  economic  environment  that  I  am  describing  is  quite  possible  with  a floating exchange 
rate, and a government that is totally committed to fiscal prudence. The Kwacha exchange 
rate  will  have  –  for  all  practical  purposes  –  adjusted  fully  to  economic  fundamentals  and 
fluctuations will reflect inflation differentials with our major trading partners and the impact of 
exogenous shocks. 
In such a scenario I believe the level of foreign exchange reserves could exceed six months 
of imports. In today’s terms, that is almost equivalent to 100% foreign exchange cover for the 
total money supply. 
Mr president, ladies and gentlemen 
Way before that, there will be no need for exchange controls that have hitherto crippled the 
ability of the citizens to protect the purchasing power of their savings and thus their ability to 
increase  investments  in  productivity  capacity.  For  instance,  if  you  got  your  pension 
commutation on April 30, your plans to build a house or invest in a small business are now a 
pipe dream because the 49% devaluation plus the 15% depreciation since then have cut the 
purchasing  power  of  your  pension  by  over  60%.  Perhaps  you  should  be  satisfied  with  an 
investment in a bicycle. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However, for those Malawians that have access to hard currency all the time, their story is 
totally  different.  By  holding  onto  some  dollars  which  they  sold  after  the  devaluation,  they 
have  become  relatively  richer.  In  others  words,  for  most  of  us,  exchange  controls  inhibit 
active risk management and foster social inequalities. 
Instead  of  being  a  temporary  measure  to  manage  the  oil  price  shock  in  late  1970’s, 
exchange controls have become a permanent feature of our economy. We are now scared to 
remove them as exogenous shocks – fuel price increase increases, unfavourable terms of 
trade, global financial crises and so forth – have never given Malawi a breathing space. 
Our  neighbours  in  Zambia  were  wiser:  they  abolished  exchange  controls  in  the  1980’s.  At 
that time both Malawi kwacha and Zambian kwacha were about 2 to US$1. Today Malawi’s 
is approaching K300 and Zambia’s about K5, 000. Until recently, Zambians were completely 
free to choose between holding, quoting or transacting in US dollars. The job of defending 
the Zambian Kwacha’s role as legal tender fell on the fiscal authorities and not the central 
bank or man in the street. Indeed, the Bank of Zambia became more of a central bank as the 
conduct of monetary policy became much easier and credible. 
Recent changes are raising questions not about the efficacy of removal of exchange controls 
but government’s resolve to sustain fiscal prudence. 
Mr president, ladies and gentlemen 
I refer to the Zambia only to underscore the fact that the Kwacha has been floated within a 
constrained  framework  –  it  is  still  strongly  supported  by  exchange  controls  on  capital 
transactions – that is movements of funds across the border for investment, savings or good 
old  speculation  is  prohibited.  You  are  even  prohibited  from  holding  onto  dollars  without 
permission. It is currently illegal to quote or make payments in hard currency. 
In the circumstances, therefore, there is a limit to which the Kwacha can depreciate. While it 
is difficult to estimate that limit, it is definitely the amount of money to purchase hard currency 
that  matters  most.  This  is  where  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  comes  in  –  to  balance  the 
supply  of  money  to  economic  activity  and  in  so  doing  contain  inflation  and  exchange  rate 
stability. That work is made extremely difficult when the government of the day is forced to 
print money. That is why the government has committed itself to zero domestic borrowing in 
order to ensure early attainment of macroeconomic stability and thereby help Malawians to 
have a chance to improve their lives. Growth and job creation requires a stable environment; 
we are not yet there, and please do not rock the boat. 
Mr president, ladies and gentlemen 
Analysing  the  on-going  labour  disputes  and  to  suggest  a  solution  is  obviously  beyond  my 
pay-grade. I am, however, comforted in the knowledge that all concerned citizens understand 
the  risks  ahead  of  us  and  the  need  to  stabilise  the  economy,  enhance  growth  and  create 
jobs. 
For that, we also need strong banks, banks that can facility investment. Banks that can afford 
to set aside some capital to cover loans or investments in junk bonds. By junk bonds I mean 
loans to investors who have minimal resources or just good ideas – very risky borrowers. It is 
only strong banks – well capitalised and solvent – that can afford to take on such risks. It is 
strong  banks  that  can  facilitate  access  to  finance  by  the  SME’s  that  are  so  critical  for 
Malawi’s  growth  and  job  creation  –  not  banks  that  are  likely  to  lose  shareholder  value  by 
lending carelessly. 
Ensuring a strong financial system is one of the major roles of the Reserve Bank of Malawi. 
In this task, we will be as professional as possible. We will do everything in our power and 
capacity to protect the savings of the man on the street whether such savings are placed in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
banks,  pension  funds  or  insurance  and  assurance  companies.  The  days  for  financial 
institutions that can’t pay up or run away with people’s savings have since passed. 
Financial  institutions  should  at  all  times  represent  a  beacon  of  hope  and  prudence, 
underwriting  good  business  and 
facilitating  maintenance  of  sound  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. In other words, financial institutions must champion financial deepening and 
access to finance in a sustainable manner. Financial soundness calls for a focus on long-
term profitability and not on short-term profit taking. 
Mr president, ladies and gentlemen 
I have taken too much of your time and now it’s time to wish you an enjoyable evening. 
I thank you for your attention and may God bless you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
