Andrew G Haldane: On being the right size 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
the  Institute  of  Economic  Affairs’  22nd  Annual  Series,  The  2012  Beesley  Lectures,  at  the 
Institute of Directors, London, 25 October 2012. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Financial Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Andrew Gracie, Varun Paul, Kirsty Rodwell, Timothy Richards, Vicky Saporta, Rhiannon Sowerbutts and 
Belinda Tracey for their comments and contributions 
Introduction 
1. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  delivering  one  of  this  year’s  Beesley  Lectures.  I  want  to  discuss 
financial  regulation.  But  my  title  is  drawn  from  neither  finance  nor  regulation.  Instead  it  is 
drawn from evolutionary biology. 
In 1928, evolutionary biologist J. B. S. Haldane wrote an important article whose title I have 
borrowed, On Being the Right Size.1 The essential point was simple. The sheer size of an 
object, institution or animal determined their structure. In particular, as their size rose, their 
structure needed to strengthen more than proportionately if they were to remain robust and 
resilient. 
This principle is sometimes enshrined in the so-called “square-cubed” law. A proportional rise 
in an object’s size causes its area to rise by the square, and its volume by the cube, of that 
rise.  At  one  level,  this  is  simple  mathematical  geometry.  Yet  in  the  real  world,  it  carries 
fundamental implications for evolutionary structure.  
Take the animal kingdom. The square-cubed law explains why a flea, even if it were the size 
of  a  man,  would  not  be  capable  of  jumping  to  the  moon.  It  explains  why  a  hippopotamus 
cannot  turn  somersaults.  And  it  explains  why  King  Kong  and  Godzilla  were  physiological 
impossibilities – the weight transfer associated with a single step would have shattered their 
thigh bones. 
When the world’s biggest banking beasts took a step too far in 2008, they too folded under 
their own weight. Their physiological structure proved inadequate to make them robust and 
resilient.  That  is  the  essence  of  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem.  In  the  language  of  Haldane, 
international policymakers have concluded that many of the world’s largest banks are not the 
right size given their existing physiological make-up.  
Over the past few years, initiatives to solve the too-big-to-fail problem have come thick and 
fast. At root, each has aimed to strengthen the structure of the world’s biggest banks. That is 
the  good  news.  Claims  that  they  have  solved  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  appear  to  me, 
however,  premature,  probably  over-optimistic.  Worse,  they  risk  sending  a  false  sense  of 
crisis comfort. That is the bad news. 
To  see  why  such  a  cautious  conclusion  is  warranted,  we  begin  by  tracking  the  structural 
evolution of the financial system over the past few decades. We then consider the three most 
prominent policy initiatives aimed at tackling too-big-to-fail – systemic surcharges, resolution 
regimes  and  structural  reform.  In  the  final  section  we  consider  what  supplementary  policy 
options might be necessary to ensure banking is right-sized.  
                                                
1   Haldane (1928). Haldane is, regrettably, no relative.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Evolution of the financial system 
2. 
The  past fifty  years  have  seen  seismic  shifts  in  the  structure,  size  and  composition  of  the 
global financial system. These changes gave birth to the too-big-to-fail problem. Chart 1 plots 
the  ratio  of  banking  sector  assets-to-GDP,  and  its  cross-country  dispersion,  for  a  set  of 
14 advanced countries over the past 140 years.2  
For  the  better  part  of  a  century,  between  1870  and  1970,  financial  deepening  in  these 
countries followed a modestly upward trend. Over this period, the average bank assets-to-
GDP ratio rose from 16% to over 70%, or less than 6 percentage points per decade.  
Since  1970,  this  trend  has  changed  trajectory.  The  ratio  of  bank  assets-to-GDP  has  more 
than  doubled  over  the  past  40  years,  rising  from  around  70%  to  over  200%,  or  over 
30 percentage  points  per  decade.  In  other  words,  since  1970  financial  deepening  has 
occurred five times faster than in the preceding century. For some individual countries, the 
rise has been more dramatic still – in the UK, the ratio has risen five-fold. 
In cross-country studies, financial deepening of this type has generally been found to have a 
positive effect on medium-term growth (Beck and Levine (2004)). Taken literally, this would 
suggest that the rise in banking scale over recent decades has provided a significant tailwind 
to medium-term growth in advanced countries. So it seemed in the pre-crisis period.  
But  that  conventional  wisdom  has  recently  been  called  into  question.  IMF  research  has 
suggested that financial deepening can indeed be growth-positive – but within limits. There is 
a  threshold  at  which  private  credit-to-GDP  may  begin  to  have  a  negative  impact  on  GDP 
growth (Arcand, Berkes and Panizza (2012)). That threshold is found to lie at a private credit-
to-GDP ratio of around 80–100%.  
This  finding  is  consistent  with  earlier  cross-country  evidence  suggesting  that,  at  credit-to-
GDP  ratios  above  unity,  output  volatility  tends  to  increase  (Easterly,  Islam  and  Stiglitz 
(2000)).3  This  threshold  lies  significantly  below  current  levels  of  financial  depth  in  most 
advanced economies. In other words, taken at face value this evidence suggests that, at its 
current scale, banking could be acting as a headwind to medium-term growth. 
Accompanying  this  dramatic  rise  in  banking  scale  has  been  an  equally-dramatic  rise  in 
banking  concentration.  Chart  2  plots  the  evolution  of  the  asset  share  of  the  three  largest 
banks in the US, UK, Germany and Switzerland over recent decades. 
The  US  has  undergone  the  most  dramatic  upwards  shift,  with  the  share  of  the  top  three 
banks rising from around 10% to 40% between 1990 and 2007. For other countries, there is 
a less dramatic rise in concentration but from a much higher starting point, with the top three 
banks accounting for between two-thirds and three-quarters of assets in the UK, Switzerland 
and Germany. 
This  dramatic  rise  in  banking  scale  and  concentration  has  been  driven  by  financial 
liberalisation.  But  it  has  also  spawned  an  acute  problem  for  society  due  to  escalating 
expectations  of  state  support  for  the  banking  system.  These  expectations  generate  lower 
funding costs, in particular for the largest banks, which in turn encourages further expansion 
and concentration, worsening the too-big-to-fail dilemma. There is a self-perpetuating “doom 
loop” (Alessandri and Haldane (2010)). 
The  size  of  the  resulting  “implicit  subsidy”  from  the  state  to  the  big  banks  has  been  the 
subject of recent study – and no little controversy (Noss and Sowerbutts (2012)). There are a 
number  of  possible  methods  for  estimating  the  subsidy.  Perhaps  the  simplest  is  found  by 
comparing  the  “standalone”  and  “support”  ratings  assigned  to  debt  issued  by  large  banks. 
                                                
2  The data are from Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2011). 
3  This has strikingly close parallels with recent econometric evidence suggesting that growth is harmed at debt-to-GDP ratios 
above unity, for both the public sector (Reinhart and Rogoff (2010)) and private sectors (Cechetti et al (2011)). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  difference  between  these  ratings gives  an  estimate,  used  by  the market  when  pricing 
debt, of the probability of state support. 
Chart  3  plots  the  difference  between  these  ratings  for  the  29  institutions  deemed  by  the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB) last year to be the world’s most systemically-important. In the 
pre-crisis  period,  this  difference  averaged  1.3  notches.  This  sounds  material,  if  not 
breathtaking. It suggests that, while non-trivial, too-big-to-fail may not have been a first-order 
driver of the rising scale and concentration in banking. 
Yet even small notches of support can translate into big implicit subsidies if balance sheets 
are large. So it is for the world’s largest banks. Over the period 2002 to 2007, the implied 
annual  subsidy  to  the  world’s  largest  banks  averaged  $70  billion  per  year  using  a  ratings-
based measure (Chart 4). That is roughly 50% of the average post-tax profits of these banks 
over the period.  
As the crisis struck, this implicit promise became explicit. Financial support was extended to 
the banking system in the form of capital injections, guarantees and liquidity insurance. On 
some  estimates,  this  support  rose  to  three-quarters  of  annual  GDP  in  some  countries.  In 
response to these interventions, there has predictably been a further ratcheting-up in ratings-
implied degrees of state support to banks. 
By  2009,  the  ratings  difference  had  more  than  doubled  to  above  three  notches,  with  the 
implied  monetary  subsidy  over  $700  billion  per  year.  That  was  well  in  excess  of  average 
annual  pre-crisis  profits  of  these  firms.  Even  if  an  over-estimate,  the  scale  of  the  implied 
subsidy  signalled  something  dramatic  was  at  play.  Too-big-to-fail  had  become  hard-wired 
into the structure and pricing of the financial system. 
Systemic surcharges 
3. 
One way of interpreting these implicit subsidies is as the market’s best guess of how much a 
policymaker  would  be  willing  to  pay  each  year  to  avoid  the  failure  of  the  world’s  biggest 
banks. They proxy the expected social costs of big bank failure. In the jargon, they capture a 
systemic externality. 
This notion of a systemic externality has underpinned recent academic and policy efforts to 
solve the too-big-to-fail problem. Brunnermeier et al (2009) use this framework to motivate 
levying a tax – a “Pigouvian tax” – on institutions posing systemic risk externalities. This tax 
would  be  set  at  levels  which  offset  the  effects  of  the  bank’s  actions  on  wider  society.  A 
number  of  academics  have  since  proposed  measures  along  broadly  Pigouvian  lines 
(Archarya et al (2010)).  
Rather  remarkably,  policy  reforms  in  practice  have  followed  closely  in  the  spirit  of  these 
proposals. In 2010, the FSB announced its intention to introduce a “systemic surcharge” of 
additional capital on the world’s largest banks. In July 2011, the Basel Committee published 
a  methodology  for  measuring  systemic  importance  based  on  indicators  of  bank  size, 
connectivity and complexity, with additional capital of up to 2.5% depending on this score.  
In November 2011, the FSB endorsed this methodology and announced the 29 systemically-
important entities to which it would apply. This framework will be finalised this year, before 
being  phased-in  from  2016.  Legislation  is  already  in  place,  or  is  being  drawn  up,  to 
implement the systemic surcharge in the United States and Europe. 
These proposals are clearly a practical step in the right direction. By boosting levels of capital 
in the system, the probability of big bank failure will be reduced. You would have got good 
odds back in 2007 that something as seemingly elliptical as a Pigouvian tax on systemic risk 
would  have  found  its  way  onto  the  regulatory  statute  books.  Now  we  have  it.  “We  are  all 
Pigouvians now”, even if most of us cannot spell it. 
The practical question is how far systemic surcharges take us in tackling the systemic risk 
externality. In other words, at current levels by how much have systemic surcharges reduced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
expected  losses  for  the  financial  system?  That  is  an  empirical  question.  To  assess  it, 
consider the impact of capital surcharges on the expected losses facing the 29 institutions 
identified by the FSB. 
Using  each  of  these  banks’  balance  sheets,  we  generate  a  measure  of  default  probability 
using the Merton (1974) contingent claims model. We assume that the base level of equity 
for  these  banks  is  7%  (the  new  Basel  III  minimum)  and  that,  in  the  event  of  default,  they 
suffer  losses  on  their  assets  of  around  30%.4  To  keep  things  simple,  banks’  assets  are 
assumed to be (log-)normally distributed, in line with Merton (1974), and default occurs only 
when a bank’s capital is fully exhausted. 
Assume initially that default risks across banks are independent. This is a highly conservative 
assumption, as in practice bank default probabilities are highly correlated at times of stress. 
Indeed, bank correlation coefficients in crisis often head towards one. For that reason, this 
thought-experiment provides a lower bound on expected losses across the financial system. 
Chart  5  shows  expected  losses  across  the  29  banks  at  different  levels  of  the  systemic 
surcharge. In the absence of any surcharge, expected losses across the system are just less 
than  $200  billion  per  year.  Were  every  large  bank  instead  to  face  the  maximum  capital 
surcharge of 2.5%, then expected system-wide losses would fall by around 60% relative to 
their base level. And to remove 90% of the systemic externality – expected losses of around 
$5 billion – a surcharge of over 7% would be needed.  
A  more  plausible  experiment  would  be  to  assume  a  non-zero  correlation  among  bank 
defaults. For example, the failure of a large bank which caused it to fire-sale assets could 
impose externalities on  other large banks holding these same assets (Wagner (2009)). To 
place an upper bound on expected losses in the face of these fire-sale externalities, assume 
instead a correlation coefficient of one. 
Chart  5  illustrates  the  impact  on  expected  system-wide  losses  of  a  high  degree  of  default 
correlation  among  the  big  banks.  The  expected  system-wide  loss  increases  to  around 
$750 billion per year – similar in size to the implicit subsidy at its peak. A 2.5% surcharge 
now  only  reduces  expected  system-wide  losses  to  around  $350  billion  per  year.  To  lower 
expected system-wide losses to be around $5 billion per year would require a surcharge of 
around 15% – six times its current upper limit.  
If anything, these thought-experiments probably produce conservative estimates of system-
wide losses and the necessary systemic surcharge. For example, bank asset returns are in 
practice much fatter-tailed than the log-normal distribution. And in practice, banks are likely 
to default well before their capital is fully exhausted. Relaxing either assumption would push 
up  estimates  of  expected  losses  and  the  surcharge  necessary  to  curtail  these  losses 
(Schanz et al (2012)).  
Nonetheless,  if  expected  system-wide  losses  are  a  reasonable  proxy  for  the  system-wide 
externalities large banks pose, this analysis delivers a rather gloomy prognosis. At current 
levels of the surcharge, a large chunk of the systemic externality would remain untouched. If 
too-big-to-fail is the problem, then systemic surcharges seem to offer only a partial solution.  
Resolution regimes 
Capital  surcharges  lower  systemic  externalities  by  lowering  default  probabilities  for  the 
world’s largest banks. An alternative way of lowering those externalities would be to reduce 
the  collateral  damage  associated  with  their  failure.  This  has  been  a  key  motivation  for  a 
second strand of the reform debate – the design of effective resolution regimes.  
                                                
4 
James (1991). We also assume bank asset volatility of 4% per year, in line with previous empirical studies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Few  examples  better  illustrate  the  costs  of  getting  this  wrong  than  the  spiralling  queues 
outside branches of Northern Rock in September 2007. Despite being a medium-sized retail 
bank, Northern Rock’s failure caused systemic disruption and put taxpayers’ money at risk. 
In response, the UK put in place in 2009 a special resolution regime for banks, providing the 
Bank of England with tools for winding-down a failed bank.  
As the crisis illustrated, financial failure which causes systemic disruption is not confined to 
banks. And to avoid taxpayer bail-out, losses may need to be imposed on a wide class of 
bank creditors, including holders of debt as well as equity – for example, by “bail-in”. Over 
recent years, these resolution lessons have been enshrined in banking legislation.  
For example, in the United States Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act was passed in July 2010. It 
creates a new regime for the liquidation of financial companies, banks and non-banks, which 
pose  a  systemic  financial  stability  risk.  It  enables  losses  to  be  imposed  on  creditors  in 
resolution, while also prohibiting state bail-outs. 
Internationally,  in  November  2011  the G20  endorsed  the  FSB’s  Key  Attributes  of  Effective 
Resolution Regimes, developed by an international working group chaired by my colleague 
Paul  Tucker.  Efforts  are  now  underway  to  align  national  resolution  regimes  with  these 
principles. As part of that, in Europe a draft Directive on bank recovery and resolution was 
published in June 2012.  
These  initiatives  are  an important  practical step in  the right  direction,  lowering  the societal 
costs of bank failure. As with systemic surcharges, it is striking how much progress has been 
made in so short a space of time on so complex an issue. The practical question is how far 
this takes us towards removing the too-big-to-fail externality.  
During  a  bank  resolution,  one  way  of  ensuring  continuity  of  banking  services  is  by 
transferring assets and/or liabilities of a failing firm to a third party. But the only entity with 
sufficient  financial  and  managerial  resource  to  absorb  a  large  asset  or  liability  portfolio, 
without  suffering  chronic  indigestion,  is  another  big  bank.  So  it  was  during  the  crisis  –  for 
example,  Bear  Stearns  was  swallowed  by  JP  Morgan  Chase,  Merrill  Lynch  by  Bank  of 
America and Washington Mutual by Citigroup.  
This makes for a rather uncomfortable evolutionary trajectory, with rising levels of banking 
concentration  and  ever-larger  too-big-to-fail  banks.  Levels  of  banking  concentration  have 
risen in many countries since 2007, precisely because of such shot-gun marriages by over-
sized partners. In other words, resolving big banks may have helped yesterday’s too-big-to-
fail problem, but at the expense of worsening tomorrow’s.  
One way of avoiding this problem is to re-capitalise a bank by bailing-in its creditors, rather 
than transferring its assets. But resolution rules of this type are not problem-free either. Like 
all policy rules, they face what economists call a time-consistency problem. Whether a rule is 
followed in practice depends on the balance of costs and benefits at the time crisis strikes, 
not at the time the rule is written. That is why policy might in practice lack consistency over 
time – hence time-inconsistency. 
Consider that trade-off when a big, complex bank hits the rocks. On the one side is a simple, 
but  certain,  option  –  state  bail-out.  On  the  other  is  a  complex,  and  less  certain,  option  – 
resolution.  Policymakers  face  a  trade-off  between  placing  losses  on  a  narrow  set  of  tax-
payers today (bail-in) or spreading that risk across a wider set of tax-payers today and in the 
future  (bail-out).  If  governments  are  risk-averse  and  wish  to  smooth  the  pain  across  tax-
payers and across time, then bail-out may look attractive on the day. 
Financial history certainly suggests so. The history of big bank failure is a history of the state 
blinking  before  private  creditors  (Haldane  (2011)).  Recent  crisis  experience  has  written 
another chapter in this history. Next time may be different. For example, the public backlash 
against future bail-outs could reinforce government’s resolve to impose losses on creditors. 
And recent US legislation in principle locks the tax-payer cashbox and throws away the key. 
Looking forward, the issue is whether this ex-ante rule is ex-post credible.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
As Chart 6 illustrates, implied levels of support for the US’s biggest banks are much higher 
than before the crisis. More telling still, the passage of Dodd-Frank appears to have had little 
impact on levels of implied state support. It is early days for this new resolution regime and 
credibility may take time to be earned. Nonetheless, at present the market believes the time-
consistency problem for big banks is as acute as ever. 
Even if it might appear the expedient option on the day of crisis, it is questionable whether 
bail-out is the optimal response over the medium-term. Chart 7 looks at the response of bank 
and  sovereign  CDS  spreads  around  the  time  of  bank  bail-outs  in  a  selection  of  crisis 
countries. While bail-outs lowered bank CDS spreads, as might be expected, bail-out came 
at the expense of a rise in sovereign CDS spreads. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  see  why.  The  financial  crisis  has  caused  huge  damage  to  the  balance 
sheets of governments in advanced economies. For the G20 countries, the IMF forecast that 
the debt-to-GDP ratio will rise by almost 40 percentage points between 2007 and 2016, to 
almost 120%. At these levels, public sector debt may be a significant drag on medium-term 
growth (Rogoff and Reinhart (2010)). 
For  economies  with  large  banking  systems  and  without  a  credible  resolution  regime,  this 
leaves policymakers caught between a rock and hard place. When the call comes to ride to 
the banking rescue, government may be unable to afford not to. But nor, at least over the 
medium term, can they afford to. This is just the dilemma facing advanced countries today.  
Structural reform 
One  way  of  lessening  that  dilemma,  and  at  the  same  making  resolution  and  bail-in  more 
credible,  is  to  act  on  the  scale  and  structure  of  banking  directly.  Perhaps  not  surprisingly, 
recent regulatory reforms have sought to do just that. They have taken seriously the maxim 
that, if a bank is too big to fail, then it is too big. The result has been detailed proposals for 
structural reform in a number of advanced countries.  
In  the  United  States,  the  “Volcker  rule”  has  been  introduced.  This  prohibits  US-operating 
banks from undertaking proprietary trading and restricts private equity activity. The rule was 
tabled in October 2011 and became law in July 2012. Banks have two years to comply. 
In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  proposals  of  the  “Vickers  Commission”  include  placing  a  ring-
fence around retail banking activities, supported by higher levels of capital. The final version 
of these proposals was tabled in September 2011 and legislation to enact them is planned by 
2015. Banks will have until 2019 to comply.  
Most  recently  in  Europe,  the “Liikanen  plan”  was  announced  in  October  2012.  It  proposes 
that the investment banking activities of universal banks be placed in a separate entity from 
the  remainder  of  the  banking  group.  There  are  at  present  no  plans  to  legislate  these 
proposals. 
As  with  the  other  reform  strands,  it  is  remarkable  how  quickly  radical  structural  reform 
proposals are finding their way onto the statute book. And although different in detail, these 
proposals  share  a  common  motivation:  separation  of  certain  investment  and  commercial 
banking  activities.  In  theory,  such  a  separation  delivers  financial  stability  benefits  of  two 
distinct types (Boot and Ratnovski (2012)). 
First,  separation  reduces  the  risk  of  cross-contamination.  Riskier  investment  banking 
activities,  when  they  go  wrong,  can  pollute  and  dilute  the  financial  resources  of  the  retail 
bank. This potentially inflicts losses (or fear of losses) on depositors. It may also constrain 
banks’ ability to make loans to the real economy when it might most need them. This is a 
crisis-time benefit of separation. 
Second, separation can secure an improved pre-crisis allocation of financial resources from 
a societal perspective. High private return investment banking activities may crowd-out the 
human and financial resources devoted to high social return commercial banking activities. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Investment banking activities might also piggy-back on the cheaper cost of deposit funding. 
In  effect,  universal  banking  allows  privately  optimal,  but  socially  sub-optimal,  cross-
subsidisation. This is a normal-times benefit of separation. 
Both  of  these  costs  were  evident  ahead  of,  and  during,  the  recent  crisis.  Ahead  of  crisis, 
resources gravitated to the investment banking side of the fence. Between 2000 and 2007, 
UK banks’ trading books rose six times as fast as their banking books. Human capital made 
the  same  journey,  helped  by  investment  banking  salaries  rising  four  times  as  fast  as 
commercial bank salaries since 1980. 
In  the  teeth  of  crisis,  risk  cross-contamination  became  a  potent  factor.  Basic  banking 
services in universal banks were often subject to severe disruption from trading book losses, 
which exceeded by many multiples the capital allocated to them. That is why national deposit 
insurance  schemes  were  extended  and  in  some  cases  became  temporarily  unlimited.  It  is 
also why repeated attempts have had to be made to resuscitate weak credit growth over the 
past few years. 
So how far will existing structural proposals take us in harnessing these benefits? Volcker, 
Vickers  and  Liikanen  seek  legal,  financial  and  operational  separation  of  activities.  So  in 
principle  each  ought  to  prevent  cross-contamination  at  crisis  time.  Whether  they  do  so  in 
practice depends on loopholes in, or omissions from, the ring-fence. And each of the existing 
proposals has open questions on this front.  
For  example,  the  Volcker  rule  separates  only  a  fairly  limited  range  of  potentially  risky 
investment bank activities, in the form of proprietary trading. The Vickers proposals mandate 
only a limited range of basic banking activities to lie within the ring-fence, namely deposit-
taking and overdrafts. And the Liikanen plans allow a wide range of derivative activity to lie 
outside of the investment banking ring-fence. 
It could be argued that these loopholes are modest. But as the history of the Glass-Steagall 
Act  demonstrates,  today’s  loophole  can  become  tomorrow’s  bolthole,  today’s  ring-fence 
tomorrow’s  string  vest.  At  a  minimum,  this  suggests  the  need  for  full  and  faithful 
implementation of the spirit as well as the letter of the Volcker, Vickers and Liikanen plans if 
risk cross-contamination is to be avoided 
A larger question-mark still hangs over whether these proposals will lead to a sea-change in 
the allocation of resource to retail and investment banking. The cultures of investment and 
retail  banking  are  quite  distinct.  Retail  banking  relies  on  forming  long-term  relationships, 
while  investment  banking  is  inherently  shorter-term  and  transactional.  Housing  these  sub-
cultures under one roof makes achieving the necessary separation of cultures and capital a 
significant operational headache. 
At a minimum, such a separation of culture and capital is likely to require entirely separate 
governance, risk and balance sheet management on either side of the ring fence. Without 
that,  human  and  financial  resource  allocation  either  side  of  the  ring-fence  will  become 
blurred. For example, without separate debt issuance for retail and investment banking, the 
cost of debt for a big bank will be a blended mix. The implicit subsidy in funding costs would 
then remain and with it one of the main distortions associated with too-big-to-fail. 
Only time will tell whether cultural separation can be achieved under the existing structural 
reform  proposals.  In  the  go-go  years,  will  these  reforms  be  sufficient  to  prevent  the  grass 
always appearing greener on the riskier side of the (ring-)fence? This is the acid test of the 
structural reform agenda.  
Where next? 
Progress  has  been  made  over  the  past  few  years  towards  eliminating  too-big-to-fail,  with 
further  progress  on  implementation  planned.  But  today’s  task  is  even  more  daunting  than 
before the crisis. The big banks are even bigger. The system itself is more concentrated. And 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
despite reform efforts, the market’s best guess today about tomorrow’s implicit subsidy is far-
larger  than  before  the  crisis  struck,  at  over  $300  billion  per  year  (Chart  3).  The  market 
believes that illicit state promise is even more likely to be kept. 
The wrong conclusion to draw would be that existing reforms have failed or are unnecessary 
–  quite  the  contrary.  Rather  it  is  that  these  reform  initiatives,  while  necessary,  may  be 
insufficient to eliminate the too-big-to-fail externality. If so, what are the alternatives? Several 
have been mooted. 
Re-sizing  the  capital  surcharge  is  one  possibility.  This  would  further  reduce  default 
probabilities  among  the  biggest  banks,  thereby  lowering  the  expected  system-wide  losses 
associated with big bank failure. Taking the earlier illustrative example, to reduce materially 
expected system-wide losses for the world’s largest banks would require a capital surcharge 
several  times  larger  than  its  current  upper  limit.  Interestingly,  this  would  take  bank  capital 
ratios to levels not dissimilar to recent quantitative estimates of their optimal value (Miles et 
al (2011), Hellwig et al (2011)).  
Placing limits on bank size is a second option. By reducing balance sheet exposures, this 
measure  would  reduce  directly  system-wide  losses  in  the  event  of  big  bank  failure.  The 
Dodd-Frank Act includes an explicit limit on the maximum deposit market share of US banks, 
capping it at 10%. But this does not prevent banks rising to a scale, relative to GDP, at which 
they  could  imperil  state  solvency.  For  that  reason,  limiting  bank  size  relative  to  GDP  has 
recently  been  proposed  by  a  number  of  commentators  and  policymakers  (Fisher  (2011), 
Hoenig (2012), Johnson and Kwak (2010)), Tarullo (2012)).  
Full  structural  separation  of  investment  and  commercial  banking,  a  modern-day  Glass-
Steagall Act, has continued to attract support. The main benefit this would bring, relative to 
structural  ring-fencing,  is  that  it  would  eliminate  loopholes  from  the  ring-fence  and  better 
ensure  that  the  distinct  cultures  of  retail  and  investment  banking  were  not  cross-
contaminated. That would lessen the risk of basic banking activities being starved of human 
or financial capital, both ahead of and during crisis. Full separation may also be operationally 
simpler to implement than the existing structural proposals.  
Finally, enhanced banking competition would potentially help to reduce some of the problems 
of too-big-to-fail by reducing the degree of banking concentration. Greater exit from banking, 
through enhanced resolution regimes, can help. But a bigger problem still is bank entry: the 
UK went 100 years without a new retail bank being set up. One potential barrier to banking 
entry  is  the  difficulty  of  switching  deposit  accounts  and  loan  contracts.  A  shared  banking 
platform,  containing  customer  account  details,  would  dramatically  reduce  the  frictions  in 
search  and  switch for  deposit  and  loan  products for  customers  (Leadsom (2012)). It  could 
lower materially barriers for new banking entrants.  
A powerful counter-argument to all of these more radical proposals is that they could erode 
the economies of scale and scope associated with large banks. These economies clearly do 
exist in banking, as they do in other industries. For example, fixed costs are large in finance 
and spreading them widely ought to deliver productivity improvements.  
The interesting question is at what point these economies of scale are exhausted. Indeed, 
informational and managerial diseconomies of scale are likely at some scale, whatever the 
business line. In his classic theorem, Ronald Coase tells us that firms will seek a privately-
optimal size which balances the benefits of economies of scale against these diseconomies 
(Coase 1937)).  
How does all of this apply in banking? The empirical evidence on economies of scale and 
scope in banking is surprisingly patchy. Early studies, using data from the 1980s, failed to 
find  scale  economies  much  beyond  bank  asset  sizes  of  around  $100  million  (Pulley  and 
Braunstein  (1992)).  Empirical  studies  in  the  1990s  nudged  up  the  optimal  bank  scale  to 
around $10 billion (Amel et al (2004), Mester (2005)). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Most recently, a small number of studies using data from the 2000s have pointed to scale-
economies at much higher asset thresholds. For example, Wheelock and Wilson (2012) find 
scale economies for banks with assets up to $1 trillion and Feng and Serilitis (2009) for bank 
with  assets  up  to  around  $1.5  trillion.  Using  data  on  banks  with  assets  in  excess  of 
$100 billion, Mester and Hughes (2011) not only find scale-economies, but argue that these 
may increase with bank size.  
At face value, these findings pose a real challenge to policy options which re-size banks. Or 
do they? Bank of England research has re-looked at the evidence on economies at different 
banking scales (Davies and Tracey (2012)). As Chart 8 shows, in standard models there is 
evidence  of  scale  economies  for  banks  with  assets  above  $100  billion.  Indeed,  these 
economies tend to rise with banking scale.  
But this finding is based on estimates of banks’ funding costs which take no account of the 
implicit subsidy associated with too-big-to-fail. Removing this subsidy raises banks’ funding 
costs, lowers estimates of bank value-added and thereby reduces measured economies of 
scale.  As  Chart  9  shows,  once  an  allowance  is  made  for  the  implicit  subsidy,  the  picture 
changes  dramatically.  There  is  no  longer  evidence  of  economies  of  scale  at  bank  sizes 
above $100 billion. If anything, there is now evidence of diseconomies which rise with bank 
size, consistent with big banks becoming “too big to manage”. 
This evidence reconciles Coase’s Theorem with the too-big-to-fail phenomenon. In line with 
Coase,  banks  have  chosen  the  size  which  maximises  their  private  value.  But  implicit 
subsidies  may  have  artificially  boosted  the  privately-optimal  bank  size.  Subtracting  this 
subsidy,  removing  the  state  crutch,  would  suggest  a  dramatically  lower  socially-optimal 
banking  scale.  Like  King  Kong  and  Godzilla,  these  giants  would  arguably  then  be 
physiological impossibilities.  
What  about  economies  of  scope?  A  recent  study  by  Boyd  and  Heitz  (2011)  conducts  a 
simple, but compelling, thought-experiment. They compare the lowest-available estimate of 
the social cost of the crisis with the highest-available estimate of the private benefit of scale 
and  scope  economies  in  banking.  The  social  costs  of  too-big-to-fail  exceed  the  private 
benefits of scale economies by an order of magnitude.  
Conclusion 
In his 1928 article, J B S Haldane observed that when “you drop a mouse down a thousand-
yard mine shaft it walks away, a rat is killed, a man is broken, a horse splashes”. When big 
banks  disappeared  down  the  mineshaft  in  2008,  their  splashes  generated  a  tsunami.  To 
prevent  that,  their  physiology  needs  to  change.  Existing  change  initiatives  are  right  in 
direction, but may be insufficient in degree. There may be a distance to travel before banking 
is the right size.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Chart 1 
Bank assets/GDP in selected countries 
Chart 2 
Banking concentration in selected 
countries 
Percent
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Maximum-
Minimum range
Average
1870
1890
1910
1930
1950
1970
1990
Source: Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2011)  
 Concentration (%)
UK
United States
Germany
Switzerland
UK 1921-70
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1921 1931 1941 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 2001 2011
  Source: Bank of England calculations, Capie, F. and 
Webber,  A. 
(1985),  FDIC,  Bundesbank,  Swiss 
National Bank, Bank of England calculations 
Chart 3 
Chart 4 
Ratings uplift for systemic institutions 
Notches
4
3
2
1
0
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
Implicit subsidy for systemic institutions 
US$ bn
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
Source: Moody’s, Bank of England calculations 
Source: Bank of England calculations 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 5 
Chart 6 
Expected system-wide loss  
Bank ratings uplift in the US 
Notches
US$bn
Correlated
Independent 
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0.0% 1.0% 2.0% 3.0% 4.0% 5.0% 6.0% 7.0%
Systemic surcharge
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
Source: Bank of England calculations 
 Source: Moody’s, Bank of England calculations  
  Chart 7 
Chart 8 
Sovereign and Bank CDS during  
bailout announcements 
Economies of scale (assuming no  
implicit subsidy)  
4
3
2
1
0
 Average CDS - Banks
Average CDS - Sovereigns
CDS Index:
-20 days = 1
95th percentile
Mean
Constant returns to scale
<100bn
100bn-
500bn
500bn- 1tn
Estimated scale economies
1.30
1.25
1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
1tn- 2tn
>2tn
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-20 -16 -12 -8
-4
0
4
8
12
16
20
Source: Markit, BoE calculations 
Source: Capital IQ, Bank of England calculations 
 Total assets (US$)
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Chart 9 
Economies of scale (implicit  
subsidy-adjusted) 
95th percentile
Mean
Constant returns to scale
<100bn
100bn-
500bn
500bn- 1tn
Estimated scale economies
1.30
1.25
1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
1tn- 2tn
>2tn
Total assets (US$)
 Source: Capital IQ, Bank of England calculations 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References 
Acharya, V, Pedersen, L Philippon, T and Richardson, M (2010), “A tax on systemic risk”, 
NYU Stern Working Paper. 
Admati, A., DeMarzo, P., Hellwig, M. and Pfleiderer, P (2011), “Fallacies Irrelevant Facts 
and  Myths  in  the  Discussion  of  Capital  Regulation:  Why  Bank  Equity  is  not  Expensive” 
(March  23,  2011).  Rock  Center  for  Corporate  Governance  at  Stanford  University  Working 
Paper No. 86. 
Alessandri, P and Haldane, A (2010), “Banking on the state”, Bank of England. 
Amel, D and Barnes, C and Panetta, F and Salleo, C (2004), “Consolidation and efficiency 
in  the  financial  sector:  A  review  of  the  international  evidence,”  Journal  of  Banking  and 
Finance, Elsevier, vol. 28(10), pages 2493-2519, October. 
Boot, A and Ratnovski L (2012), “Banking and Trading”, IMF Working Paper WP/12/238. 
Boyd,  J  and  Heitz  (2011),  “The  Social  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Too-Big-To-Fail  Banks:  A 
bounding exercise”, Working Paper. 
Brunnermeier,  M,  Crockett,  A,  Goodhart,  C,  Persaud,  A  and  Shin,  H  (2009),  “The 
Fundamental  Principles  of  Financial  Regulation,”  London,  Centre  for  Economic  Policy 
Research. 
Cecchetti,  S  and  Mohanty,  M  and  Zampolli,  F  (2011).  “The  real  effects  of  debt”, 
BIS Working Papers 352, Bank for International Settlements. 
Coase,  R.H.  (1937),  “The  Nature  of  the  Firm,”  Economica,  New  Series,  Vol.  4,  No.  16. 
(Nov 1937), pp. 386–405. 
Davies, R and Tracey, B (2012), “Too big to be efficient? The impact of too big to fail factors 
on scale economies for banks”, Mimeo 
Easterly,  W.,  Islam,  R.,  and  Stiglitz,  J.  (2000),  "Shaken  and  Stirred,  Explaining  Growth 
Volatility,"  Annual  Bank  Conference  on  Development  Economics.  World  Bank, 
Washington D.C..  
Feng, G., and A. Serilitis (2009), “Efficiency, technical change, and returns to scale in large 
US  banks:  panel  data  evidence  from  an  output  distance  function  satisfying  theoretical 
regularity.” Journal of Banking and Finance, 34(1), 127–138. 
Fisher, R (2011), “Taming the Too-Big-To-Fails: Will Dodd-Frank be the ticket or is Lap-band 
surgery required?” Remarks before Columbia University’s Politics and Business Club. 
Hoenig, T (2012), “Back to basics: A better alternative to Basel Capital Rules”, Speech to 
The  American  Banker  Regulatory  Symposium,  September  14.  http://www.fdic.gov/news/ 
news/speeches/chairman/spsep1412_2.html 
Hughes, J and Mester, L (2011), “Who said large banks don’t experience scale economies? 
Evidence  from  a  risk-return-driven  cost  function,”  Working  Papers  11-27,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia. 
James, C (1991), “The Losses Realized in Bank Failures”, Journal of Finance, 46, issue 4, 
p. 1223–42. 
Johnson,  S  and  Kwak,  J  (2010),  “13  Bankers:  The  Wall  Street  Takeover  and  the  Next 
Financial Meltdown”, Pantheon  
Jorda, O and Schularick, M and Taylor,  A (2011), “Financial  Crises,  Credit  Booms,  and 
External  Imbalances:  140  Years  of  Lessons,”  IMF  Economic  Review,  Palgrave  Macmillan, 
vol. 59(2), pages 340–378, June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Leadsom,  A  (2012),  “How  an  old  hand  would  change  Barclays”,  Financial  Times  Opinion 
Editorial, July 4. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/fb094718-c5f7-11e1-b57e-00144feabdc0.html#ax 
zz2A6YBHLDV  
Levine,  R  (2004),  “Finance  and  Growth:  Theory  and  Evidence,”  NBER  Working  Papers 
10766, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 
Merton, Robert C. (1974), “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest 
Rates”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 29, No. 2, (May 1974), pp. 449–470. 
Mester,  L.J.  (2008),  “Optimal  industrial  structure  in  banking,”  in  Handbook  of  Financial 
Intermediation, Arnoud Boot and Anjan Thakor, eds. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 133–162. 
Miles D, Yang J and Marcheggiano, G (2012), “Optimal Bank Capital”, Economic Journal.  
Noss,  J  and  Sowerbutts,  R  (2012),  “The  Implicit  Subsidy  of  banks”  Bank  of  England 
FS Papers Series, FS Paper No 15.  
Panizza,  U  and  Arcand,  J-L  and  Berkes,  E  (2012),  “Too  Much  Finance?,”  IMF  Working 
Papers 12/161, International Monetary Fund. 
Philippon,  T  and  Reshef,  A,  (2009),  “Wages  and  Human  Capital  in  the  U.S.  Financial 
Industry:  1909–2006,”  NBER  Working  Papers  14644,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, Inc. 
Pulley, L. B. and Y. M. Braunstein (1992), “A composite cost function for multiproduct firms 
with an application to economies of scope in banking”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 
74(2), 221–30. 
Reinhart, C and Rogoff, K, (2010), “Growth in a Time of Debt,” American Economic Review, 
American Economic Association, vol. 100(2), pages 573–78, May. 
Segoviano, M and Goodhart, C (2009), “Banking Stability Measures,” IMF Working Paper 
09/04 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). 
Schanz, J, Aikman, D, Collazos, P, Farag, M, Gregory, D and Kapadia, S (2011), “The 
long-term economic impact of higher capital levels”, Bank of England, Mimeo 
Tarullo,  D  (2012),  “Financial  Stability  Regulation”,  Speech  At  the  Distinguished  Jurist 
Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  
Wagner,  W  (2009),  “In  the  Quest  of  Systemic  Externalities:  A  Review  of  the  Literature”, 
mimeo 
Wheelock,  D.C.,  and  Wilson  P.W.  (2012),  “Do  Large  Banks  have  Lower  Costs?  New 
Estimates of Returns to Scale for U.S. Banks.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 44(1), 
171–199.  
 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
