Francois Groepe: The role of business in the National Development Plan 
(NDP), to deal with the threefold challenge of unemployment, poverty and 
inequality by 2030 
Address by Mr Francois Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Afrikaanse  Handelsinstituut 
(AHI)  National  Congress,  Kruger  National  Park, 
19 October 2012. 
 Introduction  
1.  
Chairperson,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  can  truly  say  that  I  am  pleased  to  be  part  of  the 
proceedings of the day, hosted at this beautiful venue.  
In addressing my topic, namely “The role of business in addressing the threefold challenges 
that unemployment, poverty and inequality pose to our society”, particularly highlighting the 
role  that  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  can  play  in  addressing  these  issues,  it  is 
necessary for us to first reflect on the current state of affairs.  
Inequality in South Africa 
2.  
Most recently, the World Bank in its assessment of South Africa, said that for South Africa to 
create jobs and reduce unemployment, it needs to tackle economic inequality. It goes on to 
say that South Africa can be considered as one of the most unequal countries in the world 
with the most recent estimate of the Gini coefficient being 0,69. The so-called Gini coefficient 
is  an  internationally  accepted  measure  that  indicates  the  degree  of  income  inequality  in  a 
country. The higher the coefficient, the more unequal the income distribution is. Despite the 
fact that this Gini coefficient is disputable given that the Government Social Grants system 
was not taken into account when this measure was calculated, I am sure that none of us will 
dispute the fact that inequality and poverty is rife in our country. 
In South Africa, it is estimated that the top ten per cent of the population earn as much as 
58 per cent of the income, the bottom ten per cent as little as 0,5 per cent, and the bottom 
50 per  cent  less  than  eight  per  cent.  Inequality  is  a  reality  and  simply  forms  part  of  any 
deliberations when it comes to steering a new course of development in this country. At the 
heart  of  high  inequality  lies  the  inability  to  create  employment  opportunities  on  a  large 
enough scale. South Africa’s unemployment rate of 24,91 per cent1 in the second quarter of 
this year, is amongst the highest in the world. Admittedly, we are no longer an outlier when 
compared with countries such as Greece and Spain, but that of course does not make it any 
more acceptable, recognising also that the high unemployment rates in these countries has 
not been a persistent problem but rather owing to the severe debt crisis facing Europe.  
It is worth noting that social grants constitute as much as 70 per cent of the income of the 
poorest  20  per  cent  of  this  country’s  citizens.  Had  it  not  been  for  these  grants,  around 
40 per cent of South Africans would have seen a decline in their income in the new South 
Africa during the first decade post 1994.  
To reduce inequality to more reasonable levels over the long run, social assistance is clearly 
not  enough  and  should  be  complemented  by  other  initiatives.  These  levels  of  social 
assistance are not sustainable over the long run and may be somewhat counter-productive in 
the end.  
                                                
1   Statistics South Africa 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Focussing  on  the  development  of  human  capital,  particularly  among  the  youth,  given  our 
youth unemployment level which stands at 50 per cent, is paramount. Similar opportunities 
have  to  be  created  for  all,  regardless  of  personal  background  and  circumstances,  race, 
gender  or  geography  -  this  should  be  our  uncompromising  goal.  Access  to  a  basic  set  of 
goods  and  services  during  childhood  could  be  an  important  predictor  of  future  outcomes, 
including educational achievements and earnings. These basic services comprise education, 
health  care,  essential  infrastructure  such  as  water,  sanitation  and  electricity,  and  early 
childhood development programmes.  
In South Africa, access to these services is affected by factors such as ethnicity, including 
gender,  the  composition  of  households,  taking  account  of  the  number  of  children  in  the 
household,  the  education  level  of  parents,  the  gender  and  age  of  the  person  heading  the 
household, orphan status, and where the household resides.  
Encouragingly, near universal access to schooling for those under the age of 16 has been 
achieved  in  South  Africa,  but  access  to  certain  other  services  is  found  to  be  lacking.  The 
services  that  are  not that  universally  readily  available  include  health  insurance,  safe  water 
supply,  improved  sanitation,  adequate  space  without  overcrowding.  Opportunities  such  as 
early  childhood  development  programmes,  neighbourhood  safety  and  access  to  electricity 
are found to be somewhat less problematic.  
Following  from  the  assessment  that  the  World  Bank  has  done  on  South  Africa,  despite  it 
being found that school attendance is comparable to other countries, the school completion 
rate falls short of that of our peers. Children’s inequality is mainly shaped by circumstance, 
and  inequitable  access  to  opportunities  also  affects  the  labour  market.  The  causes  of 
unequal access to available jobs have changed in recent years with education and location 
becoming more prominent. Education deficiencies now account for more than 50 per cent of 
the inequality of employment, with the premium for skills rising continuously.  
In  an  assessment  of  the  quality  of  state  education  amongst  142  countries,  South  Africa’s 
ranking  was  133,  despite  having  one  of  the  highest  rates  of  government  investment  in 
education  in  the  world,  with  expenditure  reaching  R207  billion  for  the  2012/2013  financial 
year. These outcomes necessitate an urgent and critical review of our education system and 
its outputs.  
The National Development Plan  
3.  
The National Development Plan (the Plan) offers us some hope in this regard, with its central 
focus  being  the  elimination  of  unemployment,  poverty  and  inequality  by  2030.  Within  this 
Plan, nine main challenges are being highlighted, including, inter alia:  
• 
• 
• 
Too few jobs;  
The standard of education for most black learners is of poor quality;  
Infrastructure  is  poorly  located,  under-maintained  and  insufficient  to  foster  higher 
growth;  
Spatial patterns exclude the poor from the fruits of development;  
Public services are uneven and often of poor quality; etc  
• 
• 
It is most encouraging that business investment is identified as the cornerstone of the new 
proposals  within  the  National  Development  Plan,  aiming  to  create  11-million  jobs  and 
eliminate poverty by 2030. It sets a target of reducing the unemployment rate to 14 per cent 
in 2020 and to 6 per cent in 2030, while increasing the labour force participation rate from 
54 per  cent  to  65  per  cent.  Per  capita  income  is  also  envisaged  to  increase  from  about 
R50 000 per year currently to about R120 000. It is worth emphasising that it is envisaged 
that  90  per  cent  of  jobs  should  be  in  small  and  expanding  firms  with  the  goal  of  mass 
entrepreneurship.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The Plan is business friendly in that it suggests that some labour regulations be loosened in 
an  effort  to  encourage  business  enterprises  to  employ  more  easily,  as  well  as  lower 
entry-level wages to facilitate a higher uptake of young people in the jobs market. Some of 
the  proposals  in  the  Plan  are  in  conflict  with  those  of  organised  labour,  and  will  require 
intense  negotiations  and  possibly  trade-offs  prior  to  implementation.  The  Plan  takes  a 
pragmatic and broad-based approach to the challenges that South Africa faces in eradicating 
unemployment. The role that the Plan sees for government’s intervention is permeated with a 
greater willingness to work with the private sector, as it leans towards less regulation of the 
economy. The Plan envisages small and expanding companies creating around 90 per cent 
of  the  new  employment opportunities  in  the  economy  in  the  next  20  years. This  will  place 
South  Africa  in  step  with  global  employment  trends.  Small  firms  would  benefit  from  bold 
proposals to drastically reduce so-called “red tape” and improve employment and dismissal 
procedures.  
The  National  Development  Plan  continues  by  indicating  that  the  economy  will  be  more 
enabling  for  business  entry  and  expansion,  with  an  eye  to  credit  and  market  access. 
Regulatory reform and support will also boost mass entrepreneurship. The topic of strained 
labour  relations  is  also  addressed,  indicating  that  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  economy  will 
evolve  into  a  more  labour-intensive  structure  if  tensions  between  employers  and  labour 
persist.  These  tensions  need  to  be  dealt  with  in  a  transparent  and  honest  manner  to  be 
conducive  to  enhanced  labour  absorbing  growth.  Central  to  the  propositions  made  in  the 
National Development Plan related to the jobs market, is the statement that over a 20-year 
horizon, wage growth needs to be linked to productivity growth as it is not feasible to sustain 
a labour absorbing path unless both are growing in tandem.  
In an effort to enhance the labour absorption rate of the economy, the Plan advocates a tax 
subsidy to employers to reduce the initial cost of employing a young labour-market entrant, 
and facilitating an agreement with labour unions on entry level wages. The Plan goes further 
in  suggesting  a  subsidy  to  the  placement  sector  to  secure,  prepare  and  place  matric 
graduates  in  work  opportunities.  It  is  also  proposed  that  dismissal  procedures  for 
performance or misconduct be simplified, and that compliance requirements for employment 
equity  and  skills  development  rules for  small  companies  be simplified,  or  even  done  away 
with. A small business should be afforded the opportunity to focus on making its business 
work, within a nurturing environment that will enable it to grow, in the process creating more 
employment opportunities.  
In  developing  such  a  nurturing  environment,  cognisance  should  be  taken  of  the  fact  that 
small  businesses  are  diverse  in  nature,  each  with  its  own  unique  set  of  needs.  Small 
businesses operate in both the formal and informal sector, where some can be classified as 
survivalist,  while  others  are  being  managed  by  individuals  with  entrepreneurial  flair.  Also, 
some  are  start-ups,  other  are  growing  rapidly  while  others  are  well-established  and  of  a 
stable  nature.  The  level  of  business  skills  also  differs  from  inexperienced  to  highly 
sophisticated. The markets in which they operate range from local, national to global. It is of 
crucial  importance  that  these  diversities  be  reflected  in  any  policies  and  actions  taken  to 
support the small business sector.  
Over and above the focus on the jobs market, the National Development Plan also advances 
some frank recommendations in areas such as education, health and the public sector, as 
part  of  the  creation  of  a  nurturing  and  enabling  environment  for  business  to  prosper,  and 
create those jobs that we so urgently require. A set of integrated actions is being proposed to 
address  the  issue  of  inefficiency  and  a  lack  of  service  delivery  by  the  state.  To  improve 
educational  outcomes,  the  Plan  head-on  confronts  issues  such  as  teacher  performance, 
appointment procedures and accountability. The challenges in public health management are 
also  addressed,  and  in  building  a  capable  state,  detailed  recommendations  are  made  on 
professionalising the public service. Some areas of Government where improvements have 
occurred,  include  both the  Department  of  Home  Affairs  and  at the  South  African  Revenue 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Service,  through  an  improvement  in  operational  procedures,  management  and  delivery 
systems. These improvements should be emulated by all other organs of state.  
The implementation of this Plan will surely require decisiveness on the part of the state and a 
strategic approach to negotiations, in an effort to build trust between all stakeholders in the 
economy.  The  National  Development  Plan  constitutes  a  powerful,  integrated  and  inspiring 
development agenda for the state and the whole of South Africa, and for the Plan to bear 
fruit,  it  must  not  only  be  accepted  as  a  policy  framework  by  Government,  but  should  be 
translated  into  a  plan  of  action,  with  clear  milestones  along  the  way,  within  realistic  time 
frames.  
The role of business  
4.  
To honour the main purpose of my talk this morning, it is necessary for us to now proceed 
with  a  focussed  discussion  of  the  contribution  that  business  can  make  in  addressing 
unemployment, poverty and inequality. It is imperative that youth unemployment receives a 
special focus, because low participation of young people in the economy constrains future 
economic growth and will have profoundly harmful consequences for poverty levels, equity, 
social stability and the self-worth of unemployed people. In South Africa, there are a number 
of factors that act as disincentives to the employment of new labour market entrants, such as 
a  lack  of  appropriate  skills,  high  wages  in  relation  to  productivity,  high  training  costs  and 
somewhat inflexible labour legislation.  
Processes  to  bring  young  people  into  the  labour  market  require  somewhat  of  a 
developmental approach where dedicated youth programmes need to target the youth and 
then effectively screen, select and place them. Anecdotal evidence suggests that placement 
costs  are  exorbitantly  high,  creating  opportunities  for  business  to  innovate  more  cost 
effective screening and placement processes, thereby raising the overall effectiveness of the 
system to absorb labour.  
In collaboration with Government, Business can contribute project management, process and 
administration  skills  to  assist  government  in  addressing  capacity  shortfalls  in  the  most 
expedient manner possible. For these collaborations to be productive an environment of trust 
must  be  cultivated  between  all  constituencies.  In  South  Africa,  the  level  of  trust  between 
government  and  business  is  particularly  low,  and  has  on  numerous  occasions  been 
highlighted  as  a  serious  impediment  to  progress.  From  the  side  of  Business,  an 
acknowledgement should be fostered that trust requires a dual responsibility and that more 
should  be  done  to  build  bridges  with  government.  Known  instances  where  private  sector 
service  providers  have  rendered  work  of  extremely  poor  quality  in  deliverance  of  tenders 
been  awarded  to  them  by  the  state,  do  not  contribute  towards  establishing  trust  between 
parties. In an effort to try and eradicate such practises that undermine trust between parties, 
there  is  much  room  to  accommodate  private-sector  initiatives  with  the  aim  of  combating 
these  undesirable  practises.  Similarly,  postponing,  and  in  some  instances  not  honouring 
contractual  payments  from  the  state’s  side  for  services  rendered  by  private  sector 
companies, also do not contribute to a harmonious relationship from developing between the 
state and the private sector.  
The  focus  within  the  National  Development  Plan  on  the  eradication  of  corruption  from  the 
system is most welcomed, in taking cognisance of the fact that for corrupt state officials to be 
accommodated  within  the  system,  a  willing  counter  party  from  the  private  sector  is 
necessary. There are no innocent parties in this battle; a battle that we must jointly tackle, 
bringing all perpetrators to book.  
The National Development Plan recognises the need for increased fixed investment in the 
economy.  In  fact,  it  sets  a  target  of  raising  the  level  of  gross  fixed  capital  formation  from 
around  17  per  cent  of  GDP  currently,  to  as  high  as  30  per  cent  by  2030.  Inarguably, 
well-planned  and  appropriate  infrastructural  development  is  conducive  to  higher  levels  of 
economic  growth  and  job  creation.  The  Development  Plan  clearly  distinguishes  between 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investment that generates immediate financial returns such as in airports, power stations and 
toll  roads  and  those  projects  where  financial  returns  are  far  less  measurable  such  as  in 
schools and hospitals. The role of business in increasing the overall level of fixed investment 
in  the  country,  will  most  appropriately  lie  in  the  area  of  fixed  investment  where  financial 
returns are more lucrative, through public private partnerships. International experience has 
shown  that  private  sector  participation  in  infrastructure  provision  is  most  successful  in  the 
transport and energy sectors. The participation of the private sector contributes to effective 
cost  containment  through  the  profit  motive,  improves  efficiency  and  leads  to  more 
sustainable  jobs  through  more  prudent  skills  transfer.  In  the  process  complementing  the 
capacity  of  the  state  by  addressing gaps  that  are  not  viable  for  the  state  to  attend  to  and 
taking on development risks.  
An  area  in  which  the  private  sector  can  excel,  given  appropriate  incentives,  is  that  of 
research and development which act as a driver of competitiveness and job creation. Many 
infrastructure  investment  projects  can  act  as  an  attractive  asset  class  for  private  investors 
due  to  the  predictable  nature  of  returns,  thereby  providing  a  low  risk  investment  profile. 
Infrastructure  investment  projects  may  provide  a  means  whereby  a  consistent  real  return 
over  inflation  can  be  attained  through  a  low  volatility  investment  vehicle.  Private  sector 
funding is, however, subject to policy certainty so that private investors can be assured that 
they  will  be  able  to  realise  a  return  on  their  investments.  To  this  end,  the  National 
Development  Plan  proposes  that  Regulatory  Impact  Assessments  be  done  on  all  new 
regulations, and that an expert panel be appointed to prepare a comprehensive regulatory 
review for small- and medium-sized firms in an effort to assess whether special conditions 
are required for such establishments. The implementation of this proposition by the National 
Development Plan will create a direct channel for business to assist in the formulation of new 
regulations. 
For the establishment of small-, micro- and medium-sized enterprises or SMMEs, as they are 
better  known,  that  have  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  the  creation  of  sustainable  jobs  in  the 
economy,  a  spirit  of  entrepreneurship  within  the  economy  should  be  cultivated,  anew. 
Instead  of  talking  jobs,  I  also  advocate  that  we  should  start  talking  the  establishment  of 
SMMEs and how an environment of support to these enterprises can be created, and also 
how SMMEs can best interact with their environment to increase their likely hood of survival 
and ultimately expansion.  
It  is  a  common  feature  across  countries  to  make  available  large  amounts  of  money  in  an 
effort to try and facilitate the growth of SMMEs. Disconcerting though is the fact that limited 
systematic  research  or  data  are  available  informing  the  various  policies  in  support  of 
SMMEs,  especially  in  developing  countries.  Moreover,  empirical  evidence  concerning  the 
relationship between the size of firms and growth has been mixed. Recent work on this topic 
by Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda suggests that so-called “start-ups” and surviving young 
businesses  are  most  critical  for  job  creation  and  contribute  disproportionately  to  overall 
employment  growth.  It  is  found  from  this  study  that  was  carried  out  across  99  developing 
economies between 2006 and 2010 that small- and medium-sized enterprises are the largest 
contributors to employment across countries but that SMMEs contribute more to employment 
in  low-income  countries  than  in  higher-income  countries.  Across  countries,  firms  that  are 
both small and that have been in existence for more than 10 years employing between 5 and 
99 employees have the largest proportional share of total employment compared with other 
size-age  groupings.  Small  and  mature  firms  do  not  only  employ  the  largest  number  of 
people, but they also create the most new jobs, across country income groups.  
While SMMEs are found to create more jobs, their contribution to productivity growth is found 
to be less than that of larger firms. Growth and increases in productivity amongst SMMEs 
require that policy should be focussed on the likely obstacles faced by SMMEs that range 
from a lack of access to finance, the need for business training and literacy programs as well 
as addressing other constraints such as taxation, regulations and corruption.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
It is interesting to note that SMMEs in the United States have created as much as 80 per 
cent of all new jobs over the past 10 years and account for over 98 per cent of all employers. 
In  India,  the  figure  is  closer  to  90  per  cent  and  similarly  in  Ghana  it  is  estimated  to  be  in 
excess of 90 per cent. In South Africa, small firms employing less than 50 people are falling 
short of 70 per cent of employment. Of some concern is the fact that South Africa is ranked 
44th in the world for “ease of starting a business”. It takes around a month and 5 procedures 
to start a new business in South Africa, whereas in New Zealand, one combined procedure 
executed  within one day, can accomplish the same outcome. The World Economic Forum 
places South Africa in the 112th position regarding the “Burden of Government Regulations”. 
The  proper  implementation  of  the  National  Development  Plan  will  be  conducive  to  an 
increased level of entrepreneurship in the economy, as the ease of doing business improves. 
The  obvious  outcome  of  such  a  process  will  be  the  creation  of  jobs  with  longevity,  unlike 
those jobs that sometimes follow projects undertaken by the state in an effort to address the 
scourge  of  unemployment,  that  are  not  sustainable  over  the  long  run.  Small  businesses 
generally  have  the  capacity  to  attract  those  who  are  low  to  moderately  skilled,  and  are 
therefore  best  placed  to  engage  the  overwhelming  pool  of  the  unemployed.  Small 
businesses  should  not  only  rely  on  tax  incentives  for  encouragement  to  expand  their 
businesses but should also drive the agenda in an effort to engage government in seeking 
most appropriate ways to incentivise their activities. The premise of this approach lies in the 
fact that small business is in the best position to tell what is restricting their own operations, 
unlike  officials  who  sometimes  have  limited  insight  into  sector  specific  issues.  In  short, 
instead of pushing the proverbial string from behind to make it move, rather start pulling it 
from the front by collectively making small business’ voice heard, more so than in the past. In 
this regard business formations, such as the AHI, have an important role to play.  
Larger companies holding monopolies based on incumbent technologies generally have less 
incentive  to  innovate  than  potential  rivals,  and  could  therefore  eventually  lose  their 
technological  leadership  role,  when  technological  innovations  are  introduced  by  new  firms, 
as  they  leapfrog  ahead,  taking  on  risks.  The  adoption  of  solar  energy  technology  is  an 
example of an area in which small businesses could leapfrog ahead, as countries become 
more inclined to embrace a Green Growth development approach, as we enter the so-called 
Solar Age.  
The  benefits  derived  from  the  expansion  of  business  linkages  should  also  not  be 
underestimated.  So-called  vertical  business  linkages  that  can  be  both  backwards,  where 
large companies acquire goods and services from small businesses, or forward, where large 
companies  sell  to  small  enterprises  or  distribute  their  goods  and  services  through  them, 
should  actively  be  pursued.  Small  enterprises  should  also  consider  to  more  actively  join 
themselves  in  groups  to  increase  their  capacity  to  access  markets  through  combined 
production for large orders or collective purchasing to secure better purchase prices. Such 
initiatives  can  also  be  beneficial  in  assisting  small-scale  farmers  entering  the  agricultural 
sector. 
More  opportunities  should  also  be  created  for  informal  business  socialisation  which  is 
important  for  entrepreneurial  success,  through  sharing  of  experiences,  developing  of  peer 
networks  and  the  establishment  of  role  models  to  be  emulated.  Peer  groups  create  an 
environment in which members can share their challenges, brainstorm solutions and acquire 
additional information that can be to their benefit in running their businesses. Learning from 
the peer group can contribute to small business development, establish business linkages, 
build  business  confidence,  expand  business 
relationships,  help  shape  corporate 
expectations and also contribute to the cultivation of business professionalism. Once again 
the  AHI  is  well  positioned  to  facilitate  such  interaction  learning  and  sharing  which  can  be 
crucial in assisting SMMEs to reach new levels of performance.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
5.  
Ladies and gentleman, I wish you well during your deliberations for the rest of the day as we 
search for new and innovative ways to address the challenges that we collectively face in an 
effort to make this country of ours truly great, in amplification of the inspiring achievements of 
Teams SA at the London 2012 Olympic games, that have made us all proud.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
