Erkki Liikanen: Is a reform of banking structures necessary? 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the Highlevel 
Expert Group on reforming the structure of the EU banking sector, at a meeting with Finance 
Watch, Brussels, 20 November 2012. 
 Costs of the crisis and the public outcry 
The  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  which  started  in  2007  is  by  far  the  worst  in  the 
Western world in the post-war history.  
The European Commission estimates that from October 2008 until October 2010, it has cost 
13%  of  the  European  Union’s  GDP  in  the  form  of  public  support  to  the  region’s  banks.1 
Moreover,  the  present  value  of  lost  economic  output  is  probably  bigger  by  orders  of 
magnitude than the direct support.2 
The  crisis  has  caused  a  public  outcry  which  is  justified.  Regulators  are  responding  to  the 
pressing  need  to  establish  a  financial  system  in  which  losses,  not  only  gains,  fall  on  the 
private risk takers, not on the tax payer. 
In order to find appropriate solutions, we need to understand the developments leading up to 
the global financial crisis. 
Changes in banking in the run-up to the crisis 
The new landscape 
In the years preceding the global financial crisis, the landscape of banking had gone through 
major  changes.  The  banking  sector  had grown  rapidly  and  global  financial  institutions  had 
grown ever bigger in size. 
Especially,  European  banks  appear  very  large  when  measured  in  terms  of  total  assets  in 
relation to the domestic GDP. 
Further,  the  scope  and  the  organizational  complexity  of  global  financial  institutions  had 
increased, adding to their opacity. 
There  was  a  trend  among  the  biggest  banking  institutions  to  strengthen  their  focus  on 
investment banking, including trading operations. Part of this trend was driven by the growing 
demand by non-financial firms for risk management services. Partly, it was a search for new 
revenue streams, higher profitability and economies of scale and scope. The flip side of the 
coin was strong incentives for risk taking. 
Commercial  banking  moved  increasingly  away  from  customer  relationship-based  banking 
where loans are granted and then held until maturity to the “originate and distribute” model 
where granted loans are pooled, then securitized and sold to investors. 
As  result,  banks  became  strongly  interconnected  via  increasingly  long  chains  of  claims  as 
well as correlated risk exposures, arising from increasingly similar investment strategies. This 
                                                
1   The Final Report of the High-level Expert Group (2012). 
2   See e.g. Haldane (2010): “The $100 billion question”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
shift in the business model increased traditional banks’ connections to the shadow banking 
sector.3 
The  increasing  influence  of  investment  banking oriented management culture  also  spurred 
the focus on short-term profits in commercial banking, reinforced by short-term performance 
based managerial compensation schemes. 
There  were  also  dramatic  changes  in  the  liability  side  of  banks’  balance  sheet  before  the 
financial crisis. The leverage of banking institutions had strongly increased and the average 
maturity of their own funding had shortened. 
Lack of restraints from regulation, market discipline and supervision 
Problems with capital requirements 
Capital requirements on banks proved ineffective in restraining the strong growth in banks’ 
leverage and balance sheet size because the Basel I and II rules required very little common 
equity.  
Further, what was important for the global reach of the financial crisis was that much of the 
asset  and  mortgage  backed  securities,  originating  from  the  US,  ended  up  on  European 
banks’ balance sheets.4  
This  was  partly  spurred  by  differences  in  American  and  European  banks’  capital 
requirements.  
There  were  also  problems  with  the  Basel  capital  requirements  on  banks’  trading  book 
positions.  Capital  in the range  of  zero  to  two  percent  of trading  assets  suggests that  risks 
were not fully covered by existing capital requirements.  
In particular, the Basel rules allowed banks to lower their capital requirements by securitizing 
loans from the banking book and taking in effect corresponding risks onto their trading books. 
It  has  been  suggested  that  many  of  the  loan  securitizations  were  motivated  by  such 
regulatory arbitrage rather than credit risk transfer.5 
The role of overly optimistic rating agency ratings used to market the securitized assets, and 
used as a basis for capital requirements, should not be dismissed either. 
Finally,  many  risk-weights  used  in  the  Basel  framework  to  determine  the  effective  capital 
requirements were simply too low, as was revealed by the crisis. 
Lack of market discipline and the too-big-to-fail problem 
The increasing complexity of structures and products, and the financial sector’s increasing 
interconnectedness, along with growing size, led to reduced transparency of bank balance 
sheets. 
This  should  logically  have  rung  alarm  bells  among  investors,  especially  among  banks’ 
uninsured debt holders, at some point. However, the opposite seems to have happened: the 
markets rewarded size by charging lower debt margins from the biggest institutions.6  
This  suggests  that  there  was  a  perception  among  market  participants  that  the  biggest 
financial  institutions  enjoyed  an  implicit  public  guarantee.  These  institutions  could  not  be 
allowed to fail; in other words, they had become too big, too complex or too important to fail. 
                                                
3   See e.g. Adrian and Shin (2010): “The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 
2007–09”. 
4   See e.g. Shin (2012): “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium”. 
5   See e.g. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010): “Securitization without risk transfer”. 
6   See e.g. Haldane (2010): “The $100 billion question”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In a market environment where the price of a bank’s own debt funding is insensitive to the 
risks the bank takes and decreases with the bank’s size, the bank has a strong incentive to 
further increase its leverage by taking on even more debt and continue to grow in size. 
The  implicit  subsidies  also  have  important  implications  for  the  level-playing  field  in  the 
banking  sector.  Currently,  the  competitive  distortions,  manifested  in  differences  in  funding 
costs between systemically important banks and other banks, are significant. However, our 
goal  must  be  that  no  bank  is  perceived  as  too  big  to  fail.  As  Stephen  Cecchetti  recently 
noted,  “there  should  come  a  day  when  the  Basel  Committee’s  list  of  globally  systemically 
important banks, or G-SIBs, is blank”.7 
Lack of a systemic aspect 
There was clearly also a lack of a sufficient macro-prudential aspect to banking supervision 
and regulation prior to the crisis. 
The  fundamental  problem  is  that  banks  themselves  do  not  have  an  incentive  to  fully 
internalize the social cost stemming from their own contribution to system wide risks into their 
business decisions.8  
In the absence of substitutive regulatory and supervisory measures in the years preceding 
the  crisis,  systemic  risks  built  up  in  the  form  of  ever  larger,  more  complex  and  more 
leveraged financial institutions. 
Regulatory response to the crisis 
What has already been done? 
In  response  to  the  crisis,  a  number  of  international  and  EU  wide  regulatory  reforms  have 
been  launched.  Two  reform  areas  have  been  particularly  relevant  to  the  work  of  the 
High-level  Expert  Group;  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  requirements  (Basel  III  as 
implemented  in  the  EU  through  the  CRD  IV/CRR)  and  recovery  and  resolution  (as  in  the 
Commission’s proposal). 
If effective, the new and still evolving capital adequacy requirements can go a long way to 
reduce incentives to take excessive risks across different banking operations and the use of 
excessive leverage.  
Most  obviously,  higher  capital  requirements  provide  for  more  loss  absorbency.  Liquidity 
requirements can also reduce banks’ interconnectedness by restricting the use of short-term 
market funding. They will also be helpful in reducing excessive leverage and building liquidity 
buffers.  
The new capital requirement framework also reduces complexity and interconnectedness by 
blocking  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage  which  previously  was  possible  via  complex 
securitisation structures. 
Recovery and resolution regimes aim to create a framework which did not exist at EU level 
prior  to  the  crisis.  If  successfully  implemented,  the  new  tools  such  as  the  recovery  and 
resolution  plans  can  greatly  reduce  the  social  costs  of  bank  failures  and  thus  reduce  the 
implicit  public  guarantee.  This  means  that  recovery  and  resolution  tools  can  reduce  the 
distortive risk-taking incentives created by public bail out expectations. 
Moreover, a number of initiatives9 have been launched with the aim of reducing contagion 
and  complexity  in  the  financial  market.  In  order  to  improve  transparency,  accounting 
                                                
7   See Cecchetti: “The future intermediation and regulation”, remarks prepared for the Second Conference of the 
ESCB Macro-prudential Research Network, 30 October 2012, Frankfurt, Germany. 
8   See e.g. Richardson (2012): “Why the Volcker Rule is a useful tool for managing systemic risk”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
standards  are  in  the  process  of  being  reviewed.  Banks  are  urged  to  improve  risk 
management and corporate governance practices and new macro-prudential tools are given 
to international and national authorities to better tackle asset price bubbles and procyclicality 
in lending. 
Proposals of the High-level Expert Group 
The High-level Expert Group on reforming the structure of the EU banking sector evaluated 
the current regulatory reforms and came to the conclusion that they take us a long way, but 
not  all  the  way,  in  ensuring  financial  system  stability  and  strengthening  banks’  ability  to 
provide socially vital financial services. 
Let  us  first  consider  capital  requirements.  When  capital  requirements  are  truly  risk-based, 
they  will  contain  the  excessive  risk-taking  incentives  which  result  from  banks’  access  to 
insured  deposits.  However,  where  risk  profiles  can  change  rapidly  and  where  risks  are 
difficult to measure with precision, risk-based capital requirements may not provide sufficient 
protection against excessive risk-taking. Asset and activity restrictions provide a more robust 
measure to limit risk-taking in these circumstances.10 
Second, the High-level  Expert Group came to the conclusion that many banks are still too 
complex  for  the  proposed  recovery  and  resolution  regime  to  be  truly  credible  and  time 
consistent. 
Hence, the High-level Expert Group concluded that there is a need for structural measures to 
complement  the  current  regulatory  reform.  More  specifically,  the  High-level  Expert  Group 
proposes  a  mandatory  separation  of  certain  trading  related  activities  according  to  the 
following three principles. 
First, if the share of proprietary trading, market making and certain other securities-related 
businesses in the balance sheet exceeds a given threshold, banking groups must organize 
these businesses to a separate legal entity (“trading entity”).  
The  other  businesses  that  must  be  separated  are  loans,  loan  commitments,  or  other 
exposures  to  hedge  funds  (including  prime  brokerage),  SIVs  and  other  such  entities  of 
comparable nature. Private equity investments must also be separated. 
The client-driven trading positions against which the bank has hedged itself do not have to 
be separated. Also, securities underwriting does not have to be separated but it is important 
that  risks  in  non-transitory  positions  possibly  arising  from  underwriting  are  carefully 
monitored by supervisors. 
Second, the trading entity must be separately capitalized and must not be funded by insured 
deposits.  
And third, the deposit-taking part of the banking group (“deposit bank”) is not allowed under 
any  circumstances  to  support  the  trading  entity  either  directly  or  indirectly  by  making 
transfers  or  commitments  to  the  extent  that  its  capital  adequacy  including  capital  buffer 
requirements would be endangered or that the general limits on large exposures would be 
violated. 
All other banking businesses are allowed to the deposit bank unless firm-specific recovery 
and resolution plans require otherwise. Similarly, the trading entity can engage in all banking 
activities which are not specifically mandated to the deposit bank. For instance, the trading 
entity is allowed to make loans and loan commitments to its customers. 
                                                                                                                                                   
9   E.g  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR),  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive  (MiFID) 
second review and proposals on Central Securities Depositors (CSD). 
10   See e.g. Matutes and Vives (2000): “Imperfect competition, risk taking, and regulation in banking” and Boot 
and Ratnovski (2012): “Banking and trading”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Only the deposit bank is allowed to provide retail payment services. 
An important objective of the mandatory separation, proposed by the Group, is simplicity and 
avoiding ambiguity. These facilitate implementation at the EU level. 
Furthermore, banking activities which naturally belong together should be conducted within 
the same legal entity.  
To promote these aims the proposed mandatory separation includes both proprietary trading 
and market making. Differentiating these from one another would be difficult11 and, if placed 
in  different  legal  entities  within  the  same  banking  group,  some  natural  synergies  might  be 
lost.  
By  avoiding  the  decoupling  of  proprietary  trading  and  market  making,  the  proposal  differs 
from the Volcker Rule in the United States. However, the proposed mandatory separation in 
the EU can take place within a banking group whereas the Volcker Rule prohibits proprietary 
trading from the entire banking group. 
When comparing the proposal of the High-level Expert Group and the proposal presented by 
the  UK’s  Independent  Commission  on  Banking  (ICB)  last  autumn,  one  can  say  that  the 
proposals  started  from  different  directions,  but  their  results  are  qualitatively  similar.  Both 
proposals seek to prevent the use of guaranteed deposits to risky investment. However, the 
approach taken by ICB started from the narrow banking philosophy and sought to restrict the 
use  of  those  funds.  The  High-level  Expert  Group  on  the  other  hand  focused  on  the  most 
volatile parts of banking business and sought to cordon off those. 
The main  practical  difference  in  the  position  of the  ring-fence  is  that  the  High-level  Expert 
Group proposal allows securities underwriting by the deposit bank, whereas the ICB proposal 
forces it out of the ring-fenced deposit bank. The solution of the High-level Expert Group is 
based on the view that underwriting is actually closely connected with corporate finance and 
prohibiting  it  would  hurt  the  universal  banking  model.  Note  that  if  a  bank  would  feel  that 
synergies  so  require,  there  would  be  no  prohibition  for  conducting  underwriting  business 
within the trading entity to which the market-making operations have to be transferred.  
Another difference which stems from the different starting points is that, in the ICB proposal, 
higher capital requirements are recommended for the ring-fenced deposit banks. As will be 
discussed  shortly,  the  High-level  Expert  Group  was  more  concerned  of  strengthening  the 
capitalisation of the trading entity. 
To  sum  up  the  rationale  for  separation  as  a  regulatory  measure,  I  would  emphasize  the 
following four points.  
First,  as  already  discussed  above,  separation  is  a  way  of  prohibiting  banks  with  insured 
deposits from engaging in activities whose risks are potentially high and difficult to measure 
precisely,  and  which  are  not  essential  to  deposit  banking.  Essentially,  prohibition  of  such 
activities  is  a  way  to  complement  capital  requirements  in  limiting  moral  hazard  which  may 
arise from deposit insurance. 
Second, separation of activities is the most direct instrument for tackling banks’ complexity 
and interconnectedness. As banks become simpler in structure, recovery and resolution will 
also be easier.  
The  High-level  Expert  Group  emphasised  the  importance  of  the  recovery  and  resolution 
plans  and  noted  that  more  intrusive  separation  might  be  needed  to  make  the  plans  truly 
credible (Proposal 2).  
                                                
11   See e.g. Duffie (2012): “Market making under the proposed Volcker Rule”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Third,  simpler  structures  can make  it  easier for the management  and  board  to  understand 
and  manage  and  for  outsiders  to  monitor  and  supervise  banking  institutions.  This  can 
enhance the effectiveness of both market discipline and financial supervision. 
To  facilitate  the  monitoring  of  banks  further,  the  High-level  Expert  Group  emphasised  the 
need for greater transparency. In particular, the High-level Expert Group suggested that the 
quality, comparability and transparency of risk disclosures should be improved by requiring 
detailed financial reporting for each legal entity and main business lines (Proposal 5). This 
suggestion  is  in  line  with  the  suggestions  presented  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s 
Enhanced Disclosure Task Force in the end of October.12 
The  High-level  Expert  Group  wished  to  further  strengthen  the  incentives  for  outsiders  to 
monitor banks by strongly promoting the use of bail-in instruments. These would ensure that 
also creditors are made responsible for losses (Proposal 3).  
Fourth, separating deposit banking and trading entities can also reduce the mixing of the two 
different  management  cultures.  As  Andy  Haldane  has  described,  resources  were  diverted 
away from retail banking towards investment banking before the crisis and at the same time 
the  culture  of  investment  banking  infiltrated  retail  banking  resulting  in  short-termism  and 
harmful cross-selling.13 
To support the separation of the sub-cultures of retail and investment banking, the High-level 
Expert Group strongly promotes the strengthening of capabilities of boards and management 
to run large complex banks and use of remuneration schemes that create long-term, rather 
than short-term incentives (Proposal 5). I agree with Wayne Byres who notes that “ensuring 
that  incentives  are  working  in  the  right  direction  in  the  diverse  and  complex  organisations 
such as today’s banks is easier said than done”.14 However, separation of deposit banking 
and  trading  entities,  by  making  organizations  simpler,  can  help  in  building  the  right 
incentives. 
To ensure that both the deposit bank and trading entity are sufficiently capitalised (Proposal 
4), the  High-level  Expert  Group found that  there  is  a  need  to  address  a  number of  issues 
related to how the capital requirements on trading assets and real estate related instruments 
are  defined.  In  particular  it  is  important  that  make  sure  that  the  capital  requirements  on 
trading assets are adequate to stabilise the trading entities on a stand-alone basis. 
To  this  end  the  High-level  Expert  Group  expressed  its  support  for  the  Basel  Committee’s 
trading  book  review.  It  should  be  carefully  assessed  by  the  Commission  once  completed. 
Similar  capital  requirements  review  should  also  be  carried  out  by  the  Commission  on  real 
estate related lending as risks in these instruments were central in the crisis.  
The ultimate goal of the five proposals of the High-level Expert Group is to ensure financial 
system stability while ensuring banks’ role in financing the European economy. Or as stated 
in  the  mandate  “to  establish  a  safe  and  efficient  banking  system,  serving  the  needs  of 
citizens, the EU economy and the internal market”. As this list shows, the High-level Expert 
Group did not see structural separation as a “silver bullet” for stability and security. It is not 
sufficient alone, but it is a necessary component of a balanced set of banking reforms. 
                                                
12   Enhancing the risk disclosure of banks, Report of the Enhanced Disclosure Task Force, 29 October 2012. 
13   Andrew  G.  Haldane,  “A  leaf  being  turned”,  speech  given  at  Occupy  Economics,  “Socially  useful  banking”, 
London, 29 October 2012. 
14   Wayne Byres, “Regulatory reforms – incentives matter (can we make bankers more like pilots?)”, remarks at 
the  Bank  of  Portugal  conference  on  Global  Risk  Management:  Governance  and  Control,  Lisbon, 
24 October 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The role of banks in financing the European economy 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  redirecting  the  banking  sector 
towards  strengthening  its  important  role  in the society  by  means  of  regulatory  reform. The 
financial  crisis  reminded  us  that  financial  stability  is  a  prerequisite  for  stable  economic 
growth. 
Banks have a pivotal role in providing financing to households and firms. It is particularly so 
in Europe where the banks’ role in corporate finance has traditionally been large. The banks’ 
role  in  corporate  finance  is  central  especially  for  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises 
(SMEs). The continuous and smooth supply of banking services to SMEs is also essential to 
large corporations because SMEs are often subcontractors to them. 
It  is  of  utmost  importance  that  regulatory  reforms  as  a  whole  support  and  strengthen  the 
banking sector’s ability to continue to provide these socially vital financial services efficiently 
and in a stable manner. 
Along these lines, the High-level Expert Group recognised the value of universal banks as 
suppliers of a comprehensive service to their customers and their important role in financing 
the European economy. As a result, complete separation similar to the former Glass-Steagall 
Act  in  the  US  was  not  required.  As the  deposit bank  and  the  trading  entity  are  allowed  to 
co-exist within a holding company structure, the banking group could still market all of the 
services, from its different constituent units.  
Concluding remarks 
The  reputation  of  banks  and  the  public  trust  that  they  rely  on  has  been  severely  dented 
during  the  latest  financial  crisis.  This  has  hurt  not  only  banks  themselves  but  also  the 
economies and societies of Europe and the whole Western world.  
Trust and public acceptance must now be restored, and the proposals which the High-level 
Expert  Group  has  submitted for  the consideration  of  the  EU  Commission  will  contribute  to 
this end. Achieving this important aim will benefit the banking industry and our societies at 
large.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
