Masaaki Shirakawa: Looking through prices in financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Paris 
EUROPLACE Financial Forum, Tokyo, 3 December 2012. 
 Introduction 
Today, I am very pleased to appear before you, for the second time since 2009, at the Paris 
Europlace  Financial  Forum  in  Tokyo.  When  discussing  the  issues  facing  the  financial 
industry at a meeting like this, it is clear that we have yet to put behind us the Great Financial 
Crisis (hereafter “the Crisis”), the scars of which have hardly healed, even three years after I 
last spoke here. We are still dealing with the consequences, not only in terms of needing to 
fix  problems  in  the  real  economy  but  also  with  regard  to  rebuilding  confidence  in  finance. 
There  is  also  extensive  discussion  on  how  we  could  improve  the  conduct  of  monetary, 
prudential, payment and other policies in the light of the Crisis. In the following few minutes, I 
would like to pick up one theme on which I have not fully offered my views so far – that is, 
how we should view prices in financial markets. 
The crisis that never should have happened 
The  starting  point  for  my  discussion  is  what  people  generally  thought  about  finance  in 
general  and  financial  markets  in  particular  before  the  onset  of  the  Crisis.  The  prevailing 
worldview at that time was along the following lines. 
It  all  started  from  the  innocuous  belief  that  the  market  was  the  best  arbiter  of  economic 
outcomes.  If  markets  seamlessly  covered  every  economic  activity,  and  if  they  functioned 
flawlessly in transmitting price signals, decisions made by economic agents on the basis of 
such signals would intrinsically maximize social welfare. Any effort to achieve such a state – 
completing markets and removing regulation – was regarded as desirable in its own right. Of 
all markets, financial markets were generally regarded as the ones closest to such an ideal 
state of the economy. 
On  top  of  this  foundation,  the  financial  institutions  built  an  intricate  system  of  risk 
management. Prices determined by financial markets were deemed to reflect the fair value of 
financial assets. By looking at historical patterns of price fluctuations, it was thought that risks 
arising from future  price  movements  could  be  managed  effectively.  Observations  of  prices 
were fitted into the bell curve and transmuted into concrete numbers such as value-at-risk. 
Such tools gave financial institutions confidence that they had firm control over the risks they 
were taking. If too much risk were being taken, then just the right amount of excess risk could 
be  offloaded  most  quickly  and  inexpensively  by  using  derivatives,  or  offsetting  positions 
could be conjured up swiftly and cheaply from the wide universe of financial products. 
Market participants – banks, securities houses, insurers, hedge funds, and all the rest – were 
thought  to  have  had  every  incentive  to  manage  the  risks  they  were  taking,  because,  as 
individual firms, their survival was at stake. If each participant could thus be assumed to act 
prudently, there was no reason to question the stability of the whole financial system. The 
sum of the parts would at least be equal to the whole. In official jargon, microprudence would 
ensure macroprudence. 
Meanwhile,  in  the  area  of  macroeconomic  policy,  it  was  supposed  that,  macroeconomic 
stability would be achieved, if central banks would implement monetary policy with a view to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reducing the variability  of inflation at around a certain level. The nexus between price and 
financial stability, however, was not adequately addressed.1 
It was a wonderful world of macroeconomic stability while it lasted. This came to be called 
the  Great  Moderation,  sometime  in  the  early  2000s.  In  the  advanced  economies,  10-year 
average inflation fell from 6.3 percent in the 1980s to 2.9 percent in the 1990s, and further to 
2.0  percent  in  the  decade  before  the  Crisis  –  that  is,  from  1998  to  2007.  The  financial 
industry  flourished,  and  cities  around  the  world  aimed  for  the  status  of  a  global  financial 
center. The beauty of the whole development was that not only were actual macroeconomic 
and  financial  performance  good,  they  also  were  founded  on  established  economic  and 
financial theories. There were hiccups, of course, with some of them quite serious, like the 
collapse of Long-Term Capital Management in September 1998, but these were regarded as 
failures to employ the theoretical framework rigorously enough. 
Structural roots of the crisis 
From  the  viewpoint  of  actors  during  the  Great  Moderation,  the  Crisis  should  never  have 
happened.  If central  banks  had maintained  price  stability,  public  authorities  had  worked  to 
remove impediments to market functioning, and financial actors had continued to refine their 
risk management framework, it was inconceivable that a global credit bubble so large could 
develop in the first place, let alone pop with such devastating consequences. A consensus 
has yet to emerge on the reason why the Crisis occurred, but it seems to me that blaming it 
solely on the greed or fallibility of the actors involved  is definitely not appropriate. We can 
now  identify  a  widely-shared  mind-set  regarding  prices  in  financial  markets  that  bred  the 
Crisis. Today, I would like to illustrate the shortcomings of this mind-set from two angles. One 
is the fact that financial markets can and sometimes do overshoot. The other is that there is 
only so much information that could be extracted from prices in financial markets. 
The  prevailing  view  before  the  Crisis  drew  an  important  conclusion  from  the  apparent 
“random walk” of market prices, which reflected all available information. Prices changing at 
random,  most  often  reflecting  new  information,  were  regarded  as  the  best  estimate  of  the 
intrinsic  value  of  financial  instruments.  In  such  a  market,  a  market  participant  that 
consistently  makes  mistakes  and  keeps  on  selling  low  and  buying  high  will  inevitably  be 
forced out because of mounting losses. Consequently, the market will have to be populated 
by  participants  who  can  generally  make  the  right  calls,  and  a  market  populated  by  such 
well-informed  participants  should  not  be  susceptible  to  persistent  price  overshoots.  As  a 
footnote,  short  selling  and  derivatives  are  seen  as  beneficial  practices  in  this  context, 
because  they  will  allow  market  participants  to  bet  against  misalignments  more  easily  and 
cheaply. 
Why, then, do bubbles appear? In other words, how can market prices continue to overshoot 
for a long time? 
One  way  to  answer  this  question  is  to  place  the  blame  on  market  participants’  excess 
optimism. When market participants become too optimistic, this distorts market prices, which 
then begin to overshoot. This can even happen among perfectly rational market participants, 
because the intrinsic value of any financial instrument cannot be observed. 
Prices  in  the  market  may  be  “fair  value,”  in  the  sense  that  this  is  the  best  of  all  available 
estimates. Nevertheless, that does not guarantee that the market price equals the intrinsic 
value.  In  order  for  that  to  happen,  market  participants  have  to  compete  to  determine  the 
                                                
1   For  a  discussion  of  the  prevailing  monetary  policy  framework,  see  Mervyn  King,  “Twenty  years  of  inflation 
targeting”  (The  Stamp  Memorial  Lecture  at  the  London  School  of  Economics),  October  9,  2012. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech606.pdf.  See  also  Masaaki 
Shirakawa,  “Revisiting  the  Philosophy  behind  Central  Bank  Policy”  (Speech  at  the  Economic  Club  of  New 
York), April 22, 2010. http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2010/data/ko1004e.pdf 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
intrinsic  value  of  a  traded  instrument.  As  pointed  out  by  Lord  Keynes,  however,  market 
participants  could  instead  be focused  on  anticipating  what  other market  participants  would 
consider  the  market  price  to  be.  The  market  price  would  then  be  the  best  estimate  of  the 
average opinion on that price, and not the best estimate of the intrinsic value. If, for some 
reason,  market  participants  come  to  believe  that  other  market  participants  would  expect 
prices to rise, the market price will rise irrespective of any changes in intrinsic value. Such a 
self-fulfilling cycle would lead to overshooting prices and bubbles. 
The confusion of fair value and intrinsic value also led to the mistaken belief that information 
extracted from market prices would prevent future disasters. The prevailing financial theories 
and  financial  technology  derived  from  such theories  masked  the  obvious  fallacy  of  such  a 
view. 
It was widely believed that, by observing the past patterns of market price fluctuations, the 
intrinsic  probability  distribution  of  such  fluctuations  and  the  correlations  between  various 
prices  could  be  estimated.  Once  the  probability  distributions  –  conveniently  reduced  to 
volatility  and  the  mean  under  the  assumption  of  the  bell  curve  –  and  correlations  were 
determined, those numbers were fed into computers to compute measures of risk, such as 
value-at-risk.  Estimated  probability  distributions  also  gave  market  participants  a  sense  of 
security that, if they could construct reasonably diversified portfolios, outcomes would be in 
line with the expected returns implied by the distributions. 
As  a  result,  market  participants  became  too  sanguine  in  their  risk-taking  activities.  They 
conveniently  assumed  that,  as  long  as  they  followed  the  models  and  heeded  the  risk 
measures,  they  were  taking  only  small  risks  and  were  managing  them  very  carefully.  The 
situation  was  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  the  alignment  of  expectations  among  market 
participants, which  led to an ever-widening gap between  intrinsic value and market prices, 
had the effect of reducing volatility and thus risk measures. The risk measures were reaching 
their  lows  just  as  the  Crisis  was  about  to  strike.  This  is  why  market  participants  were  so 
dumbstruck when volatility exploded and correlations became unhinged in 2008. The Crisis 
was  not  meant  to  happen  if  the  reality  fitted  the  models  and  theories,  and  if  information 
extracted  from  prices  had  forewarned  all  calamities.  Sadly,  however,  models  and  theories 
are  descriptive  views  on  how  the  world  is  working,  and  not  prescriptive  views  on  how  the 
world should work. Financial markets will inevitably deviate from what could be inferred from 
models, theories, and past patterns of market prices. 
Lessons of the crisis for central banks 
So, what are the lessons of the Crisis with respect to our approach to markets? 
It  may  be  strange  to  say  this  after  a  lengthy  description  of  faults  in  processing  market 
information, but developments in the financial markets will continue to be some of the most 
important sources of information from the perspective of central banks, as they conduct their 
monetary  and financial  stability  policies.  Financial  markets mirror  what  is  happening  in the 
broader economy. Even if central banks were not completely free of the prevailing attitude 
toward the market that led to the Crisis, there were forceful voices within the community that 
warned  against  the  buildup  of  risks  based  on  market  observations.  Central  banks  should 
continue to make every effort to extract information from the markets. As Alan Blinder once 
remarked,  broad,  deep,  fluid  markets  are  indeed  repositories  of  enormous  power  and 
wisdom.2 
Having  said  this,  the  first  lesson  is  that  central  banks  should  not  look  away  from  market 
reactions  of  which  they  may  disapprove.  For  example,  during  the  1990s  and  early  2000s, 
after the bubble burst in Japan, in spite of repeated assurances by the Japanese government 
                                                
2   Blinder, Alan, Central Banking in Theory and Practice, The MIT Press, 1998. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and  the  Bank  of  Japan,  markets  questioned  the  viability  of  the  Japanese  banking  system. 
There was dissatisfaction with this tyranny of the markets. Because of the self-fulfilling nature 
of problems in the banking sector, the situation could easily have gotten out of hand. Similar 
developments were observed in the recent Crisis as well. Nevertheless, looking back, there 
was some measure of reason in the reactions of markets. One should never stop talking to 
the mirror, even if it says that the prettiest of them all is somewhere else. 
The  second  lesson  is  that,  central  banks  should  never  forget  the  ephemeral  nature  of 
information  that  could  be  extracted  from  market  prices.  As  I  explained  earlier,  these  are 
prone to overshooting. Central banks can calculate all sorts of implied information, but the 
informational  content  of  such  numbers  is  heavily  influenced  by  the  models  adopted. 
Sometimes,  market  prices  may  only  be  reflecting  the  positions  and  actions  of  the  central 
banks themselves. Accordingly, while market prices allow central banks to come up with the 
best estimates, central banks must not lose sight of what they are trying to estimate. 
The third lesson is the importance of the diversity of market participants, especially in terms 
of their risk preferences and investment horizons. Homogenous market participants tend to 
magnify  mistakes,  increasing  the  risks  of  market  instability.  Diversity  is  preferable,  but 
irresistible  forces  such  as  rules  and  regulations  regarding  capital,  risk  management,  and 
disclosure could inadvertently homogenize the risk preferences and time horizons adopted 
by  market  participants. Unfortunately,  there  are  no good  answers,  and central  banks  must 
stand ready to fix any problems as they arise. 
Lastly, while central banks should have deep respect for financial markets, for the reasons I 
have just explained, they should be  willing to stand up to the  market from time to time. In 
order to deliver sustainable economic growth under price stability, central banks must have a 
very  long  time  horizon.  This  point  is  especially  relevant  for  financial  stability,  because 
financial cycles tend to be quite long. As Alan Blinder had noted, central banks must avoid a 
situation  where  “the  market  reacts,  or  rather  overreacts,  to  perceptions  about  what  the 
central bank might do, and the central bank looks to the markets for guidance about what it 
should do.”3 
An  example  of  how  a  central  bank  should  conduct  its  policy  in  the  face  of  market 
expectations  is  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  current  commitment  to  ease  monetary  policy 
aggressively.  That  commitment  is  conditional  on  there  being  no  significant  risk  to  the 
sustainability  of  economic  growth,  including  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances.  The 
Bank  of  Japan  will,  in  this  context,  conduct  an  assessment  independent  of  what  markets 
might be thinking, while taking full account of information derived from markets. Turning to 
Europe,  the  European  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  fixing  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy in the euro area, showing that the Bank may have a different view from the 
market on where the various sovereign spreads should be. 
Concluding remarks 
Today,  I  have  offered  my  views  on  how  overconfidence  in  extracting  information  from 
financial  markets  contributed  to  the  formation  of  financial  bubbles  that  brought  about  the 
Crisis. The strong emphasis, by market participants as well as public authorities, on the deep 
wisdom  of  financial  markets  before  the  Crisis  has  now  brought  about  a  public  backlash 
against  anything  that  even  has  a  whiff  of  using  finance  or  market  forces  to  solve  social 
issues.  This  is  unfortunate  because,  if  used  wisely,  the  market  is  still  the  best  arbiter  of 
economic outcomes, finance is the art of the possible, and well- functioning markets will open 
new  horizons.  The  lessons  for  central  banks  that  I  have  just  described  apply  largely  to 
market  participants  as well.  The financial  industry  should  also  read  the  writing  on  the  wall 
                                                
3   Blinder, Alan, id. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
about acceptable behavior regarding profits and compensation in the aftermath of the Crisis. 
What  the  market  will  bear  is  no  longer  an  acceptable  attitude.  With  the  full  recognition  of 
such  changes,  leading  to  a  more  nuanced  approach  to  information  extracted  from  market 
prices, financial institutions should be able to maximize their contribution to global economic 
recovery. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
