Fritz Zurbrügg: Financial market developments, management of foreign 
currency investments and Libor issues 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
13 December 2012. 
 In my remarks, I would like to examine three topics. First, I will expand on what, in our view, 
are the most important developments in the financial markets since the news conference in 
June. Afterwards I will address the management of our foreign currency investments. Finally, 
I  will  explore  some  of  the  issues  surrounding  the  Libor  rate,  and  the  global  discussion  on 
reference interest rates in money markets generally. 
Developments in the financial markets 
As already mentioned by my colleagues, the situation on the international financial markets 
has eased somewhat since the last news conference. This stabilisation was mainly due to 
the  announcement  in  late  summer  by  various  central  banks  of  a  further  expansion  of 
unconventional measures. 
In  Europe, the  unequivocal  declaration  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  to  safeguard 
unity  in  the  euro  area  had  an  especially  calming  effect  on  markets.  Under  its  Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme,  the  ECB  announced  that  it  would  purchase, 
under certain conditions, unlimited quantities of government bonds with a maximum term of 
three  years.  The  bonds  of  peripheral  euro  area  sovereigns,  in  particular,  benefited  from 
OMT. Yield spreads over German government bonds have declined, although they remain at 
a high level. The euro recovered, on a trade-weighted basis, after having fallen to an eight-
year low in July. It appreciated against the US dollar, the Japanese yen, the pound sterling 
and – to a lesser extent – the Swiss franc. In the US, the Federal Reserve embarked on a 
third  round  of  asset  purchases,  intervening  in  the  market  to  buy  agency  mortgage-backed 
securities. 
Equity  markets  initially  registered  distinct  gains.  The  S&P  500  stock  market  index,  for 
example, climbed 10% between mid-June and mid-September. This was followed, however, 
by  a  consolidation  phase  from  October  onwards,  which  reflected  the  high  levels  of 
uncertainty persisting in the market environment. This uncertainty is largely connected to the 
emergency policy measures in Greece and Spain, the deterioration in the global economic 
outlook,  and  the  looming  ‘fiscal  cliff’  in  the  US.  Government  bonds  perceived  as  safe 
benefited from this, with yields persisting at extremely low levels. 
Against this  backdrop,  it  is  notable  that  the  volatility  of  risky  investments  has  continued  to 
decline. The VIX index, which measures implied volatility on the US stock market, and which 
is based on option prices, is virtually back down to the level last seen prior to the outbreak of 
the  financial  crisis  in  2007.  A  very  similar  picture  emerges  from  implied  volatilities  on  the 
foreign currency and bond markets. The low volatilities are due to comparatively low demand 
for  options  to  hedge  price  movements.  This  suggests  that  market  participants’  misgivings 
about  prevailing  uncertainties  have  dissipated  somewhat,  which  is  likely  not  least  of  all  a 
consequence  of  monetary  policy  measures  by  major  central  banks.  In  addition,  some 
investors appear to expect that central banks will continue to pursue expansionary monetary 
policies for the foreseeable future, with low interest rates and an ample supply of liquidity. 
In  Switzerland,  interest  rates  remain  at  a  very  low  level.  The  yield  on  ten-year  Swiss 
Confederation  bonds  declined  to  a  new  low  at  the  beginning  of  December,  at  0.39%.  No 
other government  has  ever  recorded  nominal ten-year financing  costs  at  such  a  low  level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Money  market  rates  also  continue  to  be  very  low.  Interest  rates  on  the  repo  market  are 
predominantly  negative.  At  1  basis  point,  the  three-month  Libor  lies  only  just  above  zero. 
Based  on  Libor  futures  contracts,  the  interest  rate  expectations  of  market  participants  are 
that the low rate environment will continue for the foreseeable future. 
Management of foreign currency investments 
Our foreign currency purchases in early summer to enforce the minimum exchange rate have 
resulted  in  high  inflows  to  the  SNB’s  foreign  currency  holdings.  These  holdings  have 
increased by CHF 167 billion since the beginning of the year to CHF 425 billion at the end of 
November.  This  is  a  direct  consequence  of  our  monetary  policy.  In  the  event  that  foreign 
currency  purchases  are  necessary  to  implement  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  our  foreign 
currency reserves increase, and the balance sheet expands. 
Monetary  policy  requirements  also  have  highest  priority  when  it  comes  to  managing  the 
foreign currency reserves. This is reflected, on the one hand, in the conditions on which we 
base  our  investment  decisions,  namely  security,  liquidity  and  performance.  On  the  other 
hand, the primacy of monetary policy is also evident in the way we implement our investment 
policy. We proceed here with great caution to avoid causing distortions in the markets. 
We take account of the security and liquidity requirements for foreign currency investments 
by ensuring that a substantial part of our portfolio comprises high-quality government bonds. 
At  the  end  of  September,  83%  of  foreign  currency  holdings  were  invested  in  foreign 
government  bonds  or  held  as  sight  deposits  at  other  central  banks  and  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (BIS).  A  further  5%  were  held  in  other  investments,  mainly 
corporate  bonds.  Approximately  96%  of  our  fixed-income  securities  are  rated  AAA  or  AA. 
Around 12% of the foreign currency investments are in – exclusively foreign – equities. The 
SNB thereby holds equities to a value of about CHF 50 billion. I would like to emphasise that 
all of our equity investments are managed passively. We first decide in which markets we 
want to invest, and then replicate appropriate share indices. 
The primacy of monetary policy clearly differentiates the SNB from most other investors. In 
contrast  to  these,  the  exchange  rate  risk  on  our  foreign  currency  investments  cannot  be 
hedged. This  would  directly  conflict  with  our  monetary  policy,  since  any  hedging  would  be 
equivalent  to  a  purchase  of  Swiss  francs  against foreign  currencies,  which  would  intensify 
the upward pressure on the Swiss franc. Therefore the broadest possible diversification of 
our foreign currency investments is our sole means of reducing exchange rate risk. At the 
end of September, 48% of foreign currency holdings were invested in euros, compared with 
60%  at  mid-year,  with  28%  invested  in  US  dollars,  and  24%  in  other  currencies.  We  are 
continuously evaluating new asset classes and currencies in both advanced and emerging 
economies;  this  year,  the  SNB  began  investing  in  the  South  Korean  won.  Our  goal  is  to 
further diversify our foreign currency investments and thereby reduce risk concentration. 
To  avoid  undesirable  third-market  effects,  our  entire  investment  activity  is  invariably 
undertaken  with  a  high  degree  of  prudence  and  caution  in  respect  of  potentially  adverse 
effects on markets. This applies equally to inflows and reallocations of investments, as well 
as to the establishment of new positions. If, for example, we see ourselves confronted with 
very high foreign currency inflows, we might place these in sight deposit accounts at other 
central  banks,  before  investing  them  in  securities.  The  SNB  has  absolutely  no  interest  in 
causing market distortions or influencing currency movements in other countries. 
Issues surrounding the Libor and reference interest rates 
I would like to conclude by exploring some of the issues in connection with the Libor rate, 
and the global discussion on reference interest rates in money markets generally. Incidents 
of the Libor being manipulated, whether already admitted or suspected, are problematic for 
the reputation of the banks involved, and for the financial sector as a whole. This discussion 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
on  the  Libor  is  also  significant  for  us,  because  we  use  the  three-month  Libor  in  the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy.  No  Swiss  franc  Libor  distortions  relevant  to  monetary 
policy have thus far been ascertained. Furthermore, an SNB survey conducted among banks 
this  year  confirmed  that  the  Libor  remains  an  important  variable  for  credit  transactions, 
namely for mortgages. Of the banks surveyed, 80% indicated that they use the Libor as a 
benchmark  for  pricing  loans.  It  also  continues  to  play  a  key  role  in  the  pricing  of  financial 
products  and  derivatives.  Neither  the  sharp  decline  in  unsecured  loans  on  the  interbank 
market nor the incidents of manipulation have so far changed this. 
In  July  2012,  the  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA)  in  the  UK  was  commissioned  to 
undertake  a  review  on  reforming  the  Libor.  At  the  end  of  September,  the  working  group 
convened for this purpose presented its findings in the Wheatley Review, which included a 
series of proposed measures. These aim to prevent further attempts at manipulation, and to 
restore  confidence  in  the  Libor.  The  report  recommends,  inter  alia,  that  rate-setting 
processes  and  their  oversight  be  improved,  and  that  certain  maturities  and  currencies  be 
withdrawn.  Under  the  proposals,  the  three-month  Swiss  franc  Libor  will  continue  to  be 
determined.  Thus  at  present,  there  are  no  consequences  for  the  implementation  of  our 
monetary policy. 
Discussions  are  also  currently  underway  at  the  international  level  on  the  meaning  and 
structure  of  benchmark  interest  rates  on  money  markets.  The  SNB,  as  member  of  a  BIS 
working  group,  is  also  involved  in  these  discussions.  From  the  point  of  view  of  monetary 
policy and financial stability, the working group identifies core requirements for credible and 
robust  reference  rates.  Central  banks  or  banking  oversight  bodies  could  play  a  supportive 
role in reform efforts, inasmuch as the extensive use of benchmark rates affects the general 
public. However, since reference interest rates are primarily there to cover the needs of the 
financial markets, market participants are themselves ultimately under obligation. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
