Francois Groepe: Monetary policy and inclusive growth 
Address by Mr Francois Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
3rd UBS Economics Conference, Cape Town, 12 October 2012. 
 Monetary policy and inclusive growth 
I wish to thank UBS for inviting me to address you in my beautiful home town. The topic I 
have  been  asked  to  discuss  today  is  monetary  policy  and  inclusive  growth.  This  topic  is 
particularly relevant given South Africa’s income inequality as reflected in the most recently 
estimated Gini-coefficient of 0,69. The top ten per cent of the population earn approximately 
58  per  cent  of  the  income  and  the  bottom  50  per  cent  less  than  eight  per  cent.  We 
furthermore  have  had  to  contend  with  structural  unemployment,  which  currently  stands  at 
24,9 per cent. 
I will now proceed with a brief overview of the concepts of inclusive growth and productive 
employment  before  discussing the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  (the Bank)  mandate, the 
monetary  policy  framework  and  how  the  achievement  of  the  Bank’s  mandate  enables  the 
most appropriate backdrop for inclusive economic growth. 
Inclusive growth 
Inclusive growth refers to long-term sustained economic growth that is broad-based across 
sectors  and  inclusive  of  a  large  part  of  a  country’s  labour  force,  thereby  reducing 
unemployment  significantly.  Policies  that  encourage  inclusive  growth  tend  to  emphasize 
removing  constraints  to  growth,  creating  opportunity,  and  creating  a  level  playing  field  for 
investment.  According  to  the  World  Bank’s  Commission  on  Growth  and  Development,  a 
persistent,  determined  focus  on  inclusive  long-term  growth  by  governments  is  a  key 
ingredient of all successful growth strategies.1  
Long-term  sustained  high  growth  rates  are  further  also  dependent  on  productivity  gains. 
Productivity gains lead to higher rates of growth that in turn result in rising demand for labour 
as the economy expands and incomes rise in a virtuous circle. 
One well-known survey, by Lopez of the empirical literature on economic growth concludes 
that  macroeconomic  stability, 
rates,  and  appropriate  education  and 
infrastructure-related policies have positive effects on growth and reduce inequality. 
More  recent  research  initiatives  have  focused  increasingly  on  constraints  to  future 
development and showed that a country’s initial conditions have a critical impact on long-run 
growth.  Initial  conditions  include  levels  of  income  and  its  distribution, the  extent  of  poverty 
and  many  other  factors  including  geography,  governance  and  the  set  of  existing 
macroeconomic  policies.  World  Bank  research  in  2005  highlighted  the  extent  to  which 
institutional structures, policies, and resource endowments interact in unique ways to support 
necessary  policies  such  as  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  the  enforcement  of 
property  rights,  openness  to  trade  and  effective  government  in  achieving  higher  growth 
rates.2  The  line  of  enquiry  further  suggested that  local  peculiarities  would  tend  to  result  in 
unique sets of distortions that impede growth. In South Africa this would include inadequate 
infrastructure, skills shortages and inefficient administration at the local authority level. Efforts 
inflation 
low 
                                                
1  Commission  on  Growth  and  Development  Growth  Report:  Strategies  for  Sustained  Growth  and  Inclusive 
Development, World Bank, (2008). 
2  World Bank. Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning from a Decade of Reform. Washington DC: World Bank 
(2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to  address  the  distortions  and  constraints  could  in  practice  result  in  short-term  costs,  in 
particular if local circumstances are not well understood. If however approached judiciously, 
it should yield positive results over the medium to longer term. 
It  was  against  this  background  that  Hausmann,  Rodrik  and  Velasco  developed  their 
approach to identifying binding constraints to growth. Important lessons from this and other 
research were that development policy is country specific rather than being one-size-fits-all 
and  that  sometimes  large  positive  welfare  impacts  could  be  achieved  by  optimally 
sequencing just a few reforms to relax binding constraints. Empirical evidence also showed 
that  in  every  country  structural  transformation  and  economic  diversification  are  required  to 
achieve significant income growth and poverty reduction. For countries with relatively small 
domestic  markets  like  South  Africa  this  implies  export  diversification  in  order  to  access 
foreign markets and achieve economies of scale. 
Productive employment 
Productive  employment  is  the  main  instrument  for  achieving  sustainable  and  inclusive 
growth. Employment growth generates new jobs while productivity growth lifts the wages of 
the employed and the returns to the self-employed. 
The  key  objective  with  any  growth  strategy  is  to  strengthen  the  productive  resources  and 
capacity  of  individuals  on  the  labour  supply  side  and  to  open  up  new  opportunities  for 
productive employment on the labour demand side. 
An  inclusive  growth  strategy  should  also  recognize  the  time  lag  between  reforms  and 
outcomes as in the case of investments in education and the time elapsed before improved 
labour  skills  become  available.  Efforts  to  narrow  the  knowledge  gap  with  the  goal  of 
developing  creative  and  competitive  human  resources  are  an  important  prerequisite  for 
higher productivity. South Africa should aim to not merely catch up in this regard. We need to 
pre-empt the type of skills and knowledge that will be required over the next say two decades 
and ensure that our education and training strategies are adequately aligned so as to ensure 
that  we  have  a  work  force  with  the  appropriate  skills.  It  is,  therefore  imperative  that  our 
human capital development strategy is forward-looking and proactive. 
This necessitates us to take a hard look at our education system, as a recent assessment of 
the quality of state education amongst 142 countries, ranked South Africa at 133rd, despite 
the high levels of investment in education which now stands at R207bn per annum. 
Planning  must  therefore  focus  sharply  on  upgrading  the  quality  and  relevance  of  training 
while enhancing the skills of the labour force. In order to upgrade human resource skills to 
meet  the  need  of  an  increasingly  sophisticated  economy,  training  at  every  level  must  be 
strengthened to generate well-trained labour to meet industry demand both now and in the 
future. An inclusive growth strategy looks for ways to raise the pace of growth by utilizing the 
labour force to the fullest possible extent. 
High  unemployment  is  the  result  of  chronic  skill  and  geographical  mismatches  and  of 
policies,  product  market  structure,  and  labour  market  arrangements  that  often  protect 
insiders  at  the  expense  of  the  unemployed.  High  margins  in  product  markets  and  upward 
wage  pressure  in  labour  markets  have  resulted  in  uncompetitive  domestic  costs  of 
production  in  a  number  of  sectors.  This  erodes  external  competitiveness  and  as  a 
consequence excludes part of the population from formal economic activity. It also ends up 
constraining  a  country’s  ability  to  diversify  exports.  Entry-level  wages  are  also  sometimes 
above  the  productivity  levels  of  less  experienced  workers  and  new  entrants  to  the  labour 
market. This discourages labour demand. 
Sustainable  job  creation  that  significantly  reduces  unemployment  can  be  achieved  with 
labour  and  product  market  reforms  that  specifically  target  labour  intensive  production 
processes.  A  more  flexible  wage  setting  mechanism  that  better  aligns  wages  with 
productivity  levels  at  the  firm  level  will  improve  the  business  environment  and  our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
towards 
increasing  employment 
competitiveness  and  should  significantly  contribute 
opportunities. 
Important factors that serve to improve individual and enterprise or micro productivity include 
improved  management  skills,  updated  technology  and  better  capital  equipment.  Collective 
factors at the enterprise level that have a decisive influence on productivity outcomes include 
the  adoption  of 
the  continuous-improvement-type  work  ethic  and  overall  quality 
consciousness  that  is  so  prevalent  in  Developing  Asia.  In  many  countries,  active  labour 
market policies also serve to raise the rate of employment creation. This includes, transport 
subsidies for job seekers, on-the-job training and in some instances, temporary youth wage 
subsidies. 
Infrastructure as a key jobs driver 
Emerging-market  and  developing  country  growth  is  on  average  higher  than  that  of  South 
Africa and is indicative of country specific structural constraints. A sustained increase in the 
potential  output  of the  economy  requires  not  only  a  concerted  and  coordinated  effort from 
government, but also the support and buy-in of the private sector and labour if we were to 
succeed in improving the growth performance. It may even require a new social compact. 
In the past, infrastructure development in particular has been held back largely due to limited 
implementation capacity. This has resulted in bottlenecks in electricity generation, transport, 
and  port  infrastructure  and  South  Africa  has  therefore  not  benefited  as  much  as  other 
resource  intensive  emerging  market  economies  from  large  terms  of  trade  gains  in  recent 
years. This also discouraged investment in South Africa’s natural resource industry, and has 
made  it  difficult  in  some  instances  to  maintain  export  volume  growth.  Policy  certainty  and 
investor  confidence  have  proven  to  be  essential  prerequisites  for  the  capital  formation 
South Africa requires for substantive export led growth. 
The New Growth Path sets the goal of creating 5 million new jobs by 2020 and to this end 
identifies the structural problems in the economy that need to be overcome as well as the 
key opportunities or job drivers in specific sectors and markets. One of the key jobs drivers is 
infrastructure  development  which  provides  the  basis  for  higher  growth,  inclusivity  and  job 
creation.  Government  has  also  established  the  Presidential  Infrastructure  Coordinating 
Commission (PICC) to address the challenges of delivery through coordination, integration 
and  accelerated  implementation.  A  single  common  Infrastructure  Plan  will  in  future  be 
centrally  driven  and  monitored.  The  objective  is  also  to  develop  a  twenty-year  planning 
framework beyond one administration to avoid the typical stop-start pattern of the past. The 
PICC’s mandate is to ensure systematic selection, planning and monitoring of large projects. 
An infrastructure book that contains more than 645 infrastructure projects across the country 
has  now  been  compiled  by  the  PICC.  An  Infrastructure  Plan  with  identified  Strategic 
Integrated  Projects  has  also  been  developed  by  the  PICC  and  adopted  by  Cabinet  and 
although  this  in  itself  will  not  address  all  the  challenges,  it  forms  an  important  part  of  the 
National  Development  Plan’s  (NDP)  proposals  to  increase  employment  and  growth  Other 
key proposals of the NDP include improving the functioning of the labour market, supporting 
small  business  through  better  coordination  of  activities  and  improving  the  capacity  of  the 
state to effectively implement economic policy. 
Although South Africa has at times over the past 18 years, achieved significantly improved 
real economic growth outcomes, built democratic institutions, transformed the public service, 
extended  basic  services  and  stabilised  the  economy,  too  many  people  are  still  trapped  in 
poverty  and  too few  South  Africans  have  obtained  employment  over  this  period  as growth 
has  not  been  sufficiently  inclusive.  The  quality  of  education  for  the  majority  has  remained 
poor  and  government  has  continued  to  experience  insufficient  capacity  in  critical  areas. 
Some  years  were  characterised  by  jobless  capital  intensive  growth  while  the  large 
employment  losses  that  this  country  suffered  during  the  recession  have  still  not  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
recovered  fully.  The  NDP  aims  to  eliminate  poverty  and  reduce  inequality  significantly  by 
2030 by growing an inclusive economy and creating 11 million jobs by 2030. 
Recent developments in the labour market 
Although employment levels have increased at a slower pace this year compared to 2011, 
the rate of job creation has been sufficient to decrease marginally the unemployment rate in 
the  second  quarter  of  2012.  Employment  creation  has  nevertheless  remained  hesitant, 
consistent with the moderate pace of recovery in real economic activity in South Africa and 
against the backdrop of the challenging global economic developments. 
The moderation in average wage settlement rates in 2011 levelled off in 2012. In the second 
quarter  of  2012,  both  the  rate  of  increase  in  remuneration  per  worker  and  productivity 
increased somewhat resulting in the growth in nominal unit labour cost remaining the same. 
These developments mitigated inflationary pressures, but the outlook for  wage growth has 
become uncertain. 
Recent  industrial  action  has  spilled  over  from  mining  to  the  manufacturing,  transport  and 
agricultural  sectors  and  has  raised  investors’  concerns.  Moody’s  Investors  Service  also 
mentioned spreading labour turmoil as an important factor in its decision to cut South Africa’s 
debt rating to Baa1 from A3. Widespread labour unrest has already shut down large parts of 
the  mining  industry  and  given  that  we  are  the  world’s  top  platinum  producer  and  a  major 
supplier  of  gold,  prices  of  precious  metals  have  risen.  The  rand’s  exchange  value  has 
reflected investor concerns in recent weeks, and although the negative consequences of the 
unrest cannot be underestimated, I am confident the currency will return to more appropriate 
levels. 
The rand will remain vulnerable to any signs of intensifying labour turmoil, but government 
has taken steps to address the labour unrest as a speedy resolution is crucial to restoring 
broader investor confidence and medium-term growth prospects. The government has also 
given  the  assurance  that  it  is  putting  immense  efforts  into  bringing  together  the  employer 
community, trade union movement and the government itself in order to stabilise the situation 
as  rapidly  as  possible.  The  longer  strikes  continue,  the greater  the  implications  will  be  for 
economic growth, employment creation and fiscal outcomes in the long run. 
The role of monetary policy 
I  have  earlier  made  reference  to  the  Lopez  survey  that  concluded  that  macroeconomic 
stability  and  low  inflation  rates  inter  alia  have  positive  effects  on  growth  and  reduce 
inequality. It is my contention that transparent, well-understood monetary policy is critical to 
achieving stable macroeconomic outcomes. The mandate of the South African Reserve Bank 
is to achieve and maintain price stability in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic 
growth. The Bank also plays a central role in overseeing and maintaining financial stability. 
Price stability reduces uncertainty in the economy and provides a favourable environment for 
growth  and  cumulative  employment  creation  over  the  longer  term.  Low  inflation  helps  to 
protect  the  purchasing  power  and  living  standards  of  all  South  Africans.  Although  low 
inflation may not necessarily in itself reduce income inequality, it does ensure the protection 
of income which is particularly important for poorer South Africans who generally do not have 
the means to adjust their nominal incomes to take account of rapid price increases. 
An  inflation  target  range  is  set  by  government  after  consultation  with  the  Bank.  The 
commitment is to pursue a continuous target of 3 to 6 per cent for headline CPI inflation. The 
Bank conducts monetary policy within a flexible inflation-targeting framework that allows for 
inflation to be temporarily outside the target range as a result of mainly supply shocks. The 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  takes  into  account  the  appropriate  medium-term  time 
horizon for inflation to return to within the target range, considering the lags between policy 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
adjustments and economic effects. This provides for interest rate smoothing over the cycle 
and makes growth more sustained and consistent. 
Since  the  implementation  of  inflation  targeting,  the  instances  when  inflation  outcomes 
exceeded  the  target  could  be  attributed  to  external  shocks  which  exacerbated  domestic 
inflationary pressures. These shocks, amongst others, included depreciation of and volatility 
in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  and  sharp  increases  in  international  oil,  commodity,  and 
food  prices.  Structural  features  of  the  South  African  economy  such  as  backward  looking 
wage settlements, uncompetitive product markets, rapidly rising administered prices and low 
productivity have also been important sources of inflationary pressures. 
It  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish  comprehensively  between  the  specific  impact  of  inflation 
targeting  and  the  general  impact  of  other  concurrent  economic  reforms  or  global 
developments.  However,  empirical  evidence  shows  that  gains  in  inflation  performance  in 
inflation  targeting  countries  were  achieved  with  no  adverse  effects  on  output  and  interest 
volatility. The inflation targeting framework has also served South Africa well and the most 
important outcomes it has contributed towards can be summarised as follows: 
• 
The  nominal  policy  interest  rate  has  declined.  This  has  lowered  the  interest  rate 
structure at the short end of the maturity spectrum. 
The  real  policy  interest  rate  has  declined  and  has  become  less  volatile.  This  has 
reduced  the  inflation  risk  premium  embedded  in  interest  rates  as  inflation 
expectations became better anchored. 
Nominal  bond  yields  have  declined.  This  has  lowered  the  cost  of  borrowing  of 
government  and  the  cost  of  funding  of  the  private  sector  to  the  benefit  of  real 
economic activity. 
Growth  in  real  gross  domestic  product  and  real  gross  fixed  capital  formation  has 
increased  and  become  less  volatile.  This  has  encouraged  employment  creation, 
particularly in the pre-crisis years. 
   The extent of the gains derived in part from inflation targeting largely depends on the Bank’s 
ability  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  within  the  inflation  target  range.  Anchored  inflation 
expectations reduce the effect of external shocks and require less policy intervention. 
The  inflation  targeting  framework  has  been  important  in  providing  greater  resilience  to  the 
large shocks coming from the global external environment. As the nominal exchange rate of 
the rand is determined by supply and demand conditions, exchange rate flexibility serves as 
an important transmission mechanism and shock absorber of external shocks. This approach 
allows output growth and interest rates to be less volatile and delivers the best outcomes in 
terms  of  price  stability  and  lower  exchange  rate  volatility  subject  to  the  risk  of  over-  or 
undervaluation in response to external shocks. 
Inflation targeting has also been successfully practiced in a growing number of countries over 
the  past  20  years,  and many  more  countries  are  moving  toward  this framework.  Empirical 
evidence  on  the  performance  of  inflation  targeting  is supportive  of  the effectiveness  of the 
framework in delivering low inflation. The monetary policy framework has allowed the Bank to 
provide stimulus when required while keeping inflation expectations well anchored. Since its 
introduction  in  2000,  inflation  targeting  in  South  Africa  has  been  applied  as  a  flexible 
framework  that  has  been  resilient  to  changing  circumstances,  including  the  recent  global 
financial crisis. The inflation targeting framework has thus far enabled the Bank and most of 
the other inflation targeting countries to steer clear of unconventional measures in achieving 
their key monetary policy objective. The Bank’s inflation forecast shows inflation remaining 
within the inflation target range over the forecast horizon to 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Conclusion 
Although there is a short-run trade-off between economic activity and monetary policy, it is 
generally  accepted  that  low  and  stable  inflation  produces  an  environment  in  which  overall 
economic  performance  and  inclusive  growth  can  flourish.  The  Bank’s  flexible  approach  to 
inflation  targeting,  I  believe  positions  South  Africa  to  best  deal  with  external  shocks  and 
minimise their disruptive impact on the domestic economy. Growth, employment and income 
levels have been more stable and consistent since 2000 and the introduction of the current 
inflation targeting framework. 
Achieving  greater  economic  inclusion  is  a  critical  need  for  the  country.  Monetary  policy 
should  be  complemented  by  growth-oriented  and  job-creating  fiscal,  industrial  and  labour 
policies. Emerging market and developing economies are now more resilient than in previous 
decades but structural issues still need to be addressed. Weaknesses in any subsector or in 
regulation  or  corporate  governance  will  limit  monetary  policy  efficacy  and  lead  to  weak 
growth,  which  in  turn  is  a  drag  on  fiscal  consolidation.  Policies  in  general  must  therefore 
emphasise  the  resolution  of  underlying  structural  problems  within  the  economy,  and 
monetary  policy  must  be  as  supportive  as  possible,  with  due  regard  to  ensuring  price 
stability.  Although  monetary  policy  can  therefore  contribute  to  inclusive  and  sustainable 
growth  (and  you  will  probably  agree  that  the  SARB  has  indeed  adopted  policies  that  are 
supportive  in  this  regard),  one  needs  to  recognise  the  limitations  of  monetary  policy  and 
hence  acknowledge  that  other  policymakers  and  stakeholders  also  have  an  important  and 
significant  role  to  play  in  achieving  both  inclusive  and  sustainable  growth  over  the  longer 
term. 
Thank you. 
References: 
Aron  J.  and  Muellbuaer,  J.,  “Transparency,  credibility  and  predictability  of  monetary  policy 
under  inflation  targeting  in  South  Africa”,  Department  of  Economic,  Oxford  and  Nuffield 
College, Oxford, 31 March 2007. 
Ianchovichina,  E  and  Lundstrom,  S.  What  is  Inclusive  Growth?,  Policy  Research  Working 
Paper No. 4851, The World Bank. 2009 
Hausmann,  R.,  Rodrik  D.,  and  A.  Velasco.  Growth  Diagnostics.  Mimeo,  Harvard  Kennedy 
School. Cambridge. 2005. 
Lopez, H. “Pro-Poor Growth: A Review of What We Know (and of What We Don’t)” Mimeo. 
World Bank. 2004 
The  Infrastructure  Plan,  Presidential  Infrastructure  Coordinating  Commission  (PICC),  April, 
2012.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
