Mario Draghi: The monetary policy of the European Central Bank and its 
transmission in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the opening of the 
academic year 2012–2013, Università Bocconi, Milan, 15 November 2012. 
 Financial markets and the disruption caused to the transmission of monetary policy 
The  year  that  is  about  to  end  will  be  remembered  not  only  for  the  effects  the  European 
sovereign debt crisis has had on the euro and for the significant weakening of the European 
economy, but also for the responses to these challenges by the ECB, national governments 
and the European Union. 
The artificial calm in the markets prior to the crisis had, in Europe, for a long time allowed 
misguided economic policies or simply encouraged inaction in countries that had profound 
need for fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. The outbreak of the crisis substantially 
increased risk aversion: the weaknesses of these countries were exposed; in an environment 
of already weak growth, investors turned away, sovereign spreads started to rise. 
Soon, the solvency of the governments of these countries was questioned, and with it the 
solvency of the financial institutions located there. Within the euro area, less and less money 
circulated between banks in different countries. Doubts about the future of the euro area in 
its  current  form  encouraged  a  speculative  movement  which  lead  to  further  increases  in 
sovereign  spreads.  All  the  governments  of  the  weaker  countries  responded  with  fiscal 
consolidation policies, initially hesitant, then more vigorous. But economic activity continued 
to weaken and spreads continued to grow. 
It was a situation which has brought into focus the nature of the “ideal” fiscal consolidation – 
one  which  reduces  the  deficit  and  the  debt  with  the  least  negative  consequences  for  a 
country’s GDP. 
The  prevailing  evidence  indicates  that  it  should  be  concentrated  on  reductions  in  current 
spending  and  not  on  tax  increases.  Even  those  who  do  not  share  this  approach  agree, 
however,  that  it  is  essential  that  the  process  be  perceived  as  credible,  irreversible  and 
structural so that it can affect sovereign spreads, and that price stability conditions as well as 
conditions on financial markets are such that they do not interfere with fiscal consolidation. 
In  response,  the  ECB  lowered  its  benchmark  interest  rates.  Under  normal  circumstances, 
such reductions would have been transmitted in a relatively uniform way to households and 
firms across the euro area. But that’s not what we found.  
In some countries, the rate cuts were fully passed on. In others, the interest rates charged on 
bank loans to the real economy declined only little, if at all. And in a others still, some lending 
rates have actually risen.  
Why this divergence? The concept of “monetary policy transmission” is fundamental to the 
activities  of  a  central  bank,  i.e.  the  process  by  which  changes  in  the  benchmark  rate  of 
interest of a central bank are transmitted through the financial system to the real economy. 
In a system that is working properly, there is a stable relationship between changes in the 
central bank’s rates and the cost of bank loans for households and firms. Central banks can 
thus influence the overall economic situation and maintain price stability. 
But the financial system of the euro area has witnessed a severe fragmentation of the single 
financial  market.  The  costs  of  bank  financing  differed  greatly  in  different  countries.  Many 
banks, and in some countries the entire banking system, have in fact had no access to the 
euro  area  interbank  market.  Increases  in  interest  rates  on  government  securities  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
exacerbated  the  funding  costs  of  domestic  banks  and  severely  limited  their  access  to 
markets. 
This  has  made  difficult  the  transmission  of  impulses  coming  from  an  accommodative 
monetary policy through adjustments in interest rates on loans to households and firms by 
banks. Interest rates do not have to be identical across the euro area, but it is unacceptable if 
significant differences arise because of the fragmentation of capital markets or the perception 
of a break-up of the euro area. In an economy like that of the euro area, where about three-
quarters  of  corporate  finance  comes  from  the  banking  sector,  the  impact  on  the  real 
economy, investment and employment are serious. The fragmentation of the single financial 
market has led to a fragmentation of the single monetary policy. 
For this reason, the countries most exposed to the crisis of confidence were not able to take 
advantage, except to a limited extent, of the low rates of interest: they had entered a vicious 
circle. 
Economic  growth  was  falling.  Public  finances  were  deteriorating.  Banks  and  governments 
were  being  forced  to  pay  even  higher  interest  rates.  And  credit  growth  was  falling  further, 
leading to rising unemployment and reduced consumption and investment.  
The  outlook  for  the  euro  area  economy  as  a  whole  was  increasingly  fragile.  There  were 
potentially  negative  consequences  for  Europe’s  single  market,  as  access  to  finance  was 
increasingly influenced by location rather than creditworthiness and the quality of the project.  
The disruption of the monetary policy transmission has profound implications. It threatens the 
single monetary policy and the ECB’s ability to ensure price stability in both directions. This 
was why we acted. 
Restoring the proper transmission of monetary policy 
To decide what type of action was appropriate, we had to make two key assessments. First, 
we had to diagnose precisely why the transmission was disrupted. And second, we had to 
identify the most effective policy tool to repair those disruptions, while remaining within our 
mandate to preserve price stability. 
The countries most affected are those where the economic policies of the past tended to be 
inappropriate, where the response of governments at the start of the crisis was half-hearted 
and hesitant. It is up to the governments of those countries to make a major effort to regain 
credibility. 
The responses of all these governments have been remarkable for its intensity and speed, 
and yet interest rates continued to rise. There was a fear factor in the market valuations that 
governments alone did not seem able to dispel. 
A  situation  of  systemic  instability  was  occurring;  it  was  undermining  the  euro  area  and 
dashing hopes for the positive effects of the reforms undertaken to restore the transmission 
of monetary policy. It was necessary to allay the unfounded fears about the future of the euro 
area.  It  was  necessary  to  create  a  credible  support  mechanism  capable  of  averting 
destructive scenarios, and the exercise of that support falling within the mandate of the ECB. 
The  OMTs  have  been  designed  for  this  purpose,  to  restore  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. 
The OMTs provide for interventions in the markets for government securities, with no ex ante 
limits, but not in an uncontrolled or unconditional way. These interventions relate to bonds 
with a residual maturity of up to three years. It is a clear signal to investors that their fears 
about the future of the euro area are unfounded. 
But we have not forgotten the origin of the problems of the sovereign debt market in Europe. 
One  of  the  requirements  for  conducting  OMTs  is  that  the  countries  concerned  must  have 
negotiated  with  other  governments  in  the  euro  area  a  programme  under  the  European 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  which  imposes  strict,  effective  and  credible  conditions  over  an 
extended  period  of  time.  In  this  way,  governments  are  obliged  to  continue  the  necessary 
reforms, even in a scenario where the ECB intervenes. The participation of the International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  with  its  experience  in  monitoring  adjustment  programmes,  is  an 
additional safeguard. 
The consequences of the ECB’s actions 
First,  OMTs  will  not  lead  to  disguised  financing  of  governments.  We  have  specifically 
designed our interventions to avoid this. They will take place solely on secondary markets, 
where bonds that have already been issued are traded. If interventions take place, they will 
involve  buying  government  debt  from  investors,  not  from  governments.  All  this  is  fully 
consistent with the Treaty’s prohibition on monetary financing. Moreover, they will focus on 
shorter maturities and leave room for market discipline on longer maturities.  
Second, OMTs will not compromise the independence of the ECB. The ECB will continue to 
take all decisions related to OMTs in full independence. It will decide whether to intervene 
based  on  its  own  assessment  of  monetary  policy  transmission  and  with  the  aim  of 
safeguarding price stability. The fact that governments have to comply with conditionality will 
actually protect our independence. The ECB will not be forced to step in because of a lack of 
policy implementation.  
Third, OMTs will not create excessive risks for euro area taxpayers. Such risks would only 
materialise if a country were to run unsound policies. This is explicitly prevented by the ESM 
programme.  And  we  have  been  very  clear  that  each  time  a  programme  starts  being 
reviewed, we will routinely suspend operations and resume them only if the review has been 
concluded  positively.  This  will  ensure  that  the  ECB  intervenes  only  in  countries  where  the 
economy and public finances are on a sustainable path. 
Finally, OMTs will not lead to inflation. We have designed our operations so that their effects 
on monetary conditions will be neutral. For every euro we inject, we will withdraw a euro. In 
our assessment, the greater risk to price stability currently is associated with the possibility of 
falling prices in some euro area countries. In this sense, OMTs are not in contradiction to our 
mandate: in fact, they are essential for ensuring we can continue to preserve price stability.  
Moreover, we have no evidence that the announcement of the OMT programme has affected 
inflation  expectations.  They  continue  to  be  firmly  anchored.  This  is  testament  to  our  track 
record on price stability over the last decade and our credible commitment to preserving it. 
We have all the necessary tools at our disposal to maintain it and to withdraw any excess 
liquidity in case of upward risks to price stability. 
Since the announcement of the possibility to undertake OMTs, there have been several signs 
of  greater  tranquillity  in  financial  markets:  the  significant  decline  of  sovereign  spreads,  the 
resumption of capital flows by money market funds in the United States, which had stopped 
for about a year, some issues of corporate and sovereign bonds from countries that had lost 
access to the market for almost three years, such as Ireland and Portugal, the completion of 
the  financing  plans  of  the  Italian  and  Spanish  treasuries,  the  fact  that  the  share  of  Italian 
public  debt  held  by  non-residents  has  increased,  and  lastly  a  stabilisation  of  TARGET2 
balances, which are the true measure of the economic and financial imbalances in the euro 
area.  Finally,  it  is  yesterday’s  news  that  recourse  to  the  ECB  by  banks  in  some  large 
countries  that  were  in  difficult  funding  conditions  has  declined  for  the  second  consecutive 
month. It is important to understand that financial stability in the euro area is in everyone’s 
interest, but primarily in the interest of creditor nations which have greater exposures. 
There is no doubt that these improvements would not have been sustainable, nor would they 
be so in the future without an extraordinary, persistent and, above all, structural consolidation 
of public budgets and structural reforms in all euro area countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Completing economic and monetary union 
It is worth looking back to remind ourselves of the difficulties that the process of European 
integration has encountered in the past, and overcome.  
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’s tenure at the Banca d’Italia and at the European Commission 
was punctuated by realignments in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary 
System.  He  famously  pointed  out  the  key  problem  of  the  “inconsistent  quartet”  –  fixed 
exchange rates, free trade, capital mobility and national monetary policies.  
The single currency was identified as the solution.  
Today,  we  see  that  this  solution  was  incomplete.  The  crisis  has  exposed  the  need  to 
complete economic and monetary union.  
In my joint work with the Presidents of the European Council, the European Commission and 
the  Eurogroup,  we  have  identified  four  pillars  on  which  to  build  a  stable  and  prosperous 
Europe: a banking union with a single supervisor; a fiscal union that can effectively prevent 
and  correct  unsustainable  budgets;  an  economic  union  that  can  guarantee  sufficient 
competitiveness to sustain high employment; and a political union that can deeply engage 
euro area citizens.  
Progress is under way in all these directions. Of course, it is not straightforward to implement 
such an ambitious vision. But I am confident that Europe will once again emerge stronger 
from its present difficulties. 
Tommaso  was  convinced  that  “a  strong currency  requires  a  strong  economy  and  a  strong 
policy, not only a central bank that is strong and authoritative”. I share his conviction.  
The  ECB’s  response  to  the  crisis  has  a  clearly  defined  relationship  with  the  process  of 
European integration. 
With our non-standard policy measures, we have preserved the functioning of the monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism  and  thus  been  able  to  maintain  a  steady  course  for  the 
objective of price stability inscribed in our mandate. Potentially disastrous outcomes to the 
crisis have been thwarted; valuable, though not infinite, time has been gained. 
But  the  ECB  cannot  replace  the  actions  of  national  governments  with  respect  to  either 
economic policy effectiveness or democratic legitimacy. Ultimately, it is up to governments to 
dispel once and for all the persistent uncertainties that markets perceive and citizens fear. 
The ultimate goal is political union, a stable and integrated Europe with a common destiny. 
This will take a long time and the path will be an uncertain one. But in the meantime, it would 
be wrong not to act. 
A great deal has been achieved already. Governments have implemented corrective actions 
for  public  finances.  The  fiscal  compact  envisages  the  principle  of  balanced  budgets  in 
national legislations. The ESM provides for the possibility of financial assistance for countries 
in difficulty to keep the crisis from spreading. And the ECB’s non-standard policy measures 
will  be  complemented  by  banking  union,  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  for  European 
banks. 
It is essential that all parties involved in Europe’s large and complex path of reforms stick to 
their  commitments.  We  have  to  proceed  along  this  path  with  calm  pragmatism,  asking 
ourselves  what  the  minimum  requirements  for  completing  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
are. They are all  within  our reach, including fiscal reform and structural policies to support 
competitiveness and growth.  
Along the way, we must remain guided by the principle that no country is justified in pursuing 
policies that harm other members of the community to which it belongs. The construction of 
an institutional architecture for Europe based on this foundation is not only a response to a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
need  for  responsibility.  Without  the  sharing  of  national  sovereignty  at  European  level,  the 
very sovereignty of individual states is in danger. 
This is the first lesson of the crisis for us Europeans. It is not only a matter of economics and 
finance. We can, together with Zygmunt Bauman, extend it to much broader areas. 
He wrote: “The European house is not to the detriment of national cultures, but provides a 
sort  of roof covering  local  traditions,  values  and  differences.  And  the  paradox  is  that  each 
country is much more at risk of losing its specific identity if it is exposed without protection, 
that  is,  without  this  European  shield,  to  the  global  forces  which  are  violently  and  blatantly 
supranational, which disregard local issues and specificities”. 
Let  me  finish  with  an  anecdote  about  Tommaso,  to  whom  we  are  dedicating  this 
professorship  today.  As  you  know,  in  recent  months  I  have  repeatedly  stressed  the 
irreversibility of the euro. This was precisely the sentiment of one of Tommaso’s most noted 
quips.  Speaking  in  2004  about  the  “EMU”,  an  abbreviation  for  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union, he remarked that it was also the name of an Australian bird rather like an ostrich. And 
he added: “Neither of them can go backwards”. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
