Duvvuri Subbarao: Leveraging cooperative advantage 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International  Conference  on  “Leveraging  cooperative  advantage”  as  part  of celebrating the 
International  Year  of  Cooperatives  at 
the  College  of  Agricultural  Banking,  Pune, 
16 November 2012. 
 1. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  inaugurate  this  two  day  International 
Conference on “Leveraging Cooperative Advantage” organized to celebrate the International 
Year of Cooperatives declared by the United Nations (UN). This is an opportunity to which I 
attach a lot of value.  
2. 
The year-long celebration of cooperatives all over the world gives us an opportunity 
to revisit “the strengths of the cooperative business model as an alternative means of doing 
business and furthering socio-economic development.” I am delighted too that the Reserve 
Bank’s College of Agricultural Banking is hosting this Conference. When it was first set up, 
this  College  had  a  specific  mandate  for  capacity  building  of  personnel  in  rural  and 
cooperative sectors. Hosting this Conference is therefore an opportunity for the College to 
broadbase its expertise in this area by learning from international experience.  
3. 
There  is  a  common  perception  around  the  world  that  the  original  rationale  for 
cooperatives  has  ebbed  away,  and  that  in  today’s  complex,  globalising  world,  there  is  no 
meaningful role for cooperatives. That is clearly a misperception. Indeed I will argue to the 
contrary – that precisely because today’s world is complex and globalising, there is a more 
meaningful  role  for  cooperatives  to  play.  But  let  me first  attempt  to  outline  what  exactly  is 
meant by a cooperative. 
Defining cooperatives – an aggregation of power for business goals 
4. 
There  are  several  formal  definitions  of  the  cooperatives,  but  at  the  very  core, 
cooperatives  are  member-owned  businesses.  Their  rationale  draws  from  the  strength  of 
aggregation.  Cooperatives  aggregate the  power  of  people  who,  on their  own,  would  find  it 
difficult to achieve their business goals. They are thus unique entities in the sense that they 
are member- owned, member-driven and member-controlled businesses. 
The  way  cooperatives  are  organized,  they  provide  a  third  alternative  with  free 
5. 
market organisations at the one end (which provide goods and services through exchanges 
in  the  market)  and  the  state  owned  organisations  at  the  other  (which  provides  goods  and 
services through state control). Without going into the details of the theoretical exposition, I 
can safely say that cooperation emerges when it either reduces the cost and / or increases 
the  benefits to the  prospective  members  by  undertaking  an  activity  of common  interest. In 
case  of  financial  cooperatives,  this  translates  to  increasing  the  return  on  savings  and 
reducing the interest on loans to members after making sure that there are adequate margins 
to plough back surpluses for future sustainability and growth.  
Rationale and relevance of cooperatives today 
Let me now return to the question of the rationale of cooperatives in today’s world. 
6. 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  cooperatives  have  a  very  meaningful  role  to  play  in  today's 
complex, globalising world for at least two important reasons.  
7. 
Over  the  past  60  years,  we  have  seen  several  episodes  of  economic  growth  in 
different parts of the world. One clear lesson of this experience is that growth is sustainable 
only  if  it  is  inclusive.  A  growth  process that  increases  inequity  lacks  durability,  and  indeed 
even legitimacy, eventually threatening economic and social stability. Evidence in support of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
this is overwhelming – the “Occupy Wall Street” movement of last year being just the latest 
manifestation of the discontent associated with inequitable growth. Governments around the 
world are therefore anxious that even as they pursue economic growth, they must make that 
growth process inclusive. There are many ways of understanding inclusive growth: the way I 
understand it is that inclusive growth is a process where the poor contribute to growth and 
the poor benefit from growth. From this perspective, the cooperative system can become an 
effective  instrumentality  for  inclusive  growth  and  a  powerful  platform  for  enfranchising  the 
less privileged. 
8. 
There is a second and equally powerful argument that reinforces the importance of 
cooperatives.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has  taught  us  some  very  important  lessons.  The 
general disenchantment with “casino banking” in certain developed economies underscored 
the dangers of over-financialization of the real economy.  
9. 
In  comparison,  the  cooperative  business  has  been  more  resilient.  Its  source  of 
stability is the inclusiveness embedded in its very structure: “as owned by members and for 
the members.” This structure ensures that cooperatives are not enterprises run just for short 
term profits, but are a business model for long term sustainability and inclusive growth.  
10. 
In  case  of  financial  cooperatives,  they  do  basic  banking  and  do  not  indulge  in 
investment  banking  or  trading;  they  are  not  dependent  on  bulk  or  wholesale  markets  for 
funding. They buy and hold, and in their lending, they depend more on their knowledge of the 
borrower rather than on the collateral that can lose value rapidly. They bring in bio-diversity 
in  the financial  landscape.  Hence  the  cooperative  philosophy  is  an  excellent  example  of a 
value  based  business  model.  As  the  UN  Secretary  General  Ban  Ki-moon  put  it, 
“Cooperatives are a reminder to the international community that it is possible to pursue both 
economic  viability  and  social  responsibility.”  Quite  understandably,  the  experience  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  has  generated  serious  thinking  about  cooperatives  as  a  bulwark  for 
financial stability. 
Are cooperatives on the decline? 
11. 
Notwithstanding  the  above  arguments  in  support  of  the  rationale  of  cooperatives, 
there is a stereotype view that cooperatives are on the decline. Evidence, however, is to the 
contrary.  A  recent  study  by  ILO1  cites  evidence  that  the  cooperative  business  model  is  a 
sustainable  form  of  enterprise  that  is  able  to  withstand  a  crisis.  The  study  also  addresses 
questions like whether cooperatives only succeed at a time of economic crisis. Are they a 
business  model  that  people  turn  to  when  needed,  only  to  return  to  the  dominant  investor-
owned  model  when  the  crisis  is  over?  The  study  concludes  that  there  is  no  evidence  in 
support of this. In fact, it is the strength built up by cooperatives during the good times that 
helps them tide over a recession.  
Evolution of cooperatives – global experience  
12. 
Globally,  the  cooperative  movement  covers  over  one  billion  people  generating 
economic activity, resources and jobs. Countries with the most significant numbers of people 
in cooperative membership are India, China and the United States. Countries with significant 
presence of cooperative banks are Germany, France, the Netherlands and Italy.  
13. 
Experience  from  around  the  world  shows  that  cooperatives  have  been  strong  in 
countries  where 
the  respective 
governments in the initial stages. How they later evolved differs from country to country. Two 
main  factors  have  worked  in  their  success  viz.,  the  degree  of  government  control  and  the 
they  have  received  definitive  policy  support 
from 
                                                
1  Resilience of the Cooperative Business Model in Times of Crisis, Johnston Birchall & Lou Hammond Ketilson, 
2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
extent of member participation. In today’s technology driven globalised environment, it also 
matters whether and to what extent they are prepared to face competition.  
Evolution of cooperatives – Indian experience 
14.  
The growth of cooperatives in India has been impressive and covers a wide array of 
activities  including  credit  &  banking,  fertilizer,  sugar,  dairy,  marketing,  consumer  goods, 
handloom, handicraft, fisheries, housing etc. The Indian cooperative movement, comprising 
around six hundred thousand cooperatives is arguably the largest cooperative movement in 
the world, providing self employment to millions of poor. There are stellar success stories like 
“Amul”  owned  by  the  Gujarat  Cooperative  Milk  Marketing  Federation  (GCMMF)  and  Self 
Employed  Women  Association  (SEWA),  Gujarat.  Among  consumer  cooperatives,  the  trail 
blazer  has  been  Warana  Bazaar,  Warananagar,  Kolhapur.  Beyond  these  high  profile 
success  stories  though, the  story  of  Indian  cooperatives  has  been  varied. There  are  heart 
warming successes as also disappointing, if not dispiriting, failures.  
Cooperative movement – driven by state policy 
15. 
In  India,  state  policy  and  support  played  a  major  role  in  the  development  of  the 
cooperative  movement. Historically,  the  passing  of  the  Cooperative  Credit  Societies  Act  in 
1904  and  a  more  comprehensive  Cooperative  Societies  Act  later  in  1912  marked  the 
beginning  of  state  policy  of  active  engagement  and  promotion  of  cooperatives.  Further 
impetus for state support came from a study by Frederic Nicholson, followed by the Edward 
Law Committee on Cooperative Legislation. In 1915, the Maclagan Committee reiterated and 
advocated that “there should be one cooperative for every village and every village should be 
covered by a cooperative”.  
16. 
In  the  subsequent  decades,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  played  a  vital  role  in  the 
development of the cooperative movement in the country. There were specific provisions in 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934  both  for  the  establishment  of  an  Agricultural  Credit 
Department (ACD) in the bank and for extending refinance facilities to the cooperative credit 
system. A seminal landmark in the history of cooperative credit and banking was the All India 
Rural Credit Survey in 1954, conducted by the Reserve Bank. Based on the experience of 
India and several other developing countries, the Committee stressed that: “no form of credit 
organisation at the rural base will be suitable except the cooperative society”. The integrated 
scheme of rural credit, introduced pursuant to the Committee’s recommendations, gave a big 
boost to the country’s cooperative movement.  
17. 
As  the  planning  process  by  way  of  the  five  year  plans  took  root  in  the  post-
independence  period,  “building  up  a  cooperative  sector  as  part  of  a  scheme  of  planned 
development” became one of the central aims of national policy. The planning process was 
driven by the principle that: “Cooperation should become, progressively, the principal basis of 
organization  in  branches  of  economic  life,  notably  agriculture,  minor  irrigation,  small 
industries, processing, marketing, distribution, rural electrification, housing, construction and 
provision  of  essential  amenities  for  local  communities.  Even  in  the  medium  and  large 
industries  and  transport  sectors,  an  increasing  range  of  activities  could  be  undertaken  on 
cooperative lines.”  
18. 
Over the years, the importance of cooperatives increased well beyond a business 
form  to  a  more  broad  based  development  philosophy  to  fulfil  the  common  economic 
aspirations of the poor and disadvantaged. This narrative suggests that growing state faith 
played a critical role in evolution of cooperatives.  
Cooperatives also driven by the land holding pattern  
19. 
spread of cooperatives.  
In  addition  to  state  policy,  the  changing  pattern  of  landholding  in  India  aided  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
20. 
During the 50s and 60s, more than a fourth of the total cultivable land was held by 
large  farmers.  By  the  year  1995–96,  this  picture  changed  significantly  with  large  farms 
yielding ground to small and marginal farms whose share increased both by way of number 
of  operational  holdings  as  well  as  operational  area.  As  per  the  latest  agricultural  census 
(2005–06), small and marginal farmers, having less than 2 hectares of land, accounted for 
83 per cent of the total number of operational holdings and 41 per cent of the operated area. 
It is this class of “small” farmers, operating at the margins – socially as well as financially, 
with  low  income  base  and  limited  market  orientation,  vulnerable  to  climate  changes  and 
facing considerable risk in their agricultural operations – that define the profile of the clientele 
of cooperatives. The average size of loans disbursed by the cooperatives works out to about  
30,000,  as  against  1,38,000  disbursed  by  the  commercial  banks  (2010).  The  difference 
evidences the nature of the cooperatives and their clients. 
Still they seem to be losing out – problems in the rural cooperative credit system 
21. 
As indicated above, the cooperative movement in India has had the support of state 
policy and also the landholding pattern. Yet, cooperatives seem to be losing out on business 
share. The market share of rural cooperative banks in India has been continually receding – 
from  7.2  per  cent  in  2001  to  3.7  per  cent  in  20102.  If  the  share  of  cooperatives  declines 
further,  they  may  lose  their  role  as  an  important  player  in  rural  credit.  This  raises  an 
important policy question. Can a process such as the cooperatives be driven entirely as a top 
down process? Isn’t bottom up support a necessary condition for the cooperative movement 
to thrive?  
Why is the cooperative system faltering? 
22. 
There are several reasons for the disappointing performance of cooperatives in the 
country calling into question their viability and sustainability. I will reflect briefly on the more 
important ones. 
(i) 
The Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS), which once played a major 
role in the growth of agriculture by supporting small and marginal farmers, seems to 
be on the decline. Until the early 1990s, cooperatives provided almost 62 per cent of 
the  agri-credit  in  the  country,  but  over  the  years,  their  share  has  declined,  going 
down to 16 per cent by 2009–10. 
Several  factors  have  led  to the  deceleration  of  credit flow  to  agricultural and  rural 
development  activities.  State  intervention  into  and  politicization  of  these  primarily 
democratic  and  member  governed  cooperative  institutions  has  impaired  their 
governance  both  on  managerial  and  financial  fronts.  Examples  of  governance 
impairment include non-conduct of elections, frequent supersession of boards, delay 
in audit and states’ intrusion into administrative and financial management.  
The  Task  Force  appointed  by  Government  of  India  (GoI)  for  revival  of  the 
cooperatives  noted  that  impairment  in  governance  was  deep.  The  State  often 
combined  the  role  of  the  dominant  shareholder,  manager,  regulator,  concurrent 
supervisor and auditor creating severe conflicts of interest. Cooperatives were also 
required to function by administrative boundaries and were often divided into smaller 
entities just because of division of panchayats, districts or states.  
Weak finances, growing  NPAs  and  poor  resource  base  are factors contributing  to 
the declining performance of the cooperatives at the bottom level. These grass root 
institutions  mostly  depend  on  the  higher  agencies,  i.e.  central  cooperative  banks 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
                                                
2  The story of decline is similar for urban cooperatives which saw their share drop from 6.3 per cent in 2001 to 
3.5 per cent in 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(v) 
(vi) 
(CCBs) which, in turn, have to borrow from the next higher agencies. There is thus, 
a chain of dependency at all levels of the cooperative credit structure for resources 
from the outside.  
The  cooperative  structure  is  biased  in  favour  of borrowers,  and  depositors  get  an 
unequal  treatment.  Only  borrowers  can  become  members  of  the  cooperative. 
Depositors  are  either  non-members  or  “nominal”  members  with  no  voting  rights. 
First,  this  goes  against  the  concept  of  mutuality  (thrift  and  credit  going  hand  in 
hand). Second, it is not fair to depositors that their money is being intermediated by 
the cooperatives without their having any say in the management. 
There  are  other  developments  that  have  constrained  the  growth  of  cooperatives. 
They have been unable to cope with the rapid pace of change in the financial sector. 
New  products  and  services,  application  of  technology  and  adoption  of  advanced 
management practices have improved the efficiency and driven the margins down in 
the  financial  sector.  While  other  players  have  adjusted  to  these  changes, 
cooperatives  have  lagged  behind.  This  pulled  them  into  a  vicious  cycle  of  falling 
business, poor governance and weak human resources.  
23. 
The declining share of cooperatives in rural credit is worrisome especially since they 
are oftentimes the only source of support for small and marginal farmers. The health of the 
long  term  cooperative  credit  structure  is  also  a  cause  for  concern  as  it  affects  capital 
formation and hence productivity in agriculture. 
Yet their outreach is their strength and they need to leverage on this 
24. 
Do all the infirmities I have outlined above mean that cooperative institutions do not 
have any positives and are not relevant today? The answer is clearly no. Their vast network, 
with over 100,000 live outlets of the Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS), is a 
major  strength.  I  believe  there  is  no  other  institution  that  has  this  depth  of  penetration  for 
purveying credit and mobilisation of resources. How then do we leverage on this strength of 
cooperatives, especially for furthering financial inclusion in the country? 
25. 
The three tier STCCS consists of more than a hundred thousand primary agricultural 
credit  societies,  (PACS),  nearly  four  hundred  District  Central  Cooperative  Banks  (DCCBs) 
with 13,000 branches and 31 State Cooperative Banks with nearly one thousand branches.  
26. 
More  significant  –  besides  the  numbers  –  is  the  location  of  these  outlets.  The 
number  of  PACS  located  in  hilly  terrains,  deserts  and  other  areas  with  poor  access  far 
exceed the number of rural branches of commercial banks and RRBs. Located as they are in 
the rural areas, the STCCS units have better knowledge of their existing and potential clients. 
The large cooperative structure with deep penetration and endowment of local knowledge is 
an ideal platform for furthering financial inclusion. Arguably, cooperatives have been in the 
business of financial inclusion long before the phrase became fashionable.  
27. 
Notwithstanding  the  above  advantages,  PACS  were  not  formally  recognized  as 
Business  Correspondents  and  were  not  formally  integrated  into  the  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme (FIP) at par with commercial banks and Regional Rural Banks. The DCCBs were 
not  allocated  any  villages  despite  the fact that  a  large  chunk  of  rural  population  held  their 
bank  accounts  in  DCCB  and  SCB  branches.  One  reason  is  that  these  banks  are  not 
sufficiently  technology-enabled  to  participate  in  the  technology  driven  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme. To  redress  this  handicap,  as  part of  its  mandate  of  institutional  development, 
NABARD has embarked on an ambitious effort to bring the cooperative banks on a common 
technology platform in a phased manner. They should then be ready to be integrated into the 
FIP provided there is also an improvement in their financial health.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Reviving the cooperative structure – what needs to be done? 
28. 
If the inherent advantages of cooperatives as member-owned and operated entities 
is to be realized and they are to play a meaningful and sustained role in financial inclusion, 
many  of  the  above  constraints  and  handicaps  will  need  to  be  urgently  addressed.  Let  me 
briefly outline the agenda in this regard.  
Improve professionalism in governance / management 
Governance  in  Cooperative  Banks  lacks  professionalism.  There  is  need  to 
29. 
professionalize both the governance structure and the functioning of these institutions. First, 
governance  has  to  be  segregated  from  management.  The  Board  must  restrict  its  role  to 
governance  and  allow  the  CEO  and  the  senior  management  to  manage  the  day  to  day 
operations of these entities. The Board can exercise oversight over the management through 
established  channels  like  reviews  in  Board  Meetings  and  by  seeking  progress reports  and 
information.  There  is  also  a  need  for  stringently  applying  the  “fit  and  proper”  criteria  to 
personnel considered for managerial positions in these institutions.  
Address poor financial status 
30. 
The  deteriorating financial  position  of  unlicensed  cooperative  banks  is  an  issue of 
concern.  Of  the  402  cooperative  rural  cooperative  banks  in  the  country  as  on  March  31, 
2009, 313 were unlicenced. In accordance with the recommendations of the Committee of 
India’s Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA), the Reserve Bank decided that no unlicenced 
cooperative bank will be allowed to function in the country after March 31, 2012. After this, 
RBI and NABARD worked closely with the cooperative banks and licensed 272 of them, in 
some cases by relaxing the licencing norms.  
31. 
As on April 1, 2012, there still remained 41 cooperative banks which could not meet 
even the relaxed licencing norms. In order to maintain the integrity of the cooperative system 
and  to  protect  public  interest,  the  Reserve  Bank  imposed  Directions  on  these  41  banks 
prohibiting them from accepting fresh deposits. I must mention here that the Directions do 
not imply any ban on the normal operations of the banks with the existing account holders. 
While  prohibiting  these  banks  from  accepting  fresh  deposits,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been 
guided by the need to protect the interests of depositors and by larger public interest.  
32. 
Also, a large number of Cooperative Societies at the bottom level i.e. 18553 PACS 
(around 20 per cent of total) could not be covered under the revival package recommended 
by  the  Vaidyanathan  Committee-  I  (VC  I)3  because  of  poor  recovery  performance.  States 
have to come out with a road map for reviving these PACS. The remaining eligible PACS 
covered under VC-I have to work towards achieving full recapitalisation by bringing in their 
own share towards recapitalisation.  
33. 
The  position  of  Urban  Cooperative  banks  is  relatively  better  as  the  process  of 
consolidation and resolution over the last few years has weeded out many of the financially 
weak banks in a non-disruptive manner. As on date, only one UCB remains to be licenced.  
Adopt technology for a level playing field  
34. 
Technology  has  become  a  major  factor  in  determining  the  essence  of  modern 
banking  efficiency.  Cooperative  banks  are  still  far  behind  commercial  banks  and  RRBs  in 
upgradation  of  technology.  Cooperative  banks  must  realise  that  banking  in  today’s  world 
cannot be independent of technology, not so much because of competition from commercial 
                                                
3  A  Committee  set  up  in  2004  to  make  recommendations  for  strengthening  the  rural  cooperative  credit 
institutions in the country. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks  alone,  but  because  that  is  what  the  modern  customer  –  rural  or  urban  –  demands. 
Cooperatives must, therefore, come up to speed in regard to technology.  
Improve share capital and deposit safety 
35. 
As I mentioned earlier, the critical issue for the future of cooperatives is to ensure 
that members have a substantial financial stake in the cooperative. A number of initiatives 
including increasing the face value of the membership fee or shares would be necessary to 
make this happen.  
36. 
Members today are hesitant to keep deposits even with their own PACS because of 
concerns about the safety of their deposits. Deposits in PACS are not covered by DICGC, 
and  the  deposit  insurance  schemes  of  states  have  remained  only  on  paper.  There  is  an 
urgent  need  to  rebuild  customer  faith  and  trust  in  cooperative  institutions  so  that  small 
depositors do not vote with their feet and take business away from cooperatives.  
Increase member participation 
37. 
With  the  ever  increasing  number  of  small  and  marginal  farmers  and  hence 
increasing  informal  tenancy,  developing  aggregation  models  for  financing,  agronomic 
practices,  input  supply,  use  of  equipments,  marketing  and  processing  are  immediately 
required. While the Joint Liability Groups of farmers can serve as an intermediary step, the 
long term solution is more intense engagement with members.  
38. 
For  increasing  member  participation  in  the  affairs  of  the  PACS,  it  is  essential  to 
increase  the  number  of points  of  contact  between  the  members  and  the  PACS.  The  most 
effective contact can come only be through fruitful business between the two, and hence, the 
product range offered by the PACS needs to expand significantly.  
39. 
We need to work towards converting PACS into multi functional entities so that all 
members  automatically  think  of  their  PACS  whenever  they  think  about  products  and 
services.  Examples  of  PACS  engaged  in  procurement,  providing  warehousing  facilities, 
stocking  and  providing  other  inputs  including  seeds  and  saplings,  leasing  out  farm 
equipments,  becoming  e-enabled  common  service  centres  providing  land  records  and 
information  on  weather,  market  prices,  and  extension  advisories,  and  so  on  are  now 
available  in  some  states.  PACS  also  need  to  provide  other  financial  products,  especially 
insurance, and enhance their fee based income.  
Questions for the way forward 
40. 
which, I hope, will engage the attention of this Conference over the next two days. 
Having set out the agenda for repair and reform, let me now raise a few questions 
Question 1: Are cooperatives doing enough for financial inclusion? 
41. 
The  basic  philosophy  and  essence  of  cooperative  credit  structure  is  to  ensure 
financial  inclusion.  Financial  exclusion,  as  we  all  know,  is  not  confined  only  to  the  remote 
parts  of  this  country;  it  exists  in  urban  centres  as  well.  The  significance  of  urban  financial 
inclusion  also  lies  in  the  fact  that  financial  inclusion  of  the  urban  poor,  and  particularly  of 
migrant  labourers,  provides  a  forward  linkage  to  rural  financial  inclusion  through  the 
remittance corridor. This question is directed particularly to cooperatives working in urban set 
up.  Are  they  doing  enough  for  financial  inclusion?  Have  they  cared  to  open  large  enough 
number of accounts of slum dwellers and migrant labourers?  
Question 2: Can cooperatives improve the supply chain to ease inflationary pressure?  
42. 
In  developing  economies  where  the  supply  chain  management  is  generally  weak, 
the layering of middlemen oftentimes creates an artificial inflationary pressure. Can a more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
proactive approach in developing sustainable agri-value chain through cooperatives help in 
sustainably easing inflationary pressure?  
Question 3: How to strengthen the democratic character of a cooperative? 
43. 
Democracy and open membership are among the cardinal principles of cooperation. 
However,  a  recent  study  conducted  on  urban  cooperative  banks  by  the  College  of 
Agricultural  Banking  presents  a  disappointing  picture  of  the  democratic  set  up  in  these 
institutions.  The  low  attendance  of  members  in  general  body  meetings  and  their  poor 
participation  in  the  election  process  raise  questions  about  the  democratic  quotient.  Are 
governing  bodies  and  associations  working  towards  encouraging  greater  involvement  of 
members  in  cooperative  governance?  Should  there  be  a  separate  institution  similar  to  the 
Election Commission to improve the democratic ethic of cooperatives?  
44. 
A  relevant  issue  is  that  there  are  several  instances  of  cooperative  institutions 
becoming leader centric. They do well under some good leaders, but crumble when those 
leaders leave. What is the “mantra” for institutionalizing leadership at the grass root level?  
Question 4: Should cooperative banks diversify beyond basic banking? 
45. 
There  is  an  ongoing  debate  on  whether  cooperative  banks  should  restrict 
themselves  to  offering  plain  vanilla  products,  or whether  they  should  also,  like  commercial 
banks, diversify into offering exotic and complex products. In deciding on this, we should be 
guided by the experience of the crisis. The main criticism against banks post-crisis has been 
that they have mostly turned into becoming “casinos”. Isn’t there value then in cooperatives 
restricting themselves to being “utility” banks? 
Question 5: Should these be social audit of cooperatives? 
46. 
While  “cooperative”  is  a  social  phenomenon,  “banking”  is  a  commercial  and 
business  proposition.  Keeping  in  view  these  two  conflicting  dimensions  of  cooperative 
banking,  there  is  an  argument  in  favour  of  evaluating  cooperatives  on  non-financial 
parameters alongside the financial parameters. Can there be a system of social audit which 
world assess the performance in terms of social, environmental and community goals of the 
organisation? If yes, what should be the appropriate institutional mechanism for this social 
audit function? 
I  argued 
I  have  said. 
Let  me  now  conclude  by  summarizing  what 
Conclusion 
47. 
that 
notwithstanding  stereotype  views  to  the  contrary,  the  cooperative  ethic  remains  relevant 
even  today.  Indeed,  we  have  become  even  more  aware  of  the  value  of  a  member  driven, 
grass  root  institution  like  the  cooperative  after  witnessing  the  devastation  caused  by  the 
greed and excess of the financial sector that resulted in the global financial crisis of 2008/09. 
Thereafter, I traced the Indian experience of cooperatives and conjectured whether the main 
weakness of the cooperative structure in India is the fact that it grew on the basis of support 
from a top down state policy rather than as a broad based bottom-up movement.  
48. 
I then reflected on the several infirmities of the Indian cooperative sector, but argued 
that  despite  these  infirmities,  cooperatives  have  played  a  vital  role  in  furthering  financial 
inclusion. I then moved on to listing the main issues concerning the cooperative sector that 
we  must  address  in  order  to  revitalize  it.  Finally,  I  raised  five  questions  relating  to  the 
cooperative sector on the way forward that must engage the attention of this Conference. 
49. 
As I come to a close, I realize that I have been more cynical than I actually want to 
be. Perhaps I should correct that. The cooperative ethic is unexceptionable. It has been and 
can be a powerful instrumentality for enfranchising the poor and the less privileged. Indeed, 
there  are  numerous  instances  from  around  the  world,  and  from  India  too,  of  successful 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
cooperatives.  Yet  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  both  financial  and  governance  related,  the 
credibility  of  cooperatives  has  got  eroded,  especially  since  cooperatives  have  come  under 
the  spell  of  several  infirmities,  some  of  them  chronic.  Yet,  it  is  possible  to  cure  these 
infirmities and revive the cooperative structure into health and vibrancy. Indeed this is not a 
matter of choice, but an imperative if we are to achieve our collective aspiration for inclusive 
growth. I hope this Conference will help us find a way forward in this regard. 
My best wishes for the success of this Conference.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
