Matthew Elderfield: The Irish banking sector – five challenges 
Address by  Mr  Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Association  of  Compliance  Officers 
Ireland,  University  College  Cork,  Cork, 
19 October 2012. 
in 
 Completing  the  task  of  fixing  the  Irish  banking  system  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  A  healthy 
functioning banking system is essential to the economic well-being of Ireland. It is essential 
for  breaking  the  damaging  link  between  a  distressed  banking  system  and  weak  public 
finances.  And  it  is  important  for  economic  recovery  that  the  banks  are  once  again  in  a 
position  to  lend  to  small  businesses  and  homeowners.  But  despite  the  considerable  effort 
that  has  gone  in  to  recapitalising,  shrinking,  restructuring  and  otherwise  reforming  the 
banking  system,  the  process  is  by  no  means  complete  and  significant  challenges  remain. 
How much longer will this process take and what can be done to speed it up? It may be a 
source  of  considerable  frustration  that  this  process  is  not  yet  over,  but  considering  the 
severity of the banking crisis in Ireland, compounded with the on-going Eurozone debt crisis, 
it is perhaps not a surprise. What then are the remaining challenges that need to be tackled 
to speed up and complete the process of fixing the banks? 
I  would  highlight  5  such  challenges:  problem  portfolios,  balance  sheet  restructuring, 
profitability, culture and capital. Let me take some time today to talk about each of these in 
turn. 
Problem portfolios 
While the banks have transferred their troubled commercial property loans to NAMA (and are 
selling  down  their  non-core  portfolios),  they  retain  their  legacy  portfolio  of  mortgage,  SME 
and other assets which have a high level of arrears, impairment and embedded losses. A lot 
of work has been undertaken to assess the quality of these assets and to ensure both that 
adequate  capital  is  held  against  them  and  that  adequate  accounting  provisions  are  held 
(following new guidance from the Central Bank). So, a much greater level of capital has been 
set aside against the risk of loss and higher levels of prudent provisions are now in place. 
However, more work remains to be done in order to develop a more precise and clear picture 
of  the  performance  and  degree  of  embedded  losses  in  these  portfolios.  This  is  the  first 
challenge. Efforts to date have involved, in the first instance, a top down estimate of portfolio 
losses and, more recently with the assistance of Blackrock (a consultant used by the Central 
Bank),  a  bottom-up  loan  by  loan  loss  forecast  exercise  based  on  conservative  modelling 
assumptions. But there is a remaining task: a case-by-case re-underwriting, involving where 
possible recovery and where necessary restructuring, of troubled loans. 
This  is  crucially  important  for  a  number  of  reasons. While  the  banks  still  have  uncertainty 
about  the  granular  performance  of  their  loan  portfolios,  they  will  be  unsure  of  the  exact 
capital buffer that is in place and the extent to which they have adequate capital for extreme 
loss developments. To my mind, this encourages an attitude of hoarding capital and provides 
disincentives to lending. At the end of the summer, there was much debate around a widely 
reported Central Bank analysis of lending to the small business sector, where we found that 
loan rejection rates were significantly higher than other EU jurisdictions, excepting Greece, 
and  which  to  our  mind  pointed  to  supply  constraints  in  the  banking  sector  (in  addition  to 
problems over credit quality). Uncertainty about the current loan book and the exact losses 
that will crystallise (and therefore consume capital) are likely a factor in constraining lending. 
Absent  an  exercise  of  even  further  recapitalisation,  the  best  option  is  more  specificity  and 
understanding of the performance of the legacy loan portfolios – and an exercise in facing up 
to losses and modifying loans as necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The banks’ mortgage portfolios are a case in point and have involved close attention by the 
Central Bank. At this event last year, I explained how we were initiating a project to require 
mortgage  arrears  resolution  strategies  from  all  lenders  in  Ireland.  We  received  these  in 
November of last year and provided feedback to the banks, highlighting the need for more 
effort on a number of fronts. One major area of concern was the lack of operational capacity 
in the banks to deal with customers in arrears so we required senior management to commit 
to  a  step  change  improvement  in  that  capacity.  The  plans  we  received  showed  significant 
improvement and we are continuing to monitor progress closely. 
We also pressed the banks to work harder to develop specialist strategies for their buy to let 
portfolios. And, crucially, we insisted that the banks develop a broader range of techniques to 
deal  with  loans  in  arrears,  drawing  on  the  ideas  of  the  so-called  Keane  group.  In  a  slight 
simplification of the position, the banks were relying heavily on the provision of interest only 
arrangements  or  the  capitalisation  of  interest  arrears,  even  though  these  techniques  were 
clearly unsuitable for a sizeable group of customers with unsustainable mortgages as a result 
of  a  severe  reduction  in  income.  The  banks  were  required  to  identify  a  broader  range  of 
techniques,  including  loan  modification  arrangements  such  a  split  mortgages  and  the 
introduction of mortgage to rent schemes, and to pilot these during Q3 of this year. These 
pilots  are  now  mostly  concluded  (although  are  dragging  on  in  one  or  two  cases)  and  the 
banks are now in starting the process of rolling out the new arrangements more widely. 
This process offers the prospect of restructuring loans where necessary to avoid customers 
continually re-defaulting. The Central Bank has studiously avoided prescribing the detail of 
the loan modification arrangements adopted by the banks and it must necessarily be for the 
banks  themselves  to  undertake  the  case-by-case  review  of  customers  that  is  required. 
However, I would observe that there is significant variability in the approaches that the banks 
are taking to loan modification. That is natural and understandable, and I would not expect a 
standard approach across so many different institutions, with different portfolios and different 
types of owners, for so many different customers. But there are some key parameters in the 
typical  loan  modification  arrangements  that  might  perhaps  merit  a  close  side-by-side 
comparison in due course. For example, a crucial new technique is that of the provision of a 
split  mortgage.  This  involves  rightsizing  the  performing  part  of  the  mortgage  based  on 
affordability,  as  determined  by  current  income,  and  warehousing  the  non-performing  part. 
This is to be welcome, but the treatment of the warehoused element merits close attention. 
For  example,  is  there  shared  risk  between  the  bank  and  the  customer  regarding  this 
element?  And  is  it  realistic  that  full  interest  accrues  on  this  warehoused  element?  As  the 
banks  move  out  of  their  pilot  phase  on  these  new  techniques  and  adopt  them  in  their 
mortgage  arrears  resolution  strategies,  our  code  in  this  area  requires  them  to  publish  full 
details  on  their  websites.  So  there  will  shortly  be  an  opportunity  for  some  comparative 
analysis of the different arrangements that are being promulgated and therefore some public 
and customer feedback on the design choices that have been made. 
One important message today is that these efforts underway for mortgage arrears need to be 
matched for the banks’ SME portfolios. Earlier in the year, the Central Bank commissioned 
an in-depth analysis of the leading banks operational capacity for SME loan review, recovery 
and  resolution.  The  results  were  in  many  respects  dismayingly  similar  to  those  regarding 
mortgage arrears operations. For example, the reviews found the following: limited specialist 
skills, limited ability to scale up to conduct restructuring and resolution activity, inconsistent 
quality and depth of financial analysis of borrowers, incomplete financial information collected 
from borrowers, lack of portfolio segmentation and limited use of KPI’s. 
More  fundamentally,  it  appeared  that  portfolios  were  largely  subject  to  rescheduling  and 
extended forbearance rather than a determined effort to restructure loans and deploy a wide 
range  of  workout  options.  Given  the  extent to  which  many  SMEs  entangled  themselves  in 
property investment, there is clearly a difficult task facing the banks. The message from this 
review  work  is  that  here  too  we  need  to  see  a  step  change  in  operational  capacity  and  a 
mindset change in terms of tackling, rather than deferring, problems. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
So, while we will not be rolling out the same extensive regulatory framework as is in place for 
mortgages  and  mortgage  arrears  (due  to  the  different  consumer  protection  standards  that 
are relevant), a key area of regulatory focus in the coming months will be to press the banks 
to  effectively  re-underwrite  their  SME  portfolio  and  more  decisively  tackle  the  challenge of 
recovering  and  as  necessary  restructuring  problem  loans.  The  banks  need  to  raise  their 
game on the handling of problem SME loans and the Central Bank intends to press them to 
do just that. 
Balance sheet restructuring 
The  second  principle  challenge  facing  the  Irish  banks  is  of  one  of  balance  sheet 
restructuring. By this, I mean the process of disposing of certain assets in order to strengthen 
the  financial  position  of  the  bank  and  to  shrink  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  so  that  its 
funding position is more sustainable. (I should note that I haven’t set out funding as one of 
the principal five challenges, which  is perhaps unexpected, but this is on the grounds that 
improving the banks liquidity position and capacity to fund themselves with reduced reliance 
on the central bank will flow from successfully addressing the other challenges. And indeed 
while all these are necessary conditions for improved funding, they are not sufficient, as it is 
clear that sustained access to wholesale markets – apart perhaps from heavily collateralised 
transactions such as covered bonds and the like – is only realistically likely to occur after the 
Irish  sovereign  has  fully  returned  to  the  market.  So:  funding  is  an  important  and  pressing 
issue,  but  one  that  will  only  be  solved  after  both  the  foundations  of  a  stronger  banking 
system and sovereign market access have been re-established.) 
Ireland has demonstrated strong progress with the challenge of balance sheet restructuring. 
The first phase of this exercise, as is well known, involved the implementation of NAMA. This 
allowed the transfer of hard to value and poorly performing commercial property assets out of 
the  banking  system  to  improve  the  balance  sheet  strength  of the  Irish  banks. The  second 
phase  of  this  exercise,  which  is  now  well  progressed,  has  involved  the  identification  and 
disposal of so-called non-core portfolios. This has less to do with cleaning out poor quality 
assets  –  although  there  are  some  in  this  category  –  but  rather  reducing  leverage  in  the 
balance sheet and reliance on central bank funding, by rightsizing the banks’ balance sheets 
to a sensible proportion relative to their on-going ability to fund themselves. 
Progress in the disposal of non-core assets has been impressive, with most banks hitting or 
exceeding their targets and doing so at a lower cost to capital, by achieving better prices, 
than  had  been  budgeted  in  our  stress  test  exercise.  The  environment  for  asset  disposals 
has,  however,  been  getting  more  difficult,  as  the  Eurozone  crisis  has  widened  and  the 
imperative to deleverage has touched other banks as well. The remaining challenge, then, in 
this space is to make sure that the asset disposal process remains on track and is concluded 
successfully. However, the Irish authorities have been keen to emphasise that this process 
should  not  be  at  the  expense  of  fire  sale  prices,  so  the  current  market  environment  may 
provide a constraint on the ability to reach the endpoint to a predefined schedule. 
Should that be the end of balance sheet restructuring? One area of debate is whether it is 
advisable to undertake a third phase of restructuring involving a select number of banks and 
certain  portions  of  their core  portfolios. The  objective  here  would  be  to  trim  back  the  core 
balance sheets by identifying poor performing or hard to value mortgage assets for transfer 
out  of  the  banking  system.  However,  important  technical  issues  remain  to  be  solved 
regarding the suitable vehicle for these assets, and how that would be funded. In short, there 
may be an opportunity for a new phase of balance sheet restructuring to provide a further 
strengthening of the banking system – but this is not yet assured. 
Profitability 
The profitability challenge should, I hope, be obvious. It is important that the banks regain 
profitability in their core businesses so that they can stand on their own feet and no longer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
rely on taxpayer support. In post-crisis Ireland, where it often seems that regard for the banks 
among  the general  public  is  at  an  all-time  low,  the  prospect  of the  institutions  which  have 
caused  so  much  economic  distress,  and  required  so  much  taxpayer  support,  earning 
ever-increasing profits from their activities is understandably met with dismay by those hard 
pressed consumers that are being charged more. But it is surely preferable that the banking 
system is able to operate based on the commercial arrangements it has with its customers 
rather  than  continuing  to  have  dependence  on  government  and  taxpayer  assistance.  By 
breaking the nexus between banks and Government, both will be able to access funds at a 
cheaper  rate  driving  down  costs  to  both  bank  customers  and  the  taxpayer.  The  banking 
system needs to generate retained earnings to bolster its capital position of its own accord, 
and therefore needs to re-establish its profitability.  
How  is  the  profitability  challenge  going?  Further  balance  sheet  restructuring  will  help  if  it 
strips out poor performing or high risk assets. Also, crucially, recognition of impaired assets 
and a granular and diligent re-underwriting of problem portfolios will allow loan book losses to 
be put in the past. These developments will help, but more is needed to be done, especially 
while domestic demand remains depressed and inhibits new business growth. 
At the centre of the profitability equation for the banks is a need to improve their net interest 
margin.  On  aggregate,  the  net  interest  margin  for  the  three  main  Irish  banks  has  fallen 
sharply,  from  1.83%  in  2007  to  0.82%  by  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Net  interest  margins 
remain highly compressed for the banks and will continue to do so while prevailing interest 
rates  are  low.  Progress  on  profitability  will  only  be  possible  in  the  interim  due  to  gradual 
re-pricing of assets to reflect the cost of funds.  
I should also note that in my view we are getting close to the position where the changing 
circumstances  arising  from  successful  implementation  of  the  IMF/EU  programme  and  the 
introduction of the banking union should permit the full removal of the government guarantee. 
This will favourably impact on profitability as a result of reduced fees. 
Realistically, however, the prospects for significant improvement in net interest margins as a 
driver  of  profitability  will  be  limited for  the  immediate future  in  light  of  the  macro-economic 
environment.  What  is  in  the  banks’  own  hands,  however,  is  to  rigorously  tackle  their 
operating costs. The banks need to continue their efforts in this area and the management 
teams should be commended for tackling tough decisions around staffing levels and branch 
closures,  which  are  clearly  difficult  but  necessary  measures.  As  a  note  of  caution,  it  is 
important  that  this  process  of  rationalisation  does  not  compromise  the  risk  management 
infrastructure  and  IT/operational  framework  in  the  banking  system.  These  would  be 
short-term  cost  savings  that  sowed  the  seeds  for  later  problems  and  painful  expense,  as 
we’ve seen in the past and indeed quite recently. So, the Central Bank will encourage bank 
management to stick to their cost-cutting agenda, but to do so with careful deliberation. They 
do  need  to  maintain  the  capacity  to  deliver  the  needed  services  to  the  economy  and  the 
general public. 
Culture 
While  most  of  the  challenges  are  financial  in  nature,  there  is  one  that  is  not  but  is 
nevertheless  absolutely  essential:  We  need  to  see  a  substantial,  deeply  rooted  and 
sustained  change  in  the  culture  that  operates  within  the  Irish  banking  system.  Cultural 
change is evidently a complicated, laborious and time-consuming process and will need to 
touch on the number of dimensions, but at its essence we need to see a fundamental shift in 
attitudes to risk management and to the treatment of consumers. The financial crisis exposed 
a corrosive influence at the heart of the way the Irish banks were run and that has had to be 
decisively tackled. 
The  Central  Bank  has  acted  to  initiate  change  in  this  area  and  has  encouraged  improved 
governance and standards of behaviour. We have introduced a corporate governance code, 
which is fully enforceable, designed to improve the rigour of oversight of bank management 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and to broaden the gene pool of bank boardrooms. A new fitness and probity regime is now 
in place to more rigorously police those who work in the financial services sector. Some 71 of 
the 73 executive and non-executive directors who were in place at the time of the guarantee 
have now or will shortly depart the system. 
But the work of cultural change is by no means complete – indeed it still has a long way to go 
– and must necessarily be driven by the new boards of the Irish banks. They need to set the 
tone  at  the  top  and  clearly  articulate  their  expectations  of  ethical  conduct  amongst  their 
management team and their staff at large. They need to ensure that the ranks of senior and 
middle management are subject to renewal and refreshment, to bring some fresh blood into 
the  mix  without  the  baggage  of  the  past  and  with  the  motivation  to  lead  the  process  of 
change.  New standards of behaviour need to be backed up when hard cases of individual 
conduct  come  to  a  head,  and  not  avoided.  Recognition  of  the  importance  of  good  risk 
management,  compliance  and  treating  customers  fairly  needs  to  become  embedded, 
hardwired into the processes, remuneration, objectives, communications and way of thinking 
in the Irish banks until it becomes second nature. 
This  is  a  hard-to-measure  and  difficult  task  but  needs  to  be  kept  at  the  top  of  the  senior 
management and Board agenda. It is important to speed the recovery of the banking system, 
by  helping  renew  the  social  contract  between  the  banks  and  society  at  large  and,  more 
tangibly, ensuring that lapses in risk management or consumer care do not lead to further 
losses,  consumer  detriment  and  reputational  damage  which  impede  the  banks’  and  the 
economy’s path to recovery. 
Capital 
Finally, then, let us turn to the banks’ capital challenge and the question of whether or not 
they  have  adequate  economic  and  regulatory  capital  to  operate  safely  and  provide  the 
lending  necessary  for  the  economy.  As  I  will  explain,  this  is  a  complex  question  and  is 
impacted by a number of factors, some of which appear favourable and some of which do 
not.  Answering  this  question  also  involves  a  considerable  number  of  judgement  calls, 
including the question of the speed with which we want to get to the point that there remains 
absolutely no doubt about the banks’ ability to meet both any future losses and the planned 
higher international capital standards that are coming down the track. 
The factors impacting the banks’ capital position are numerous and, of course, are closely 
related to the previous challenges that I’ve outlined. The extent to which problem loans are 
successfully recovered or necessarily written off or restructured will be a key factor, as will 
the extent of progress on balance sheet restructuring (and the costs this imposes along the 
way). The banks’ ability to return to profitability will allow them to retain earnings so that the 
capital requirements of the future can be met on their own. But what other elements will bear 
on the capital challenge? 
On the positive side, the current starting point is a strong one due to the significant capital 
injections  that  have  taken  place  as  a  result  of  the  previous  stress  tests  of  the  banking 
system. Current capital ratios for the leading domestic banks include a healthy buffer above 
minimum requirements: for example, the total capital ratio for AIB is 19.9%, Bank of Ireland’s 
is 14.3% and PTSB’s is 21.5%. Above these requirements, the banks have a further buffer of 
contingent capital instruments to absorb additional potential losses, which is another positive. 
Also,  as  noted  previously,  since  the  last  stress  tests  the  losses  on  disposal  of  non-core 
assets has turned out to be less than predicted. And also in the positive, albeit tentatively, 
are some early signs of stability in the housing market, at least in the Dublin area. 
However,  there  are  also  adverse  developments  which  could  impact  the  next  in-depth 
assessment of capital. While housing prices may have shown signs of stability in the Dublin 
area, they  are  still  significantly  depressed  and  may  have  further to  decline  outside  Dublin. 
The macro-economic  environment  remains  very  difficult,  with  domestic  demand  depressed 
and the continuing crisis in the Eurozone weighing on recovery and confidence. The position 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
on  mortgage  arrears  has  continued  to  deteriorate  since  the  last  stress  test  (although, 
positively,  are  so  far  within  stress  levels)  and  the  introduction  of  insolvency  legislation 
creates uncertainty as to the future trajectory of losses. And, as I’ve mentioned in previous 
remarks, we know that in the medium term the Irish banks need to close the gap to meet new 
international capital standards under Basel 3 and CRD IV. 
Since we are talking about the speed of the recovery of the banking system and the question 
of time, it is perhaps useful here to make the distinction between current capital requirements 
and  what  one  might  call  the  stressed  capital  position  of  the  banks.  Very  simply  put,  the 
current capital position is the calculation of the banks’ capital requirements against current 
prevailing  minimum  regulatory  standards  and  in  light  of  the  bank’s  current  accounting 
position. As I have just noted, the current capital position of the banks is healthy due to the 
significant  injections  of  taxpayer  and  private  funds  that  have  taken  place.  This  healthy 
position appears assured for the immediate future given the buffer between current capital 
levels  and  minimum  European  requirements.  However,  in  the  medium  term  the  position 
becomes  more  uncertain,  principally  due  to  the  anticipated  strengthening  of  the  minimum 
EU standards, uncertainty around profitability and uncertainty around the exact size of future 
losses  in  problem  portfolios.  This  is  where  the  stress  capital  position  comes  in:  this  is  an 
exercise in projecting forwards the level of losses (and of profitability) – and doing so with an 
overlay of stress to provide an added degree of comfort and conservatism. As you know, this 
method  has  been  used  to  good  effect  to  force  a  significant  recapitalisation  of  the  system 
already. 
How much uncertainty or risk is there in the medium term capital position for the banks? I’m 
afraid  I’m  going  to  disappoint  you  and  say  that  we  need  to  wait  and  see  and  do  another 
thorough, rigorous and professional job of assessing that very question. This will take place 
during the course of next year and the Central Bank will again conduct its own independent 
assessment  of  the  banks’  loan  losses,  again  with  the  assistance  of  Blackrock,  rather  than 
rely on the banks’ own calculations. We will, as before, call it as we see it. 
But  in  the  design  of  this  exercise  –  by  ourselves,  by  the  troika,  by  the  European  Banking 
Authority and by the prospective new Eurozone banking supervisor, the ECB (there will be a 
lot of chefs in this one!) – there will be some important judgement calls regarding the severity 
of the stress parameters and the methodology to be applied. Fundamentally, there is a public 
policy choice around living with a currently healthy capital position until the point of need of 
public support, if indeed that is the case. Call this a just-in-time approach to backstops, if you 
like.  Or,  alternatively,  the  stress  design  can  be  calibrated  to  frontload  anticipated  new 
regulatory requirements or potential tail events while discounting the prospect of the banks 
earning their own way to full capital health. The benefit of this latter approach is that it more 
speedily  gets  the  banks  to  a  position  of  undeniable  capital  resilience,  so  that  they  should 
have  no  deterrent  from  lending  and  the  residual  risk  of  future  support  at  a  later  date  is 
eliminated. 
But  this  frontloaded  design  choice  is  of  course  potentially  costly  in  terms  of  adding  to  the 
sovereign debt burden. And in this respect, there is a sixth and most fundamental challenge 
of all, namely breaking the damaging link between the banking system and the government 
finances. It is clear that this in itself is an essential component of the successful completion 
of the financial programme for Ireland and a speedy recovery of the Irish banking system. It 
is  hard  to  think  of  the  Irish  banks  returning  to  unsecured  market  funding  before  the 
government  does  so.  And  it  is  hard  to  think  of  the  Irish  banks’  capital  position  being 
definitively  resolved  before  the  impact  of  bank  debt  on  government  finances  has  been 
resolved. This has been the lesson of the Irish programme so far. That huge strides have 
been made in tackling the banking system problems through decisive and costly actions, but 
that  there  are  limits  to  the  public  policy  measures  that  can  be  taken  without  European 
assistance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  encouraging  news  is  that  this  was  recognised  by  European  policymakers  in  the  Euro 
group  summit  at  the  end  of  June.  The  damaging  linkage  between  banking  systems  and 
sovereign  finances  has  been  recognised  and  it  has  been  accepted  that  borrowing  to 
recapitalise  banking  systems  adds  to  the  negative  feedback  loop  between  the  two.  I  look 
forward to the outcome of the continuing discussions on the Summit conclusions so they are 
translated  into  a  specific  policy  proposal  that  is  indeed  effective  in  breaking  the 
banking-sovereign link. However, there are key steps that need to take place before this can 
be achieved, most notably the development of the banking union and centralised Eurozone 
banking supervision. But that is a topic for another day. For now, my point is that in addition 
to  the  five  domestic  challenges  for  the  Irish  banking  system  to  more  speedily  achieve 
recovery, there is a sixth European challenge where there are positive signs but much work 
still to be done. 
This dependence on European developments, however, is no excuse for the banks to delay 
in  tackling  the  five  challenges  I  have  discussed. With  apologies  in  advance  for  the  risk  of 
oversimplification, let me sum this all up in the following way. One way to think about this is 
that the Irish banks are now out of the critical ward, with more healthy vital signs, following 
radical  surgery  and  an  extensive  transfusion  of  blood  from  the  Irish  taxpayer.  But  as  they 
stagger  back  to  work  they  are  still  weak  and  aren’t  contributing  to  society  as  they  should. 
They  need  to  demonstrate  dedication  in  getting  fully  fit:  they  need  to  face  up  to  their 
remaining ailments – by recognising losses – and continue to slim down – both their balance 
sheets and their costs.  The banks now have the uncomfortable task of telling the neighbours 
who  donated  blood  to  them  that  they  need  to  charge  them  more  as  customers.  And  the 
banks need to approach their new situation with a new culture to show they’ve truly changed 
their ways. These measures, which are in the hands of the banks’ own management and do 
not depend on Europe, will help speed them to full recovery.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
