Andreas Dombret: Banks and trust 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 58th Kreditpolitische Tagung, a conference on the theme of “Banks and 
trust”, held by the magazine “Zeitschrift für das gesamte Kreditwesen”, Frankfurt am Main, 
9 November 2012. 
 Banks in the service of society 
1 
Banks and trust – this is a wide-ranging topic which relates both to individual institutions and 
to the economy as a whole, and one which I would like to take up from the point of view of a 
central banker whose responsibilities also include the stability of the financial system. In the 
following, I wish to look at aspects relating to individual institutions, the economy as a whole, 
regulatory matters and wider society. 
The  social  aspect  is  already  apparent  in  your  introductory  announcement  for  today’s 
conference,  in  which  you  write,  “The  era  of  the  well-respected  banker  is  over:  nowadays, 
traits  such  as  greed,  lack  of  self-restraint,  and  immorality  are  to  the  fore”.  This  social 
perspective reminds us that there is a responsibility towards society which goes beyond the 
concerns of homo oeconomicus as found in the textbooks. 
According to Adam Smith, the striving of each individual after his or her own happiness leads 
to prosperity for society at large. This is the proverbial invisible hand of the market. Or, in his 
own words from his magnum opus, The Wealth of Nations, “It is not from the benevolence of 
the butcher, the brewer or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their 
own interest.” Translated to the financial sector, this means: it is not to the loving kindness of 
banks that we owe our mortgage, but to their desire for profit and interest. And that is as it 
should be. Systems which are based on selflessness fail because people are not selfless. 
Any  stable  economic  system  needs  to  take  due  account  of  the  fact  that  people  think  of 
themselves first. 
This  is  overstating  things  somewhat.  By  which  I  mean  that  this  view  requires  some 
qualification. If everyone were purely selfish, then we would all be cheating one another the 
whole  time. Thankfully,  cooperation  is  an  empirically  observable  fact.  It goes  beyond  what 
can be explained simply by self-interest. We are only able to live together because people do 
not think exclusively of themselves but are also prepared to take responsibility – not just for 
themselves, but for others, too. 
In  this  sense,  a  change  in  consciousness  is  required.  Trust,  long-term  thinking  and 
sustainability: these are all challenges which face our society as a whole. Short-termism, on 
the other hand, is one of the principal causes of the current financial crisis and crisis in trust. 
In  terms  of  short-termism  on  the  financial  markets,  there  are  two  opposing  theories.  One 
theory  says  that  enterprises  and  banks  –  the  large  ones  at  least  –  belong  to  their 
shareholders,  and  should  therefore  be  managed  in  their  interests.  Shareholders’  income 
rises and falls with the bank’s performance. The shareholders’ interests therefore lie chiefly 
in the enterprise’s long-term success. 
The opposite theory says that because shareholders are the most mobile, they are the ones 
least  concerned  with  the  long-term  future  of  the  bank  or  enterprise  –  unless  they  hold  so 
many shares that selling them might inflict damage on the enterprise. Therefore, they favour 
short-term profit growth and pay little regard to long-term prospects. 
There  is  certainly  evidence  pointing to  a  long-term  approach  being  in the  best  interests of 
proprietors. Many owner-managed banks held up well in the financial crisis. In concentrating 
on investment advice, most of these institutions have a business model which continued to 
work in the financial crisis. The savings bank sector also weathered the crisis well. And the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
same  goes  for  the  cooperative  banks,  in  which  the  customers  are  also  owners.  These 
institutions did not lose people’s trust. 
Let me be clear: this does not mean that banks operating as public limited companies are 
obliged to take a short-term approach. But they need to put in place functioning management 
and incentive structures. And they most certainly have to restore a greater sense of social 
responsibility  to  their  own  houses.  The  financial  sector’s  role  in  serving  the  real  economy 
needs to be clearly discernible in their business models. 
Investment  banks  can  do  this  too.  Equipped  with  the  right  business  model,  they  can  be 
genuine “servants” of the real economy. There are many ways of doing this. For instance, 
providing  good  advice  in  the  business  of  mergers  and  acquisitions.  Such  services  are  of 
value  for  customers  in  the  real  economy.  And  a  suitable  price  can  be  charged  for  such 
services. Or if a bank undertakes currency-hedging on the foreign exchange market for an 
exporter,  this  can  be  of  existential  importance  to  an  enterprise  which  is  part  of  the  real 
economy. Good advice is therefore essential here. 
Things  become  dangerous  when  banks  get  wrapped  up  in  a  world  of  their  own.  When 
speculation becomes an end in itself. Properly functioning management structures need to 
be able to prevent this. This relates not least to remuneration structures. It also has to do 
with questions of organisation and often with the quality of a bank’s risk management. 
And  it  has  to  do  with  the  rules  banks  set  themselves  and  live  by  in  their  dealings  with 
customers: for instance, finding out what the customer actually needs first, instead of starting 
off by seeking to maximise fees. Or take, for example, “payment by customer satisfaction”. 
Obviously, customer satisfaction is difficult to measure and to attribute to individual advisors. 
Or  there  is  the  issue  of  “product  information  for  investment  products”.  The  importance  of 
clearly  explaining  the  opportunities  and  risks  involved  in  financial  products  should  be  self-
evident.  And  yet, quite a  lot  of  people feel  they  are  on  shaky ground  with  these  products, 
partly because the products are complex, possibly too complex. There is still work the banks 
can do in this regard. 
So, there is a lot that individual banks can improve if they are to regain the trust of customers 
and the public, not least by setting an example and leading from the front.  
The Gordian knot 
2 
But what can the state do? One thing the state certainly can and must do is create a suitable 
overall organisational framework and supervise institutions effectively. I will have more to say 
about this later.  
But,  above  all,  there  is  an  ethical  principle  which  needs  to  be  heeded  more  closely, 
particularly  in  these  times  of  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis.  The  principle  is  that  of 
subsidiarity,  on  which  Walter  Eucken,  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  the  social  market 
economy, based his notions of how the economy and society should work. 
The  aim  of  subsidiarity  is  self-determination  and  individual  responsibility.  According  to  this 
principle,  problems  should  be  solved  through  individual  responsibility  as  far  as  possible, 
which is to say by the individual or individuals, or by the smallest group or at the lowest level 
of an organisation. Only if this is not possible should subsidiary assistance be provided by 
groups or public collective organisations of progressively increasing size or at progressively 
higher organisational levels. This principle places ethical limits on the scope for state action 
in the current crisis. And it also follows that those who receive assistance must learn to live 
with monitoring and control. 
There are economic limits in any case. It is all too clear, after all, that the current crisis is also 
a  crisis  of  trust  in  the  viability  of  countries’  debt  positions.  And  it  is  a  crisis  of  trust  in  the 
soundness  of  the  banks.  Indeed,  in  the  crisis-hit  countries  there  is  a  close  connection 
between the crisis of trust in the banks and the crisis of trust in government finances. What 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
we  need,  therefore,  is  clear  organising  principles  both  for  the  financial  system  and  for 
monetary  union,  principles  which  prevent  the  creation  of  unhealthy  incentives.  First,  bank 
risks and sovereign risks must be prevented from being too closely intertwined. Second, the 
principle of subsidiarity must be anchored still more firmly. 
The intertwining of bank and sovereign risks is likened by many to a Gordian knot, which it 
needs a sword to cut if the current financial and sovereign debt crisis is to be resolved. I have 
to admit that I find this view surprising and, indeed, astonishing. 
It reminds me of a story by the novelist Manès Sperber, in which a teacher asks one of his 
pupils what he knows of the Gordian knot. The boy’s answer is somewhat unexpected: “No 
one  could  undo  the  Gordian  knot,  not  even  Alexander.  But  instead  of  admitting  this, 
Alexander  took  a  sword  and  cut  the  knot,  which  any  idiot  could  have  done.  After  this, 
Alexander  was  called  ‘the  Great’”. The  teacher  did  not  see  the funny  side  of this:  “Six,  sit 
down”, he replied. (In those days, grades went from one to six, not AAA to D.) 
The loops of the knot: systemic and fundamental aspects of the crisis in trust 
3 
Few  words  can  have  had  such  a  high-profile  career  as  the  term  “systemic”.  I  would  like 
briefly to define it in connection with the financial and sovereign debt crisis. If an event is not 
systemic,  it  can  be  dealt  with  in  isolation.  If  this  were  the  case,  the  debt  problems  and 
problems with the banking systems in the various countries could be regarded as a series of 
standalone phenomena, rather than as a systemic phenomenon which affects the euro area 
as a whole. 
Things  are  rather  different  with  systemic  events:  there  are  contagion  effects  between  the 
countries and contagion between financial institutions. Hence my image of the Gordian knot, 
which refers metaphorically to the feedback loops between the financial sector and the real 
economy. 
At  the  end  of  last  year  there  were  clear  indications  of  a  systemic  financial  crisis.  The 
provision of central bank liquidity for a period of three years relieved some of the pressure 
initially. But only for a short time. The markets soon realised that this measure had pulled the 
knot between the public sector and the banking system tighter rather than loosening it. There 
is  no  way  round  the  need  for  reform  and  restructuring.  Government  bond  purchase 
programmes  increase  the  level  of  interdependency,  and  firewalls  are  no  substitute  for  the 
restoration  of  solvency  and  investor  trust. To  return  to my  original  metaphor:  neither  is  an 
effective  means  of  untangling  the  knot.  This  can  be  achieved  only  through  economic 
adjustment,  through  structural  reform  and  through  balance  sheet  adjustment  –  action  is 
required here from national governments and banks in equal measure. 
Since  the  outbreak  of the financial  crisis, the  banks  have  made  considerable  adjustments. 
Legacy assets have been scaled down and balance sheets shrunk. However painful this may 
have been for individual institutions, it was right and necessary. But the banks cannot afford 
to stand still. There are new challenges they have to confront. In particular, margin pressure 
and increasing competition in domestic business come to mind.  
Recapitalisation: a “sword” to cut the knot? 
4 
Adequate capital buffers strengthen the essential resilience of the financial sector. The risk of 
contagion is reduced. If a systemic event occurs, such buffers create room for manoeuvre 
before risk assets and lending have to be cut back. Therefore, to win and retain trust, banks 
need to be sufficiently well capitalised. 
I’ll make no bones about it: a level of capitalisation that just meets the minimum supervisory 
requirements  would  fall  far  short  of  what  is  needed,  in  my  view.  I  believe  it  was  the  UK 
economist Charles Goodhart who told the following tale to illustrate the dangers of minimalist 
compliance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A weary traveller arrives at a rural railway station. To his delight, he sees exactly one taxi 
waiting there and asks the driver to take him to his destination. To his amazement, the taxi 
driver tells him, “I would love to take you there but cannot, I’m afraid.” “Why not?”, he asks, 
flabbergasted. 
“There is a local bye-law that says a taxi has to be here at all times.” 
“But a taxi is here.” 
“Ah  yes,  but  if  I take  you  home, there  would  no  longer  be  a  taxi  waiting  here. That  would 
violate the bye-law.” 
This  is  what  can  happen  with  statutory  minimum  requirements.  Trust  cannot  be  won  by 
attending merely to the minimum requirements. 
Recapitalisation can nonetheless restore trust. Where it has been lost, or where it risks being 
lost. Ideally, the capital buffers should be put in place by banks when the economy is in an 
upward phase, so they are ready to use in a crisis. 
In this context, assistance from the public purse for recapitalisation can be a key measure. 
But it places a burden on government finances – particularly if a number of banks get into 
difficulties at the same time, which is what happens when there is a general crisis of solvency 
and trust. In turn, weak government finances and falling prices for the government bonds on 
banks’ balance sheets undermine trust in the solvency of the banks. Therefore, government 
recapitalisation assistance is not a sword to cut the knot, but merely an auxiliary measure to 
make the necessary adjustments easier. 
Banking union: another sword? 
5 
To disentangle the Gordian knot on a lasting basis, the tight-running feedback loop between 
banks  and  government  finances  needs  to  be  loosened.  Greater  separation  between  bank 
and sovereign risks can without doubt be achieved partly through suitable banking regulation 
which  puts  strict  limits  in  place  in  this regard. Improving the  banking  system’s  risk-bearing 
capacity  is  also  a  necessary  part  of  the  package.  A  banking  union,  too,  may  make  an 
important  and  useful  contribution.  Core  elements  of  such  a  banking  union  would  be,  first, 
common banking supervision, and, second, a common resolution regime for banks which get 
into difficulties. 
In  putting  these  measures  in  place,  the  risk  to  the  taxpayer  should  be  limited  as  far  as  is 
possible. Mutualisation of risk cannot be the goal. The principle of subsidiarity requires that 
risks be borne where they arise. The individual investors have to bear liability first, with the 
state  stepping  in  as  a  true  last  resort.  Thus,  private  creditors  have  to  play  their  part  in 
restructuring and resolution – investors have to bear their responsibility. “Bailing in” investors 
prevents implicit state guarantees, or at least limits them. This has important implications for 
the  structure  of  incentives  to  take  on  risk.  It  means  market  participants  cannot  rely  to  the 
same extent on being bailed out when the crunch comes. 
With  regard  to  a  banking  union,  I  am  sorry  to  disappoint  those  who  would  like  it  to  be  a 
means of mutualising liability for legacy assets on banks’ balance sheets. This, too, follows 
ultimately from the principle of subsidiarity. Mutualisation of risk is conceivable only at some 
future  date,  but  certainly  not  mutualisation  of  losses  which  arose  on  the  watch  of  national 
supervisors.  Anything  else  would  be  like  taking  out  an  insurance  policy  after  the  insured 
event has occurred. 
Banks now need to formulate resolution plans – I shall return to this shortly. This is extremely 
important  if  bail-outs  are  to  be  rendered  unnecessary.  And  in  order  to  separate  systemic 
functions from non-systemic functions, and thereby allow banks to become insolvent. They 
have  to  free  their  balance  sheets  of  problematic  legacy  assets  themselves,  rather  than 
passing them on to the community. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Making regulation effective and sustainable 
6 
Trust  in  the  banks  will  only  return  if  we  succeed  in  bringing  decisive  improvement  to  the 
applicable “rules of the game”. The crisis has made clear that a fundamental reordering of 
the  international  financial  system  is  essential.  This  does  not  mean  simply  banning 
undesirable activities on the financial markets and stopping market processes. Rather, it is a 
matter  of  creating  the  right  incentives  for  market  participants  to  engage  in  risk-aware 
behaviour  and  putting  in  place  a  consistent  and  reliable  overall  organisational  framework 
which  creates  lasting  obligation.  This  means,  for  instance,  imposing  the  right  kind  of 
regulation on the right kind of business, irrespective of whether it is carried out by a bank or 
by an institution in the shadow banking system. In this way, regulation can create trust. 
Because  banks  are  the  central  players  in  the  financial  system,  the  process  of  working 
through  the  implications  of  the  crisis  must  start  first  of  all  with  the  rules  applying  to  the 
banking  sector. We  have  already  achieved  a  great  deal  in  revising  banking  sector  rules  – 
even if this is not always appreciated by the public. 
The central achievement of our reform efforts is without doubt Basel III, which is to say the 
fundamental revision of capital rules and the introduction of global liquidity rules for banks. 
The  new  rules  will  add  significantly  to  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector.  In  order  to 
maintain  a  level  playing  field  internationally,  it  is  important  that  all  the  countries  involved 
adhere  to  what  has  been  agreed  and  transpose  the  new  rules  into  national  legislation  in 
timely  fashion.  Although  it  has  become  apparent  recently  that  some  countries  are  having 
difficulties  sticking  to  the  timetable,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  succeed  in  achieving 
implementation on time. 
As well as Basel III, the rules agreed for dealing with systemically important banks are also 
noteworthy.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  recently  published  an  updated  list  of  28  global 
systemically important banks. Amongst other things, these banks have to meet still stricter 
capital requirements. Furthermore, the Basel Committee has published a set of rules which 
will  apply  to  banks  that are  systemically  important  at  a  national  rather  than  a  global  level. 
These banks, too, will be subject to capital surcharges. 
As well as strengthening banks’ resilience, the focus is also on developing credible resolution 
regimes. In future, banks have to be able to exit the marketplace without impairing system 
stability and without the use of taxpayers’ money. Only if this is a credible threat will trust be 
restored. This is the only way that banks’ ability to “blackmail” the taxpayer can be curtailed. 
Thus, the passing of a new international standard was an important step towards achieving 
regulation which promotes trust. This is the first time rules have been put in place on a global 
level  setting  out  how  insolvent  banks  are  to  be  wound  up.  The  rules  laid  down  by  the 
standard now need to be transposed into national law and regulations consistently and on 
schedule. 
Limiting risk-taking incentives 
7 
Before the crisis, implicit guarantees created moral hazard. It is here that the root cause of 
the loss of public trust suffered by the banks is to be found. Thus, the ultimate reason was an 
inadequate overall organisational framework which set up the wrong incentives. 
In this context, profit targets were announced which now look “unrestrained” or “greedy” but 
which  at  the  time  investors  demanded  –  with  support  at  the  end  of  the  day  from  an 
inadequate  overall  organisational  framework.  And  the  false  incentives  led  banks  to  lose 
touch to an ever increasing extent with traditional banking services. Banks lost a sense of 
reality.  But  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis  five  years  ago,  there  has  been  a  deep-seated 
change, even if it perhaps does not go far enough for many. A lot of institutions are saying 
farewell  to  pre-crisis  profit  targets.  And  they  are  factoring  in  less  financial  leverage,  partly 
because of the Basel III capital rules. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In  many  cases,  business  models  are  being  reworked  as  well.  Many  banks  are  looking  to 
focus  more  on  business  with  personal  and  corporate  customers  while  scaling  back  their 
investment banking. They are now seeing themselves more in terms of being “servants” to 
the real economy. In this way, banks will be able to regain public trust. After all, the savings 
banks and cooperative banks, with their traditional business model, rode out the crisis years 
well. 
Another  element  in  the  realignment  of  business  models  is  the  rethinking  of  remuneration 
practice in the financial sector. There is no disputing that mismanaged remuneration systems 
helped cause the crisis. Remuneration in the financial sector needs to be brought back into 
line  with  the  risk  entailed  in  business  activities,  and  needs  absolutely  to  be  based  on  a 
financial  institution’s  creation  of  lasting  value,  rather  than  on rapidly  pumping  up  earnings. 
Banks  must  prove  through  their  business  models  that  they  are  trustworthy,  and  their 
remuneration culture is the litmus test for this – whether they like it or not. 
From the point of view of financial stability, it is the structure of remuneration which requires 
reform  rather  than  the  amounts  involved.  However,  it  is  also  clear  that  the  amount  of 
remuneration  received  has  to  be  adapted  to  lower  medium  to  long-term  earnings  in  the 
financial sector. Thus, the efforts to establish a sustainable remuneration culture in harmony 
with the goal of financial stability must not be allowed to wane. 
It  is  good  to  note  in  this  connection  that  remuneration  systems  and  principles  of  good 
governance  are  now  receiving  increased  attention  from  shareholders.  They  have  been 
impressively  active  in  the  votes  on  remuneration  reports  at  the  AGMs  of  a  number  of 
European  and  US  banks  in  recent  months.  Clearly,  the  era  of  the  sound,  trustworthy, 
respected banker is actually not quite over. Or at least it is coming back into fashion. 
Conclusion: banks and trust 
8 
To sum up: banks mainly have to earn trust themselves. And that is hard work, admittedly. 
The  banks  need  to  strengthen  their  capital  base  and  adjust  in  timely  fashion  to  the  new 
Basel III requirements. And the banks have to gear their portfolios more towards the needs of 
private households and enterprises and less towards government financing. We regulators 
also  have  to  ask  ourselves  searching  questions  about  whether  regulatory  privileges  for 
governments are still appropriate. At the end of the day, only this can permanently loosen the 
knot between the sovereign debt crisis and the banking sector. 
A lot has already been set in train. But the banks cannot rest yet. Trust, after all, is a scarce 
resource which needs to be managed carefully. Trust needs to be sought anew each day, 
both with customers and with the public. 
Without  trust,  without  “credit”,  banking  cannot  function.  The  media  and  politicians  have  a 
responsibility here, too, in not undermining public trust, for example through talk of allegedly 
missing gold at the Bundesbank which has absolutely no basis in fact. 
Banks provide the grease which makes the wheels of the real economy turn, and they will 
continue to be needed in the future. Therefore, as well as criticising them, we must also give 
them constructive support. 
Or – and this is more than apt here in Frankfurt’s Abs Saal – in the words of banker Alfred 
Herrhausen: “Say what you think, do what you say, and be what you do”. 
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
