Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula: Stimulating academic development in Zambia 
Speech  by  Dr  Tukiya  Kankasa-Mabula,  Deputy  Governor  (Administration)  of  the  Bank  of 
Zambia, to the Zambia Centre for Accountancy Studies Students, Lusaka, 17 October 2012. 
 Management Staff  
Lecturers  
Students,  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Good afternoon to you all,  
I feel greatly privileged to be here with you this afternoon to share with you the background to 
my career progression and to also give you an inspirational message that may stimulate you 
to greater heights. I take this opportunity to thank the management of the Zambia Centre for 
Accountancy  Studies  for  extending  an  invitation  to  me.  I  always  get  a  satisfying  feeling  to 
speak to students, particularly given that I am coming from a background of lecturing.  
As has been said earlier, I am currently the Deputy Governor Administration at the Central 
Bank  of  Zambia.  For  those  of  you  that  may  not  be  too  familiar  with  what  the  role  of  the 
central  bank  is;  the  primary  role  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is,  and  I  quote:  “to  formulate  and 
implement monetary and supervisory policies that will ensure the maintenance of price and 
financial system stability so as to promote balanced macroeconomic development”.  
The functions of the Bank are stipulated in the Bank of Zambia Act and these are as follows:  
To licence, supervise and regulate the activities of banks and financial institutions so 
1. 
as  to  promote  the  safe,  sound  and  efficient  operations  and  development  of  the 
financial system;  
To promote efficient payment mechanisms;  
To issue notes and coins to be legal tender in the Republic and regulate all matters 
relating to the currency of the Republic;  
To act as banker and fiscal agent to the Republic;  
To support the efficient operation of the exchange system; and  
To act as adviser to the Government on matters relating to economic and monetary 
management.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
2.  
3.  
As  Deputy  Governor  Administration,  my  work  includes  overseeing  the  Human  Resources, 
Finance,  ICT,  Audit,  Bank  Secretariat  (Legal,  Board  Secretarial  and  Public  Relations), 
Procurement and Maintenance Services, and Security functions of the Bank.  
Prior to my appointment as Deputy Governor Administration, I was the Bank Secretary. This 
position  entailed  being  the  Chief  Legal  Advisor  to  the  Bank,  Secretary  to  the  Board  of 
Directors and in charge of the Bank’s Public Relations function.  
My first career was that of an Academic. I lectured Law at the University of Zambia. I then 
briefly  joined  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  as  the  Director  of  Licensing  and 
Enforcement before moving to the Bank of Zambia.  
To  say  something  about  my  academic  qualifications,  I  graduated  with  a  Bachelor  of  Laws 
degree from University of Zambia, thereafter a Master of Laws degree from Harvard where I 
was a Fulbright Scholar and a PhD from University of London, Centre for Commercial Law 
Studies, Queen Mary and Westfield College. Allow me to mention that all my studies were 
done on scholarship.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Apart from my work, I am also involved in service to the public and to the Church through 
sitting on various Bodies.  
I was not appointed to this position my chance; it took effort and hard work to be noticed. I 
believed in myself and knew I had to put in the best to achieve anything I wanted to achieve.  
So what message do I carry for you this afternoon? My Theme is that YOU CAN DO IT!  
To you the students, I want to encourage you to see yourselves as leaders. You are the 
future of this nation. You are part of the cream that need to push this country forward. I would 
like  you  to  realise  that  academic  and  professional  qualifications  are  an  integral  part  of 
settings  yourselves  up  for  one’s  life.  By  being  here,  you  are  establishing  a  path  for  your 
successful career whether as an employee or an entrepreneur. The knowledge that you are 
gaining is assisting in developing and enhancing your ability to think and perceive as well as 
manage the various situations that life offers.  
The outcome of your academic development will obviously have a positive impact on your 
family, society, culture and country at large. MAKE SURE YOU TAKE FULL ADVANTAGE 
OF THIS OPPORTUNITY. It sets the stage for the rest of your future. If you graduate from 
here  with  poor  grades  will  mean  you  have  limited  your  access  to  top  notch  institutions, 
should you, for example, wish to get an advanced qualification. You are limited even to apply 
for scholarships. And in situations of competition, the best will be selected.  
ZCAS is one of the renowned institutions in Zambia. One thing you must realise is that not 
everyone has the opportunity to be enrolled in an institution of higher learning to obtain an 
academic or professional qualification. Therefore, you must make the best of this opportunity 
to  be  here  at  ZCAS  and  indeed,  be  thankful  to  God.  Many  of  your friends  are  not  able  to 
have this opportunity. I am also aware that for quite a good number, it is a great sacrifice by 
your parents to send you here. You should ensure that this investment pays off by putting in 
your best.  
DISCIPLINE  
For many of you, this may be the first time that you have experienced so much freedom in 
your lives. It is the beginning of taking responsibility for your own lives. The importance of 
being disciplined in both your academic and social life cannot be overstated. I believe there 
are no capitaos at ZCAS. You must be your own capitao.  
I entered the University with very good grades. I am forever grateful and indebted to a fellow 
student who was then in 2nd year who sarcastically told me that there were a lot of brilliant 
girls who had gone to University only to be redirected after a year due to poor performance. 
For  me,  that  was  the  rude  awakening  of  the  need  to  be  focused.  YOU  MUST  BE 
FOCUSSED. YOU MUST KNOW WHY YOU ARE HERE.  
Avoid indiscipline, and indeed the company of those who are undisciplined. Do not succumb 
to  negative  peer  pressure  both  in  the  academic  realm  and  in  the  social  realm. We  are  all 
aware that being socially undisciplined can in fact lead to death. Zambia wants to raise an 
HIVAIDS free generation. You are a big part of realizing that dream.  
You need to have strong moral values to stand up for what you know is right, and to do the 
right  thing.  In  an  environment  like  this  one,  it  is  very  easy  for  anyone  to  fall  into  the 
temptation of succumbing to peer pressure and end up in wrong and unpleasant situations.  
I  will  take  this  opportunity  to  encourage  you  and  reiterate  that  you  observe  what  you 
constantly hear, know and see about the campaign against contracting the virus that causes 
AIDS. We have so much information about the disease to inform each one of you. Each of 
you, as an individual, has a big role to play in preventing the spread of the disease. Going 
back to what I said earlier about maintaining high morals, keep away from abusing alcohol, 
drugs and sex as these are the ingredients that are likely to lead you into high risk behavior 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
such  as  unprotected  sex  and  cause  you  to  contract  the  HIV/AIDS.  Abstinence  is  the  only 
100% effective way to avoid getting infected.  
WHAT EMPLOYERS WANT  
Employers want to see in you potential to be a high flyer and willingness to learn new things. 
Employers  want  a  demonstration  of  productivity.  Employers  want  to  receive  a  good 
reference,  a  transcript  that  reflects  goods  results  and  a  qualification  from  an  institution  of 
repute, a qualification that is relevant to their needs.  
You  therefore  need  to  be  forward  looking  even  as  you  select  your  subject.  PLAN  YOUR 
LIVES.  Do  not  have  the  attitude  of  FIKAISOLVA.  Have  a  recipe  for  a  successful  life.  It  is 
never  too  early.  I  had  decided  when  I  began  to  study  law  that  I  wanted  to  specialize  in 
commercial law. That path has brought me to where I am today.  
I must make mention that you are fortunate in that the environment of the college is ideal for 
learning. I had the opportunity to be taken around the college and I observed that you have 
modern  facilities  and  equipment  that  support  your  learning.  Your  classrooms  have  the 
necessary furniture, the computer laboratory has access to internet and the physical building 
conditions are solid.  
FAITH AND WISDOM  
It  is  very  important  not  to  ignore  your  spiritual  wellbeing.  It  is  what  will  make  you  a  whole 
being.  I  will  end  by  sharing  with  you  a  scripture  passage from  the  Paul’s  Second  letter  to 
Timothy Chapter 2:22–25  
“Have no part at all in the wrong things that young men like to do. Believe. Have 
love. Follow what is right. Live at peace. Do these things along with others who 
have a clean heart and talk to God.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
