Mario Draghi: Competitiveness – the key to balanced growth in monetary 
union 
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at Treasury Talks “A 
European strategy for growth and integration with solidarity”, a conference organised by the 
Directorate General of the Treasury, Ministry of Economy and Finance – Ministry for Foreign 
Trade, Paris, 30 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  in  Paris  and  to  have  the  opportunity  to  discuss  with  you  the 
challenges of restoring growth and job creation to the European economy. 
We are doing so against the background of a relative stabilisation of market conditions, and 
more generally  of  improved  confidence  about the  stability  of  the  euro  area.  Fears  that the 
euro  could  be  reversible  have  been  addressed.  The  recent  announcement  of  the  Outright 
Monetary Transactions (OMTs) can be taken as an example of how to address tail risks, with 
possible  severe  consequences  for  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  how  to  bring 
confidence back to the euro area financial markets.  
The  confidence  effect  of  the  OMT  announcement  has  been  significant,  and  rightly  so. 
Excessive  government  bond  spreads  have  gone  down,  corporate  bond  and  covered  bond 
spreads  have  tightened,  and  a  number  of  banks  in  stressed  countries  have  been  able  to 
regain market access. These developments are very important for the prospective financing 
of the real economy.  
The  relative  stabilisation  that  has  occurred,  however,  does  not  rely  solely  on  the 
determination that we have shown at the ECB. It also relies, crucially, on the determination of 
governments to validate two assumptions:  
First is the collective commitment of all governments to reform the governance of the euro 
area. This means completing economic and monetary union along four key pillars: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a financial union with a single supervisor at its heart, to re-unify the banking system; 
a fiscal union with enforceable rules to restore fiscal capacity; 
an economic union that fosters sustained growth and employment; and 
a  political  union,  where  the  exercise  of  shared  sovereignty  is  rooted  in  political 
legitimacy.  
To borrow a turn of phrase from our late colleague Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa: these are not 
short-term matters. But they are urgent matters. 
The  second  condition  for  lasting  stabilisation  is  the  individual  commitment  of  each 
government to maintain or restore in their own country the conditions of competitiveness that 
are at the source of balanced growth and employment. 
This is the aspect I would like to focus on now.  
I  welcome  the  consensus  that  now  exists  in  France  that  competitiveness  is  a  key  policy 
concern.  Indeed,  it  is  a  key  concern  in  every  country  of  the  euro  area.  And  it  is  of 
fundamental importance to the euro area as a whole. 
Europe’s future prosperity requires member countries to be competitive individually in order 
to be competitive jointly and thrive in an open, global economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
External and internal competitiveness of the euro area 
Let me begin by defining a competitive economy. In essence, it is one in which institutional 
and macroeconomic conditions allow productive firms to thrive. In turn, the development of 
these firms supports the expansion of employment, investment and trade. 
Prices, costs and wages are important factors for firms to develop and maintain shares of the 
global  market.  But  there  are  other  factors  that  have  become  increasingly  important  in  the 
past  decade,  especially  for  advanced  economies.  As  low-cost  competitors  have  emerged 
elsewhere  in  the  world,  specialisation  in  high-value  products  and  innovative  technologies, 
which are our comparative advantages at a global level, has become vital. 
These are two areas in which the euro area performs well, exporting mid-tech and high-tech 
products to a wide range of advanced and emerging markets.  
Reflecting  the  increased  importance  of  emerging  economies  in  the  past  decade,  all  major 
advanced economies have lost export market shares. But compared with the United States 
and  Japan,  the  euro  area  has  held  up  relatively  well,  largely  by  adjusting  the  range  of 
products in which it specialises.  
Since the launch of the euro, the concentration of exports in high-tech and research-intensive 
products has increased faster than in other sectors. This has been one factor explaining why 
the  current  account  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  never  deviated  much  from  balance. 
Since  the  time the  euro  was  launched,  all  the  other main  economic  areas  have  either  run 
large surpluses or  large  persistent  deficits.  China, for  example,  has run  a  surplus  of  up  to 
10% of GDP, while the US deficit has reached up to 6% of GDP. 
But the balanced position for the euro area as a whole masks quite different positions among 
countries.  The  pattern  of  global  imbalances,  of  large  deficits  and  large  surpluses,  repeats 
itself within the euro area. For example, just before the crisis, some countries were running 
deficits close to 15%, while others posted surpluses close to 7%.  
Moreover,  the  relatively  resilient  export  performance  of  the  euro  area  hides  very  uneven 
experiences at the country level. For example, German and Spanish exports have held up 
very  well,  only  losing  around  10%  of  their  market  share  since  1999.  Other  countries, 
particularly  large  manufacturers  such  as  Italy  and  France,  have  seen  their  share  of  world 
trade fall by between 30% and 40%, similarly to the United States and Japan.  
The  roots  of  these  uneven  performances  lie  not  only  in  divergences  in  price  and  cost 
competitiveness that have emerged in the euro area, but also in different abilities to orient 
exports to the fastest growing products and partners.  
The crisis has made one thing absolutely clear: large imbalances within the euro area can 
become a fundamental issue for the stability of economic and monetary union. 
Why  do  I  say  this?  Because  it  is  inevitable  that  a  union  of  sovereign  states  can  become 
fragile  if  some  states  are  permanent  creditors  and  others  are  permanent  debtors.  This  is 
particularly true if the imbalances are on a large scale. 
Such a situation undermines mutual trust. It can then damage the overall functioning of the 
union, which will in turn spill over to all members. It can also make the conduct of monetary 
policy much more challenging. 
This is the fundamental reason why improvements in competitiveness are so vital for all of 
our organisations and institutions, including the ECB. And it is the fundamental reason why 
reforms to strengthen national economies are so essential. 
Reforms  are  not  only  in  the  individual  interest  of  euro  area  countries:  they  are  also  in  the 
collective interest of the union, because they will help to restore its stability and cohesion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Recent progress in euro area convergence 
So how can these severe divergences within the euro area be addressed? Certainly, there 
has  been  some  recent  progress  in  the  convergence  of  relative  costs  and  of  internal  and 
external imbalances.  
This reflects to a large extent stronger policy action in the fields of fiscal consolidation and 
structural reforms  as  well  as  deleveraging  in  the  private  sector. Trade  balances  have  also 
improved in most euro area countries, which had experienced excessive domestic demand 
and substantial losses in price and cost competitiveness before the crisis.  
In most cases, this improvement has resulted from a combination of relatively strong export 
growth (particularly in Spain or Portugal) and very weak or negative import growth (notably in 
Greece). 
The contraction of domestic demand continues to play a role in this adjustment. Part of this is 
cyclical,  but  it  also  reflects  rebalancing  away  from  previously  unsustainable  domestic 
demand growth. Demand has to be contained and supply has to increase, it is only that the 
supply adjustment takes more time. 
There are also signs that competitiveness gains have contributed to recent improvements in 
current accounts. Exports have held up relatively well in view of the weakening of external 
demand. Exports of goods and services have increased by 22% in volume for Spain since 
2009 – and by 15% for Ireland, 22% for Portugal and 19% for Italy.  
More  importantly,  some  countries  that  lost  export  shares  before  the  crisis  have  since 
registered  positive  export  performance,  notably  Spain  and  Portugal.  This  shows 
improvements  in  cost  competitiveness  and  gains  in  export  market  shares  in  most  of  the 
countries where the need for adjustment is largest.  
The downward adjustment of unit labour costs is proceeding in these countries.  
The  countries  with  the  largest  imbalances  have  notably  recaptured  some  of  the  losses  in 
competitiveness  incurred  previously.  For  example,  the  countries  under  full  EU-IMF 
programmes  have  seen  their  unit  labour  costs  improve  by  more  than  10%  since  2008, 
relative  to  the  euro  area  average.  Their  current  accounts  have  improved  by  around 
8 percentage points of GDP since then. 
This is welcome, but it would have been preferable if these adjustments had occurred before 
the EU-IMF programmes had to be put in place. 
The  gains  in  cost  competitiveness  respond  not  only  to  adjustments  in  relative  wages. 
Productivity  matters.  In  low-productivity  sectors,  labour  shedding  has  increased  aggregate 
productivity,  particularly  in  Ireland  and  Spain,  but  also,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in  Greece  and 
Portugal. 
We expect, however, that progress in structural reforms, especially those that improve the 
functioning of labour markets, will help lower unemployment and facilitate new employment 
opportunities.  The  reform  momentum  has  been  particularly  pronounced  in  some  countries 
with relatively rigid labour markets, which in many cases coincide with those countries that 
face the largest adjustment. 
Despite the adjustments in relative unit labour costs, the overall price adjustment has been 
much less pronounced. There is clear evidence that increasing profits contributed to a large 
extent to upward pressures on prices in some countries. 
It is of paramount importance here to address the lack of competition in a number of areas 
with  strong  vested  interests.  This  is  imperative  to  ensure  that  the  flexibility  of  wage  costs 
translates into the necessary gains in price competitiveness. This is true in particular for the 
service sectors that have been most shielded from competition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Policies for improved competitiveness 
What more can be done to maintain the positive performance momentum and to integrate 
those parts of the euro area that are lagging behind?  
Some euro area countries are not taking full advantage of their well-educated labour forces 
and of their potential in terms of innovation and global reach. They could greatly benefit from 
reorienting  their  productive  structure  towards  more  sophisticated  products,  upgrading  their 
quality and redirecting their exports towards strongly growing markets.  
Innovation  is  crucial  in  this  respect.  This  means  for  a  start  that  where  profit  margins  are 
restored,  they  should  serve  to  fund  research  and  development  to  a  higher  extent.  But 
innovation  potential  is  not  always  translated  into  actual,  marketable,  employment-creating 
and growth-sustaining innovation.  
What  is  key  in  translating  potential  into  actual  innovation  and  growth,  is  the  regime  of 
economic  incentives.  And  it  is  indeed  this  system  of  economic  incentives  that  the  current 
wave of structural reforms in the euro area is addressing.  
Another crucial element for a country’s innovativeness and potential growth is education, the 
quality of a country’s human capital. For this reason, in fiscal consolidation efforts, an eye 
must be kept on not only maintaining but also further improving the quality of education.  
At the same time, research on innovation shows that to exploit fully the potential embedded 
in a country’s labour force, the economic and institutional environment must be conducive for 
knowledge to be used effectively for economic development. 
A central challenge for our economies is to set conditions so that the skills and capabilities of 
the labour force, especially of our young people, can be profitably employed in competitive 
firms, or in the new enterprises that they will go on to set up.  
In this vein, removing rigidities in product and labour markets clearly raises the potential for 
growth and job creation. And the resumption of economic growth is fundamental for returning 
to a sustainable fiscal position. 
Concretely, we must identify the bottlenecks that prevent the vast resources of the euro area 
from being used most fruitfully. This process is already under way: the World Bank’s latest 
Doing Business report highlights Greece as one of ten countries that have most improved the 
ease of doing business, albeit from a rather unfavourable level. The momentum of reform is 
clearly going in the right direction, although much remains to be done. 
Spain and Portugal were among the countries that made resolving insolvent firms easier, a 
crucial  ingredient  for  efficiently  restructuring  the  economy  in  this  transition  period,  as 
resources must shift from unproductive to productive activities. It is the latter that create jobs. 
This  reallocation  process,  though  sometimes  painful  in  the  short  run,  carries  the  seed  of 
future  prosperity:  a  growing  body  of  knowledge  shows  that  by  increasing  the  ability  of  the 
economy  to  adjust,  so  that  factors  can  be  reallocated  to  the  most  competitive  firms, 
aggregate labour productivity can increase substantially. Some studies indicate a gain of as 
much as 20–30%.  
The current focus on competitiveness in France, leading towards an institutional and fiscal 
set-up that can support firms’ investment and innovation, is therefore a welcome step in the 
right direction. It would be particularly welcome if this improved in particular the functioning of 
labour market for young people, so that they can find a job. 
For the euro area, too, increased labour mobility across borders is crucial. We should see 
that  the  current  institutional  arrangements  of  the  welfare  state  do  not  stand  in  the  way  of 
such mobility. The portability of entitlements across borders is a crucial pre-condition for such 
mobility and should be fostered.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Competitiveness and market integration 
Another  important  aspect  is  the  growth  and  competitiveness-enhancing  potential  of  further 
market integration in Europe.  
One example is a very recent study, which finds that applying the EU Patent would raise the 
gains for European firms from patenting inventions by 60%. Furthermore, if all countries also 
adopted best practices, those gains would more than double. 
I quote this example to show that improving competitiveness in Europe does not imply a race 
between euro area countries, but rather the exploitation of their comparative advantages in 
the single market and a global economy that offer far greater growth possibilities than each 
economy on its own. 
Improving  competitiveness  by  setting  the  conditions  for  boosting  productivity  is  not  about 
ranking: it is about raising the bar for each country to enhance its potential and use it.  
The policy challenge 
Let me now conclude. 
We  at  the  ECB  have  responsibility  to  maintain  price  stability.  As  part  of  this  mandate,  we 
acted to remove unfounded doubts about the irreversibility of the euro. This is a necessary 
condition for price stability and will help restore the stability and prosperity of the euro area.  
But it is not a sufficient condition: it is the responsibility of individual governments to adopt 
policies that ensure the full responsiveness of wages and prices, facilitating the efficient use 
of our large potential resources, thus revitalising growth. 
Euro area governments have made significant progress, but their work is not yet complete.  
What I see in France, and in many other parts of Europe, is a consensus that the erosion of 
competitiveness has to be reversed. This is meaningful. 
What I also see in France, and in many other parts of Europe, is a growing debate on the 
best possible functioning of product and labour markets. This is essential. 
Given  that  the  full  effect  of  many  structural  reforms  will  only  emerge  with  a  time  lag,  it  is 
indeed  of  utmost  importance  that  national  policies  continue  to  focus  not  only  on  fiscal 
measures  but  at  the  same  time  address  key  structural  problems  in  labour  and  product 
markets.  
This would – and, indeed, will – complement full compliance with the reinforced EU fiscal and 
governance framework, including rapid implementation of the fiscal compact. Full compliance 
is important to send a strong signal to markets and strengthen confidence in the soundness 
of public finances.  
This would – and again I expect I can say it will – also complement the reform of governance 
of the euro area that I mentioned earlier. 
The recent signs of stabilisation allow us all to face the medium-term challenges for the euro 
area with a degree of confidence. All policy-makers should take advantage of this situation to 
continue  their  reforms  with  determination.  The  challenge  is  substantial.  But  the  prize  – 
balanced growth, price stability, employment and social progress, is significantly larger.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
