Mervyn King: Twenty years of inflation targeting 
Text of the Stamp Memorial Lecture by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, London 
School of Economics, London, 9 October 2012. 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
 I am indebted to my colleagues in the Bank and on the Monetary Policy Committee for invaluable help and insightful 
comments on earlier drafts of this lecture, especially to David Aikman, Charles Bean, Nils Blythe, Alex Brazier, Spencer 
Dale, Iain de Weymarn, Richard Harrison, Andrew Hauser, David Miles and Tony Yates. In particular, I regard Tim Taylor 
as a co-author of the lecture, although he is absolved of any errors in the current draft. 
Introduction 
I am delighted to be back at the School to deliver the Stamp Memorial Lecture. Lord Stamp was 
eminent  in  the  worlds  of  both  academic  and  public  life.  Among  other  achievements,  he  was  an 
alumnus  and  a  governor  of  the  School,  and  a  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England.  Following  his 
untimely death, in an air raid in 1941, he was succeeded at the Bank by John Maynard Keynes. 
Keynes and Stamp often broadcast live discussions on the BBC which were published a week later 
in The Listener. Their conversations during the 1930s, at the height of the Great Depression, are 
eerily reminiscent of the enormous challenges we face today, as you can see from the following 
exchange in 1930: 
KEYNES: Is not the mere existence of general unemployment for any length of time an absurdity, a 
confession of failure, and a hopeless and inexcusable breakdown of the economic machine? 
STAMP: Your language is rather violent. You would not expect to put an earthquake tidy in a few 
minutes,  would  you?  I  object  to  the  view  that  it  is  a  confession  of  failure  if  you  cannot  put  a 
complicated machine right all at once. 
KEYNES:  In  my  opinion  the  return  to  the  gold  standard  in  the  way  we  did  it  set  our  currency 
system an almost impossible task ... If prices outside this country had been going up since 1925 
that  would  have  done  something  to  balance  the  effect  on  this  country  of  the  return  to  the  gold 
standard. 
STAMP: Hush, Maynard; I cannot bear it. Remember, I am a Director of the Bank of England. 
In  some  respects  our  experience  today  is  no  different:  putting  right  our  economic  machine  is 
proving  a  slow  and  difficult  task.  But  in  the  1920s  the  Government  made  the  task  substantially 
harder  by  reinstating  the  gold  standard  at  a  rate  that  left  sterling  overvalued.  Today,  monetary 
policy is part of the solution, not part of the problem. That is thanks, in large part, to the monetary 
framework we have had in place since 1992.  
Twenty  years  ago  today,  on  9  October  1992,  the  newspapers  reported  that  for  the  first  time 
monetary policy in Britain would be based on an explicit target for inflation. Three weeks earlier, 
sterling had been forced out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM). A new framework 
for monetary policy was needed. After keen debates within the Treasury and the Bank of England, 
the answer emerged – the inflation target. The essence of this new approach was the combination 
of a numerical target for inflation in the medium term and the flexibility to respond to shocks to the 
economy in the short run – and so the framework became known as flexible inflation targeting. 
It is time to reflect on twenty years’ experience of inflation targeting; fifteen years of stability and 
five  years  of  turbulence  –  the  Great  Stability  and  the  Great  Recession,  shown  in  Table  1  and 
Charts  1–3.  Over  that  period,  monetary  policy  around  the  world  has  changed  radically.  Inflation 
targeting has spread to more than 30 countries. And the results in terms of low and stable inflation 
have  been  impressive.  There  have  been  pronounced  reductions  in  the  mean,  variance  and 
persistence of inflation in Britain and elsewhere. During the past twenty years, annual consumer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
1 
price inflation in this country has averaged 2.1%, remarkably close to the 2% target and well below 
the averages of over 12% a year in the 1970s and nearly 6% a year in the 1980s.1  
But  did  we  pay  too  high  a  price  for  this  achievement  in  lowering  inflation?  After fifteen  years  of 
apparent  success,  the  past  five  years  of  financial  crisis  and  turmoil  in  the  world  economy  have 
raised serious questions about the adequacy of inflation targeting. We don’t have to look far to see 
that the costs of financial instability are huge. In Britain, total output is today some 15% below an 
extrapolation of its pre-crisis trend, and that gap is likely to persist for some time yet.2 In the light of 
such  costs,  should  monetary  policy  go  beyond  targeting  price  stability  and  also  target  financial 
stability?  And  should  the  present  financial  crisis  lead  us  to  question  the  intellectual  basis  of 
monetary policy as practised in most of the industrialised world today?  Those questions are the 
subject of tonight’s lecture.  
The story of inflation targeting 
But let us start at the beginning. Shortly after the adoption of inflation targeting, my predecessor 
but one, Lord Kingsdown (Robin Leigh-Pemberton as he then was), gave an important speech at 
the London School of Economics – indeed in this room – entitled “The Case for Price Stability”.3 I 
remember  it  vividly  –  for  I  had  been  involved  in  drafting  it.  It  was  an  exciting  time;  we  were 
reconstructing British monetary policy after the trauma of forced exit from the ERM. In those days, 
of course, the Chancellor set monetary policy and the Bank of England played only a behind the 
scenes  role.  But  the  role  of  the  Bank  was  about  to  change  –  first  with  the  Inflation  Report  in 
February  1993,  which  gave  the  Bank  its  own  public  voice,  and  then  with  independence  for  the 
Bank and the creation of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) in 1997.  
The inflation target was born out of the experience that high and variable inflation was very costly 
to reduce and that only a policy based on domestic considerations would be credible. The objective 
of  monetary  policy  in  the  medium  term  would  unambiguously  be  price  stability.  As  the  then 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, put it “we wish to reduce inflation to the point where 
expected changes in the average price level are small enough and gradual enough that they do not 
materially affect business and household financial plans”. The idea that there is a long-run trade-off 
between  price  stability  and  employment  had  long  since  been  abandoned.  That  intellectual 
revolution, associated with the names of Friedman, Phelps and Lucas, had stood the test of time 
and formed the foundations of inflation targeting.  
The initial reception of the inflation target among economists and commentators alike was distinctly 
mixed.  As  the  Financial  Times  put  it  in  a  leader  published  twenty  years  ago  today,  “the 
Chancellor’s  speech  was  as  economically  thin  as  it  was  politically  disappointing”.  The  critics 
argued that the new framework was inadequate to control inflation. They were to be proved wrong. 
Over  the  previous  twenty  years  inflation  had  been  the  single  biggest  problem  facing  the  UK 
economy,  peaking  at  27%  a  year  in  1975.  Over  the  subsequent  twenty  years,  inflation,  as  I 
mentioned earlier, would average only 2.1%. 
From  the  outset,  inflation  targeting  was  conceived  as  a  means  by  which  central  banks  could 
improve  the  credibility  and  predictability  of  monetary  policy.  The  overriding  concern  was  not  to 
eliminate  fluctuations  in  consumer  price  inflation  from  year  to  year,  but  to  reduce  the  degree  of 
uncertainty over the price level in the long run because it is from that unpredictability that the real 
costs of inflation stem.  
                                                
1   The continuously compounded annual rate of inflation (as measured by the CPI) from August 1992 to August 2012 
was 2.1%, and the average of the annual rates each August over that period is 2.2%. 
2   Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009)  present  an  array  of  evidence  to  document  the  cost  of  prolonged  recessions  following 
financial crises. 
3  Leigh-Pemberton (1992). 
2 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  improvement  in  credibility  of  policy  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  whereas  in  1992  expected 
inflation, as measured by the difference between yields on conventional and index-linked gilts, was 
close to 6%, today the same measure is around 2½ %. 
Predictability of the price level is greater because over a long period inflation has on average been 
close to the target4. Even if inflation deviates from target – as will often be the case – it is expected 
to return to target, and so inflation expectations are anchored.5 That is why since 2007 the UK has 
been able to absorb the largest depreciation of sterling since the Second World War, as well as 
very  large  rises  in  oil  and  commodity  prices,  with  an  increase  in  inflation  to  an  average  of  only 
3.2%  over  the  past  five  years  and  without  dislodging  long-term  inflation  expectations.  So  the 
framework has been tested and has proved its worth. 
But  the  current  crisis  has  demonstrated  vividly  that  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  for  economic 
stability  more  generally.  Low  and  stable  inflation  did  not  prevent  a  banking  crisis.  Did  the 
single-minded pursuit of consumer price stability allow a disaster to unfold? Would it have been 
better to accept sustained periods of below or above target inflation in order to prevent the build up 
of  imbalances  in  the  financial  system?  Is  there,  in  other  words,  sometimes  a  trade-off  between 
price stability and financial stability?6 
The intellectual foundations of monetary policy 
The  experience  of  the  past  five  years  suggests  that  we  reassess  the  intellectual  framework 
underpinning monetary policy.7 The emergence of inflation targeting, and the successful results in 
the  form  of  the  Great  Stability,  coincided  with  the  development  of  the  so-called  New  Keynesian 
consensus on macroeconomic theory. This framework offered a theoretical foundation for flexible 
inflation  targeting.  Central  to  the  New  Keynesian  view  is  the  assumption  that  some  prices  are 
“sticky”  and  adjust  slowly.  That  assumption  has  two  implications.  First,  high  inflation  produces 
inefficient changes in relative prices. As a result, there is a cost to inflation. Second, when central 
banks  change  nominal  interest  rates  they  also  affect  real  interest  rates,  and  so  encourage 
households  and  businesses  to  switch  expenditure  from  today  to  tomorrow  or,  as  in  present 
circumstances, the other way round. In this way, central banks can, in the model at least, offset 
shocks to aggregate demand.  
But there are shocks to supply as well as demand. External cost shocks sometimes drive inflation 
away  from  the  target,  as  we  saw  in  recent  years  with  rises  in  world  energy  and  food  prices. 
Because other prices are “sticky”, attempts to keep inflation at target all the time would result in 
inefficient  fluctuations  in  output.  There  is,  therefore,  a  trade-off  between  stabilising  inflation  and 
stabilising output. Following a cost shock, it is sensible to bring inflation back to target gradually. 
                                                
4  The difference between inflation and price level targeting is often exaggerated in the literature, as discussed in King 
(1999). 
5  Since the start of the crisis, there has been a convergence between the practice of flexible inflation targeting and the 
practice of dual-mandate central banks. The Federal Reserve quietly adopted a 2% inflation target in January, and 
Japan did the same with the announcement in February of a numerical goal for inflation of 1% a year. This practical 
convergence means that there is now little steam behind the question of the relative merits of the two approaches to 
the target, or mandate, for central banks. 
6  A number of commentators have questioned the wisdom of flexible inflation targeting. For example, Eichengreen et al 
(2011) and Barker (2012). The first of those asserts that “the traditional separation, in which monetary policy targets 
price  stability  and  regulatory  policies  target  financial  stability,  and  the  two  sets  of  policies  operate  largely 
independently of each other, is no longer tenable” (op. cit. p. 5). 
7  The most complete analysis of the New Keynesian model as applied to monetary policy is Woodford (2003). It is no 
accident that in official circles the most serious questioning of the foundations of inflation targeting emanates from the 
Bank of Japan (BoJ) and the Bank of International Settlements (BIS). The “lost decade” has prompted an interesting 
series of speeches by the BoJ’s governor, Masaaki Shirakawa. And the BIS, freed from day-to-day involvement with 
the  setting  of  interest  rates,  has  long  argued  that  monetary  policy  and  financial  policy  cannot  be  considered 
separately. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
3 
In this, by now conventional, framework, the proper objective of monetary policy is to minimise the 
variability of inflation around the target rate and the variability of output (or employment) around a 
sustainable path consistent with stable inflation.8 Such an objective means that the central bank is 
effectively choosing a trade-off between the volatility of inflation and the volatility of output. This is 
sometimes  described  as  choosing  a  point  on  the  Taylor  frontier  showing,  as  in  Chart  4,  the 
combinations  of  lowest  volatility  of  inflation  for  a  given  volatility  of  output.9  That  optimal  choice 
leads to a policy reaction function describing how the central bank responds to shocks hitting the 
economy.10  
The success of the New Keynesian framework was that it showed how the long run objective of 
price  stability  could  be  implemented  by  an  appropriate  central  bank  policy  reaction  function.  It 
stressed the importance of expectations and credibility, to which too little attention had been paid 
during the inflationary episodes of the 1970s and 1980s.  
But inevitably, as with all models, the basic New Keynesian model omits a number of key factors. 
The  treatment  of  expectations  is  simplified,  and  neglects  the  possibility  that  expectations 
themselves may be a source of fluctuations, rather than simply reflecting changes elsewhere in the 
economy. Sentiment can vary, misperceptions occur, and people can change the heuristics they 
use to cope with a complex world.11 And it lacks an account of financial intermediation, so money, 
credit and banking play no meaningful role. Those omissions obviously limit the ability of the model 
to help us understand the trade-offs between monetary policy and financial stability. 
Although  there  is  a,  by  now  extensive,  literature  on  financial  frictions,  including  attempts  to 
incorporate them in New Keynesian models, it turns out that such extensions make little difference 
to  the  propagation  of  shocks,  to  optimal  policy,  or  to  the  quantitative  conclusion  that 
overwhelmingly the most important objective remains inflation stabilisation.12 There is no doubt that 
financial  frictions  such  as  asymmetric  information,  credit  constraints,  and  costly  monitoring  of 
borrowers, to name but a few, are an important part of the story of how crises happen and why 
they  impact  on  output.  But  those  models  do  not  provide  a  convincing  account  of  the  gradual 
build-up of debt, leverage and fragility that characterises the run-up to financial crises.13  
                                                
8  This specification of the objective function can be derived as an approximation to the maximisation of the welfare, 
defined  over  consumption  and  leisure,  of  a  representative  consumer  with  an  infinite  horizon  (see  Rotemberg  and 
Woodford, 1997). 
9  The frontier is named after the US economist John Taylor. 
10  To implement such a policy reaction function requires an empirical judgement about the factors that drive the volatility 
of  both  inflation  and  output.  In  principle,  these  should  include  those  factors  in  the  banking  and  financial  system, 
including movements in asset prices, that generate fluctuations in demand and output and affect the way in which 
shocks are transmitted through the economy. In practice, however, rather little attention was paid to the role of the 
banking system in determining inflation and output. 
11  Brazier et al. (2008). 
12  The  relevant  literature  tries  to  integrate  standard  or  workhorse  models  of  financial  frictions  (such  as  the 
Bernanke-Gertler (1989) model of the financial accelerator and the Kiyotaki-Moore (1997) model of credit cycles) into 
a  New  Keynesian  “sticky”  price  model.  Examples  of  this  literature  include  Bernanke,  Gertler  and  Gilchrist  (1999), 
Curdia and Woodford (2009) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). The only way the addition of a financial sector “matters” 
in  these  models  is  if  we  contemplate  exogenous  shocks  to  the  financial  friction  itself.  That  is  not  very  instructive. 
Several interesting papers presented at a Federal Reserve conference in Washington in March 2012 analysed a wide 
variety  of  potential  “financial  frictions”  that  might  create  externalities  that  would  justify  a  policy  intervention.  My 
concern is that there seems no limit to the ingenuity of economists to identify such market failures, but no one of 
these  frictions  seems  large  enough  to  play  a  part  in  a  macroeconomic  model  of  financial  stability.  So  it  is  not 
surprising  that  it  has  proved  hard  to  find  examples  of  frictions  that  generate  quantitatively  interesting  trade-offs 
between price and financial stability – the finding in these models is that overwhelmingly the most important objective 
remains stabilisation of inflation. 
13  Focussing on small deviations around the linearization of the steady-state of a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium 
model helped to divert attention away from the gradual build up of big risks. 
4 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Existing  models,  then,  do  not  tell  us  why  stability  today  may  come  at  the  expense  of  instability 
tomorrow.  Perhaps  we  should  heed  the  advice  of  Ricardo  Caballero,  who  has  written  that 
“macroeconomic research has been in ‘fine-tuning’ mode within the local maximum of the dynamic 
stochastic general equilibrium world, when we should be in ‘broad-exploration’ mode”.14  
So let me now move into broad exploration mode and give three  examples in  which a trade-off 
between monetary and financial stability might arise, and which could in theory justify a policy of 
aiming off the inflation target in order to reduce the risk of future financial instability, before I turn to 
whether such a policy would have been appropriate before the crisis. 
The first is where misperceptions about future incomes persist and are embodied in key prices, 
such as the exchange rate and long-term interest rates. Households, businesses, and banks can 
all make big mistakes when forming judgements about the future, and make spending decisions 
today which they will come to regret when their true lifetime budget constraints are revealed. There 
is  no  mechanism  for  ensuring  that  misperceptions  about  the  sustainable  level  of  spending  are 
corrected quickly. It may take many years before those beliefs are invalidated by experience. So 
an  equilibrium  pattern  of  spending  and  saving  can  emerge  that  is  stable  temporarily  but  not 
sustainable indefinitely. And misaligned prices may reinforce mistaken beliefs if people are using 
market prices to extract signals about future incomes and consumption opportunities. Evidence of 
the persistence of misperceptions can be seen in the imbalances in the world, and especially the 
European, economies. 
I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  when  economic  agents  make  these  mistakes  they  are  behaving 
irrationally.  Rather  that  in  a  world  of  intrinsic  uncertainty  it  is  far  from  obvious  how  to  make 
decisions. The  assumption  of rational  expectations  is  very  helpful for  economists  when  trying  to 
understand  the  implications  of  their  own  models  –  it  is  a  discipline  to  prevent  the  drawing  of 
arbitrary conclusions. In practice, however, households are on their own in a highly uncertain and 
complex world where they are learning from experience. When it comes to decisions about how 
much to spend and how much to save, expectations of future incomes are crucial. In the absence 
of a complete set of markets for future consumption goods – and labour – there is no mechanism 
to ensure that decisions today, and so the implied plans for tomorrow, will be consistent with the 
possibilities available in the future. If revisions to expectations of future incomes are uncorrelated 
across households, then aggregate spending will be relatively stable. The problem comes when 
many households have  similarly over-optimistic views about the future. Aggregate spending and 
borrowing can then be unsustainably high and lead to an inevitable correction at an unpredictable 
date  when  reality  dawns.  Financial  markets  both  reflect  and  propagate  that  common  degree  of 
optimism. Sentiment and animal spirits can change very quickly. 
Examples include the extrapolation of past growth rates of incomes or asset prices into the future 
when in fact they reflect an adjustment of the level of income or asset price to a new equilibrium. At 
the time, the MPC argued that the rise in the ratio of house prices to incomes in the years leading 
up to 2007 reflected a fall in long-term real interest rates – in other words, an adjustment to a new 
equilibrium  house  price  to  income  ratio.  But  if  households  extrapolated  past  increases  in  house 
prices  into  the future,  then  they  may  have  mistakenly  inferred  that future  incomes  too  would  be 
higher, and so spending and borrowing more than could be sustained. Similar arguments could be 
made  about  the  reaction  of  businesses  and  households  to  the  rise  in  the  sterling  effective 
exchange rate in the late 1990s, and I shall return to this later. 
Since long-term interest rates in financial markets are, if anything, even lower today the question of 
sustainability  has  not  yet  been  resolved.  Misperceptions  mean  that  unsustainable  levels  of 
spending,  and  associated  levels  of  debt,  can  build  up  over  many  years.  When  those 
misperceptions  are  eventually  corrected,  they  lead  to  sudden  large  changes  in  asset  values,  a 
synchronised  de-leveraging  of  balance  sheets,  a  large  downward  correction  to  spending  and 
                                                
14  Caballero (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
5 
output,  and  defaults.15  Keynesian  policies  to  smooth  the  path  of  adjustment  by  supporting 
aggregate  demand  can help  in  the  short  run,  but  their  effectiveness  is limited  by  the fact  that a 
significant adjustment to spending – from consumption to investment – is required.  
If  policymakers  can,  first,  identify  misperceptions,  and,  second,  correct  them  by  changes  in 
monetary  policy  –  both  highly  uncertain  empirically  –  then  there  is  indeed  a  trade-off  between 
hitting  the  inflation  target  and  reducing  the  chance  of  a  financial  crisis  down  the  road.  But  are 
central banks less prone to misperceptions than others? 
My second example concerns what Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan calls the 
“cycle of confidence”. He argues that success breeds confidence, and eventually over-confidence 
and complacency, leading to collapse. Such ideas are closely associated with the work of Hyman 
Minsky and others. Minsky set out a “financial instability hypothesis” in which a period of stability 
encourages exuberance in credit markets and subsequent instability.16  
Perhaps the experience of unprecedented stability in the UK and world economies before the crisis 
dulled the senses and bred complacency about future risks. I talked about this when I christened 
the period leading up to 2003 the nice (non-inflationary consistently expansionary) decade.17 The 
point of that speech was that the following decade was unlikely to be as nice. And, of course, it 
wasn’t. But the point didn’t get home, and the financial system became more and more fragile as 
the  leverage  of  our  banking  system rose to  unprecedented  levels.  The experience  of  continuing 
stability may have sowed the seeds of its own destruction.  
That idea has been explored recently in an interesting new book by Nassim Taleb.18 He argues 
that the opposite of fragility is not resilience or robustness, but “antifragility”, that is a state in which 
people or institutions thrive on volatility, shocks to the system and risk. We go to the gym to stress 
our muscles in order to strengthen them; occasional seismic activity may prevent a more damaging 
earthquake. Frequent exposure to shocks and surprises may improve the way people learn about 
and manage risks. In a complex world, we are “better at doing than we are at thinking”, in Taleb’s 
words. Unless we train and practice at coping with bad outcomes we may fail to respond in the 
right  way  to  adverse  shocks  when  they  come.  “Antifragility”  does  not  imply  that  it  might  be 
desirable to engineer small recessions in order to head off a deep depression. We know far too 
little about the economy to attempt any such strategy, and in a world of intrinsic uncertainty we rely 
on heuristics – simplified rules of thumb – to guide our behaviour. But it offers a warning of the 
dangers of believing that the role of monetary policy is to offset all shocks. Rather than pretend that 
we can forecast the future, a more intelligent response is to reinforce the resilience of those parts 
of the financial system that we cannot permit to fail and encourage entry and exit in a free market 
in other parts. It is clear that we need to understand more about how stability affects risk-taking, 
leverage, and the “cycle of confidence”.  
My  third  example  relates  to  the  so-called  “risk  taking”  channel  of  monetary  policy.19  Short-term 
policy rates, especially when they are, as now, exceptionally low, may encourage investors to take 
on more risk than they would otherwise wish as they “search for yield”.20 Financial institutions with 
                                                
15  There  is  a  substantial  literature  on  debt  deflation,  including  Fisher  (1933),  Minsky  (1982b),  Bernanke  and  Gertler 
(1990), King (1993), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012). 
16  Minsky (1982a). More recently Geanakoplos (2010) has set out a theory of what he calls the “leverage cycle”. Again, 
this cycle is driven by sentiment, and has a self-reinforcing dynamic. In good times leverage increases and that helps 
to drive up asset prices as optimistic investors can access financing on easy terms. But at some point bad news puts 
the process into reverse. Losses trigger margin calls which force asset sales and cause a collapse in asset prices. 
The reason that such a cycle is costly is due to a series of externalities and market imperfections. 
17  King (2003). 
18  Taleb (2012). 
19  A term coined by Borio and Zhu (2008). 
20  Rajan (2005) argues that the “search for yield” was an important ingredient in the story of the crisis. 
6 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
long-term commitments (pension funds and insurance companies, for example) need to match the 
yield they promised on their liabilities, with the yield on their assets. When interest rates are high, 
they  can  invest  in  safe assets to generate the necessary  revenue. When  interest  rates  are  low, 
however, they are forced to invest in riskier assets to continue to meet their target nominal rate of 
return. That tends to push down risk premia and lower the price of borrowing. Other investors too 
find it difficult to accept that in a world of low nominal and real interest rates equilibrium rates of 
return will not meet their previous expectations.21 If these mechanisms are important, the financial 
cycle may be heavily influenced by monetary policy, especially when interest rates are low. That 
also creates the possibility of a trade-off between monetary and financial stability.  
All three examples suggest that the conventional analysis of the trade-off between the volatility of 
inflation and the volatility of output is likely to be far too optimistic. Does this add up to a case for 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  of  rising  asset  prices  rather  than  waiting  to  “mop”  up  after  the  bust? 
Certainly we have seen that monetary policy cannot fully offset the effects of financial crises for two 
reasons. First, crises may impact output before the response of monetary policy is felt. Second, 
crises  typically  reduce  potential  supply  growth,  for  example  by  disrupting  the  supply  of  credit  to 
productive firms. A failure to take financial instability into account creates an unduly optimistic view 
of  where  the  Taylor  frontier  lies,  especially  when  it  is  based  on  data  drawn  from  a  period  of 
stability.  Relative  to  a  Taylor  frontier  that  reflects  only  aggregate  demand  and  cost  shocks,  the 
addition  of  financial  instability  shocks  generates  what  I  call  the  Minsky-Taylor  frontier,  shown  in 
Chart 5. This reflects the influence of misperceptions, financial cycles and the search for yield. On 
the Minsky-Taylor curve, for a given degree of inflation variability, output is more volatile in the long 
run  than  on  the  simple  Taylor  curve.  Ignoring  financial  instability  might  mean  choosing  a  policy 
reaction function that is believed to imply a trade-off at point O in Chart 5. In fact, the true trade-off 
is given by point P. Once that is understood then the optimal policy reaction function might well 
change and correspond to a trade-off at point Q.22  
The examples I have given suggest the possibility that there is a trade-off between meeting the 
inflation target in the short run and reducing the risk of a financial crisis in the long run. To shed 
light on whether that possibility warrants a change to the way we implement inflation targeting, I 
want now to conduct a counter-factual thought experiment and ask whether monetary policy before 
2007 might have moderated the crisis if it had not simply pursued a target for inflation. 
A counter-factual monetary policy 1997–2007 
I  want  to  ask  whether,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  monetary  policy  should  have  been  set 
differently during the period of the so-called Great Stability. Should interest rates have been higher 
during  that  period  in  order  to  mitigate  some  of  the  growth  of  credit,  rise  in  asset  prices,  and 
increase in the leverage of the banking system? Many commentators today seem to think that the 
answer is clearly yes – though I seem to remember that fewer said so at the time – and most of the 
                                                
21  Another mechanism, working through banks’ leverage, is posited by Adrian and Shin (2011). They show that if banks 
target  a  Value-at-Risk  constraint,  then  monetary  policy  loosening can increase  risk  taking.  The  reduction in  policy 
rates boosts asset prices  (by  lowering  discount  rates),  and  also  steepens  the  yield  curve  which  tends to  increase 
banks’ net interest margins. Other things equal, this reduces bank leverage by boosting the net worth of the bank and 
increasing  its  ongoing  profitability.  To  hit  its  target  Value-at-Risk  the  bank  expands  its  balance  sheet,  purchasing 
assets and pushing up the price of assets thereby amplifying the effect of the initial monetary policy loosening. 
22  There  is  a  further  consideration  that  is  even  more  intriguing.  The  existence  of  misperceptions,  the  “cycle  of 
confidence” and the use of heuristics, and the search for yield, all create direct welfare costs over and above their 
impact on inflation and output because they distort household behaviour. This means that financial instability matters 
for welfare independently of its effect on output and inflation. So policy is directed at reducing not only the volatility of 
output and inflation but also the distortions to household decisions. That introduces a third dimension to the welfare 
analysis and the constraint on policy-makers is represented by a three-dimensional Minsky-Taylor surface. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
7 
pressure on the MPC, both from without and within, was for lower rather than higher levels of Bank 
Rate.23  
Before trying to answer the question, let me remind you of two key facts about the Great Stability. 
First, the growth rate of GDP over the period prior to the onset of the crisis in 2007 was 2.9%, very 
close to its previous long-run average of 2.8% (see Table 2). Second, the policy rate set by the 
MPC was higher than that in any other G7 country for almost the whole of the ten years prior to 
the crisis (see Chart 6).  
But if the rate of growth was sustainable, its pattern was not. In the late 1990s, there had been a 
substantial,  and  not  entirely  explicable,  rise  in  sterling  of  around  25%  against  most  other 
currencies, leading to the emergence of imbalances in the UK economy. These took the form of a 
shift  in  the  composition  of  output  away  from  manufacturing  and towards  services,  and  a  shift  in 
demand away from exports towards domestic demand. National saving  fell to unsustainably low 
levels.  
In the early years of the MPC there was an intense debate about these imbalances, and how they 
should affect monetary policy.24 In a speech in April 2000, I argued that “it is important not to let 
domestic demand grow too rapidly for too long. The longer the correction is left, the sharper the 
required adjustment will be”.25 The question was how much to stimulate domestic demand, at the 
cost of exacerbating the imbalances, in order to compensate for weak external demand, and the 
minutes of the MPC in 2001 and 2002 explicitly discussed the case for accepting inflation below 
target over the two-year horizon.26 The Committee rejected the case, and during that period most 
of  the  dissenting  votes  on  the  MPC  were  for  lower  rates  (see  Table  3).  The  dilemma,  and  the 
MPC’s resolution of it, was summed up by my predecessor Eddie George in 2002 when he said 
“So in effect we have taken the view that unbalanced growth in our present situation is better than 
no growth – or as some commentators have put it, a two-speed economy is better than a no-speed 
economy.”27 
Was that the right choice?  
As in some other industrialised countries, asset prices, including house prices, had been pushed 
up by falls in long-term real interest rates (see Chart 7). Since those long rates were set in world 
capital markets by the interaction between the demand for investment and the (very large) supply 
of saving, only a strategy of persistently higher interest rates at home than overseas – which to 
some extent we did follow – would have prevented a significant rise in asset prices, thus reducing 
some of the upward pressure on credit growth.28  
Such a strategy might have brought some benefits for financial stability. It is possible that without 
rising asset prices we might have kept expectations of future incomes on a more modest path that 
did  not  later  require  a  correction.  Higher  rates  and  the  resulting  recession  and  unemployment 
might  have  reminded  firms,  households  and  financial  markets  that  the  economy  was  not 
                                                
23  For  the  record,  over  the  relevant  period  I  was  in  a  minority  voting  for  a  higher  level  of  Bank  rate  on  fourteen 
occasions. 
24  See  the  minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  especially  during  2001.  All  MPC  minutes  are  available  at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/Pages/mpc/.  See  also  Barker  (2003),  Bean  (2003),  King  (2000, 
2002) and Large (2005). 
25  King (2000). 
26  See in particular the Minutes of the MPC for January 2002. 
27   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2002/speech156.pdf. 
28  The analysis in Bean et al (2010) suggests that the output cost of slowing credit growth to the non-financial sector 
would have been substantial. There is a good deal of simple-minded comment to the effect that central banks should 
have “burst the bubble” before the crisis occurred. This ignores the wisdom in Issing’s (2012) remark that: “A central 
bank has no instruments for targeting individual asset prices successfully, and creating a macroeconomic mess by 
pricking a bubble would ruin the reputation of a central bank.” 
8 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
guaranteed  to  experience  continual  steady  growth,  and  thereby  have  disrupted  the  dynamic  I 
described earlier in which stability leads to overconfidence and eventual instability – by stressing 
the economy in order to promote its “antifragility”, in Taleb’s phrase. And higher domestic interest 
rates might have alleviated some of the “search for yield” that probably followed a period of low 
rates.  
But leverage and the growth rate of credit may be relatively insensitive to interest rates, especially 
once a self-reinforcing cycle of optimism and credit expansion is underway. And this financial crisis 
was a global one; the United Kingdom could not alone have stopped it happening. We would still 
have suffered greatly from the very sudden and sharp fall in world output and trade in 2008–09. 
We might still have experienced a banking crisis and a domestic “credit crunch” because, as my 
colleague Ben Broadbent has described,29 lending to the UK real economy contributed only a small 
share of the rise in leverage of the largest UK banks which reflected more an expansion of lending 
within the financial sector and overseas (see Table 4). Three quarters of UK banks’ losses to date 
have been on their foreign assets. The search for yield that prompted excessive risk-taking was the 
result of low long-term interest rates around the world, not simply rates in the UK.  
So what would have happened had we adopted the counter-factual policy of higher levels of Bank 
rate? 
Of  course,  it  is  impossible  to  know  with  certainty.  And  much  depends  on  what  would  have 
happened to the exchange rate. On the MPC, two views were discussed. One was that by setting 
interest  rates  at  a  much  higher  level,  so  dampening  domestic  demand  and  output  growth, 
expectations of the long-run exchange rate consistent with a sustainable path of domestic demand 
might  be  dislodged  and  “jolted”  down  to  a  lower  equilibrium  level  –  from  A  to  B  in  Chart  8. 
Certainly,  there  seemed  good  reason  at  the  time  to  imagine  that  slower  growth  at  home  might 
mean  that  hot  money  would  return  to  countries  experiencing  stronger  growth.  As  a  result,  the 
current exchange rate would have fallen from O to P in Chart 8 and then been expected to follow 
the  path  PB  consistent  with  uncovered  interest  rate  parity.  The  result  would  have  been  higher 
external  demand  to  offset  weaker  domestic  demand.  After  a  time,  we  might  have  attained 
“one-speed” growth, so avoiding the unpalatable choice between “two-speed” and no growth.  
The  other  view  was  that  higher  interest  rates  would  not  have  altered  the  expected  long-run 
equilibrium value of sterling, but would have led to an immediate upwards jump in the exchange 
rate,  as  the  greater  interest  rate  differential  with  other  countries  would  have  shifted  up  the 
uncovered interest rate parity path from OA to QA in Chart 8. That would have meant even weaker 
external demand, and a more depressed domestic economy.30 Higher interest rates would have 
moderated  domestic  credit  growth  and  asset  prices,  but  only  at  the  expense  of  slower  output 
growth, rising unemployment and a prolonged undershoot of the inflation target.31  
Everything  would  have  hinged  on  the  success  of  the  strategy  in  bringing  down  the  expected 
equilibrium level of sterling in the long run to avoid a further rise in sterling in the short run and a 
damaging recession. At best, persistently higher interest rates would have implied an initial slowing 
of  growth,  a  deliberate  attempt  to  weaken  sterling,  and  an  under-shooting  of  the  inflation  for  a 
period.  At  worst,  we  would  have  seen  the  exchange  rate  appreciate  further.  The  decade  would 
have been characterised by rising unemployment and very low inflation.  
To  have  deviated  from  our  statutory  remit  in  a  direction  that  would  have  imposed  real  costs  to 
output and employment would have been a big gamble. But the costs of the ensuing crisis have 
been so great that we cannot stop there and say that nothing could have been done.  
                                                
29  Broadbent (2012). 
30  Consistent with this, those on the MPC most worried about the high level of the exchange rate advocated lower, not 
higher, interest rates in order to bring about a depreciation, at the risk of making the imbalances more acute. 
31  The strategy of not raising, and for some lowering, Bank Rate appealed to those who saw signs of an improvement in 
the supply performance of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
9 
Was there a better alternative to a strategy of higher interest rates? The natural first line of defence 
against  financial  crises  is  macro-prudential  policy.  In  principle,  such  policies  can  shift  the 
Minsky-Taylor curve closer to the original Taylor curve. With hindsight, before 2007 there should 
have been a cap on the leverage of banks (see Chart 9). And the cap should have tightened as 
asset prices increased and the likely exposure to losses increased. That is why  we now have a 
macro-prudential policy regime in the UK. It will be overseen by the Bank of England’s Financial 
Policy Committee, which will have the power to direct, and make recommendations to, regulators 
about capital and leverage in the UK financial system. 
In my judgement, the big challenge to monetary policy before the crisis was a serious mis-pricing in 
long-term interest and exchange rates, and the imbalances that resulted. Much of this was outside 
the control of UK policy-makers and reflected developments in the world economy. It is arguable, 
though  not  certain,  that  in  the  absence  of  a  macro-prudential  regime  or  tighter  fiscal  policy, 
persistently higher interest rates might have been a second-best strategy. It would, though, have 
been a big gamble. As the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke has remarked, “the 
issue is not whether central bankers should ignore possible financial imbalances – they should not 
– but, rather, what is ‘the right tool for the job’ to respond to such imbalances”.32 So it is vital that 
macro-prudential tools and micro-prudential regulation are part of the armoury of a central bank to 
mitigate, if not prevent, the build up of excessive leverage and risk-taking in the banking and wider 
financial sector. From next year, the Bank of England will have those responsibilities, and the new 
Financial Policy Committee is already up and running. 
But  macro-prudential  tools  deal  with  symptoms  rather  than  the  underlying  problems  of 
misperceptions  and  mispricing.  Although  we  think  the  new  tools  given  to  the  Bank  would  have 
helped to alleviate the last crisis, it would be optimistic to rely solely on such tools to prevent all 
future  crises.  It  would  be  sensible  to  recognise  that  there  may  be  circumstances  in  which  it  is 
justified to aim off the inflation target for a while in order to moderate the risk of financial crises. 
Monetary policy cannot just “mop up” after a crisis. Risks must be dealt with beforehand. I do not 
see  this  as  inconsistent  with  inflation  targeting  because  it  is  the  stability  of  inflation  over  long 
periods,  not  year  to  year  changes,  which  is  crucial  to  economic  success.  The  key  principles 
underlying 
transparency  of 
decision-taking, and they will remain the cornerstone of successful monetary policy in the future.  
targeting  are  credibility,  predictability  and 
inflation 
flexible 
Conclusions 
Governor Leigh Pemberton’s 1992 lecture concluded with a message for the LSE: “in a world of 
price stability you might not think of inviting the Governor of the Bank of England to address you”. 
Had price stability guaranteed financial stability, and had I achieved my long-held ambition of being 
boring, that might have been true.  
Unfortunately, it is not how things have worked out! 
What I have tried to show tonight is that the case for price stability is as strong today as it was 
twenty years ago – both in theory and in practice. The clarity and simplicity of the inflation target 
helps to anchor inflation expectations on the target. We forget the lessons of the 1970s and 1980s 
at our peril. In the end, the essence of central banking is to maintain confidence in, and the value 
of, paper money. 
It is far too soon to bury inflation targeting. Together with central bank independence, it played a 
key  role  in  bringing  price  stability  to  the  UK.  As  the  Times  reported  20  years  ago,  “the  pound’s 
firmer tone, and softer German money market rates, could tempt the Chancellor to shave half a 
point  off  base  rates  to  coincide  with  the  Prime  Minister’s  speech  at  Brighton  today”.  The  party 
conference season is no longer a time for speculation about changes in interest rates. No doubt we 
shall learn a great deal about the appropriate allocation of responsibilities to monetary policy, on 
                                                
32  Bernanke (2011). 
10 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the one hand, and macro-prudential policy, on the other, over the next twenty years. But we should 
not throw out the baby with the bathwater. Low and stable inflation is a pre-requisite for economic 
success. 
Much  of  what  I  have  said  is,  I  hope,  a  call  to  arms  for  economists,  and  especially  younger 
economists,  to  rethink  the  foundations  of  our  macroeconomic  theories. Not  to  abandon  rigorous 
modelling – after all, in the words of last year’s Nobel Prize winner Tom Sargent “it takes a model 
to  beat  a  model”  –  but  to  recognise  that  in  our  present  models  the  way  we  think  of  human 
behaviour in the face of irreducible uncertainty is seriously incomplete.  
Ideas matter far more than is usually recognised in the public discussion of monetary policy which 
concentrates  too  much  on  personalities.  Keynes  and  Stamp  both  knew  that.  In  February  1929, 
Josiah Stamp  went  to  Paris  as  a  member  of  the  Young  Committee  to  assess  whether  the 
reparations debts run up by Germany could be repaid – the similarities with the present situation in 
Europe are too poignant to dwell on. In a letter to Keynes, Stamp compared these international 
meetings to a conjuror trying to pull a rabbit out of the hat:  
“It is still a madhouse, in a way – but all are mad in a very genteel way, the main occupation being 
elaborate  proofs,  from  different  angles,  of  sanity.  One  half  sit  round  a  hat  saying  with  Coué 
reiteration: there is a rabbit – there is. The other half try to make a noise like a succulent lettuce. 
There is a general conviction that the more eminent the conjurors convened, the more certainty is 
there of the existence of the rabbit”.33 
The only escape from madness is the power of ideas. Today, we understand less than we would 
wish  about  how  the  economy  works.  The  challenge  of  trying  to  understand  more,  and  of 
developing those new ideas, belongs to you – the next generation of students and academics at 
the LSE and elsewhere. Go to it! 
 
                                                
33  Stamp’s letter is reprinted in the collected works of J.M.Keynes volume XVIII, p.306-7, Macmillan 1978. Émile Coué 
was a French psychologist who developed a popular method of psychotherapy based on optimistic autosuggestion. 
He would have been right at home in modern economic policy debates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
11 
Annex: 
Tables and charts 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
 
References 
to 
low 
issues 
inflation  – 
for  policy”,  available  at 
Adrian,  T  and  H.  Shin  (2011),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary  Economics”, 
Handbook of Monetary Economics 3A pp. 601–650, Elsevier. 
Barker,  K.,  (2003),  “Adjusting 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2003/speech190.pdf . 
Barker, K., (2012), “Macroeconomic policy: too much autonomy and too little coordination”, 
Centreforum, available at www.centreforum.org/assets/pubs/macroeconomic-policy.pdf . 
Bean,  C.,  (2003),  “Asset  Prices,  Financial  Imbalances  and  Monetary  Policy:  Are  Inflation 
Targets  Enough?”  in  Anthony  Richards  and  Timothy  Robinson  (eds.)  Asset  Prices  and 
Monetary Policy, pp. 48-76. Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney. 
Bean, C., M. Paustian, A. Penalver, and T. Taylor, (2010), “Monetary Policy after the Fall” In 
Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.  
Bernanke,  B.,  (2011),  “The  Effects  of  the  Great  Recession  on  Central  Bank  Doctrine  and 
Practice”, remarks at the 56th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 
18 October 2011. 
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler, (1989) “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations”, 
American Economic Review, Vol. 79(1), pp. 14–31. 
Bernanke,  B.,  and  M.  Gertler,  (1990),  “Financial  Fragility  and  Economic  Performance”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, pp. 87–114. 
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative 
Business  Cycle  Framework”,  in  John  B.  Taylor  and  Michael Woodford (eds.)  Handbook  of 
Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume 1, pp. 1341-1393. Elsevier: Amsterdam. 
Borio, C. and H. Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing 
link in the transmission mechanism?” BIS Working Paper 268. 
Brazier, A., R. Harrison, M. King, and A. Yates (2008), “The Danger of Inflating Expectations 
of  Macroeconomic  Stability:  Heuristic  Switching  in  an  Overlapping-Generations  Monetary 
Model”, International Journal of Central Banking, 4(2), 219-254. 
Broadbent,  B.,  (2012),  “Deleveraging”,  speech  available  at  www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech553.pdf. 
Caballero,  R.,  (2010),  “Macroeconomics  after 
the 
Pretense-of-Knowledge  Syndrome”,  MIT  Department  of  Economics  Working  Paper 
No. 10–16.  
Curdia, V., and M. Woodford, “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy,” working paper, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2009.  
Eichengreen,  B.,  M.  El-Erian,  A.  Fraga,  T.  Ito,  J.  Pisani-Ferry,  E.  Prasad,  R.  Rajan,  M. 
Ramos, C. Reinhart, H. Rey, D. Rodrik, K. Rogoff, H. Shin, A. Velasco, B, Weder di Mauro, 
and Y. Yu (2011), “Rethinking Central Banking,” Brookings Institution, Washington. 
the  Liquidity  Trap:  A 
Eggertsson,  G.,  P.  Krugman 
Fisher-Minsky-Koo  Approach”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  (2012)  127(3):  1469–
1513. 
Fisher, I., (1933), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica, Vol. 1, 
no. 4. 
“Debt,  Deleveraging,  and 
the  Crisis:  Time 
to  Deal  with 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(2000), 
“Balancing 
(2003),  speech 
the  Economic  See-Saw,”  speech  available  at 
in  Leicester  available  at  www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
Geanakoplos,  J.,  (2010),  “The  Leverage  Cycle.”  In  D.  Acemoglu,  K.  Rogoff,  and  M. 
Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, vol. 24, 1–65. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Gertler, M., and Kiyotaki, N., (2010), “Financial intermediation and credit policy in business 
cycle analysis”, in Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier.  
Issing, O., (2012), “Central Banks – Paradise Lost” Mayekawa Lecture, Institute of Monetary 
and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, mimeo. 
King, M., (1994), “Debt deflation: theory and evidence,” European Economic Review, Vol. 38, 
issue 3–4, pp 419–45.  
King, M., (1999), “Challenges for Monetary Policy,” in New Challenges for Monetary Policy, 
11-58. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
King,  M., 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2000/speech82.aspx. 
King,  M.,  (2002),  “Monetary  Policy  in  the  UK:  –  challenges  ahead,”  speech  available  at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2002/speech169.pdf. 
King,  M., 
publications/Documents/speeches/2003/speech204.pdf.  
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore, (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy 105(2).  
Large,  A.,  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy:  Significant  Issues  of  Today”,  speech  available  at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2005/speech262.pdf. 
Leigh-Pemberton,  R.,  (1992),  “The  Case  for  Price  Stability”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly 
Bulletin, November.  
Minsky, H., (1982a), “Debt-Deflation Processes in Today’s Institutional Environment,” Banca 
Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, December.  
Minsky,  H.,  (1982b),  “The  Financial-Instability  Hypothesis:  Capitalist  Processes  and  the 
Behavior  of  the  Economy”  in  Charles  Kindleberger  and  Jean-Pierre  Laffargue  (eds.), 
Financial Crises. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. 
Rajan, R., (2005), “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” in The Greenspan 
Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  pp.  313–370.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City:  Kansas 
City. 
Reinhart,  C.,  and  K.  Rogoff,  (2009),  “This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial 
Folly,” Princeton University Press. 
Rotemberg, J., and M. Woodford, (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework 
for 
the  Evaluation  of  Monetary  Policy”,  NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual,  Vol.  12, 
pp. 297–346. 
Shirakawa, M., (2010) “Revisiting the Philosophy behind Central Bank Policy”, Speech at the 
Economic Club of New York, April 22 2010. 
Taleb, N., (2012), “Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder” Forthcoming from Random 
House (US) & Penguin (UK). 
Woodford,  M.,  (2003),  “Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy,” 
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
19 
