Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Growth and stability – implications and priorities for 
Asia 
Keynote speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the IIF 
Annual  Membership  Meeting  2012:  “Growth  and  Stability  –  Implications  and  Priorities  for 
Asia”, Tokyo, 12 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is my honour and great pleasure to speak at this 2012 Annual Membership Meeting of the 
IIF here in Tokyo. These continue to be times of great uncertainty, with financial institutions 
being very much at the centre of the global efforts to restore stability and growth. Confidence 
in financial institutions however continues to remain fragile in several parts of the world. This 
is  a  time  when  strong  and  responsible  leadership  in  the  financial  industry  has  never  been 
more important. The IIF is well-positioned to lead this charge through its role in advocating 
the industry standards and best practices, drawing on the collective experience of its broad 
membership. Indeed, it has performed this role most commendably. 
The common theme during the meetings throughout this week has been centred on growth 
and  stability.  I  appreciate  this  opportunity  to  speak  on  the  global  economic  and  financial 
developments  from  the  perspective  of  Asia.  My  remarks  will  also  include  a  view  of  Asia’s 
development priorities to firmly anchor our future growth and stability prospects. Finally, I will 
conclude with a few words on the implications of the evolving financial regulatory landscape 
for large international financial institutions from the view of a host country, given that many of 
the world’s largest financial institutions have a presence in our financial systems. 
Part 1 
Half a decade into the global financial crisis, the world economy continues to be significantly 
challenged  by  the  inability  to  hold  a  sustained  recovery.  This  clearly  has  important 
implications for Asia. While continuing to register positive economic growth, the momentum 
of the growth in 2012 has begun to moderate in most of emerging Asia. In addition, global 
policy  spillovers  and  the  deleveraging  activities  in  US  and  Europe  have  contributed  to 
increased and more volatile capital flows with its consequential implications on the financial 
markets in Asia. 
While  the  extraordinary  policy  actions  taken,  in  particular,  by  central  banks  have  been 
important in averting a major global economic recession, it has proven to be insufficient to 
support  a  sustained  recovery.  In  the  recent  months,  the  global  economy  has  again 
experienced a broad based moderation in growth from an already modest pace. The most 
pressing challenge  confronting  policymakers  in  the  crisis-affected  economies  is  to  develop 
an optimal policy mix that will address the fiscal imbalance and impaired financial sector, and 
structural adjustments that will enhance competitiveness while at the same time be able to 
reduce  the  adverse  impact  these  policies  would  have  on  the  economy.  However,  it  is 
important to recognise that drastic actions will have drastic consequences. While there is a 
general  consensus  that  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  adjustment  are  necessary  to 
regain  competitiveness  and  sustainable  growth  in  the  future,  in  the  immediate  term  it  will 
involve  costs  to  the  economy.  As  the  experience  in  previous  crises  has  shown,  including 
during the Asian Financial Crisis, there are threshold levels that when breached the economy 
will  be  pushed  into  an  even  deeper  recession.  This  will  in  turn  increase  the  cost  of  the 
resolution  of  the  crisis  and  result  in  an  even  more  prolonged  period  of  weakness.  The 
concern is also the potential huge financial and social costs. 
The Asian experience during the financial crisis in the late 1990s has also shown that the 
potential  for  effective  results  is  enhanced  when  the  policy  package  is  comprehensive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Financial restructuring and repair, fiscal consolidation and structural adjustments have their 
best  chance  to  yield  results  in  an  environment  in  which  there  is  some  economic  growth. 
Piecemeal policy measures that primarily focus on addressing the immediate problems will 
be inadequate and will not be able to garner sufficient growth momentum and thus sustain 
confidence.  The  financial  restructuring  and  repair,  the  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural 
adjustment urgently needs to be complemented with wide-ranging pro-growth policies. 
Another  challenge  confronting  the  world  economy  lies  in  the  manner  in  which  policy 
coordination  may  be  improved,  both  within  and  across  borders,  to maximise  the  impact  of 
policy measures while minimising the unintended spillovers on other parts of the economy or 
financial  system  and  across  borders.  Enhanced  coordination  can  also  provide  increased 
clarity  on  the  direction  of  policy  and  reduce  overreactions  by  the  market  while  boosting 
confidence in prospects for the policies to achieve their intended outcomes. 
Strong fundamentals in Asia will continue to support our prospects in this more challenging 
environment. Following the Asian financial crisis, several emerging economies in Asia have 
strengthened their economic and financial fundamentals, improved their fiscal and external 
debt positions, and reformed their banking sectors. This has yielded tremendous payoffs. It 
has  supported  our  economies  to  withstand  the  effects  during  this  recent  global  financial 
crisis. Structural adjustments to diversify our economic structure and sources of growth have 
been  an  important  part  of  this  resilience.  Asia  also  continues  to  have  considerable  policy 
flexibility to respond to external and domestic developments, although a prolonged delay in 
the recovery in the advanced economies will erode this policy flexibility in the future. 
Part 2 
Asia’s development agenda also forms a key part of the efforts to firmly anchor our future 
growth. Several imperatives in the development of the financial sector are key in enhancing 
and  maintaining  both  growth  and  stability  in  our  region.  First,  is  the  further  financial 
deepening in the Asian economies through the development of market-based and diversified 
channels of intermediation to support the region’s economic transformation. Since the Asian 
financial crisis, Asia has already made significant progress in this direction, in particular, in 
the progress and growth of the capital markets. Across Asia, the development of the financial 
system also continues to be pursued with vigor. In the previous decade, during a period of 
relative  stability,  Asia  had  focused  on  building  and  solidifying  our  financial  system.  Deep, 
diverse  and  progressive  financial  systems  have  contributed  significantly  to  increasing  the 
resilience of our economies. 
Looking ahead, the next phase of Asia’s transformation will see a rising and more affluent 
middle income population. There will also be massive investments required for infrastructure 
and development and for a higher contribution to growth by small and medium businesses. 
This will substantially increase demand for a wider spectrum of high quality financial products 
and services. The strategy is also for the intensification of financial deepening in Asia to meet 
the increased demands of domestic investors in the management of their surplus funds. A 
large part of Asian funds are still intermediated through the global financial markets and then 
recycled back into Asia. This increases Asia’s exposures to volatile capital flows. To reduce 
the  existing gap  between  the  supply  of  and  demand for financial  assets  within  Asia,  it  will 
require  the  development  of  a  vibrant  risk  capital  ecosystem  comprising  intermediaries, 
financial markets and the supporting financial infrastructure to facilitate the efficient allocation 
of savings to productive investments. 
Second is the strengthening of financial linkages and connectivity, within the Asian region, 
and  between  Asia  and  other  economies  including  other  emerging  economies.  Asia  has 
reached the stage of development where its further advancement calls for deeper regional 
integration  that  will  result  in  greater  capital  mobility  across  borders,  facilitated  by  more 
interconnected  financial  systems.  As  a  rapidly  growing  region,  greater  regional  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
integration will support the more effective and efficient intermediation of Asia’s sizeable funds 
towards meeting the investment opportunities of the region. 
Efforts  to  enhance  cross-border  financial  linkages  and  advance  financial  integration  have 
also  intensified  in  Asia  in  this  decade,  mainly  through  the  progressive  liberalization  of  the 
financial  sector,  the  pooling  of  resources  to  promote  the  development  of  domestic  capital 
markets and the integration of payments and settlement systems. These developments have 
also seen the growing presence of Asian financial institutions in the region. In 2011, central 
banks  in  the  ASEAN  region  have  endorsed  an  ASEAN  Financial  Integration  Framework 
which  will  pave  the  way  for  greater  market  access  and  operational  flexibility  for  qualifying 
financial institutions. This represents the collective commitment of the region in the efforts to 
strengthen the region’s capacity to intermediate regional and international financial resources 
to productive activity in the region. 
A  third  imperative  is  the  alignment  of  the  financial  sector  to  Asia’s  demographic  trends. 
Demographic  profiles  vary  widely  across  Asia  and  have  a  significant  impact  on  economic 
potential  of  the  region.  For  many  parts  of  Asia,  demographic  developments  foreshadow 
significant  changes  in  consumption,  health  and educational  patterns. These  changes  have 
reinforced the significance of domestic sources of growth. Asia’s rising domestic demand has 
been  supported  by  the  development  of  a  much  broader  range  of  financing  options.  Going 
forward,  the  access  to  financing  for  healthcare,  education  and  retirement  will  reduce  the 
need for high levels of precautionary savings, and thus strengthen further domestic demand 
in the economy.  
The  fourth  imperative  relates  to  ongoing  efforts  to  expand  financial  inclusion.  Financial 
inclusion has been, and must continue to be, a key component of Asia’s overall strategy to 
achieve balanced and equitable growth. Indeed, in the advanced economies, there is a now 
greater  focus  and  attention  on  expanding  financial  inclusion  to  support  the  strength  of 
recovery.  Emerging  Asia  has  achieved  remarkable  progress  on  this  front.  The  period  of 
higher  growth  has  been  accompanied  by  lifting  millions  out  of  poverty.  Asia  however  still 
remains the home of two-thirds of the world’s poor. Therefore, much still remains to be done. 
The  imperative  is  to  arrest  the  widening  income  disparities  and  in  inequality  through 
providing  more  households  and  small  businesses  with  meaningful  access  to  financial 
products  and  services,  thus  bringing  them  into  the  economic  mainstream.  Another  is 
ensuring that as Asia develops, households, particularly in the lower income groups, do not 
become  financially  excluded  because  financial  products  and  services  become  increasingly 
unaffordable or complex, or due to practices of financial institutions which increase barriers 
to access. 
Finally,  Asia  is  now  building  on  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in  strengthening  the 
resilience of our financial systems. Authorities in Asia are at various stages of translating the 
global financial reform measures into local standards. In a number of countries in Asia, the 
global financial crisis has also sharpened the focus on risks in financial institutions which are 
more  systemically  important.  This  includes  having  the  regulatory  reach  that  extends  to 
institutions outside the formally regulated system. 
The implementation of global financial reforms has however, also substantially increased the 
regulatory  complexity  associated  with 
the  proliferation  of  binding  “one-size-fits-all” 
prescriptions. While these rules mainly aim to address the fundamental weaknesses of the 
global  financial  system  exposed  during  the  crisis,  it  is  important  not  to  lose  sight  of  other 
critical elements of sound regulation and supervision. The crisis has underscored the need 
for  judgment  to  have  a  greater  role  in  regulation  and  supervision.  The  implementation  of 
global reforms is also proceeding at a time of tighter global financial conditions and weaker 
global  growth.  While  the  work  of  the  Basel  Committee,  now  more  than  two  years  old, 
suggests  that  its  effects  on  economic  growth  will  be  modest,  the  highly  dynamic  global 
financial  conditions  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  implementation  of  the  new 
standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  addition,  in  a more  interconnected  world,  building  Asia’s  resilience  to future shocks  has 
also  included  significant  progress  in  the  arrangements  to  respond  to  potential  threats  of  a 
crisis  on  a  regional  scale.  These  arrangements  are  currently  being  strengthened  in  Asia, 
through  regional  platforms  for  cooperation  and  more  developed  home-host  supervisory 
arrangements that reflect the wider regional footprint of financial institutions in Asia. 
Part 3 
At  this  point,  allow  me  to  offer  some  reflections  on  the  changing  economic  and  financial 
landscape  for  internationally  active  financial  institutions.  Asia  is  host  to  a  diverse  group  of 
foreign financial institutions, many of which have a long history and entrenched presence in 
the region, with strong roots in our local economies. For the most part, these institutions have 
made  important  contributions  to  the  development  of  domestic  financial  systems  and 
economies.  This  includes  meeting  the  demands  for  financial  services  in  areas  not  being 
extensively served by the domestic financial system. 
While the international policy response to the global financial crisis has been extensive and 
on  an  unprecedented  scale,  an  area  that  has  not  been  as  extensive  is  the  cross-border 
dimension of policy making. More specifically, the global financial crisis has highlighted the 
gaps  in  the  international  framework  for  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  cross-border 
activities  of  financial  institutions.  This  has  generated  renewed  concerns  on  the  extent  to 
which  external  shocks  might  be  transmitted  to  the  domestic  economies  as  a  result  of  the 
presence of such international foreign financial institutions. 
As part of the international regulatory reforms, significant progress has been made to ensure 
that  systemically  important  financial  institutions  have  a  higher  degree  of  resilience  and 
stronger incentives to reduce their systemic risks over time. This includes through the holding 
of  higher  capital,  and  requirements  for  all  global  SIFIs  (systemically  important  financial 
institutions)  to  develop  recovery  and  resolution  plans.  Although  intended  to  reduce  the 
externalities associated with the failure of these institutions, it remains unclear whether the 
implementation  of  these  measures  will  ultimately  produce  balanced  effects  on  both  home 
and host economies. 
In  addition,  the  unilateral  measures  being  taken  by  some  countries  to  protect  domestic 
financial  systems  have  also  created  specific  challenges  for  host  economies.  In  addition, 
potential issues may arise in the implementation of such reform measures. If not addressed 
and  well-coordinated, 
financial  markets, 
disproportionately increase the costs of intermediation or present new sources of contagion 
to domestic host economies. The call thus is for closer cooperation between the authorities 
to avoid such unintended consequences. 
Within  host  economies,  the  expectations  on  global  financial  institutions  will  increase  to 
reinforce the safety valves against the propagation of systemic risks across borders. There is 
thus greater focus on promoting operating models that are more stable while continuing to 
encourage a meaningful contribution to the domestic economies. The experience has been 
that financial institutions that have maintained a long presence in Asia have for the most part 
pursued  sustainable  strategies  and  have  in  turn  reaped  tremendous  payoffs  from  their 
long-term commitment to their operations in Asia. 
the  development  of  Asia’s 
it  could  affect 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Mahatma Gandhi once said “You must be the change that you wish to see 
in the world”. This might be said for Asia today. Even as our minds are also pre-occupied 
with addressing the current financial and economic challenges before us, our agenda is also 
to build a stronger future. Asia is therefore committed to taking the important steps today to 
ensure  our  resilience  to  future  shocks  and  thus  secure  the  stronger  foundations  for  our 
collective growth and stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
