Mario Draghi: Strengthening the foundations of the euro area and 
maintaining price stability 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Wirtschaftstag 
2012  “Kapitalismus  in  der  Krise?  Die  Zukunft  der  Marktwirtschaft”  der  Volksbanken 
Raiffeisenbanken,  organised  by  Genossenschaftsverband  e.V.,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
7 November 2012. 
 Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
Es ist mir eine große Freude, heute hier bei Ihnen zu sein. 
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak to you today. Small- and medium-sized 
enterprises – and the banks that finance them – are the backbone of the German economy. 
Your continued success is vitally important – not only for Germany, but also as a key driver 
of growth and employment in the euro area as a whole.  
For this reason, you are a very important constituency for the European Central Bank (ECB). 
We  pay  close  attention  to  your  experiences  and  your  views  of  the  future.  For  example, 
through surveys that we conduct twice a year, we are able to gather valuable information on 
the access to finance of smaller companies in the euro area.  
The most recent survey was released only last Friday and relates to the period from April to 
September  2012.  It  contains  information  from  about  7,000  small  and  medium-size  firms 
throughout the euro area, of which around 1,000 are from Germany.  
The findings are encouraging for firms in Germany. Banks remain willing to provide them with 
loans. But the situation for SMEs in the euro area overall is more difficult. Many are reporting 
a deteriorating financing situation. The availability of bank loans for SMEs across countries 
has become increasingly divergent. 
These developments reflect the fact that the economic and financial situation in the euro area 
remains challenging. I would like to use my address today to discuss that situation and to 
share with you the ECB’s views. I will focus on two themes in particular. 
My first theme will be the important steps being taken by governments to put the euro area 
on  the  path  back  to  stability.  Individually,  they  are  addressing  their  deep-rooted  economic 
challenges. Collectively, they are working to strengthen the foundations of the euro area.  
My second theme will be the measures taken by the ECB to maintain price stability and to 
remove unfounded fears about the euro area. These measures are essential to ensure that 
our low interest rates are passed through to the real economy. 
The current economic situation 
Let me begin with the current situation in the euro area.  
Unemployment  is  deplorably  high.  Overall  economic  activity  is  weak  and  it  is  expected  to 
remain weak in the near term. And the growth of money and credit are subdued.  
In this context, inflation is well contained. We expect it to fall below 2% next year. 
Germany has so far been largely insulated from some of the difficulties elsewhere in the euro 
area.  But  the  latest  data  suggest  that  these  developments  are  now  starting  to  affect  the 
German economy. This is also evident in the KfW-ifo-Mittelstandsbarometer.  
Germany is an open and integrated economy, so it is not surprising that a slowdown in the 
rest of the euro area has an impact here. Intra-euro area trade amounts to around 40% of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
German GDP. And around 65% of foreign direct investment in Germany comes from other 
euro area countries. 
But it is less often noted how problems in the wider euro area affect the financial situation 
in Germany. It is the weak euro area economy that is keeping interest rates here at very low 
levels.  And  it  is  the  crisis  of  confidence  in  some  euro  area  countries  that  is  causing  safe-
haven flows of money into Germany, depressing interest rates even further. 
This  highlights  the  fact  that  countries  in  a  single  currency  area  are  connected  like 
communicating vessels. A change in one vessel creates an equal change in all the others. 
As interest rates rise in countries in difficulty, they fall in strong countries like Germany. As 
TARGET2  liabilities  increase  in  some  countries  due  to  capital  outflows,  TARGET2  claims 
increase in Germany due to capital inflows.  
Financial  developments  in  Germany  are  the  mirror-image  of  financial  developments  in  the 
rest of the euro area. And this means that measures to ensure the stability of the euro area 
as a whole will also be to the benefit of Germany. 
So  let  me  now  turn  to  the  actions  being  taken  by  governments  to  achieve  that  goal  of 
stability. 
improvements 
Actions by governments to restore stability 
Across  the  whole  euro  area,  governments  are  making  determined  efforts  to  reverse 
economic imbalances. They are implementing reforms to redress the misguided policies of 
the past and to create sustainable long-term growth. It is a difficult road and there is still a 
long way to go. But the early signs are encouraging. 
Fiscal consolidation is progressing well in most countries. The International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) forecasts that the euro area’s primary budget will be almost in balance this year. By 
comparison, Japan will have a primary deficit of 9% of GDP, the United States 6.5% and the 
UK more than 5%.  
We  are  also  seeing  some  noteworthy 
in  competitiveness.  Price 
competitiveness  has  improved  significantly  in  several  euro  area  countries.  And  current 
account deficits are falling.  
For example, the countries under full EU-IMF programmes have seen their unit labour costs 
improve  by  more  than  10%  since  2008,  relative  to  the  euro  area  average.  Their  current 
accounts have improved by around 8% of GDP since then. 
Governments have also taken measures to strengthen the rules and institutions that guide 
economic  policies  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  positive 
developments  do  not  simply  reverse  when  economic  conditions  improve  and  markets 
stabilise. 
One notable example is the new fiscal compact, which will provide a strong tool for keeping 
budgets close to balance in the future. Governments have also set up a new framework to 
prevent and correct unsustainable developments in the private sector. 
In  short,  some  hard  work  has  been  done  in  the  euro  area  to  unwind  imbalances  and  to 
reinforce governance. But there is still a lot more hard work to do. Maintaining the current 
momentum of reform is essential for putting the euro area on the path back to stability. 
Fragmentation in monetary policy transmission  
Let me now turn to the measures being taken by the ECB. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The confidence crisis and the process of adjustment across the euro area has weighed on 
short-term growth and dampened inflationary pressures. To maintain price stability, the ECB 
has lowered its interest rates to historically low levels.  
But  before  August  this  year,  our  low  interest  rates  were  not  reaching  companies  and 
households  evenly  across  the  euro  area.  In  some  countries,  interest  rate  reductions  were 
being fully passed on. In others, lending rates barely declined. And in a few countries, they 
had actually risen.  
This  divergence  happened  because  banks  in  some  countries  had  found  it  increasingly 
expensive to obtain funding from market sources. They therefore could not pass on the lower 
interest rates to their customers.  
This meant that monetary policy was unable to support the real economy in these countries. 
Smaller companies were affected the most, as was clear from our surveys of SMEs. And as 
companies  in  the  euro  area  are  very  dependent  on  bank  loans  for  financing,  some 
economies were being forced into a damaging cycle.  
Economic  activity  was  weakening.  Public 
finances  were  deteriorating.  Banks  and 
governments were being forced to pay even higher interest rates. And credit and economic 
growth were then falling further, leading to rising unemployment and reduced consumption 
and investment. 
This situation posed serious risks not only for the countries concerned, but for the whole euro 
area.  It  was  hindering  the  overall  economic  recovery.  It  was  even  damaging  the  single 
market,  as  healthy  companies  were  being  curtailed  in  financing  solely  because  of  their 
location. 
If  this  situation  had  been  left  unaddressed,  it  could  have  created  a  risk  of  deflation  and 
threatened the ECB’s ability to ensure price stability. That is why we decided that action was 
essential. 
Understanding the ECB’s response 
How did the ECB respond to this situation?  
In our analysis, a key reason why our low interest rates were not being passed on was that, 
earlier this year, some investors had become influenced by imagined scenarios of disaster. 
They were therefore charging very high interest rates to governments and private borrowers 
in countries they perceived to be most vulnerable. 
These interest rates went beyond levels warranted by economic fundamentals and justifiable 
risk  premia.  Interest  rates  do  not  have  to  be  identical  across  the  euro  area.  But  it  is 
unacceptable  if  the  reason  for  large  differences  is  the  fragmentation  of  capital  markets 
caused by fears of a euro area break-up. 
It was clear to us that governments could not address these break-up fears alone. The only 
way to restore market confidence and the proper transmission of our monetary policy was a 
fully credible backstop against disaster scenarios. 
Our new programme of Outright Monetary Transactions provides this backstop by allowing 
for unlimited interventions in government bond markets. This commitment has generated a 
lot  of  debate.  But  we  have  to  understand  how  markets  work.  Our  actions  have  to  send  a 
clear signal to markets that their fears about the euro area are baseless. 
It  is  important  to  stress  that  “unlimited”  does  not  mean  uncontrolled.  Most  importantly,  to 
qualify for interventions, countries must have agreed a European Stability Mechanism (ESM) 
programme with strict conditionality and IMF involvement. The ECB will only intervene if the 
policy conditions under that programme continue to be met. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Conditionality is very important. It ensures that countries continue to reform while the ECB is 
active. It provides a clear basis for us to terminate our operations if the programme is not 
complied with in full. And it also protects the ECB’s independence, as we will not be forced to 
substitute for a lack of actions by governments. 
Consequences of the ECB’s actions 
So  what  can  citizens  expect  will  be  the  consequences  of  the  new  programme?  Let  me 
emphasise three key points. 
First, our actions will not lead to disguised financing of governments.  
Interventions will take place solely on the secondary market, where bonds already issued are 
traded. This is fully consistent with the Treaty’s prohibition on monetary financing. And since 
we will only purchase bonds with a remaining maturity of between one and three years, there 
will still be ample room for market discipline on governments at longer maturities. 
Second, our actions will not lead to inflation. 
The  weak  overall  economic  situation,  combined  with  slow  money  growth,  means  that  the 
risks  of  inflation  are  currently  very  low  over  the  medium  term.  Our  interventions  will  not 
change this outlook. In fact, for every euro we inject with our interventions, we will withdraw a 
euro. So they will not affect monetary conditions. 
Furthermore,  we  see  no  signs  that  our  announcement  has  affected  inflation  expectations. 
They are firmly anchored because we have always delivered price stability. And citizens can 
trust  that  we  will  continue  to  do  so:  price  stability  remains  our  mandate  and  our  sole 
objective. 
Third, our actions will not lead to greater risks for taxpayers in Germany. 
Taxpayers are protected by the fact that our interventions will take place only in countries 
with sound economic and fiscal policies. Their continued commitment to these policies will be 
ensured by the ESM programme. And the ECB will assess compliance with this programme 
in full independence.  
Moreover,  by  normalising  conditions  in  financial  markets,  our  actions  will  help  reverse  the 
capital  flows  into  Germany  that  are  creating  some  distortions  here.  This  should  ultimately 
support the savers, pension funds and insurance companies that depend on interest income. 
And it should reduce TARGET2 imbalances. 
In  other  words,  ECB  actions  that  support  market  confidence  are  of  benefit  not  only  to 
countries in difficulty, but also to the euro area as a whole. Our measures ensure the proper 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  which  means  neither  excessively  high  interest  rates  nor 
excessively low interest rates. The measures enable the ECB to continue to maintain price 
stability for the benefit of all citizens of the euro area. 
The  announcement  on  OMTs  has  already  triggered  positive  effects.  Sentiment  in  financial 
markets has improved significantly. Excessive government bond spreads have gone down, a 
number  of  banks  in  stressed  countries  have  been  able  to  regain  access  to  markets  and 
Target2 balances have broadly stabilised.  
The way forward 
Let me draw to a close. 
Actions by the ECB can build confidence in the euro area in the near term. But only actions 
by governments can secure confidence in the euro area over the longer term. In particular, 
governments need to work together to establish a stronger institutional structure for the euro 
area. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  process  began  in  June  this  year  with  what  has  been  called  the  “Four  Presidents’ 
Report”. That report – of which I am a co-author – identified four key pillars on which a stable 
and  prosperous  monetary  union  should  be  built.  These  pillars  are  financial  union,  fiscal 
union, economic union and political union. 
In the near term, the most important pillar is financial union. Financial union is essential in a 
single  currency  area  where  cross-border  capital  flows  can  lead  to  credit  booms  and  other 
imbalances – and where the negative effects of a bust can spread rapidly to other members.  
One  essential  part  of  financial  union  is  a  single  banking  supervisor.  As  you  know,  the 
European  Commission has  recently  proposed  that  the  new  supervisor  should  be  based  at 
the  ECB.  This  is  important  to  ensure  consistency  across  the  euro  area  and  to  prevent 
regulatory capture. Day-to-day tasks, however, would remain with national supervisors who 
have the competence and resources to implement them. 
But  financial  union  does  not  have  to  imply  the  pooling  of  deposit  guarantee  schemes,  an 
issue  that  I  know  is  of  concern  in  this  country.  Organising  and  funding  deposit  guarantee 
schemes can remain a national responsibility, with comparable effectiveness.  
In  the  longer  term,  all  four  pillars  are  equally  important.  They  are  the  bedrock  for  the 
enormous potential of the single currency for Europe’s citizens. 
Completing economic and monetary union would give citizens greater security against any 
future crisis. It would create the foundations for sustainable growth and employment. For all 
citizens of the euro area, it is therefore essential that Europe’s leaders stay on course.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
