Erkki Liikanen: On the structural reforms of banking after the crisis 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the High-
level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector,  at  the  Centre  for 
European Policy Studies, Brussels, 23 October 2012. 
Changes in banking in the run-up to the crisis 
 The new landscape 
In  the  years  preceding  the  global  financial  crisis  that  started  in  2007,  the  landscape  of 
banking had gone through major changes. Global financial institutions had grown ever bigger 
in size and scope and their organizational complexity had increased, adding to their opacity. 
They had become strongly interconnected via increasingly long chains of claims as well as 
correlated  risk  exposures,  arising  from  increasingly  similar  investment  strategies.  Their 
leverage  had  strongly  increased  and  the  average  maturity  of  their  own  funding  had 
shortened. 
Driving forces 
Behind  these  trends  were  forces  that  intensified  competition  in  banking;  technological 
development and deregulation. Advances in information technology as well as in investment 
theory and practice meant that commercial banks faced increasing competition both on their 
liability side and asset side.1  
New savings alternatives to bank deposits, such as money market mutual funds, proliferated 
and new opportunities for borrowing, in addition to bank loans, emerged. In fact, an entire 
shadow banking sector developed, comprising a chain of non-bank institutions which  were 
able to provide similar financial intermediary services as traditional banks. 
In this environment, deregulation was partly a response to this and allowed banks to cope 
with the increasing pressure from non-bank competitors. 
In the US, the gradual unwinding and the ultimate repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act in the late 
1990s  made  it  possible  to  reunite  investment  banking  and  commercial  banking  which  had 
been separated since the crisis of the 1930s.2 
In  Europe,  the  universal  banking  model  already  had  a  longer  history  of  combining 
commercial banking and investment banking under the same roof.  
However,  there  was  a  trend  before  the  crisis,  among  the  biggest  European  banking 
institutions,  to  strengthen  their  focus  on  investment  banking,  including  trading  operations, 
and to increase wholesale funding to the point of excess. Part of this trend was driven by the 
growing demand by non-financial firms for risk management services. 
With more freedom to choose their business models, banks sought for economies of scale 
and scope and strived to take advantage of diversification benefits from multiple sources of 
income. 
Commercial  banking  moved  increasingly  away  from  customer  relationship-based  banking 
where loans are granted and then held until maturity to the “originate and distribute” model 
where granted loans are pooled, then securitized and sold to investors. 
                                                
1  See e.g. Hoenig and Morris (2011): “Restructuring the Banking System to Improve Safety and Soundness”. 
2  See e.g. Pennacchi (2012): “Narrow banking”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This  shift  in  the  business  model  increased  traditional  banks’  connections  to  the  shadow 
banking  sector  and  they  became  part  of  the  long  intermediation  chains  characteristic  of 
shadow banking.3 
The  increasing  influence  of  investment  banking oriented management culture  also  spurred 
the 
in  commercial  banking,  reinforced  by  managerial 
compensation schemes that were based on short-term performance.  
Investment banks in turn transformed themselves from partnerships to public corporations. 
This  helped  them  grow  but  also  provided  them  with  incentives  to  take  risks  that  partners 
would not have taken with their own money. 
focus  on  short-term  profits 
Contributing macroeconomic factors 
The  expansion  of  banks’  balance  sheets  in  the run-up to  the  crisis  was fuelled  by  several 
macroeconomic factors.  
First, global imbalances especially between the leading emerging economies and the United 
States  developed  as  globalization  continued.  Accumulating  surpluses  in  the  emerging 
economies increased their demand for (seemingly) safe assets.4  
Partly  as  a  response  to  this  growing  demand,  the  advanced  western  financial  markets 
offered  financial  innovations  that  increasingly  utilized  securitization  of  previously  illiquid 
assets such as (subprime) mortgages. In Europe, imbalances started to develop within the 
euro area, with many countries experiencing overheating of their property markets.  
Another important macroeconomic factor was that, in the aftermath of the slower economic 
growth  of  the  early  2000,  the  monetary  policy  stance  both  in  the  US  and  Europe  was 
relatively light. 
Finally,  the  wide-spread  consensus  of  “the  great  moderation”  fostered  expectations  of 
declining  macroeconomic  risks.  This  was  based  on  growing  evidence  that  business  cycle 
fluctuations were getting smaller and inflation rates were getting lower and steadier.  
Lack of restraints from regulation, supervision and market discipline 
Problems with capital requirements 
The Basel capital requirements on banks proved ineffective in restraining the strong growth 
in banks’ leverage and balance sheet size. Most importantly, the Basel I and II rules required 
very  little  common  equity.  Much  of  the  eligible  capital  had  poor  loss  absorbing  capacity, 
which helped trigger the crisis.  
Secondly, what was important for the global reach of the financial crisis was that much of the 
asset  and  mortgage  backed  securities,  originating  from  the  US,  ended  up  on  European 
banks’ balance sheets.5  
This  was  partly  spurred  by  differences  in  American  and  European  banks’  capital 
requirements as the EU moved ahead to implement the Basel II reform in full while the US 
largely  stayed  in  Basel  I  and  maintained  a  separate  leverage  ratio  requirement.  In  effect, 
capital requirements on perceived low-risk assets, such as mortgage backed securities, were 
lower in Europe than in the US.  
                                                
3  See e.g. Adrian and Shin (2010):” The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 
2007–09”. 
4  See e.g. Bernanke, Bertaut, Pounder DeMarco, and Kamin (2011): “International capital flows and the returns 
to safe assets in the United States, 2003–2007”. 
5  See e.g. Shin (2012): “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  third  set  of  regulatory  problems  concerned  the  Basel  capital  requirements  on  banks’ 
trading book positions. The Basel rules allowed banks to lower their capital requirements by 
securitizing  loans  from  the  banking  book  and  taking  corresponding  risks  onto  their  trading 
books.  
For instance, banks provided short-term loan commitments, which had very low Basel capital 
requirements, to off-balance sheet special-purpose investment vehicles (SIVs) which in turn 
funded  mortgage-backed  securities.  This  is  an  important  example  of  how  and  why  banks 
were strongly connected with the shadow banking sector.  
It  has  been  suggested  that  many  of  the  loan  securitizations  were  motivated  by  such 
regulatory arbitrage rather than credit risk transfer which would aim at a better diversification 
of credit risks among banks and other financial institutions and insurance companies.6  
The role of overly optimistic agency ratings used to market the securitized assets, and used 
as a basis for capital requirements, should not be dismissed either. 
Fourth,  many  risk-weights  used  in  the  Basel  framework  to  determine  the  effective  capital 
requirements were simply too low, as was revealed by the crisis. 
Lack of market discipline and the too-big-to-fail problem 
The increasing complexity of structures and products, and the financial sector’s increasing 
interconnectedness, along with growing size, led to reduced transparency of bank balance 
sheets.  
This  should  logically  have  rung  alarm  bells  among  investors,  especially  among  banks’ 
uninsured debt holders, at some point. However, the opposite seems to have happened: the 
markets rewarded size by charging lower debt margins from the biggest institutions.7  
This  suggests  that  there  was  a  perception  among  market  participants  that  the  biggest 
financial  institutions  enjoyed  an  implicit  public  guarantee.  These  institutions  could  not  be 
allowed to fail; in other words, they had become too big to fail. 
In a market environment where the price of a bank’s own debt funding is insensitive to the 
risks the bank takes and decreases with the bank’s size, the bank has a strong incentive to 
further increase its leverage by taking on even more debt and continue to grow in size. 
Another way for banks to benefit from cheap funding is deposits which are explicitly insured 
and whose interest rates are consequently insensitive to banks’ risk taking. 
To  sum  up,  neither  banks’  debt  holders  nor  depositors  had  proper  incentives  to  react  to 
banks’ increasing opacity, leverage and risk-taking.  
Lack of a systemic aspect 
There  was  clearly  the  lack  of  a  sufficient,  systemic  (macro-prudential)  aspect  to  banking 
supervision and regulation prior to the crisis. 
The  fundamental  problem  is  that  banks  themselves  do  not  have  an  incentive  to  fully 
internalize the social cost stemming from their own contribution to system wide risks into their 
business decisions.8  
In the absence of substitutive regulatory and supervisory measures, systemic risks built up in 
the form of ever larger, more complex and more leveraged financial institutions. 
Three main weaknesses ought to be mentioned. 
                                                
6  See e.g. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010): “Securitization without risk transfer”. 
7  See e.g. Haldane (2010): “The $100 billion question”. 
8  See e.g. Richardson (2012): “Why the Volcker Rule is a useful tool for managing systemic risk”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
First, the Basel minimum capital requirements were based on stand-alone risks of a bank. 
For  instance,  the  Basel  rules  entail  no  direct  measure  of  an  asset’s  exposure  to  systemic 
risk, such as home and real estate loans’ exposure to the business cycle. 
Second, liquidity risks resulting from short-term money market funding were not part of the 
Basel  minimum  capital  requirements.  This  was  a  problem  because  excessive  short-term 
money  market  funding  increases  interconnectedness  and  thereby  systemic  risk  in  the 
financial system.  
Moreover, if a rapid growth of lending, for example to a booming property market, can only 
be financed from the short-term markets, it is often an indication of growing risks on a bank’s 
asset side.9  
Third, the existing supervisory structures focused on risks facing institutions rather than the 
financial system as a whole. 
Public reaction to the crisis and need to rebuild trust 
The huge cost of the financial crisis, both in terms of direct public support to banks and lost 
economic  output  has  sadly  fallen  to  tax  payers.  This  has  caused  an  understandable  and 
justified public outcry. 
Trust needs to be rebuilt between banks and the general public, and the coordinative role of 
the regulatory reform is central in this process. But management teams and boards of banks 
also play a crucial role in rebuilding trust. In order to succeed in this, we must make sure that 
also  in  banking  not  only  gains  but  also  losses,  incurred from  private  risk-taking fall  on  the 
risk-takers. 
Our perspective has to be long enough, well beyond the current troubles. But it is also of vital 
importance to carefully plan the implementation of reforms in order to ensure the continuation 
of  smooth  provision  of  lending  and  other  vital  banking  services  in  the  current  challenging 
environment. 
Regulatory response to the crisis 
Summary of problems 
The problems in banking, revealed by the crisis, can be summarized as follows. 
There  has  been  excessive  risk-taking,  excessive  leverage,  excessive  complexity  and 
inadequate capital.  
An  important  form  of  risk-taking  has  been  the  growing  maturity  mismatch  between  assets 
and liabilities as funding from the market has increasingly shortened. Excessive real estate 
lending increased banks’ exposure to macroeconomic and hence systematic risks. All these 
factors have increased the likelihood of bank failures. 
Secondly,  there  have  been  extensive  interconnectedness  and  very  limited  possibilities  to 
resolve failed banks, including possibilities to shift the burden to banks’ creditors. Both these 
factors  increase  the  impact  of  bank  failures  or,  alternatively,  the  cost  to  tax  payers. 
Interconnectedness  also  increases  the  risk  of  bank  failure  because  it  increases  banks’ 
opacity  which can lead to the loss of investors’ trust thereby making banks more prone to 
runs. 
Thirdly,  there  have  been  competitive  distortions  via  explicit  and  implicit  subsidies,  which 
reduce both internal market efficiency and the level playing field. For instance, the availability 
                                                
9  See e.g. Shin (2010): “Macroprudential policies beyond Basel III”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of insured deposits to fund other, more risky, banking activities has skewed incentives and 
competition. 
Banks’ incentives to sound long-run risk management have also weakened. 
National measures to implement regulatory reforms and the lack (until recently) of sufficient 
EU wide frameworks in supervision and resolution are a concern to the well functioning of the 
internal market in the area of banking. Common rules and institutions would also facilitate the 
much needed undoing of the bank-sovereign loop. 
What has already been done? 
In response to the crisis, international and EU wide regulatory reforms have been focused on 
two crucial areas, capital adequacy and liquidity requirements (Basel III) and recovery and 
resolution (e.g. the Commission’s proposal). 
If  effective,  the  new  and  still  evolving  capital  adequacy  requirements  of Basel  III  can go  a 
long way to reducing incentives to take excessive risks and the use of excessive leverage.  
Most  obviously,  Basel  III  addresses  the  issue  of  inadequate  capital.  Basel  III  liquidity 
requirements can also reduce banks’ interconnectedness by restricting the use of short-term 
market funding. They will also be helpful in reducing excessive leverage and building liquidity 
buffers.  
Basel  III  also  reduces  complexity  and  interconnectedness  by  blocking  opportunities  for 
regulatory arbitrage which under Basel II was possible via complex securitisation structures. 
Recovery  and  resolution  regimes  for  systemically  important  financial  institutions  aim  at 
creating a framework which did not exist at EU level prior to the crisis. If successful, such 
plans can greatly reduce the social costs of bank failures and reduce the need for the implicit 
public guarantees. This means that recovery and resolution plans can reduce the distortive 
risk-taking incentives created by public bail out expectations. 
Moreover, a number of initiatives have been launched with the aim of reducing contagion and 
complexity  in the financial market. In order to improve transparency, accounting standards 
are  in  the  process  of  being  reviewed.  Banks  are  urged  to  improve  risk  management  and 
corporate governance practices and new macro-prudential tools will be given to international 
and national authorities to better tackle asset price bubbles and procyclicality in lending. 
Proposals of the High-level Expert Group 
The  High-level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector  has 
presented a structural proposal to be implemented at the EU level. 
In  the  process  of  reaching  the  final  outcome,  the  Group  considered  two  avenues  as  a 
possible way forward. 
In  the  first  avenue,  additional,  non-risk-weighted  capital  requirements  on  trading  activities 
and banks’ credible recovery and resolution plans, subject to supervisory approval, were the 
main instruments.  
Such measures would be in line with the ideas of academic researchers who have suggested 
that a review of capital requirements is the best way to tackle risks in trading 10and who have 
emphasized the need to develop bank resolution and recovery mechanisms.11 
                                                
10  See e.g. Duffie (2012): “Market making under the proposed Volcker Rule”. 
11  See e.g. The Squam Lake Report (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
However, if the bank were not able to prove that its required recovery and resolution plan 
was credible, separation of certain banking activities could be imposed. 
In the second avenue, separation of retail and investment banking would be imposed. 
Separation  would  be  consistent  with  research  which  emphasizes  that  capital  requirements 
are not sufficient to limit excessive risk-taking incentives induced by deposit insurance if risks 
are difficult to measure and risk profiles can be changed rapidly.12 
Sufficiently  wide  separation  of  investment  banking  activities  would  also  avoid  definitional 
problems  which  arise,  for  example,  when  the  dividing  line  is  pursued  between  proprietary 
trading and market making.13  
Eventually, the Group converged to the following five proposals to be implemented at the EU 
level. 
Proposal for mandatory separation 
1. 
The Group proposes a mandatory separation of certain trading related activities according to 
the following three principles. 
First, if the share of proprietary trading, market making and certain other securities-related 
businesses in the balance sheet exceeds a given threshold, banking groups must organize 
these businesses to a separate legal entity (“trading entity”). 
Second, the trading entity must be separately capitalized and must not be funded by insured 
deposits.  
And third, the deposit-taking part of the banking group (“deposit bank”) is not allowed under 
any  circumstances  to  support  the  trading  entity  either  directly  or  indirectly  by  making 
transfers  or  commitments  to  the  extent  that  its  capital  adequacy  including  capital  buffer 
requirements would be endangered or that the general limits on large exposures would be 
violated. 
The threshold above which separation is required must be low enough so that the volume of 
activities below the threshold can be considered insignificant from the viewpoint of financial 
stability. 
The  other  businesses  that  must  be  separated  are  loans,  loan  commitments,  or  unsecured 
credit exposures to hedge funds (including prime brokerage), SIVs and other such entities of 
comparable nature. Private equity investments must also be separated. 
The client-driven trading positions against which the bank has hedged itself do not have to 
be separated. Also, securities underwriting does not have to be separated but it is important 
that risks in long-term positions possibly arising from underwriting are carefully monitored by 
supervisors. 
All other banking businesses are allowed to the deposit bank unless firm-specific recovery 
and resolution plans require otherwise. 
Only the deposit bank is allowed to provide retail payment services.  
The trading entity can engage in all banking activities which are not specifically mandated to 
the  deposit  bank.  For  instance,  the  trading  entity  is  allowed  to  make  loans  and  loan 
commitments to its customers. 
                                                
12  See e.g. Matutes and Vives (2000): “Imperfect competition, risk taking, and regulation in banking” and Boot 
and Ratnovski (2012): “Banking and trading”. 
13  See e.g. Blinder (2010): “It’s broke, let’s fix It: rethinking financial regulation”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The rationale for separation as a regulatory measure can be summarized in the following four 
points. 
First,  separation  is  a  way  of  prohibiting  banks  with  insured  deposits  from  engaging  in 
activities  whose risks are potentially high and difficult to measure precisely, and which are 
not essential to deposit banking. 
Second, separation of activities is the most direct instrument for tackling banks’ complexity 
and interconnectedness. As banks become simpler in structure, recovery and resolution will 
be easier.  
Third,  simpler  structures  can make  it  easier for the management  and  board  to  understand 
and  manage  and  for  outsiders  to  monitor  and  supervise  banking  institutions.  This  can 
enhance the effectiveness of market discipline and financial supervision. 
Fourth, separating deposit banking and trading entities can also reduce the mixing of the two 
different management cultures. 
The separation of activities is complementary to, rather than a substitute for, other areas of 
bank regulations.  
The  disadvantage  of  separating  banking  activities  may  be  that  the  benefits  of  scale  and 
scope  and  diversification  of  revenue  streams  are  reduced.  However,  evidence  on  the 
economies of scale and scope in banking as well as the benefits from diversification seems 
to be mixed. 
Most importantly, when separation is allowed to be carried out within the banking group, the 
banks’  ability  to  efficiently  provide  a  wide  range  of  financial  services  to  their  customers  is 
maintained. 
Additional separation conditional on the recovery and resolution plan 
2. 
A credible recovery and resolution plan implies that the bank stakeholders bear the costs of a 
possible  bank  failure  and  that  there  is  no  significant  harm  to  the  real  economy,  even  in  a 
crisis situation when many banks are in trouble at the same time. This would imply that no 
tax payer money is under threat of being used in a bail out. 
Therefore it is essential to strive for good recovery and resolution plans. A solid plan will also 
enhance the bank’s own risk management and potentially increase transparency of the bank 
to outsiders. 
The  European  Commission’s  plan  that  banks  need  to  draw  up  and  maintain  effective  and 
realistic recovery and resolution plans (RRP) is of utmost importance. Banks should be able 
to demonstrate the ability to isolate retail banking activities from trading activities and to wind 
down  significant  trading  risk  positions  in  a  crisis  situation,  in  a  manner  that  does  not 
jeopardize the bank’s financial health nor does significantly contribute to systemic risk. 
A credible recovery and resolution plan is a challenging goal to achieve, so the criteria on 
passing the credibility “test” must be set high. The European Banking Authority (EBA) plays a 
central  role  as  a  standard  setter  in  ensuring  that  the  RRPs  and  their  supervisory 
assessments are applied uniformly across the Member States. 
The  Group  suggests  that  if  a  bank’s  recovery  and  resolution  plan,  assessed  by  the 
supervisor, is not acceptable, a more comprehensive separation of activities can be required 
than under the proposed mandatory separation. For example, a wider separation might have 
to cover all trading related assets.  
Facilitating the use of bail-in instruments 
3. 
The Group strongly promotes the proposal to use bail-in instruments to further increase the 
loss absorbing capability of banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
In order to limit interconnectedness within the banking system, it is preferable that the bail-in 
instruments should not be held by investors within the banking sector. 
In order to create a liquid market for the bail-in instruments, it would be essential to carefully 
define  their  contractual  properties  in  order  to  reduce  uncertainty  and  ambiguity  and  hence 
facilitate their efficient market pricing.  
Therefore the Group is of the opinion that the bail-in instruments should be applied only to 
particular debt instruments and to make sure that investors know the eventual treatment of 
the respective instruments in a crisis situation. 
4.  
A review of capital requirements on trading assets and real estate related 
instruments 
The measurement of risks inherent in trading assets is prone to a significant “model risk”; the 
risk that the model itself, used in the risk measurement is inaccurate. 
The severity of model risk stems largely from the presence of “tail risks” in trading assets. 
These  are  risks  which  cause  catastrophic  losses  but  which  materialize  with  a  very  low 
probability.  Moreover,  tail  risks  are  intertwined  with  severe  liquidity  shortages  which 
materialize in systemic crises. Hence, almost by definition, tail risks are difficult to model and 
measure. 
Separation of the riskiest trading activities from deposit banking is a key to limiting the impact 
of these risks.  
Other  measures  available  are  robust  capital  requirements  which  do  not  heavily  rely  on 
models,  and  limits  on  risk  concentrations  and  counterparty  exposures.  In  this  respect,  the 
Group acknowledges the important work in reviewing the trading book capital requirements 
conducted by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
The Group recommends that the Commission should carry out an evaluation of whether the 
resultant  amendments,  in  terms  of  robust  capital  requirements  and  limits  on  risk 
concentrations and counterparty exposures, would be sufficient at the EU level. 
The  Group  recommends  that  the  Commission  should  also  evaluate  the  sufficiency  of  the 
current capital requirements on real estate related lending which has been the major source 
of losses in many financial crises, including the most recent one. 
Need to reinforce corporate governance reforms 
5. 
Finally, the Group strongly promotes the strengthening of corporate governance and control 
of banks. In particular the Group considers that it is necessary to augment existing corporate 
governance  reforms  by  specific  measures  to  1)  strengthen  boards  and  management; 
2) promote the risk management function; 3) rein in compensation for bank management and 
staff; 4) improve risk disclosure and 5) strengthen sanctioning powers.  
Comparison with other proposals 
An important objective of the mandatory separation, proposed by the Group, is simplicity and 
unambiguity. These facilitate implementation at the EU level. 
Furthermore, banking activities which naturally belong together should be conducted within 
the same legal entity.  
To promote these aims the proposed mandatory separation includes both proprietary trading 
and market making as differentiating these from one another would be challenging14 and, if 
                                                
14  See e.g. Duffie (2012): “Market making under the proposed Volcker Rule”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
placed in different legal entities within the same banking group, some natural synergies might 
be lost.  
In  this  respect,  the  proposal  makes  deposit  banks  somewhat  narrower  than  the  definition 
under  the  Volcker  Rule  in  the  United  States.  However,  an  important  difference  is  that  the 
proposed mandatory separation in the EU can take place within a banking group whereas 
the Volcker Rule prohibits proprietary trading from the entire banking group. 
Further, all corporate loans are allowed in deposit banks because differentiating among loans 
according to the customer size would be equally challenging at the EU level and important 
scale economies in corporate lending might be lost. 
This suggests that, as regards corporate lending, deposit banks would be somewhat broader 
than under the UK’s Independent Commission on Banking (ICB) proposal. 
Conclusions 
Remaining concerns 
Many observers have noted that major systemic risks can remain in the various parts of the 
banking system, even if these are separated from one another.15 This is a valid concern even 
though separation by definition reduces interconnectedness as a key source of systemic risk. 
The  possibility  to  further  review  capital  requirements  and  limits  on  risk  concentrations  and 
counterparty exposures in trading activities, as discussed in the other recommendations, are 
the means to further containing systemic risks. 
It  is  also  important  that  the  development  of  capital  surcharges  for  systemically  important 
institutions as well as macro-prudential tools such as caps on loan to value ratios (LTVs) is 
continued. 
An obvious danger lies in the possibility that structural measures, together with higher capital 
and liquidity requirements, may drive an increasing part of banking to the shadow banking 
sector.  
If this implies that market expectations of implicit public guarantees shift to the less regulated 
shadow banking sector, then the fundamental problem has not been solved.  This is a matter 
that needs further consideration and needs to be constantly monitored. Proactive measures 
may need to be taken. 
The role of banks in financing the European economy 
Banks play an important role in the society. 
Banks have a pivotal role in providing finance to households and firms. It is particularly so in 
Europe where the banks’ role in corporate finance has traditionally been large. 
The  banks’  role  in  corporate  finance  is  central  especially  for  small  and  medium  sized 
enterprises (SMEs). The continuous and smooth supply of banking services to SMEs is also 
essential to large corporations because SMEs are often subcontractors to them. 
It  is  of  utmost  importance  that  regulatory  reforms  as  a  whole  support  and  strengthen  the 
banking sector’s ability to continue to provide these socially vital financial services efficiently 
and in a stable manner. 
The  reputation  of  banks  and  the  public  trust  that  they  rely  on  has  been  severely  dented 
during  the  latest  financial  crisis.  This  has  hurt  not  only  banks  themselves  but  also  the 
economies and societies of Europe and the whole Western world. 
                                                
15  See e.g. Goodhart (2011): “The Vickers Report: An Assessment”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Trust and public acceptance must now be restored, and the proposals which the High-level 
Expert  Group  has  submitted for  the consideration  of  the  EU  Commission  will  contribute  to 
this end. Achieving this important aim will benefit the banking industry and our societies at 
large.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
