Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Crafting policy in a shifting operating 
environment 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the 2012 FINEX National Conference, Manila, 5 October 2012. 
 It is a pleasure to join you on your 44th National Conference. FINEX is unique in our market 
because you are an organization of professionals – rather than of specific institutions. In your 
vision/mission statement you declare you are the “leading national organization of financial 
professionals  and  practitioners”.  As  such,  you  represent  the  financial  expertise  across 
several industries. Let me underscore the term ...“expertise”. 
Therefore, it can be said that the “psyche” that moves financial markets is determined among 
your  membership.  I  use  the  term  psyche  here  to  refer  to  both  the  “expert  knowledge” 
accumulated through facts and figures and the “raw gut” that brings those facts and figures to 
life in the financial world... The trader instinct. The hunt for the gain. The “animal spirits” as 
John Maynard Keynes refers to. 
Risk taking behavior complicates policy  
I  was  reflecting  on  your  chosen  topic  –  “Driving  Growth  and  Competitiveness  Through 
Innovation”. Three big words… Growth, competitiveness and innovation. At first I thought of 
how  broad  the  topic  was,  especially  when  taken  against  the  very  specific  mandate  of  the 
BSP. And then it dawned on me that because market innovation is driven by your members’ 
“animal  spirits”,  this  topic  squares  quite  well  with  the  motivation  to  our  work  as  a  central 
bank…which has to do with the channels of transmission of monetary policy. Let me explain.  
The better known or more familiar channels of transmission of monetary policy are – interest 
rate, exchange rate, credit, asset prices and expectations. But there is one more channel that 
is  less-talked-about  but which  has  recently  become  prominent  both  in  the  literature  and  in 
global real world practice. This is the “risk taking channel of policy”, which has gained ground 
during this prolonged period of low global interest rates.  
Let me illustrate why this has been so. First, the low interest rate environment encourages 
agents to take more risk than they normally would…just to enhance yield on their portfolio. 
Second, low interest rates affect asset valuations… and therefore modify credit worthiness of 
some  corporates.  These  in  turn  encourage  the  structuring  of  financial  products  (through 
derivatives) for projects that may not normally meet credit standards.  
A global example of the risk taking channel is the now-familiar story of the mortgage crisis in 
the  US.  While  a  bank  that  securitized  its  mortgages  freed  up  liquidity  trapped  in  its 
non-tradable  long-term  receivables,  the  value  chain  of  continued  securitization  and 
re-securitization  proved  to  be  very  vulnerable  to  price  shocks.  Nobody quite  imagined  that 
the  loss  in  the  value  of  that  single  underlying  collateral  could  become  wholesale.  Nobody 
quite foresaw that we would get a global crisis, the socio-economic dislocations arising from 
which would not have yet fully abated nearly five years since it began.  
Closer to home, the example we can cite is market behaviour reflected in the magnitude and 
speed  of  capital  flows  into  the  country.  Accommodative  monetary  conditions  in  advanced 
economies,  the  weak  US  employment  picture,  and  the  still-unresolved  European  crisis 
continue to direct investors to re-balance their portfolios... And, Emerging Markets (including 
the Philippines) are currently an attractive target. This puts the peso under pressure of sharp 
swings against global currencies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Using the right tools for the job 
The peso appreciation has been recent topic of interest in news columns of academics and 
former  government  technocrats.  A  few  have  encouraged  the  BSP  to  “print  more  money” 
instead of sterilizing, as a response to capital inflows. They would like the BSP to be more 
“resolute  in  our  pushback”  on  the  exchange  rate  lest  we  lose  more  jobs  to  competitor 
countries like India. 
My  response  to  this  is  that  doing  so  would  be  inflationary.  “Printing  money”  to  absorb  the 
expected capital flows would lead to a tremendous expansion in domestic liquidity that would 
fan price pressures. In addition, the peso’s strength is largely fundamentally supported. So, 
official BSP action should only be to reduce excessive volatility in the rate movements. 
Capital flows are fickle and crafting monetary policy to address them is even trickier. It seems 
quite  simple  to  prescribe  monetary  easing.  But  that  seemingly  simple  construct  could  fan 
inflation  pressures,  lead  to  asset  bubbles  and  create  more  “problems”  beyond  what  we 
thought we were trying to solve to begin with. It is easy to let money lose, but it is not easy to 
“clean up” afterwards.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  emphasize  that  risk  taking  complicates  monetary  policy 
formulation and implementation. To address this, the BSP has had to use a menu of policy 
actions. We  have  not  limited  ourselves  to the  policy  rate.  But  we  have  used  an  enhanced 
policy tool kit. The kit includes allowing some exchange rate appreciation to account for the 
structural inflows and macroprudential regulations such as the increased risk weight on NDF 
transactions. The toolkit  also  includes  a  careful  build-up  of  our  reserves.  Reserves  are for 
insurance. But it is not easy to determine an “optimal level” as some have suggested. The 
risks we are now insuring against are also evolving. That said, our experience in the recent 
crisis and its aftermath has taught us that it is critical to use the right tools for the job.  
Competitiveness is more than the price 
Moving to the second big term in your theme – Competitiveness. The BSP’s contribution to 
competitiveness is maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment and banking regulatory 
framework. Within these, the market can plan well ahead, consider expansion, innovate and 
find market-based solutions to address risks. 
The BSP’s primary mandate is price stability. It’s noteworthy that since 2009, the BSP has 
been successful at keeping inflation well-within the Government’s official target range. And it 
appears that we would be able to do the same in 2012 and 2013. Our forecast for inflation is 
that  over  the  policy  horizon,  inflation  should  be  manageable.  Therefore  our  current  policy 
stance remains appropriate. In other words, you can expect interest rates to remain low over 
this period. But we will  make adjustments should circumstances warrant, including, among 
others, in the event tensions in the Middle East escalate and more weather-related supply 
chain disruptions occur.  
On the external front, the country’s external position is likely to remain robust, which in turn 
should  fundamentally  support  the  peso.  Our  experience  has  taught  us  that  allowing  the 
market room to determine the exchange rate is equitable and efficient. So far, (looking at the 
REER), the peso has maintained its competitiveness and volatility has just been in line with 
the region.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the BSP fully appreciates that when finance executives consider the 
macroeconomic operating environment, your ultimate unit of analysis is the corporate bottom 
line. You consider every transaction and how it would increase the value of the firm. This is 
well  and  good.  But  the  complication  arises  when  these  individual  “animal  spirits”  do  not 
behave  as  the  “invisible  hand”  of  Adam  Smith would  have  determined.  Oftentimes,  an  act 
that may be beneficial to a firm may actually turn out to be harmful when all other firms are 
engaged in the same transaction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  is  a  newer  appreciation  of  the  complexities  of  financial  markets.  In  order  to  create  a 
stable macro operating environment, the BSP must now go beyond stable interest rates and 
exchange rates. The BSP must now also ensure that the financial market accounts for how 
risk exposures interact with one another.  
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  monetary  stability  must  now  be  pursued  alongside 
financial stability. So far, through the series of reforms we have instituted, we have been able 
to  keep  the  banking  system  in  a  position  where  its  capital  is  able  to  absorb  significant 
external  shocks…  and  we  are  ready  for  the  adoption  of  Basel  3  capital  standards  starting 
2014. But this is not enough. 
At the BSP, we have formally taken on financial stability as a prudential task. A high-level 
committee  has  been  operating  for  this  purpose,  working  on  an  agenda  consistent  with 
international  reform  initiatives.  Although  still  at  the  early  stages,  we  have  already  initiated 
some prudential policies and built quantitative models for the singular purpose of mitigating 
the build-up of systemic risks. 
At  the  national  level,  the  Financial  Stability  Coordinating  Council  or  FSCC  has  been 
convened  as  well.  Composed  of  the  DOF,  IC,  SEC,  PDIC  and  the  BSP,  the  FSCC  is  to 
identify  areas  of  brewing  pressures  and  to  take  pro-active  measures  before  these  risks 
spillover. The agreed upon agenda of the FSCC covers quite a bit of ground. Many elements 
of the agenda are of direct relevance to the financial executive, regardless of whether you 
are in banking, securities, insurance or in the corporate field. 
Growth has to be inclusive 
The final big word in your theme is Growth. In every forum I have been invited to speak, I am 
always  asked  the  question,  what  can  BSP  do  to  sustain  growth,  alleviate  poverty  and 
improve income distribution?  
These questions and similar comments indicate that much is expected of the BSP... perhaps 
too much. Let me remind everyone that the mandate of the BSP is price stability, and we are 
now moving more towards price and financial stability. We have the tools to pursue these. 
But, monetary and financial stability cannot be expected to do everything. It has been said, 
one cannot push on a string. There are other government agencies that are more specifically 
geared for stimulating and maintaining growth.  
What we have done so far is endeavour to make credit and funding accessible at reasonable 
prices, commensurate to the risks agents are willing to take. For the needs of Main Street, 
we  are  in  partnership  with  other  government  agencies  on  the  capital  market  agenda.  On 
servicing  the  unbanked  and  marginalized,  the  BSP  has  1)  put  together  a  regulatory 
environment  that  has  encouraged  banks  to  design  suitable  financial  products,  and 
2) expanded our financial education and enhance consumer protection efforts.  
Innovation, competition, growth – role for Finex? 
Putting  all  three  big  words  together  –  innovation,  competition,  growth  –  there  is  clear 
recognition that the government agencies cannot possibly handle the tasks alone. We need 
the private sector to be our active partner.  
Here is where FINEX can play a major role. I mentioned at the onset that you are unique in 
your  representation.  As  such,  FINEX  should  be  called  upon  to  drive  growth  and 
competitiveness  by  pushing  innovations  that  go  beyond  the  bottom  line,  that  consider  the 
bigger picture, that contribute to financial stability. There are many ways by which you can 
pursue this in your own work. 
• 
You  can  avoid  the  temptation  of  leveraging  finance  through  carry  trades.  The 
pay-offs  may  look  enticing  but  compounded  risk  exposures  are  created  in  the 
process which often cannot be unwound without significant loss.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Credit  underwriting  standards  need  to  be  kept  high.  This  ensures  that  credit  is 
allocated  based  solely  on  the  merits  of  the  prospective  economic  activity  and  the 
counterparty’s ability to pay.  
Binding  market  conventions  and  redress  mechanisms  should  be  pursued.  Such 
conventions  set  the  bar  on  market  conduct  which  then  translate  to  uniformity  in 
behaviour and practice.  
Other  avenues  may  be  considered.  When  your  individual  creativities  are  pooled  together 
under the FINEX umbrella, the opportunities are limitless. 
Final thoughts 
I have covered quite a bit of ground this morning. But much of the breadth has been dictated 
by the call of the times. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  best  financial  investments  today  are  those  that  build  bigger 
markets  in  the  future.  Markets  wherein  stakeholders  are  better  aware  of  financial 
opportunities. Markets that are best able to withstand the build-up of system-wide risks. 
This,  in  my  view,  is  the  unique  opportunity  that  is  presented  to  a  unique  organization  of 
financial executives. Will FINEX rise to this challenge? 
Thank you and good morning to all of you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
