Kiyohiko G Nishimura: A tale of two programs in the early resolution of 
the deflation problem 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Niigata, 5 December 2012. 
 Introduction 
I  am  privileged  and  honored  to  be  here  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative  and 
business leaders in Niigata Prefecture. I deeply appreciate your support and cooperation in 
taking  part  in  interviews  and  surveys  conducted  by  our  Niigata  branch.  The  information 
from these interviews and surveys is invaluable for the Bank of Japan in grasping Japan’s 
financial  and  economic  developments  and  conducting  monetary  policy.  What  is  more,  we 
are  delighted  to  share  with  you  information  –  not  only  on  what  is  happening  in  Japan  but 
also  around  the  globe  –  on  various  occasions,  including  events  at  branches  like  the 
opportunity  we  are  enjoying  today. I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  and  also 
ask for your continued cooperation. 
Today  I  will  be  talking  about  the  early  resolution  of  the  deflation  problem  and  the  Bank’s 
two programs. In the first half of my talk, let me outline financial and economic developments 
since  the  summer.  In  the  latter  half,  I  will  explain  the  Bank’s  basic  thinking  on  monetary 
policy conduct, focusing on its two programs: the Asset Purchase Program, the total  amount 
of  which  the  Bank  at  the  end  of  October  decided  to  increase  for  the  second month in a 
row; and the Loan Support Program, which it decided to newly establish. 
I. 
Developments in overseas economies 
Deceleration in overseas economies becoming more severe 
Looking at developments in overseas economies since the second half of 2011, the negative 
impact of the European debt problem has spread globally through the effects on trade and 
business sentiment. As a  result, economic activity in many countries and regions, especially 
in  the  manufacturing  sector,  has  remained  in  a  deceleration  phase.  Every  April  and 
October,  the  Bank  releases  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter,  the 
Outlook  Report),  which  presents  Policy  Board  members’  assessment  of  economic  activity 
and  prices  based  on  their  forecasts. In  addition  to  the  semiannual  Outlook  Report,  the 
Bank  also  releases  interim  assessments  in  January  and  July  that  present  the  Bank’s 
revised forecasts. The interim assessment in July 2012 listed uncertainty regarding overseas 
economies  as  one  of  the  risk  factors  for  Japan’s  economy,  and  frankly  speaking,  my 
impression  is  that  these  risks  actually  materialized  within  a  short  period  of  time  since  this 
summer. 
Specifically, risks related to the European debt problem materialized and their effects spread. 
The negative  impact  of this  problem has grown, not  only  in  peripheral  European  countries 
but also in the core countries, through a decline in trade within the euro area and weakening 
business sentiment. Economic activity  in Europe has receded slowly, with real GDP for the 
euro  area  now  having  registered  negative  growth  for  four  consecutive  quarters.  This 
weakness  in  the  European  economy  is  affecting  not  only  exports  within  the  euro  area  but 
also  those  bound  for  outside  the  area,  and  has  started  to  affect  global  trade  and 
economic growth through global supply chain networks. 
In  addition, emerging  economies,  which  had  been hoped  to  drive  global  economic  growth, 
are lacking momentum. As for the Chinese economy, exports to Europe – which make up a 
large share in China’s total exports – have declined, the effects of excess investment in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
wake of the Lehman shock are starting to be felt, and inventory adjustments in a wide range 
of  areas,  including  materials  industries,  have  been  more  prolonged  than  expected,  though 
some  economic  indicators  have  shown  signs  of  improvement  very  recently. Partly  against 
the background of weakness in final demand in Europe and China, the pick-up in the NIEs 
and  the  ASEAN  economies  has  moderated,  particularly  in  exports  and  business  fixed 
investment in manufacturing in the corporate sector. 
Outlook for overseas economies 
With regard to the outlook for overseas economies, the current deceleration phase is likely 
to continue for the time being, but we expect that against the background of a sustainable 
recovery  in  the U.S.  economy  and  a  pick-up  in  the Chinese  economy  the global  economy 
will gradually emerge from that phase and enter a moderate recovery thereafter. Uncertainty 
about the outlook for overseas economies, however, is not insubstantial, including  the  timing 
of  economic  recovery.  Attention  should  continue  to  be  paid  to  the  possibility  that  the 
European  debt  problem  may  become  more  serious. While  the  U.S. economy  continues 
to  be  on  a  moderate  recovery  trend,  the  momentum  toward  recovery  warrants  careful 
monitoring given that uncertainty about the fiscal policy outlook, in particular with regard to 
the “fiscal cliff”, remains significant. As for the Chinese economy,  improvement  in  the supply 
and  demand  balance  may  require  considerable  time,  especially  in  materials  industries, 
where  there  is  excess  production  capacity. Moreover, Japan-China relations  have  already 
started  to  affect  a  number  of  areas  and  there  is  concern  that  they  may  have  wider 
implications for Japan’s economy. 
Although  global  financial  markets  were  unstable  until  this  summer,  since  then,  investors’ 
risk aversion triggered by the European debt problem has abated somewhat, partly owing to 
the fact that European authorities have carried out a range of policy measures. Nevertheless, 
particular  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  developments  in  financial  markets,  as  fiscal  and 
economic structural reforms in Spain and Greece are still underway. 
II. 
Recent developments in Japan’s economy 
Weakening economic activity 
I  will  now  explain  recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy.  In  the  first  half  of  2012, 
Japan’s  economy  registered  high  growth:  real  GDP  in  January–March  grew  at  an  annual 
rate of  5.2  percent  as  domestic  demand  remained  firm,  mainly  supported  by  both  public 
and  private  reconstruction-related  demand.  However,  in  July–September,  GDP  growth 
turned negative for the first time since October–December 2011, showing an annual decline 
of 3.5 percent. 
Reflecting  the  deceleration  in  overseas  economies,  exports  and  industrial  production  have 
decreased. This weakness in exports and industrial production has started to affect domestic 
demand,  which  has  remained  firm  thus  far.  For  instance,  business  fixed  investment  in  the 
manufacturing  sector  has  shown  some  weakness,  mainly  due  to  the  deceleration 
in 
overseas  economies. Going  forward,  we  need  to  remain  vigilant  as  to whether there are 
any signs of firms delaying business fixed investment. In the manufacturing sector, the year-
on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  number  of  new  job  offers  has  been  negative  since  June 
2012; moreover, overtime hours worked in the economy overall have also been decreasing 
somewhat, led by a decline in the manufacturing sector. Private consumption  has  lost  some 
momentum,  partly  due  to  the  decline  following  the  expiry  of subsidies for the purchase of 
environmentally friendly cars. 
On  the  whole,  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  resilient,  mainly  supported  by 
reconstruction-related  demand  in  a  broad  sense,  including  investment  related  to  disaster 
prevention  and  energy. It  is,  however,  unlikely  to  increase  at  a  pace  that  will  offset  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
weakness in exports. Owing to these developments, the Bank judges that Japan’s economy 
as a whole has been weakening somewhat. 
As for prices, the year-on-year decline in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh 
food) peaked at a rate of 2.4 percent in August 2009 after the Lehman shock. Since then, 
the aggregate supply and demand balance – which shows the rate of utilization of labor and 
fixed  capital  –  has  been  improving  moderately  and  the  year-on-year  rate  of  decline  in  the 
CPI has been shrinking steadily since end-2009 and recently has been around 0 percent. 
the  aforementioned  developments 
Outlook for Japan’s economy 
Based  on 
in  overseas  demand,  exports  and 
industrial production are expected to continue decreasing and Japan’s economy as a whole 
to remain relatively  weak  for  the  time  being. With  the  economy  weakening  somewhat,  the 
Bank judged  it  appropriate  to  undertake  additional  monetary  easing  and  at  the  Monetary 
Policy Meeting on October 30 decided to further enhance its monetary easing for the second 
month in  a  row,  which  I  will  elaborate  on  shortly  with  regard  to  the  policy  decisions. The 
Bank believes  that  together  with  the  cumulative  effects  of  earlier  policy  measures  and  the 
effects  of  the  government’s  efforts  to  strengthen  Japan’s  growth  potential,  the  latest 
decision  to implement  monetary  easing  will  prevent  the  economy  from  deviating  from  its 
course  of returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. As overseas economies 
gradually  emerge  from  the  deceleration  phase,  exports  and  industrial  production  are 
expected  to  start  increasing  and  the  economy  as  a  whole  to  strengthen  as  spending 
activity gains  momentum. In  the  October  2012  issue  of  the  Outlook  Report,  the  Bank’s 
median  projection  for  Japan’s  annual  real  GDP growth  rate  is  1.5  percent  for  fiscal  2012, 
1.6 percent  for  fiscal  2013,  and  0.6  percent  for  fiscal  2014.  This  projection  takes  into 
account  the front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  the 
subsequent decline. Excluding  these  effects,  the  projected  growth  rates  for  fiscal  2013 
and  2014 would be around 1–1.5 percent. 
This outlook entails a number of uncertainties and there are both upside and downside risks. 
Under the current circumstances, however, we should be particularly mindful of the downside 
risks.  Specifically,  close  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  the  possibility  that  a  further 
prolonged  deceleration  in  overseas  economies  may  delay  the  recovery  in  exports  and 
industrial production, thus exacerbating the negative effects on domestic demand. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  outlook  for  the  CPI.  Excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike on prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to 
hover around 0 percent for the time being and start rising gradually thereafter reflecting the 
improvement  in  overall  economic  activity,  such  as  increases  in  corporate  profits  and 
employment as well as a pickup in wages. The median projection of the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  in  the  October  issue  of  the  Outlook  Report  is  –0.1  percent  for  fiscal 
2012,  0.4  percent  for  fiscal  2013,  and  0.8  percent  for  fiscal  2014,  excluding  the  direct 
effects  of  the  tax  hike. It  thus  appears  likely  that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
CPI will move steadily  closer toward the Bank’s “price stability goal in the medium to long 
term” for the time being of 1 percent. 
Compared with the projections in the July interim assessment, these projections represent a 
downward  revision.  The  reason  for  the  downward  revision  is  that  the  improvement  in  the 
aggregate supply and demand balance – reflecting the downward revision of the economic 
outlook  –  is  expected  to  be  delayed  and  that  crude  oil  prices  were  corrected  downward. 
Nevertheless,  despite  the  downward  revision,  the  Bank’s  CPI  projections  are  still  higher 
than those of economists in the private sector. 
In  my  view,  the  difference  between  the  Bank’s  projections  and  private  sector  economists’ 
projections  is  due  to  differences  in  the  extent  to  which  prices  are  seen  to  respond  to 
changes  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance.  The  projections  by  private  sector 
economists tend  to  strongly  reflect  developments  in  the  mid-2000s,  when  prices  failed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to  respond commensurately with the improvements in the aggregate balance. In fact, even 
though the economy registered moderate growth during this period, the inflation rate hardly 
picked  up.  This  was  a  period  when  the  excesses  in  production  capacity  remained 
unresolved,  price  competition  among  firms  was  even  severer  against  the  backdrop  of 
subdued  growth  in  the  domestic  market  reflecting  the  aging  of  and  decline  in  the 
population,  and  there  was  a  substantial  increase  in  cheap  imports  –  from  emerging 
economies  such  as  China  –  that competed  with  domestic  products. Increases  in  goods 
prices  were  also  constrained  by efforts by firms to restrain wages against the backdrop of 
an  increase  in  global  competition.  Furthermore,  property  prices  continued  to  decline  at  a 
rapid pace, and rents – which make up about 20 percent of the CPI components (all items 
less  fresh  food)  –  started  to  decline, keeping a lid on any upward pressure on overall CPI 
inflation. 
In contrast with that period, cheap imports from China today are not so conspicuous as to 
exert  sizable  downward  price  pressure  and  the  resolution  of  excess  production  capacity, 
even  if  only  at  a  gradual  pace,  is  also  making  progress. Moreover,  it  is  increasingly 
possible  to  see  cases  where  firms  have  succeeded  in  differentiating  their  goods  and 
services  in  response  to  the  aging  of  and  decline  in  the  population  and  customers  are 
showing  interest  in  high  value-added  goods  with  relatively  high  prices;  thus,  there  are 
forces  that  make  it relatively easier for firms to raise prices. In addition, the declining trend 
in property  prices has finally come to a halt and rents are expected to do the same, albeit 
with some lag. 
Taking  recent  changes  into  account,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  in  the 
baseline scenario in the Outlook Report is expected to start rising gradually as the aggregate 
supply  and  demand  balance  improves. However,  it  is  also  important  to  note  that  the 
changes that I mentioned are not that strong yet and remain vulnerable to external shocks. 
We therefore continue to remain vigilant to the downside risks. 
III. 
First program: asset purchase program 
The two stages of the transmission mechanism of monetary easing 
Let me now move on to the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy. 
The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation as early as possible and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
Based  on  this  recognition,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  aggressive  monetary  easing. The 
transmission  of  monetary  easing  can  be  divided  into  two  stages. The  first  stage  is  the 
transmission  of  monetary  easing  effects from the  realm  of  monetary  policy  to  the financial 
environment in which firms and households can raise sufficient funds at low interest rates. 
The  second  stage  is  the  transmission  of  effects  from  the  financial  conditions  to  economic 
activity  and  prices;  in  other  words,  the extent  to  which  firms  and  households  actually  take 
advantage  of  the  accommodative  financial  conditions  to  actively  increase  their  investment 
and spending. In the following, I will discuss the role of the Bank’s two programs in terms of 
these two stages. 
Accommodative financial conditions 
In its Monetary Policy Meeting on October 30, the Bank decided to increase the size of the 
Asset Purchase Program substantially. This increase is a step that targets the first stage of 
the  transmission  mechanism. The  Program  was  introduced  in  October  2010,  starting  off 
with  a  size  of  about  35  trillion  yen,  and  the  increased  purchases  were  scheduled  to  be 
completed  at  the  end  of  2011. Since  then,  the  size  of  the  Program  has  been  increased 
repeatedly and the timeframe has also been extended. In September and October 2012, the 
Bank  took  bold  steps  to  further  increase  the  size  of  the  Program  –  each  time  by  about 
10 trillion yen respectively. Consequently, the Program has reached the substantial amount 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
level.  In 
loan  contracts  have  hit  1  percent  –  an  unprecedented 
of about 91 trillion yen, and the timeframe has been extended to the end of 2013. The aim of 
the  Program  was  to  generate  accommodative  financial  conditions  in  a  situation  where  the 
Bank’s target rate was already at virtually zero percent, by encouraging a decline in longer-
term  market  interest  rates  and  a  reduction  in  risk  premiums  through  the  purchase  of  not 
only  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  and  treasury  discount  bills  (T-Bills)  but  also  of 
various types of risk assets, including CP, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), 
and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program,  financial  conditions  in  Japan  have 
become  extremely  accommodative  both  in  historical  and  international  comparison.  In  this 
sense, we believe that the Program has already achieved its intended effects. To be specific, 
in  terms  of  firms’  funding  costs,  both  short-term  and  long-term  average  interest rates  on 
new 
terms  of 
households’  borrowing  costs,  35-year  fixed  mortgage  rates  have  fallen  below  2  percent. 
Moreover, financial institutions’ lending attitude remains accommodative, issuing conditions 
for CP and corporate bonds are also generally favorable, and, overall, an environment  has 
been maintained in  which households and firms can feel secure that they can gain access 
to  funds.  Moreover,  the  Bank’s  aggressive  easing  has  mitigated  the  negative  effects 
stemming  from  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  has  fended  off  an  even  greater 
appreciation.  Against 
the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake and the European debt problem, extremely accommodative financial conditions 
have been firmly maintained. 
As part of the Asset Purchase Program, the Bank has stated its commitment to maintaining 
powerful  monetary  easing  to  achieve  so-called  policy  duration  effects.  Specifically,  the 
Bank has clarified that for the time being it aims to achieve the goal of 1 percent inflation in 
terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  through  the  pursuit  of  powerful 
monetary  easing,  conducting  its  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  and  implementing  the 
Program  mainly  through  the  purchase  of  financial  assets. The  Bank  is  determined  to 
continue with this powerful monetary easing until it judges the 1 percent goal to be in sight. 
As I mentioned, the October issue of the Outlook Report notes that in fiscal 2014 it appears 
likely that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI will move steadily closer toward the 
Bank’s  “price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  for  the  time  being  of  1  percent. 
So  far,  however,  we  have  not  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  1  percent  goal  is  in  sight. 
While the Program’s intended timescale for completing the increase is currently set for the 
end  of  2013,  given  the  commitment  it  has  made,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  operate  the 
Program beyond that date. 
the  strong  headwinds  generated  by 
IV. 
Second program: loan support program 
Making use of accommodative financial conditions 
While  the  creation  of  accommodative  financial  conditions  represents  the  first  stage  of  the 
transmission  of  monetary  easing,  the second  stage consists  of  the extent  to  which  a  wide 
range of economic entities actually make use of such accommodative financial conditions. 
At present, the average interest rate paid by firms has fallen to nearly 1.5 percent. This is 
extremely  low  compared  with  firms’  return  on  assets  (ROA),  which  has  been  around 
3 percent. Firms are in a position to raise ample funds at interest rates substantially below 
their  rates  of  return. Thus,  at  first  glance,  it  seems  as  though  firms  only  need  to  borrow 
some funds and invest them in order to make a profit; yet, this is not necessarily the case. 
Rather,  they  are  faced  with  a  situation  where  they  have  little  confidence  that  if  they  do 
borrow funds they will actually be able to sell their products or services and make sufficient 
profits.  Put  differently,  stagnant  growth  expectations  have  been  preventing  firms  from 
being  more  aggressive  in  their  business  activities,  and  under  these  circumstances  the 
accommodative financial conditions are not fully made use of. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In  order  to  overcome  this  sense  of  stagnation,  we  need  to  make  efforts  to  strengthen  the 
growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy. As  such  efforts  proceed  and  growth  expectations 
pick up, firms’ profit prospects will improve, the expected rates of return on new investments 
will  increase,  and  firms  will  become  more  proactive  in  their  spending  such  as  on 
investment.  Once  such  a  virtuous  circle  has  taken  hold,  the  accommodative  financial 
conditions  will  have  even  stronger  effects,  and  the  virtuous  circle  will  become  more 
sustainable.  This  is  what  we  aim  to  achieve  at  the  second  stage  of  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary easing. 
In  terms  of  creating  a  favorable  business  environment,  the  government  also  plays  an 
important  role. On  October  30,  2012,  the  government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  released  a 
joint  statement  with  the  title  “Measures  Aimed  at  Overcoming  Deflation”  in  order  to  state 
clearly  the  shared  understanding  of  their  respective  roles  to  overcome  deflation. This 
statement  reconfirms  the  importance  of  the  government’s  role  in  creating  a  favorable 
business environment. The Bank strongly expects the government to generate new demand 
by  vigorously  promoting  measures  – 
for 
strengthening  Japan’s  growth  potential,  based  on  the  government’s  recognition  that 
reforming the economic structure predisposed to deflation is essential in order to overcome 
deflation. 
including  decisive 
regulatory 
reform  – 
Establishment of the framework for the “stimulating bank lending facility” 
From  the  perspective  of  boosting  the  second  stage  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary  easing,  the  Bank  in  2010  introduced  the  Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support 
Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth  (I  called  it  the  Growth  Foundation 
Strengthening  Facility  or  GFSF  in  my  previous  speeches)  in  order  to  make  its  utmost 
contribution as the central bank. This facility enables the Bank to provide long-term funds at 
a  low  interest  rate  to  financial  institutions  carrying  out  lending  and  investment  that 
contribute to Japan’s economic growth. Moreover, for a central bank, this is an extraordinary 
measure  in  the  sense  that  it  directly  influences  the  lending  activity  of  financial  institutions. 
However,  because  the  intention  of  the  policy  has  been  widely  understood,  I believe  that 
the  facility  has  been  able  to  generate  some  successful  outcomes. It  is  also heartening 
that  this  facility  has  served  as  a  trigger  for  a  wide  recognition  of  the  importance  of 
strengthening the economy’s growth potential. 
Further to the introduction of this facility, the Bank on October 30, 2012 decided to establish 
the  framework  for  the  Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Stimulate  Bank  Lending  (I will call it 
the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility  or  SBLF  hereafter)  with  a  view  to  promoting 
aggressive  action  by  financial  institutions  and  helping  to  stimulate  proactive  credit 
demand  by  firms  and  households.  Under  this  facility,  the  Bank  will  provide  long-term 
yen-denominated  funds  at  a  low  cost  to  financial  institutions,  at  their  request,  up  to  an 
amount  equivalent  to  the  net  increase  in  their  lending. The total  amount  of  funds provided 
by the Bank will be “unlimited” – that is, there shall be no upper limit. Financial institutions’ 
lending  eligible  under  the  SBLF  can  be  either  yen-denominated  or  foreign  currency-
denominated.  With  economic  globalization  continuing,  the  growth  potential  of  financial 
institutions  and  firms  is  closely  linked  to  their  overseas  activities.  The  Bank  therefore 
judged  that  encouraging  lending  by  financial  institutions  –  irrespective  of  the  currency 
involved –  would be an  effective means  to boost the growth of  Japan’s economy, and that 
strengthening financial institutions’ overseas activities would help to support Japanese firms 
with growth potential from the financial side. Moreover, increasing lending  will  enhance  the 
profit  base  of  financial  institutions  themselves  in  the  medium  to  long  term  and  thus  is 
consistent  with  what  they  should  be  aiming  for. In  fact,  partly because  they  have  shown 
steady  achievements  in  their  business  matching  activities,  the  outstanding  amount  of 
financial institutions’ loans has recently been increasing at a moderate pace. 
Both  the  newly-introduced  SBLF  and  the  existing  GFSF  aim  to  encourage  further  use  of 
accommodative  financial  conditions  in  Japan  by  supporting  financial  institutions’  efforts. In 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  sense,  the  two  facilities  are  complementary  to  each  other.  Specifically,  the  SBLF 
intends  to  support  the  economy  overall  from  the  financial  side  by  encouraging  financial 
institutions to increase their lending and firms and households to increase their borrowing to 
engage  in  proactive  economic  activities. On  the  other  hand,  the  GFSF  mainly  aims  at 
playing  a  catalytic  role  in  encouraging  firms  and  financial  institutions  to  proceed  with 
efforts to strengthen the economy’s growth potential. 
The  Bank  decided  to  call  the  combination  of  the  SBLF  and  the  GFSF  the  “Loan  Support 
Program”. Under  the  Loan  Support  Program,  it  aims  at  strengthening  the  second  stage  of 
the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  easing  by  letting  the  two  facilities  achieve  their 
intended consequences. Furthermore, it expects that coupled with the stimulative effects of 
the Asset Purchase Program the effects of monetary easing as a whole will be amplified. 
Looking  at  the  last  12  months,  the  amount  of  lending  by  those  banks  and  shinkin  banks 
holding current accounts at the Bank that saw a rise in their lending increased by a total of 
approximately  15  trillion  yen.  This  implies  that  under  the  new  facility,  the  SBLF,  those 
banks  are  entitled  to  receive  funds  of  up  to  approximately  15  trillion  yen  from  the  Bank. 
Together with the 5.5 trillion yen from the GFSF, the total size of the Loan Support Program 
will  be  approximately  20  trillion  yen.  If  financial  institutions  manage  to  increase  their 
lending  more  aggressively,  the  total  size  of  the  Program  will  exceed  20 trillion  yen. 
Furthermore,  adding  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  and  the  Loan  Support  Program 
together, the  total  size  of  these  programs  will  easily  exceed  110  trillion  yen. Given  that 
Japan’s  nominal  GDP  in  2011  was  468  trillion  yen,  the  size  of  these  programs  is 
equivalent  to almost a quarter of GDP. This shows that the monetary easing undertaken by 
the Bank at present has reached a level unprecedented in the past. 
We strongly expect that financial institutions’ efforts to increase their lending will lead to an 
expansion  of  the  total  amount  of  fresh  funds  supplied  to  the  economy. To  this  end,  the 
Bank is currently  in the process of working out the details of the new facility, the SBLF, to 
make  it  easy  for  financial  institutions  to  use. We  expect  to  release  the  details  before  the 
end of the year and start operation of the facility as soon as possible. 
Because of time constraints, I discussed the Bank’s monetary policy focusing on these two 
programs. The message that I wish to emphasize once again is that the Bank has been and 
will always be ready to take appropriate and decisive action when the economy strays too 
far from the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices or when risks 
to that scenario materialize. Going forward, in order to achieve its price stability goal for the 
time  being,  the  Bank  is  determined  to  pursue  its  aggressive  monetary  easing,  making full 
use of the new policy measures. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude my speech today by touching on the economy of Niigata Prefecture. 
In  my  speech,  I  stressed  repeatedly  the  importance  of  making  efforts  to  strengthen  the 
economy’s  growth  potential  in  order  to  overcome  deflation.  Looking  at  firms  based  in 
Niigata, there are many locations where skills to make top products have been nurtured and 
accumulated  over  the  years. Even  in  the  midst  of  fierce  competition  with  overseas  firms, 
many firms have succeeded in maintaining leading market shares either at home or abroad 
on  the  back  of  these  skills  and  using  know-how  on  how  to  expand  sales  channels. This 
shows that firms have been making incessant efforts toward strengthening growth potential 
in  the  face  of  adversity  such  as  the  global  financial  crisis. I  have  full  respect  for  these 
efforts. 
In addition, while Niigata is one of the most natural resource abundant regions in Japan – 
for example in terms of oil and natural gas deposits – it has long been involved in promoting 
renewable  sources  of  energy.  Initiatives  aimed  at  commercializing  solar  power  generation 
on  a  large  scale  at  solar  parks  in  the  “snow  country”,  where  daylight  hours  in winter are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
short,  have  started  to  bear  fruit  and  power  generation  has  commenced.  Reflecting  the 
experience  after  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  last  year,  the  utilization  of  renewable 
energy  and  the  use  of  environmentally  friendly  cars  and  home  appliances  have  been 
accelerating  on  a  national  basis. Given  that  other  countries  in  the  world  are  likely  to face 
energy  constraints  in  the  future,  Niigata’s  experience  and  accumulated  know-how  in this 
field should stand it in good stead to benefit from the first mover advantage. 
Looking back at the past year, a major piece of national news was that for the first time in 
36 years, crested ibis chicks hatched in the wild on Sado Island in Niigata Prefecture. The 
crested ibis is registered as a special natural treasure in Japan and the hatching of the chicks 
is happy news. It is hoped that such happy news can also soon be heard on the economic 
front. The Bank will continue to make every effort as a central bank and do its utmost to help 
your initiatives. 
Thank you.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
