Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Challenges in compiling and communicating 
statistics in Malaysia 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the National Statistics Conference (MyStats 2012), Kuala Lumpur, 9 November 
2012. 
 Saya berbesar hati untuk mengalu-alukan kepada semua yang hadir pada persidangan yang 
julung-julung  kali  diadakan  ini,  MyStats  2012,  yang  memperlihatkan  sekali  lagi  kejayaan 
dalam  usaha  kerjasama  di  antara Jabatan  Perangkaan  Malaysia  dengan  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia. Saya juga amat gembira dan berbangga dengan sokongan yang ditunjukkan oleh 
para  peserta  yang  mengambil  bahagian  hari  ini,  yang  terdiri  daripada  sektor  swasta  dan 
sektor  awam,  pengguna  dan  perangkawan  statistik,  di  samping  rakan-rakan  saya 
daripada Irving  Fisher  Committee  on  Central  Bank  Statistics  (IFC).  Dengan  kehadiran 
kumpulan  yang  mempunyai  pelbagai  kepentingan  ini,  saya  yakin  forum  ini  akan  menjadi 
platform yang amat sesuai untuk kita berkongsi pandangan, bertukar-tukar pengetahuan dan 
pengalaman 
tentang  statistik,  dan  akhirnya  memperoleh  manfaat  besar  daripada 
persidangan ini. 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  this  inaugural  conference,  MyStats  2012,  a 
collaborative effort between Department of Statistics Malaysia and Bank Negara Malaysia. I 
am  also  very  encouraged  by  the  strong  support  from  all  of  you  present  here  today, 
representing  both  the  private  and  public  sectors,  users  and  compilers  of  statistics,  and 
Executives members from the Irving Fisher Committee on Central Bank Statistics (IFC). With 
such a diversified interest group, I believe this forum will be an important platform for us to 
share views, exchange statistical knowledge and experiences. 
The objective of MyStats is to provide a platform for our statisticians, analysts, economists, 
policy makers, academicians and media to share, discuss and highlight insights and issues 
in  statistical  analysis  and  policy  formulation  as  well  as  challenges  in  the  compilation  and 
communication of statistics. MyStats will not only discuss economic and financial data, but 
will  also  encompass  other  socio-economic  statistics  such  as  poverty  measurement  and 
indicators, labour and employment statistics, just to name a few. 
I hope that this collaborative effort will one day  turn into an annual THE statistics event in 
Malaysia and MyStats will evolve into a regional conference, similar to the well-established 
statistical  conferences  organised  by  the  International  Statistics  Institute  (ISI),  European 
Central Bank (ECB) and IFC. I must acknowledge that this conference was inspired by the 
efforts  of  the  ECB  and  IFC,  which  the  Bank  and  I,  as  the  Chairman  of  IFC,  have  been 
actively engaging with on statistical initiatives, in particular over the last one year. 
For those who are new to the IFC, allow me to mention a few words on the Committee. The 
IFC  is  a forum  of  central  bank  economists  and statisticians  as  well  as  others  who  wish  to 
participate  in  discussing  statistical  issues  of  interest  to  central  banks. It is  established  and 
governed by the international central banking community and operates under the auspices of 
the  Bank for  International  Settlements (BIS).  Currently,  the IFC  has  about  80 central  bank 
members and is actively organising statistical initiatives, particularly conferences, seminars 
and workshops. These initiatives discuss the burning statistical issues confronting the central 
banking  community  and  the  issues  discussed  reflect  contemporary  concerns  of  central 
bankers themselves. More details on IFC and its activities can be found on the BIS website. 
The  theme  of  MyStats  2012,  “Enhancing  National  Statistics  to  Meet  Public  and  Private 
Sectors Needs during a Period of Transformation”. This theme is most appropriate given that 
Malaysia is embarking on an economic transformation programme (ETP) to achieve a high 
income high value-added economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The transformation  process  would  demand  richer, more  reliable  and  timely  data  to  assess 
the progress of various change program being taken and ensure initiatives implemented are 
effective in achieving the transformation agenda. This is critical given the transformation is 
taking  place  amidst  a  more  challenging  global  economic  environment.  Downside  risks  to 
global  growth  are  now  more  elevated,  with  heightened  uncertainties  surrounding  the 
European sovereign debt crisis and fiscal issues in the US that would have impact on global 
growth prospects. In this environment, it is of utmost importance that relevant and credible 
statistics  are  available  to  policymakers  and  analysts  on  a  timely  basis,  to  allow  for  an 
accurate and comprehensive diagnosis of the economy, so that appropriate and pre-emptive 
policy actions can be taken. 
To my mind, there are three perennial issues facing statisticians and authorities; the extent of 
data coverage, granularity and timeliness. Indeed, it has been often noted that the surprise 
element at the onset of economic and financial crisis is often due to the lack of high quality, 
comprehensive and timely data. For example, the Asian Financial Crisis revealed major gaps 
in  statistical  coverage,  especially  on  detailed  cross  border  exposures  and  indicators  for 
financial  soundness,  which  had  permitted  serious  vulnerabilities  to  go  undetected  and 
unresolved for a long time. 
Another key lesson learnt, was from the global financial crisis, where the lack of data and 
monitoring  of  financial  innovation  that  had  allowed  the  build  up  of  financial  risks  to  go 
undetected until it was too late. Another good example was the existent of a large shadow 
banking  system  that  is  unregulated  and  unsupervised.  At  the  same  time,  insufficient 
coverage and depth of information can potentially place policymakers at the risk of deriving 
at the wrong conclusion and thus, prescribing the wrong policy measures or prescriptions. 
The  decisions  that  we  make  are  only  as  good  as  the  data  on  which  it  is  based.  In  this 
respect, I would highlight two areas in particular that requires further data compilation. 
First, in the area of labour market statistics, there are notable gaps in terms of data collection 
on  the  economy-wide  wages,  hours  worked  per  labour,  productivity  index,  unit  labour  cost 
and duration of employment. We also do not have data and enough information on the kind 
of  jobs  that  the  economy  is  producing,  either  by  sector,  wage  level,  type  of  jobs  and  for 
whom the jobs are created. 
The data gaps would complicate the assessment on key issues such as the sustainability of 
household  indebtedness,  whether  we  are  creating  the  right  type  of  jobs  or  whether  our 
policies are providing long term or temporary employment. 
Second, there are significant gaps in terms of balance sheet data, especially for households 
and  corporates. This  deficiency  in  data complicates  detection  of  vulnerabilities,  build  up  of 
risks  and  propagation  of  shocks  from  one  sector  to  another.  I  hope  the  discussion  today 
would provide insights into dealing with some of these issues I earlier mentioned. 
At this conference, we will have the opportunity to examine areas which we can improve so 
that  our  statistics  are  credible,  relevant  and  timely,  would  facilitate  informed  policy 
formulation and decision making by the authorities, and enable informed decision makings by 
economic agents such as investors, financial institutions and the general public at large. 
In  the  first  three  sessions  today,  our  distinguished  speakers  and  discussants  will  share 
insights  and  experiences  in  many  areas;  the  adoption  of  statistical  best  practices  in  data 
management, ways to promote data sharing and communication of statistics, identification of 
statistical  gaps  and  limitations  faced  by  analysts  or  authorities  in  the  usage  of  data.  The 
session  would  also  explore  and  provide  possible  resolution  to  challenges  confronted  by 
compilers and users of statistics. 
In the concluding panel discussion, the panellists will deliberate on new data requirements, 
the need for more forward looking and pre-emptive data collection and compilation, identify 
best  practices  to  enhance  data  integrity  and  communication  of  statistics,  and  the  role  the 
private sector can play in contributing better data collation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Your  views  today  is  important  as  it  would  provide  insights  and  assistance  to  statistical 
compilers, policymakers and regulatory authorities to facilitate planning and enhancement of 
existing data measurement or implementation of new statistical initiatives. The end game is 
to  facilitate  effective  analysis,  monitoring  and  surveillance  of  the  economic  and  financial 
activities and provide accurate assessment of risks and the effectiveness of policy initiatives 
and the state of the economy. This forum will also provide analyst an opportunity to share 
their views on the type of data that would be useful to them. 
While  debating  on  the  statistical  needs  of  the  public  and  private  sectors,  there  are  many 
areas that could be considered, amongst them: 
1. 
Does  the  private  sector  benefit  given  the  significant  resources  that  have  been 
invested  by  the  national  statistics  office,  regulatory  authorities  and  government 
agencies to compile more comprehensive, timely and granular data?  
What  type  of  data  that  the  private  analysts  require  that  would  improve  their 
analytical capability to provide analysis for informed decision making to their client?  
Based  on  past  experiences,  data  compilation  always  lags  behind  financial 
innovations  and  economic  developments.  Based  on  this  premise,  what  should  be 
the strategy, from the perspective of statisticians and users, to ensure the availability 
of new and appropriate data on a timely basis to meet future needs of users?  
How can data compilers and users play a greater role inidentifying new data needs 
of a high income and high value added economy?  
How can statisticians play a more proactive role in advising or communicating with 
users on the availability of appropriate data for analysis and surveillance to avoid the 
redundancy of data collection?  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
These  questions  are  by  no  means  exhaustive  but  I  hope  our  distinguished  speakers  and 
discussants today will address some of them. The speakers and discussants today represent 
a wide spectrum of group of compilers and users of statistics, who have vast experience in 
conducting significant research in many areas that uses national and international statistics. 
Through  their  presentations  and  discussions,  we  hope  to  learn  from  their  knowledge  and 
thinking on relevant issues in the field of statistics. 
We are also honoured to have two international speakers from the IFC who will talk about the 
international  best  practices  in  data  management  and  country  experiences  in  data  sharing 
and  communication  of  statistics. I  would  also  like  to take this  opportunity  to  thank them  in 
advance.  I  would  also  like  to  record  our  appreciation  to  the  representatives  from  various 
national organisations for chairing the sessions and sharing their views on the topic that we 
had identified. 
Before  I  end  my  remarks,  I  thought  it  worth  emphasising  again  the  importance  of  greater 
collaboration  between  statisticians,  compilers  and  end  users  of  statistics  in  improving  data 
compilation,  communication  and  its  usage.  In this  respect, I  believe  that  MyStats  will  be  a 
strong foundation to facilitate and enhance this collaborative effort. 
On that note, I wish you a productive and engaging conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
