Jean-Pierre Danthine: Financial stability developments and the delayed 
new Swiss banknotes 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
13 December 2012. 
 In my introductory remarks today, I would like to look at the main developments in the area of 
financial stability since the publication of our Financial Stability Report in June of this year. 
Afterwards, I will talk about the postponement of the new banknote series. 
In  the  area  of  financial  stability,  the  improvement  in  the  big  banks’  capital  situation  is 
particularly noteworthy. The prevailing uncertainties and the risks for the banking sector as a 
whole remain considerable, however. 
Prevailing risks remain considerable 
General economic and financial conditions for the Swiss banking sector remain difficult. On 
the  one  hand,  the  situation  in  the  financial  markets  has  eased  since  June  2012.  This  is 
largely  due  to  various  decisions  and  measures  taken  by  governments  and  central  banks 
worldwide.  On  the  other  hand,  the  easing  of  tensions  in  the  financial  markets  should  be 
interpreted with caution. Should the measures already taken not be effective or should the 
progress  made  in  restructuring  government  budgets  be  slow,  we  cannot  rule  out  renewed 
turbulence in the financial markets. The European banking industry is also in a fragile state. 
Although  CDS  premia  for  European  banks  have  been  going  down  in  the  last  few  months, 
their level is still considerably above previous years as well as that of Swiss and US banks. 
Finally, as my colleague Thomas Jordan has explained, the global economic outlook remains 
modest. For Europe, in particular, we have revised our short-term forecast downwards again 
slightly.  
For  Switzerland,  the  National  Bank  is  expecting  moderate  growth.  Economic  conditions 
remain  comparatively  good,  which  –  in  conjunction  with  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  –  is 
boosting  the  continued  strong  momentum  in  the  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets.  I  will 
speak about developments in this market in more detail later on. 
To sum up, the risks in the banking environment remain considerable. First, the risk of an 
escalation of the European debt crisis is not insignificant. Second, imbalances are building 
up  in  the  Swiss  real  estate  market.  This  goes  hand  in  hand  with  an  increased  risk  of 
significant price corrections in the medium term.  
Greater resilience of the big banks 
The  situation  of  the  big  banks  has  improved  since  the  last  news  conference,  as  both 
institutions have further increased their resilience. This increase was particularly pronounced 
at  Credit  Suisse.  According  to  the  bank’s  most  recently  published  data,  it  increased  its 
holdings  of  loss-absorbing  capital  by  roughly  three-quarters  in  the  second  half  of  2012.  In 
addition  to  retaining  profits,  this  increase  is  mainly  attributable  to  the  capital  measures 
announced in July, which have already been implemented to a large extent. In addition, as 
part  of their  strategic  reorientation,  both  big  banks  announced measures  which  will  further 
enhance their resilience. For instance, both institutions are planning to further expand their 
loss-absorbing  capital,  to  reduce  their  risks  and,  in  particular,  trim  their balance  sheets  as 
well as to pursue a policy of dividend restraint. 
The National Bank welcomes the increase in the big banks’ resilience achieved thus far, as 
well  as  the  announced  measures  to  further  improve  their  capital  situation.  The  consistent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
implementation of these measures is important for two reasons: First, leverage has remained 
high despite the improvement in the capital situation. Second, the risks in the environment – 
and thus the associated potential losses for the big banks in the event of a further escalation 
of the European debt crisis – remain considerable. 
Situation at domestically focused banks 
I would now like to turn to the situation at domestically focused banks. 
The risks associated with the environment in which these banks operate increased during the 
past six months. Indeed, the isolated signs of a slowdown of growth in the mortgage and real 
estate  markets  observed  in  the  second  quarter  did  not  materialise  in  the  third  quarter.  In 
particular, prices in the different segments of the residential real estate market continued to 
rise  at  a  sustained  pace.  At  the  same  time,  growth  in  the  mortgage  loan  volume  was  still 
considerably higher than GDP growth. Imbalances have therefore grown.  
As far as risk appetite and capitalisation are concerned, the situation of domestically focused 
banks has not changed significantly during the last six months. 
On the one hand, banks’ risk appetite has not diminished overall. This is substantiated by the 
following: First, in the case of new mortgage loans, both the loan-to-value ratios and loan-to-
income ratios have remained at a high level. Second, interest rate risk has not declined and 
remains high. Third, the already low margins on interest income have continued to decrease. 
There are nevertheless considerable differences from one bank to another, in particular as to 
how their risk appetite has evolved. Certain banks have reduced their risk-taking significantly 
during the last quarters, while others have increased their exposure to risk.  
On  the  other  hand,  average  capitalisation  for  domestically  focused  banks  relative  to 
regulatory  requirements  is  still  at  a  historically  high  level.  However,  as  the  SNB  already 
emphasised  in  its  latest  Financial  Stability  Report,  the  resilience  of  these  banks,  as 
measured by the regulatory capital indicators, is overestimated. 
Therefore, six months after being announced, the stricter capital requirements for mortgages 
and the revision of the self-regulation rules for mortgage lending have not, or not yet, led to a 
significant  trend  reversal  in  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets,  although  there  is  some 
anecdotal evidence pointing in that direction. It cannot be ruled out that the impact of these 
measures  has  not  fully  materialised  or  is  simply  not  yet  reflected  in  the  data  available.  In 
particular, due to the still exceptionally low interest rates, there is, however, a considerable 
risk that these imbalances continue to build up, and the risk of an abrupt correction over the 
medium term keeps increasing. 
Under these circumstances, the SNB is carefully monitoring the developments in mortgage 
and real estate markets. It periodically assesses the necessity to activate the countercyclical 
capital buffer.  
Issuance of the new banknote series in 2015 at the earliest 
In February 2012, the National Bank informed the public that the new banknote series would 
be postponed. Today, I would like to provide some background information on our decision.  
The National Bank is committed to putting banknotes into circulation that are state of the art 
in terms of both their design and their technological aspects. In order to meet this standard, 
such  a  project  must  be  launched  at  an  early  stage.  Integrating  and  combining  security 
features  involving  new  technologies  that  have  not  previously  been  used  for  banknotes 
presents a special challenge. Since the development phase for new security features is very 
long,  launching  a  new  series  is  likely  to  take  several  years  for  the  technical  feasibility 
assessment alone. Certain insights can only be gained during the actual serial production.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that 
the  new  security 
the  complexity  of 
The development of the new banknote series began in 2005 with a design competition. In the 
planning  phase  for  the  technical  feasibility  and  during  initial  production  tests  in  2010,  it 
became  evident 
features  necessitated  a 
postponement of the issue date to autumn 2012. In autumn 2011, during an early phase of 
the serial production, technical difficulties arose which had not been discernible in the testing 
phase, whose results were positive. For this reason, the SNB this year decided to conduct a 
comprehensive  re-assessment  of  the  entire  project  together  with  the  industrial  partners 
producing  the  new  banknote  on  its  behalf.  As  a  result,  several  mostly  technical  measures 
were defined and in some cases have already been implemented. These measures should 
ensure that the series can go into long-term industrial production.  
Owing  to  the  complexity  and  scope  of  the  necessary  work,  the  first  denomination  of  the 
series, the CHF 50 note, may be expected in 2015 at the earliest. The SNB will announce the 
issue date as soon as production of the first banknote denomination has been completed.  
Since  the  National  Bank  wants  to  continue  meeting  the  highest  quality  standards,  it  has 
accepted  a  postponement  in  the  new  issue,  a  decision  which  was  rendered  all  the  easier 
because the banknotes currently in circulation continue to offer a high standard of security. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
