Lesetja Kganyago: South Africa’s Financial Stability Review – key issues 
in September 2012 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank,  at  the  launch  of  the  September  2012  Financial  Stability  Review,  Pretoria, 
24 October 2012. 
 Welcome and introduction 
1. 
Members of the press,  
Guests,  
Colleagues,  
Ladies and gentlemen.  
Welcome to the release of the September 2012 edition of the Financial Stability Review. The 
Financial Stability Review has been published semi-annually since 2004 to promote a stable 
financial system.  
In addition to its primary objective of price stability, the Bank has a mandate to oversee and 
maintain financial stability. In pursuit of this mandate and to contain systemic risk, the Bank 
continually  assesses  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  key  components  of  the  financial 
system and formulates and reviews policies for intervention and crisis resolution.  
Through  the  publication  of  the  Financial  Stability  Review  the  Bank  endeavours  to 
communicate its assessment of potential risks to financial system stability and the mitigation 
thereof.  
The Bank also hopes to enhance the understanding of, and encourage informed debate on 
these complex and challenging matters related to financial stability.  
2. 
Key issues from the September 2012 Financial Stability Review 
International macro-financial developments 
2.1 
Since the publication of the March 2012 Financial Stability Review global economic growth 
has remained weak and the volatility in global financial markets persisted.  
The negative prospects for economic growth in advanced economies are not only affecting 
emerging-market economies in various  ways, but are also posing serious threats to global 
financial stability.  
Downside risks to growth such as elevated levels of unemployment, continued uncertainty for 
a lasting solution in the euro area, and the threatening fiscal cliff in the United States present 
serious challenges to financial systems globally.  
The  programmes  of  increased  liquidity  provisioning  by  central  banks  in  the  United  States, 
Europe, Japan and the United Kingdom would hopefully mitigate these threats.  
Although emerging market economies remain important drivers of global economic growth, 
concerns about the structural nature of the economic slowdown in China have led to fears 
that  the  slowdown  may  be  protracted  and  may  have  significant  economic  and  financial 
implications for other emerging market economies in particular.  
The volatility in capital flows to emerging economies has also increased as global uncertainty 
causes regular changes in the risk appetite of investors.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Impediments  to  global  economic  growth  are  also  challenging  the  resilience  of  economic 
growth in sub-Saharan Africa.  
Domestic macro-financial developments 
2.2 
The uncertain and subdued global economic environment also negatively impacted on real 
economic activity in South Africa. As a result the Bank’s forecasts of growth in real GDP for 
2012 and 2013 have been revised down.  
Although  confidence  in  the  financial  services  sector  has  recovered  strongly  in  2009  and 
remains at high levels, confidence still has not returned to its pre-crisis level.  
The banking sector plays a key role in the stability of the South African financial system and 
remained stable during the first half of 2012:  
• 
the  sector  remained  adequately  capitalised  in  terms  of  the  current  minimum 
regulatory requirements;  
banks  continued  to  post  healthy  profitability  numbers,  supported  by  generally 
improved quality of assets;  
although  the  banking  sector’s  total  unsecured  gross  credit  exposure  increased 
further in the first half of 2012, it remains only about 10 per cent of total gross credit 
exposure of the sector;  
the  sector’s  credit  exposure  to  counterparties  with  legal  jurisdiction  in  the  GIIPS 
countries  (Greece,  Italy,  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Spain)  remained  insignificant  with 
negligible exposure to sovereigns;  
draft  2  of  the  proposed  amended  Regulations  relating  to  Banks,  incorporating  all 
Basel III related changes, was published in August in preparation of the adoption of 
Basel III as from 1 January 2013 in South Africa.  
    The  life  insurance  industry  maintained  adequate  capital  buffers,  and  healthy  increases  in 
income contributed positively to confidence levels in the industry.  
The Financial Services Board as the regulator of insurance companies is in the process of 
implementing  the  Solvency  Assessment  and  Management  framework  for  the  insurance 
sector.  This  framework  is  aimed  at  enhancing  the  soundness  of  domestic  insurance 
companies and protecting policyholders through a risk-based solvency regime.  
The domestic bond market generally performed strongly in the first half of 2012, underpinned 
by South Africa’s inclusion in Citibank’s World Government Bond Index.  
Domestic  financial  markets,  nevertheless  remained  vulnerable  to  global  oil  and  food  price 
shocks as well as to domestic concerns following turmoil in the labour market.  
As  important  clients  of  banks,  conditions  in  the  corporate  and  household  sectors  play  an 
important role in gauging the stability of the financial system:  
• 
in  the  corporate  sector  much  needed  investment  is  still  lacking,  but  recent  data 
suggest  a  slight  but  broad  based  recovery  in  business  confidence  in  the  third 
quarter;  
the  household  sector’s  appetite  for  debt  seems  to  be  increasing  further,  but  data 
show  that  their  savings  portion  of  disposable  income  also  increased,  albeit  only 
marginally;  
the  declining  trend  in  consumer  confidence  was  borne  out  by  a  weakening 
Consumer  Financial  Vulnerability  Index  as  well  as  a  decline  in  the  FNB/BER 
consumer confidence index;  
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 in addition, residential real-estate market activity remained under strain as growth in 
mortgage  advances  by  banks  remained  subdued,  also  negatively  impacting 
profitability and confidence in the building and construction sector.  
 Infrastructural and regulatory developments 
2.3 
Regulatory reforms currently in the process of being investigated or implemented that would 
enhance the robustness of the financial regulatory environment in South Africa include:  
• 
progress made with the implementation of a twin peaks model of financial regulation 
in South Africa;  
enhanced  standards  for  bank  capital  and  liquidity  through  the  implementation  of 
Basel III;  
the development of legislation for risk-based supervision of insurance groups;  
the strengthening of resolution regimes;  
resolution planning for systemically important financial institutions.  
• 
• 
• 
Internationally,  the  harmonisation  of  standards  and  principles  for  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement systems applied to systemically important payment systems and financial market 
infrastructures  is  also  being  investigated,  while  the  oversight  and  regulation  of  shadow 
banking are being strengthened.  
Concluding remarks 
2.4 
The  South  African  financial  system  has  proved  to  be  relatively  resilient  in  the  wake  of  a 
volatile and uncertain global environment and some domestic socio-economic concerns;  
Although  the  recent  conjuncture  is  uncertain  and  several  challenges  remain,  the  financial 
system is generally sound.  
I  have  briefly  highlighted  the  key  issues  raised  in  the  Financial  Stability  Review.  More 
detailed analyses are available in the publication itself, and will be highlighted by the authors’ 
presentations.  I  invite  you  to  engage  with  the  Review  as  part  of  the  important  process  of 
ongoing debate on financial stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
