Ardian Fullani: Competition versus risk-taking in the banking sector in 
SEE countries 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  conference  on 
“Competition  versus  risk-taking  in  the  banking  sector  in  SEE  countries”,  organized  by  the 
Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo, Prishtina, 5 October 2012. 
 Honourable Governors, 
Dear participants, 
Regular  regional  meetings  are  a  good  opportunity  to  discuss  economic  and  financial 
developments in our countries. They help identify the similarities and differences among us, 
and the economic and financial policies we need for solving the problems we encounter.  
The geographic position and economic relations with the same trade partners are factors that 
have  led  to  similar  economic  and  financial  developments  across  our  countries.  They  have 
determined the nature and size of contamination from the global economic crisis, in general, 
and the euro area crisis, in particular.  
The impact of the crisis on our countries has often been the main topic of discussion in such 
meetings.  Macro-financial  difficulties  and  uncertainties  in  the  euro  area  render  the  actual 
European crisis the main focus of this meeting as well.  
Actual operations and commitments of the European Central Bank consist in a wide range of 
instruments that European authorities may use to support financial markets and institutions. 
Investors, however, are still waiting on additional decisions which will be more harmonised 
and  stronger  politically.  The  economic  situation,  especially  in  Greece  and  Spain,  remains 
difficult,  whereas  Portugal  and  Italy  have  undertaken  additional  fiscal  consolidation 
programmes.  Unemployment  in  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  has  reached  historic  levels, 
especially  amongst  the  youth.  Economic  growth  is  weak  and  is  mainly  concentrated  in 
central countries of the euro area.  
Our  countries  have  been  affected  by  this  situation  for  objective  reasons.  Trade  relations, 
movement  of  capital  and  workers,  and  the  financial  system  are  channels  that  pass  these 
problems on to our economies. The form, size and extent of this impact have evolved over 
the past four years.  
At  present,  the  situation  is  reflected  in  the  decrease  of  domestic  demand,  decline  of 
economic  growth,  reduction  of  available  income,  loss  of  confidence  and  deterioration  of 
optimism; this is, in turn, reflected in higher savings.  
Consequently,  these  developments  have  placed  the  focus  of  economic  policies  towards 
economic  activity  and  revitalisation  of  optimism  in  order  to  boost  investments  and 
consumption.  On  the  other  hand,  maintaining  financial  stability  becomes  a  necessity, 
creating  thus  a  binomial  of  priorities  that  condition  each  other  and  require  a  simultaneous 
solution.  
The Albanian economy is increasingly facing the challenge of economic growth. Although the 
Albanian  economy  enjoys  consolidated  macroeconomic  stability  and  sound  financial 
foundations, aggregate demand has been weak during the first nine months of 2012. Both 
domestic and foreign demand suffer from high uncertainty, relatively tight lending standards, 
and limited space for discretionary and stimulating policies.  
In  the  domestic  context,  the  economy  continues  to  face  relatively  low  consumption  and 
private investments and an absent stimulus by the public sector resulting from the orientation 
of the fiscal policy towards maintaining long-term stability of the public debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
On the other hand, the banking and financial system remains sound and liquid and capital 
indicators are at relatively satisfactory levels. The activity of the banking sector continues to 
be  strongly  supported  by  the  increase  of  publics’  deposits.  Banks  have  reinforced  their 
capital  position  to  boost  resilience  against risks arising from  banking  operations.  As  at the 
end of June 2012, the capital adequacy ratio stood at 15.6%. Credit developments, however, 
remain a problem that is subject to the performance of economic activity and expectations for 
the future. 
Slowdown of economic activity and decline of demand for investments and consumption by 
businesses  and  households  are  determinants  of  private  sector  credit  and  credit  quality 
performance.  On  their  side,  banks  have  evidently  increased  their  prudence  as  regards 
lending.  
Periodic stress tests show that the banking sector is resilient and can withstand any adverse 
events to economic performance. However, we are aware that the banking industry is facing 
difficult  challenges.  Besides  recovery  of  economic  activity  and  confidence  for  the  future, 
improvement  of  credit  quality  requires  also  the  completion  of  legal  issues  to  enable  and 
facilitate collateral execution. Selling impaired assets at their real market value is the starting 
point of the process for making financial correction and enriching the private sector’s balance 
sheets  and  the  financial  system  a  whole.  Cleaning  up  balance  sheets  would  promote 
economic activity through consumer investments, by ensuring a constantly improved credit 
quality. 
Currently, the mutual influence of economic activity and credit quality is the main concern to 
monetary  policy.  Efficiency  of  successive  interventions  by  lowering  the  key  interest  rate  is 
overshadowed by negative expectations. 
Consequently,  the  effects  of  business  and  household  consumption  and  investments  on 
domestic demand are not at the desirable level. In spite of these problems, economic growth 
remains in positive territory, but below the potential. According to our estimates, it will remain 
positive even in the future. Economic and financial operators’ inflation expectations remain 
anchored around the Bank of Albania’s target. 
Good 
the  banking  sector,  and  stability  of 
macroeconomic  indicators  have  led  to  harmonised  economic  policies  for  maintaining  the 
status quo. If this situation remains as such in a predictable time horizon, the monetary policy 
may  remain  accommodative  over  the  same  period.  The  recovery  of  the  domestic  demand 
and  economic  growth  is  further  related  to  expectations,  which  are  also  affected  and 
contaminated by our trade partners’ condition.  
The  fiscal  policy  has  aimed  at  fiscal  consolidation  and  has  continued  making  efforts  to 
prudentially provide necessary fiscal stimuli. 
Currently, if the privatization process is successfully completed, then the fiscal opportunities 
for  promoting  economic  growth  and  for  revering  any  negative  expectations  are  significant. 
The  way  of  using  privatization  receipts  should  not  only  support  the  short-term  economic 
growth  objectives,  but  should  also  affect  the  economic  operators’  expectations  for  stable 
economic growth in the future. The latter can be achieved by using additional revenues to 
reduce debt levels and support reforms for structural changes in the economy. 
Dear participants, 
Currently, we are of the opinion that the concept of long-term development strategies of a 
deeply national character is an important issue for the stable long-term growth in our region. 
Lacking a regional perspective does not favour the individual success of small economies in 
the global economy.  
The process of connectivity and  integration of transport infrastructure  should continue  with 
the  integration  of  development  strategies,  capital  markets,  the  labour  and  primary 
commodities,  and  energy  infrastructure.  Our  economies  are  vulnerable  and  contaminable 
liquidity  condition  and  capitalization  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
from  global  developments  because  they  are  small  economies  in  an  economic  region 
fragmented  and  dependent  on  foreign  inflows  in  the  form  of  investments,  exports  and 
remittances.  
Increase  in  the  market  share,  ease  in  production  factors  mobility  (capital,  labour,  and  raw 
materials),  integration  of  financial  and  payment  systems,  integration  and  coordination  of 
scientific and educational curricula and addressing of challenges from a regional perspective 
would make the region an attractive and integrating economic place. This integration would 
identify 
the 
competitiveness of each of our economies.  
Consequently,  it  would  convert  the  tendency  of  the  region  to  be  negatively  contaminated 
from global developments into an opportunity, a positive impact, in order to achieve high and 
stable economy growth in the long run. 
Thank you!  
regional  advantages,  enhancing  at 
the  comparative 
the  same 
time 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
