Ryuzo Miyao: Eurozone crisis – implications for Asian economies 
Initial remarks by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, a member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, for 
the Panel Discussion at the Asian Development Bank Institute, Tokyo, 12 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I am honored to be invited to this panel discussion at the Asian Development Bank Institute. 
In discussing today’s topic, “the Eurozone Crisis and Its Implications for Asian Economies”, I 
would  like  to  speak  briefly  about  three key  aspects. I  will  begin  with  reviewing  the  current 
Eurozone crisis, then consider its implications for Asian economies, and lastly I will outline 
the Bank of Japan’s contribution to regional monetary cooperation in Asia. 
Nature of the Eurozone crisis 
II. 
I am sure that most of today’s audience is already familiar with developments in the current 
Eurozone crisis, but I would like to emphasize two points about the nature of the crisis. The 
first is that the Eurozone crisis highlights the difficulties of so-called monetary union without 
fiscal  union.  Eurozone  countries  introduced  the  single  currency,  the  euro,  under  the 
European  Central  Bank,  while  each  member  country  maintains  its  own  fiscal  sovereignty. 
However, there have been ongoing intensive discussions, since even before monetary union 
began, especially in academic circles, about the necessity for an adjustment mechanism in 
the form of fiscal transfers, labor mobility etc., if a common currency is to work. Thus, the 
issue  of  how  to  manage  fiscal  policies  under  a  single  currency  regime  is  one  of  the  most 
fundamental and most enduring challenges for the Eurozone.  
Second, as long-term interest rates in member countries converged at low levels following 
the introduction of the single currency, the Eurozone enjoyed the benefits of the expansion of 
trade and investment. At the same time, however, it also gradually accumulated economic 
and  financial  imbalances,  such  as  loose  fiscal  spending  and  a  bubble  in  the  real  estate 
market.  Because  these  imbalances  were  built  up  over  a  period  of  more  than  a  decade 
following the introduction of euro in 1999, it would not be surprising if it takes a long time for 
the Eurozone to achieve a full recovery. If this is indeed the case, we must be aware that 
there is a risk of the crisis becoming a severe headwind against the global economy in the 
longer-term perspective. I will come back to this point later. 
Implications for Asian economies 
III. 
It took about 50 years, from the signing of the European Coal and Steel Community Treaty in 
1951, for Europe to achieve the introduction of the euro. Meanwhile, the possibility of deeper 
economic  and  financial  integration  in  Asia,  and  in  particular  the  introduction  of  an  Asian 
single currency, has been discussed at various levels. There may seem to be little possibility, 
at the present time, of a common currency being established in Asia, but the day might come 
some time in the future when the introduction of an Asian single currency might be discussed 
as  a  concrete  option.  In  preparation  for  such  a  future  possibility,  I  think  it  is  important  for 
Asian countries to deepen their understanding of the implications and lessons to be learned 
from the current Eurozone crisis. I would like to touch briefly upon three issues. 
First, as we all recognize, the Eurozone crisis has had a notable impact on Asian economies 
through  several  channels:  through  trade,  through  the  financial  system  and  through  asset 
prices. Although Asia has been enjoying relatively high economic growth, it would be overly 
optimistic  to  expect  a  complete  decoupling  of  Eurozone  economies  and  Asian  economies. 
Considering  in  particular  the  degree  and  persistence  of  the  Eurozone  crisis,  we  must  be 
aware that the downside risk continues to weigh on the Asian economies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Second, the question of how to develop and manage fiscal policy under a single currency 
regime is a huge topic for Asia, if in fact it considers monetary union as a concrete option. As 
I mentioned, in the case of European monetary union, monetary policy was centralized under 
the European Central Bank, while fiscal policy remained the responsibility of each member 
country.  Furthermore,  Article  125  of  the  Lisbon  Treaty,  the  so-called  no  bailout  clause, 
makes  it  illegal,  in  principle,  for  one  member  state  to  assume  liability  for  another  member 
state. This means that, even if one member country falls into a fiscal crisis, other member 
countries  are  not  allowed  to  support  the  troubled  member  with  fiscal  transfers.  Thus,  the 
crisis management of fiscal problems has become a major challenge for Eurozone countries. 
If the Asian region makes a step towards monetary union in the future, a consensus must be 
achieved in advance among the members as to how fiscal integration should proceed and 
how  social  security  systems,  such  as  pension  and  health  care  systems,  should  be 
harmonized. 
Third,  the  risk  of  economic  and  financial  imbalances  must  be  monitored  closely.  The 
Eurozone, especially the peripheral countries, enjoyed good economic performance after the 
introduction of the euro. That is because foreign exchange risks were eliminated within the 
Eurozone,  expanding  trade  and  investment  in  the  area,  and  also  because  the  long-term 
interest rates of these countries went down toward the level of German government bonds 
and converged at low levels, which also stimulated the economy in the peripheral countries. 
At  that time, market  participants  called this  convergence  of  interest rates  the  “interest  rate 
bonus”,  and  praised  it  as  being  “the  fruit  of  monetary  union”.  In  hindsight,  however,  this 
convergence of long-term interest rates encouraged loose fiscal policies, or combined with 
overly  optimistic  economic  projections,  led  to  real  estate  bubbles  in  some  countries. 
Meanwhile,  necessary  structural  reforms  were  stalled,  including  labor  market  reforms,  and 
the competitiveness gaps within the region remained unsolved. Given that growth potential in 
Asia is high and its middle-class is expected to grow further, Asia must avoid over-heating of 
the economy such as excess investment or the creation of bubbles. This lesson should be 
relevant  even  when  Asia  faces  the  downside  risk  associated  with  the  Eurozone  crisis, 
because  excessive  short-term  policy  stimulus  may  increase  the  potential  risk  of  these 
imbalances. In addition, even though economic growth is relatively high in the region, it is still 
important  that  Asia  makes  progress  on  the  structural  reforms  that  are  necessary  for  it  to 
maintain this growth over the medium- and long-term. 
in  Asia.  The  European  Council  and 
Bank of Japan’s contribution to regional monetary cooperation in Asia 
IV. 
In  the  light  of  this  discussion,  I  would  like  to  outline  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  contribution  to 
regional  monetary  cooperation 
the  European 
Commission  have  played  a  major  role  in  market  integration  in  Europe,  through  what  we 
might call “top-down integration”. However, it seems to me that market integration in Asia is 
moving  forward  autonomously  through  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment  by  the  private 
sector, that is to say, through “bottom-up integration”. In light of this, central banks in Asia are 
working  together  in  promoting  regional  monetary  cooperation  to  develop  deep  financial 
markets. The Bank of Japan also contributes to these undertakings. 
For example, the Bank of Japan is a leading member of the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia 
and Pacific Central Banks, or EMEAP, an international forum for 11 central banks from the 
Asian  and  Pacific  regions.  Under  the  umbrella  of  the  Governors’  Meeting,  EMEAP  has  a 
number  of  meetings  at  different  levels:  the  Deputies’  Meeting,  the  Working  Group  on 
Financial  Markets,  the  Working  Group  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  Working  Group  on 
Payment and Settlement Systems, the IT Directors Meeting, and the Monetary and Financial 
Stability  Committee. To address  a  wide  variety  of  practical  on-site  issues,  member  central 
banks  cooperate  closely  with  each  other,  which  could  also  be  described  as  a  bottom-up 
approach. 
One specific example of an EMEAP initiative is the effort to develop liquid local bond markets 
that are able to link directly the region’s abundant savings and its investment opportunities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  grew  out  of  the  experience  of  the  Asian  currency  crisis  of  1997,  where  there  was  a 
fundamental recognition that Asia remained highly dependent on banks, indicating that the 
local  bond  and  other  capital  markets  were  not  sufficiently  developed.  To  address  this 
problem, the  EMEAP  central  banks  established an  investment  trust  called  the  Asian  Bond 
Fund  (ABF)  in  2003,  and  became  the  initial  buyers  by  investing  in  sovereign  and  quasi-
sovereign bonds in eight EMEAP member economies. When it was launched, the Fund was 
limited to investment only in U.S. dollar-denominated bonds, but in 2005 began to purchase 
local currency-denominated bonds as well. In the same framework, EMEAP also launched 
an exchange-traded fund (ETF) called the Pan Asia Bond Index Fund (PAIF) , which was first 
listed  on  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Hong  Kong  in  2005,  and  later  cross-listed  on  the  Tokyo 
Stock Exchange in 2009. 
In addition, the Bank of Japan, together with the Japanese Ministry of Finance, participates 
actively in the ASEAN +3 meetings. Under the Chiang Mai Initiative, it has contributed to the 
creation of a framework to prevent currency crises, and to respond once they occur. Through 
these  kinds  of  practical  activities,  members  cooperate  to  develop  robust  financial  markets 
and establish stable financial systems. 
Conclusion 
V. 
I  have  discussed  the  current  Eurozone  crisis  and  its  implications  for  Asian  economies,  as 
well as the Bank of Japan’s contribution to regional monetary cooperation in Asia. Given its 
growth potential, Asia is expected to maintain an increasingly large presence in the global 
economy even when it faces the downside risk associated with the crisis. In that process, a 
variety of financial supports will obviously play important roles, where the bottom-up nature of 
the Asian integration process must be recognized and respected. But we should also be fully 
aware of the potential risk of economic and financial imbalances such as excess investment 
and credit bubbles in the case of Asia. In deepening regional financial integration, we should 
always  remember  the  basic  viewpoint  of  achieving  sustainable  long-term  growth  in  the 
region.  
Thank you very much for your kind attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
