Michael Gondwe: Skills development as a catalyst for youth employment 
promotion, income growth, and micro, small and medium enterprises 
Keynote address by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the stakeholder 
consultative  workshop,  organised  by 
the  Technical  Education,  Vocational  and 
Entrepreneurship  Training  Authority  (TEVETA)  of  the  Republic  of  Zambia,  Lusaka, 
18 October 2012. 
 ii. 
Chairperson  
Ladies and gentlemen  
It is indeed an honour and privilege to make this keynote address on skills development as a 
catalyst  for  youth  employment  promotion,  income  growth,  and  micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) development.  
Mr Chairman  
Over the recent past, macro-economic stability and appreciable economic growth has been 
achieved in Zambia as reflected in:  
i.  
Positive  real  GDP  growth  averaging  6.5%  per  annum  in  the  last  5  years  coupled 
with rising per capita incomes;  
Falling  inflation,  relatively  stable  exchange  rate  and  downward  trend  in  lending 
rates;  
Favourable external sector performance; and  
Stability and growth in the financial sector;  
iii.  
iv.  
The main  challenge that  still  remains  is  that  of meeting the  basic  needs  of the  majority  of 
Zambians, in particular our youth and women, who suffer the brunt of high unemployment.  
It  is  for  this  reason  that  action  is  urgently  needed  to  boost  skills  development  in  order  to 
enhance  productive  capacities,  investment  and  decent  jobs  to  sustain  the  incomes  of 
working families, the poor and the vulnerable. 
Dear participants  
The  productivity  and  the  quality  of  work  are  major  determinants  of  life  quality,  affecting 
nutrition,  health  and  education,  social  protection,  and  fair  treatment.  Jobs  are  particularly 
important for the poor, whose labour is often their only asset and a primary route to poverty 
eradication.  
It is for this reason, that we at the central bank recognise skills development as an economic 
imperative. This is because it increases productivity of economic agents.  
Chairperson  
In the aftermath of the recent global financial crisis of 2008, employment has re-emerged as 
a top priority area across the world.  
A  large  and  growing  young  population  can  be  a  driver  for  economic  growth  and  social 
progress  provided  they  access  quality  education  and  health,  and  are  engaged  in  decent 
employment, without which, many young people will not be able to escape negative social 
vices and poverty.  
In recognition, of the foregoing, the National Budget for 2013 whose theme is; “Delivering 
Inclusive  Development  and  Social  Justice”  has  for  the  first  time  put  job  creation  at  the 
centre of its development agenda by explicitly targeting the creation of 200,000 jobs in 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Sectors  targeted  for  these  jobs  are  agriculture,  tourism,  manufacturing  and  construction 
(including infrastructure).  
Ladies and gentlemen  
Sustained efforts to bring in private investment coupled with supportive public policies and 
investment,  would  contribute  to  enhancing  productive  capacities  and  generating  the  much 
needed  jobs  in  our  country.  This  should  be  coupled  with  easier  access  to  credit  for 
productive  enterprises  -  especially  micro,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (MSMEs)  – 
and  reforms  to  foster  technological  change  and  productive  diversification  in  line  with  the 
changing structure of the global economy.  
In the above recognition and its continued quest to contribute to unleashing the potential of 
local MSMEs, the Bank of Zambia hosted a strategic forum on the role of finance in this area, 
in June this year. As a follow-up, the Government is working closely with stakeholders and 
the cooperating partners in improving availability of financial resources to MSMEs. Further, 
some provision has been included in the 2013 Budget.  
Distinguished participants  
MSMEs could play an important role in creating employment and spurring growth. However, 
their competitiveness is undermined by inadequate infrastructure, limited access to financial 
and business services.  
Stakeholders  can  help  small  firms  to  integrate  in,  and  reap  more  benefits  from  local  and 
international  value  chains,  by  facilitating  the  provision  of  business  services,  among  which 
continuous skills development is paramount.  
An important policy question is how to address the constraints which affect the capacity to 
grow and generate earnings of MSMEs, very often informal that operate in traditional sectors 
and account for the bulk of jobs in our country. This feat, ladies and gentlemen, can only be 
achieved  gradually,  as  the  drivers  of  informality  are  usually  multiple  and  deeply  rooted  in 
long-standing development gaps and weaknesses.  
Dear participants,  
We recognised the efforts made by the Government aimed at enhancing a broad spectrum of 
skills in the country through such institutions as TEVETA.  
What  is  required  is  a  more  Targeted  intervention  in  order  to  improve  labour  market 
opportunities  for  individuals  by  helping  them  obtain  necessary  skills  and  facilitating  labour 
market transitions.  
Countries  that  have  been  most  successful  in  skills  development  did  so  by  sustaining 
implementation  of  coordinated  policies 
formation, 
employment and decent work. These countries include India, Costa Rica, and South Korea.  
They made quality education broadly available and introduced mechanisms to match supply 
to the current demand for skills, often by means of linking training providers and employers at 
sector and local levels.  
They helped workers and enterprises adjust to change and used skills strategically as a core 
element of industrial, technology and trade policies to move from lower to higher productivity 
activities and facilitate investment in new industries.  
Involving workers and the private sector was a main feature of this approach. Zambia can 
learn a lot from some of these countries.  
Effective 
facilitate 
demand-driven  training  in  sectors  and  locations  with  high  job  growth  potential,  avoiding 
bottlenecks and improving employability. 
linking  education  systems,  skills 
the  private  sector  should 
in  conjunction  with 
training  systems 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Expanding  accessibility  to  quality  training  is  a  powerful  instrument  for  empowerment  and 
inclusion  of  the  youth  and  disadvantaged  groups:  women,  rural  dwellers  and  persons  with 
disabilities. In some cases, apprenticeships in the informal economy can offer many young 
people an opportunity to learn a trade and enter the world of work.  
Skills  development  is  a  necessary  response  to  the  challenge  of  youth  unemployment. 
Effective  programmes  should  involve  packages  of  training-cum-labour-market-services. 
These  should  include:  providing  advisory  services  and  career  guidance,  vocational 
counselling, job-search assistance and job placement, as well as access to different types of 
training,  including  combinations  of  learning  and  earning  through  apprenticeships  or 
subsidized  employment  in  return  for  on-the-job  training.  Successful  entrepreneurship 
programmes  should  also  involve  providing  basic  business  skills  and  linking  would-be 
entrepreneurs to mentoring, finance and market opportunities. These integrated approaches 
are needed to assist young people in their transition from school to work and to tackle the 
multiple constraints they face on the labour market.  
The need for effective certification cannot be overemphasised.  
In  conclusion,  skills  development  can  make  a  critical  contribution  to  youth  employment 
promotion  and  income  generation  through  MSMEs.  Coordinated  policies  linking  education, 
skills formation, and employment are required.  
Well-designed active labour market policies linked with technical and vocational education, 
on-the-job training and apprenticeships – both formal and informal – are essential for skills 
development, employment and entrepreneurship and can help alleviate unemployment and 
underemployment. 
Connecting training providers and employers can be especially effective at sector and local 
levels. Further, involving the private sector is essential to employment creation.  
Furthermore,  special  attention  should  be  paid  to  supporting  MSMEs  as  the  most  dynamic 
sources of employment. Financial institutions should provide easy access to funds to reduce 
cost  of  doing  business.  The  multiple  drivers  of  informality  should  be  tackled  through 
integrated policy packages that promote a gradual transition to formal activities.  
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the challenge I give all stakeholders that are involved in skills 
development, youth empowerment and development of MSMEs.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
