Patrick Honohan: A view from Ireland – the crisis and the euro 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the David Hume 
Institute  and  the  Scottish  Institute  for  Research  in  Economics,  Edinburgh,  13  November 
2012. 
 Insulating the euro from both scepticism and complacency 
How is it that the euro, having confounded its critics by displaying resilience and tranquillity 
for a decade, is suddenly plunged by the global financial crisis into a severe structural crisis? 
The view from Ireland, one of the economies most damaged in the crisis, allows us to see 
just how release 1.0 of the euro was under-designed, and robust only to moderate shocks. 
Also evident from Ireland is how the plausibility and credibility gained from the outset by the 
system resulted in market and official complacency that allowed imbalances of indebtedness 
to grow too large. The debts reached such a point that, when a crisis of confidence hit, it was 
likely  to  have  consequences  too  large  to  be  coped  with  by  conventional  tools.  Now  non-
standard  measures  of  monetary  policy  and  intergovernmental  lending  have  been  put  in 
place, while the institutional architecture of the euro area is being rapidly overhauled towards 
a fairly early release date for euro 2.0 
Although  it  is  said  that  Celts  are  prone  to  analysing  and  re-analysing  the  historical 
antecedents of present woes; and although I cannot claim to be free of this vice, if vice it be, I 
will  try  not  to  rake  over  at  any  length  the  sorry  story  of  how  Ireland’s  macroeconomic 
performance became bogged-down in the first years of the new millennium. Instead I want to 
speak  more  about  how  the  euro  is  involved  in  this  story,  and  how  a  way  forward  is  being 
mapped. 
Scotland and Ireland in the crisis 
I  know  I  will  be  understood  in  using  a  bog  as  a  metaphor  when  speaking  to  a  Scottish 
audience. Indeed, I am aware that, although Ireland prides itself on the extent and richness 
of its bogs, raised and blanket, Scottish naturalists claim that you have to go to Caithness 
and Sutherland to find “arguably the finest blanket bogs on the planet”. In the 1990s, Ireland 
had  stuck  to  the  arduous  but  dry  uplands  of  growth  through  competitiveness  and  fiscal 
discipline  that  alone  lead  safely  to  sustainably  higher  income,  full  employment  and  steady 
prosperity. But sometime around the turn of the century, lured by a Will O’ the wisp, or tine 
ghealáin, or teine biorach, in the form of a property and construction bubble financed by easy 
access to foreign borrowing, Ireland stumbled into a morass of over-indebtedness from which 
it is now extricating itself.  
It is the international context in which the extrication is being engineered on which I want to 
focus today and in particular to the European context. We, Irish and Scots, live in Europe and 
depend  on  our  European  connections  for  much  of  our  prosperity.  If  I  may  be  permitted  to 
consider the economy of Scotland in isolation, I might say that in some respects it depends 
on  European  connections  even  more  so  than  Ireland.  Even  excluding  intra-UK  trade,  it 
seems that European countries represent nine of Scotland’s top ten export customers. (For 
Ireland,  the  same  applies  with  one  difference:  China  is  a  bigger  customer  of  Ireland  than 
Norway).  Of  course  the  rest  of  the  world  matters,  and  will  do  increasingly,  but  proximity 
counts too, and Europe is the context. 
This is even more so given the recent stresses which have been felt by the euro area, and 
which have had their effect worldwide, but more particularly throughout Europe. Scotland is 
not  in  the  euro,  of  course,  but  like  Ireland,  the  economy  of  Scotland  too  uses  a  common 
currency managed in the context of a larger economic entity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Actually, were it not overshadowed by that of Ireland, the recent economic performance of 
Scotland,  might  be  characterised in  much  the  same  language,  if  I  am  to  look  at  the  latest 
GDP figures which show Scotland’s economy to be still 3 per cent below its 2007 peak, with 
construction – 15 per cent below peak – the weakest sector. The difference is in amplitude: 
Irish GNP is about 10 per cent below peak and building and construction is down almost two-
thirds from the peak. The legacy in terms of over-indebtedness is likewise much more acute 
in  Ireland.  I  do  not  ignore  the  fact  that  Edinburgh,  long  a  world  centre  of  banking,  has 
experienced some hard knocks in that sphere, but the extraordinary loan-losses experienced 
by the Irish banking system, whose shareholders lost essentially all of their investment and 
still  left  a  heavy  burden,  are  in  a  class  of  their  own,  exceeded  perhaps  only  by  Iceland. 
Weighed-down by what may (relatively speaking) be the largest ever banking tab picked-up 
by  a  Government,  Ireland,  after  years  of  apparent  fiscal  discipline,  has  recently  been 
somewhat  precariously,  but  nevertheless  rather  effectively,  fighting  to  restore  international 
confidence in its creditworthiness. 
Why has the poison of the crisis become concentrated in the euro area? 
Latvia  and  Iceland,  non-euro  countries  both,  had  equally  severe  economic  collapses 
resulting from credit-fuelled bubbles in the 2000s. Some aspects of euro area membership 
are  helpful  in  the  recovery  phase.  Thus,  while  the  siren  seduction  of  a  devaluation  fix  for 
restoring competitiveness is tied down, inflation remains under control and extensive liquidity 
provision  by  the  central  bank  met  the  outflows  of  Government-guaranteed  funds.  Yet  the 
crisis has seemed more deep-rooted and intractable in the euro area than elsewhere.  
Far-reaching corrective action needs to take account of the underlying reasons. I was beaten 
to  the  label  euro  2.0  by  the  Vice  President  of  the  European  Commission,  and  I  think  it  is 
undeniable  that  the  transformation  of  the  institutional,  legal  and  policy  architecture  of  the 
euro  area  that  is  under  way  –  and  needs  to  be  under  way  –  definitely  amounts  to  a  new 
release, and could not be merely labelled – shall we say – euro 1.2.  
After  all,  current  data  for  existing  members  does  not  shape  up  to  the  prerequisites  for 
admission to the euro in 1998. It is not only Ireland, Greece and Portugal that need to tackle 
public  debt  ratios  in  excess  of  60  per  cent  of  GDP  and  rising;  fully  two-thirds  of  the 
membership, including Germany, has debt levels in excess of that famous, albeit somewhat 
arbitrary, threshold [Chart 1]. The same with the deficit [Chart 2] and, of course, and most 
shockingly, long-term interest rates [Chart 3]. Only the spread of inflation rates remains close 
to being within the Maastricht range [Chart 4] – a tribute of course to it being the target of 
ECB  policy.  In  a  way,  that  last  slide  is  quite  instructive  in  showing  the  capacity  of  the 
monetary union to achieve what was, after all, set by Treaty as its over-arching goal, namely 
price stability. 
As of 2012, then, what were thought of as prerequisites for a successful operation of the euro 
in its initial guise are hardly present. But why has it come to this? We can answer this from a 
close-in, blow-by-blow perspective, or, standing back from consideration of the system in the 
round.  Adopting  the  first  perspective,  it  is  by  now  well  understood,  at  least  by  close 
observers,  this  situation  has  arisen  because  of  the  interaction  between  financial  market 
sentiment and the behaviour of public and private sector borrowers. Complacent regulatory 
and fiscal policy design meant that the entire euro area became increasingly vulnerable to a 
turn in sentiment that would make the servicing of vastly increased debt ratios problematic.  
Some countries with high public debt at the start of EMU did not bring their debt ratios down: 
with the newly lowered interest rates, the situation looked manageable. Public debt even in 
countries  with  relatively  low  credit  ratings  traded  during  the  early  2000s  at  tight  spreads 
allowing  these  governments  to  roll  over  their  debt  easily,  and  to  rely  on  insecure  revenue 
sources.  Then,  when  the  global  financial  crisis  hit  in  2008,  all  governments  naturally  and 
rightly allowed automatic fiscal stabilisers full rein and many added discretionary stimulus in 
accordance with most textbooks to help offset the collapse of global demand.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Accumulation  of  private  debt  was  the  other  dimension  of  creeping  vulnerability  which  was 
exposed when the global crisis hit. Liberalised finance generated balance of payments flows 
on current and private capital account resulting in large cross-border claims and liabilities to 
an extent which was scarcely monitored, especially within the euro area: indeed it was, for a 
time,  considered  politically  incorrect  in  some  quarters  to  think  of  national  balance  of 
payments and other macroeconomic data for individual euro area member states as worthy 
of  analysis.  After  all,  how  much  attention  does  Scotland  pay  to  its  balance  of  regional 
payments  within  the  United  Kingdom?  Largely  unnoticed  against  a  background  of  huge 
international flows in the rest of the world, the intra-euro area flows were large. Some of the 
private  international  flows  within  the  euro  area  were,  no  doubt,  eased  by  the  removal  of 
exchange rate risk; but it was a time of vast flows anyway, and not all of these flows were 
well-used by the under-regulated intermediaries and, in turn, by their borrowers.  
Banking losses in turn were socialised, adding to the pressure on the public finances in some 
countries, but especially in Ireland. Perhaps it is too much to ask of my audience tonight to 
picture  themselves  in  an  economy  where  all  of  the  banks  had  failed  and  required 
recapitalisation  in  the  tens  of  billions;  but  then  again,  perhaps  it’s  not  so  hard  for  you  to 
imagine this.  
In  effect,  public  and  private  sectors  both  largely  discounted  the  risk  of  a  crisis  of 
creditworthiness in the euro area until mid-2010. Since then, though, the reaction of financial 
markets has been to tighten a vicious feedback loop adding to the pressures both on those 
countries  that  had  become  over-indebted  even  at  the  old  interest  spreads,  and  on  those 
whose debt had seemed manageable at lower interest rates but now looked less so at the 
higher rates demanded by the market. [Chart 1 again] Far from trading at spreads that were 
insensitive to ratings (as had been the case just a few years before), euro area government 
bond  yields  became  super-sensitive  to  ratings  and  other  risk  factors.  Nothing  alerted 
governments to the sharp widening of yield spreads for highly indebted countries from 2010 
on: suddenly levels of debt and of public spending that seemed perfectly sustainable at the 
old levels of risk appetite and the old assessments of credit risk in the euro area, were no 
longer secure [Chart 5]. 
The risk of debt restructuring, reinforced by the case of Greece, where sizable losses have 
been incurred by investors in government bonds, has caused yields on government debt in 
many parts of the euro area – and as a result most other forms of debt in those countries – to 
soar.  Debt  levels  that  seemed  quite  manageable  at  lower  yields  now  look  potentially 
unsustainable to some market participants. In addition, the volatility of market perceptions of 
credit risks has been contributing to the level of yields. Short-term investors in what are now 
relatively  high-yield  bonds  face  considerable uncertainty  about  the  price  of  those  bonds  in 
the  market  if  they  want  to  sell  before  maturity.  It  may  very  well  be  that  they  are  caught 
needing  to  sell  just  when  the  market  happens  to  be  in  a  pessimistic  frame:  through  this 
mechanism yield volatility translates into high average yields.  
All  in  all,  the  market’s  reassessment  of  the  degree  to  which  things  can  go  wrong  has 
generated a potentially lethal combination of high yields and high debt, to the point where the 
concept  of  redenomination  risk,  previously  all  but  unimaginable  to  most  analysts,  became 
factored into market considerations.  
The commitment device bites back 
This blow-by-blow account fails, however, to explain why these mechanisms have been so 
uniquely pernicious in the euro area: after all, all of the world’s economies have been hit by 
the crisis to some extent or another. In order to understand why the euro has been at the 
epicentre of the global crisis the key concept to keep in mind is the concept of a commitment 
device. The euro is a commitment device whereby member countries increased the cost of 
policy  laxity  with  the  intention  of  obtaining  the  benefits  of  enhanced  credibility  that  policy 
would be disciplined. Unfortunately, the discipline was nevertheless not maintained, and the 
commitment penalty has been correspondingly severe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let  us  recall  that  the  euro  was  set  up  after  30  years  of  debate  on  how  to  reduce  the 
disruptive  impact  of  divergent  monetary  and  exchange  rate  developments,  including 
numerous devaluations, on real trade and investment integration in Europe.  
It  also  reflected  the  chequered  experience  of  many  European  countries  in  the  1970s  and 
1980s  with  surges  of  inflation  in  response  to  monetary  and  fiscal  indiscipline.  The  lack  of 
fiscal and monetary credibility resulted in high nominal and real interest rates and recurrent 
relapses. Was there a way for these countries to acquire the credibility of the Bundesbank? 
Both of these problems could seem to be solved if a single currency was adopted and put 
beyond  the  reach  of  politicians  with  their  tendency  to  succumb  to  a  short-term  policy 
perspective. In effect, a non-state currency. Granting full independence from government in a 
democracy to a central bank meant that its mandate would have to be a focused one. 
Central  banks  through  history  have  occasionally  acted  beyond  a  narrow  inflation  targeting 
remit  to  address  acute  financial  stability  crises  in  the  past  (as  when  the  Bank  of  England 
famously secured permission in a moment of panic to exceed the limitations of its charter – 
first in 1847 in the crisis that coincided with the Great Irish Famine). Indeed, the exception 
that proves the rule was the US Federal Reserve’s passivity which, it is generally accepted, 
lengthened and deepened the Great Depression of the 1930s.  
But that experience was not really taken into account in Maastricht Treaty planning. By the 
time of that planning, deep systemic crises were probably seen as a thing of the past for the 
advanced economy in part because of improved legal and financial infrastructures and also 
because, since the time of Keynes, fiscal policy was seen as having the tools to stem and 
reverse any aggregate demand declines that might occur. 
Against  this  background,  designing  a  mechanism  which  could  cope  with  the  moderate 
fluctuations  of  the  normal  business  cycle  and  sporadic  fiscal  pressures  and  was  sure  to 
eliminate inflationary surges and exchange rate changes seemed safe and even prudent. 
For  the  mechanism  to  work,  however,  sovereign  states  had  to  go  beyond  declarations  of 
intent. They had to design and adopt a commitment device. As a commitment device (think 
of  Ulysses  and  the  sirens,  Alexander  or  Cortez  burning  their  boats,  or  medieval  rulers 
exchanging  hostages  as  an  earnest  of  peace),  the  EMU  should  have  functioned  very  well 
indeed. Debt, competitiveness and balance of payments problems were always going to be 
harder to fix if they emerged in a euro area country. Perhaps that was not fully and constantly 
brought home to decision-makers. Instead, they seem to have assumed that all problems of 
macroeconomic imbalance would automatically be self-correcting in the new environment. 
For  example,  by  removing  the  possibility  of  devaluation,  membership  of  the  euro  ensures 
that  any  country  which  allows  its  competitiveness  to  get  out  of  line  will  ultimately  suffer  a 
costly period of adjustment likely associated with unemployment. It was always going to be 
much  more  difficult  and  more  painful  to  readjust  aggregate  competitiveness.  Did  that  stop 
countries  from  losing  competitiveness:  no!  [Chart  6].  Indeed,  wide  discrepancies  in 
competitiveness quickly opened-up and became progressively worse until 2007.  
Where  one  might  have  expected  the  financial  markets  to  enforce  discipline,  they  did  not 
always  do  so.  In  particular,  a  market  understanding  that  there  really  was  going  to  be  no 
bailing-out from the rest of the union of national governments that got into trouble, no transfer 
union,  should  have  implied  that  market  investors  would  penalise  countries  heavily  for 
accumulating  debt  at  an  excessive  rate.  Some  market  participants  did  recognise  the 
existence of differential credit risks. Let me return to the chart which I showed on ratings and 
yields [Chart 5]. The much maligned credit rating agencies did distinguish between euro area 
sovereigns – albeit only in a relatively narrow range that extended down to A (for Greece). 
But the range of market yields on government debt did not reflect even this range of credit 
assessments:  in  effect  real  money  must  have  assumed  that  governments  would  be  bailed 
out,  despite  the  “no  transfer  union”  dogma.  Accordingly  some  governments  were  able  to 
spend and borrow without seeing the cost of funds move up against them (though admittedly, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  accumulation  of  excessive  debt  before  the  crisis  was  not  as  large  as  is  sometimes 
carelessly asserted.) (Note that the markets were wrong: they did eventually lose significantly 
on Greek debt). 
The  rapid  expansion  in  cross-border  borrowing  and  lending  in  the  euro  area  unrelated  to 
Governments was a phenomenon driven as much by global financial liberalisation as by the 
existence  of  the  euro.  It  led  to  a  huge  accumulation  of  banking  claims.  The  threat  this 
accumulation presented to the public finances (given the likelihood that Governments would 
step in to cover at least a part of the losses generated by bank failures, were they to occur), 
which should have acted as a reason for national Governments to exercise some restraining 
hand  on  the  exposure,  was  greatly  underestimated  and  Governments  did  little  or  nothing 
about it. Indeed, by failing to include any significant system-wide banking surveillance in the 
euro area, the governance structures of the euro area left open a wide gap presenting huge 
risks. In addition the euro area authorities largely neglected to analyse national balance of 
payments trends on the mistaken assumption that only euro-area wide aggregates needed to 
be considered for central banking policy, and indeed the view was that focusing on national 
macroeconomic aggregates could be a damaging distraction to the formulation of the correct 
policies for achieving the price stability objectives for the euro area as a whole. 
So  although  competitiveness,  indebtedness  and  banking  failures  were  going  to  be  much 
more  difficult  to  resolve  for  a  country  in  the  euro  area,  this  commitment  device  did  not  in 
practice discipline countries. They continued to operate as if occasional devaluations could 
be  adopted  to  restore  competitiveness,  rebalance  external  payments  and  reduce  the  real 
value  of  debt.  With  the  low  interest  rate  environment  that  prevailed  due  to  the  removal  of 
market discipline, the imbalances had the potential to grow much larger than they had when 
markets had feared devaluation. Only when they got into trouble did countries realise how 
costly fixing the imbalances was now going to be: they had adopted a commitment device 
and were paying the penalty for ignoring it in their behaviour. 
The ECB response 
The deep crisis of the euro area (at first just an aspect of the global financial crisis) clearly 
required exceptional measures to bring things back onto a stable path and restore efficient 
market functioning with high levels of employment. The ECB was well-equipped to take some 
of  the  necessary  steps,  even  though  some  of  them  pushed  the  frontier  of  conventional 
monetary  policy.  Thus,  having  already  been  the  first  of  the  major  central  banks  to  provide 
unlimited financing to banks (initially on a one-off basis in August 2007) it made this open-
ended  provision  continuous  from  October  2008,  liberalised  its  collateral  rules  and  then 
provided  opportunities  for  extended  duration  lending  at  first  of  12  months  duration  (July 
2009) and then of 36 months (December 2011).  
However, as the fiscal response to the initial stages of the crisis expanded deficits and debts, 
and as the market’s heightened sensitivity to credit risk started to impose high spreads on 
borrowers across a wide swathe of the euro area the needed policy response became more 
difficult  to  implement,  especially  given  the  implicit  and  explicit  constraints  of  the  ECB’s 
mandate. In addition, the distributional impact (for example between countries) of monetary 
policy actions was beginning to become evident. 
A regime which had been set up to deal with problems of moderate scale was now being 
required  to  deal  with  a  financial  and  balance  sheet  crisis  of  severity  unmatched  since  the 
1930s. For some analysts, no attempt should have been made to use central banking tools 
to address problems not conceived of in the Maastricht Treaty. But for most it was clear that 
central  banking  tools  did  have  to  be  used  even  if  this  was  not  explicitly  envisaged  in  the 
Treaty. Although the Treaty did wish to preclude certain types of destructive action that some 
misguided central banks had fallen prey to historically, its drafters did not envisage that the 
euro area would have less of a capacity to resolve emergent problems of macroeconomic 
stability. The ECB had to act, but without trespassing on matters that are properly the domain 
of  national  governments.  This  was  especially  challenging  given  the  potential,  as  Greece 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
faced the need for a debt restructuring, of central banks’ actions resulting in very evident and 
indisputable redistributions as between member states.  
Getting the design of those actions right now presents an acute problem for the central bank. 
Entirely new issues have presented themselves.  Previously there was no great difficulty in 
ensuring that the desired interest rate levels would be transmitted by market forces more or 
less  uniformly  throughout  the  euro  area:  that  can  no  longer  be  taken  for  granted.  The 
emergence  of  redenomination  risk  in  market  perceptions  and  its  disruptive  influence  have 
generated  undesired  and  damaging  yield  volatility.  Additional  corrective  action,  as  recently 
announced, is clearly necessary.  
In  considering  and  taking  such  corrective  action,  the  ECB  has  not  only  to  ensure  no 
compromise with its Treaty mandate and obligation to maintain price stability, but must also 
avoid the appearance of partiality, and retain the confidence and respect of the body politic. 
It  has  been  argued  by  some  that  the  ECB  could  have  moved  further  sooner;  history  is  of 
course littered with at least as many unhappy episodes consequential on hyperactive central 
banks  and  those  which  were  destructively  compliant  with  the  desires  of  spendthrift 
governments  and  imprudent  bankers  as  with  those  resulting  from  excessive  central  bank 
caution, and it is history that will be the judge of all this. 
And now… 
Managing the transition from the emergent bad equilibrium of high debt, high perceived credit 
risk and risk aversion, and high and volatile yield spreads to a position where confidence has 
been sufficiently restored is the task of the policy and institutional innovations that form the 
“what’s new” of euro 2.0. To some extent the new institutions, policies and instruments are 
designed for a transitional period and to some extent as the framework in which the system 
is to settle down. Consistent with the analysis that I have proposed, it could be argued that 
only the transition matters, and that euro 1.0 had a sufficient structure, but was simply not 
well  enough  managed  in  terms  of  fiscal  and  especially  financial  regulation.  That  is  a 
defensible position, but market and indeed general public confidence in the system has taken 
such a knock that to insist on it would surely be to tie one’s hands behind one’s back also 
during the transition. For this reason alone the task must be seen as the creation of a much 
more  robust  regime  for  the  long  haul.  The  four  main  dimensions  of  reform  –  relating  to 
banking,  budgetary  framework,  economic  efficiency  and  competitiveness  for  growth  and 
democratic legitimacy – have been conveniently set out in the report of the four presidents, 
(of the European Council, the Commission, the Eurogroup and the ECB) which was prepared 
in advance of the June 2012 Summit.  
Some  of  these  are  well  understood,  some  well  advanced,  but  there  is  a  lot  of  work  to  be 
done and quite a bit of potential for misunderstandings as we go along. 
As far as the proposals now being fleshed out for a banking union are concerned, it is true 
that there are subtly different expectations concerning what can  and will be achieved, and 
how.  Three  components  are  now  envisaged  in  the  banking  union,  namely  a  single 
supervisory  mechanism,  a  common  deposit  guarantee  regime  and  a  common  resolution 
agency.  The  first  of  these  is  in  full  active  preparation;  draft  legislation  is  expected  to  be 
complete  by  the  end  of  2012  with  an  implementation  phase  during  2013.  The  other  two 
would come later. Much is expected from these, and I believe that they are very important 
elements of euro 2.0. 
For  the  single  supervisory  mechanism,  there  is  both  the  potential  for  an  operational 
improvement and – even if there were to be no operational improvement – the potential for 
greater  cross-border  confidence  in  banks  to  an  extent  that  could  improve  the  access  of 
banks in stressed countries to private and perhaps public debt and equity funding. My work 
on developing countries long ago convinced me that cross-border involvement of supervisors 
can help local supervisors achieve the distance and scepticism that can often be needed to 
detect  under-assessed  risks  in  a  banking  business,  especially  in  the  midst  of  an 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
unsustainable boom. Moving to a single supervisory mechanism will tend to achieve this, the 
main  challenges  being  how  to  do  so  without  losing  what  is  equally  essential,  the  nose  for 
local detail, rumour and feel of the market. Achieving the balance, which will require a subtle 
balance  between  national  and  central  supervisors,  will  not  be  easy  but  can  be  developed 
over time. After all, the euro area is not the only entity covering thousands of banks in which 
centrally controlled supervision is in place.  
To what extent is this likely to represent an intrusion into what should properly belong to a 
national policy arena? I am doubtful that there is any intrusion at all. Safety and soundness of 
banking  is  a  common  goal  of  bank  supervision:  non-market  goals  of  public  banking  policy 
can  be  effected  through  taxation  or  other  means.  Assessing  creditworthiness  and  balance 
sheet risks is not really something that I believe has much room for national exceptionalism. 
Expectations with regard to the likely roles of a common deposit insurance scheme and of a 
common  bank  resolution  agency  are  still  diffuse,  I  feel.  Deposit  insurance  of  the  first 
€100,000, currently provided at national level, offers peace of mind to retail users of banking 
services,  and  a  strengthening  of  the  perceived  backstop  by  pooling  the  responsibility  and 
resources for payouts could help this, especially at a time when the creditworthiness of some 
national  governments  has  been  called  into  question.  But  it  is  well  to  understand  what  a 
common deposit insurance scheme can and cannot deliver. Deposit insurance does not fully 
protect banks and banking systems against wholesale bank runs, which are typically much 
faster and larger than anything generated by retail holders. 
There is also the danger of divergent expectations with regard to the intended operation of a 
resolution agency. If greater private sector involvement in burden-sharing of future banking 
failures is envisaged, and if the single supervisory  mechanism is sufficiently proactive and 
prompt in identifying the need for and taking corrective action, then it will not require or use 
substantial public funds. But that is not how the recent wave of failures has been dealt with. 
Can we be sure that enough will have changed in this respect for the future, or will the public 
purse be called upon again? 
Perhaps I have ventured enough into the uncertainties of the design and implementation of 
euro 2.0 to convince you that this makeover is indeed a large and ambitious venture. This is 
what we are working on. Its accomplishment over the coming years is the sine qua non to 
re-establishing smooth and effective operation of finance and banking in the euro area, and 
that  in  turn  is  of  course  a  prerequisite  of  a  return  to  sustained  growth,  employment  and 
prosperity in all of the regions of Europe. 
 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
