Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Protecting the consumers of financial services 
in the Philippines 
Keynote address by  Mr  Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
(the  central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  launch  of  the  Banking  Code  for  Consumer 
Protection,  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the  Philippines  General  Membership  Meeting, 
Manila, 24 October 2012. 
 Mr. Allan Tumbaga, President of the Bank Marketing Association of the Philippines (BMAP); 
Mr. Patrick Cheng, President of Chamber of Thrift Banks; Mr. Edward Garcia, President of 
the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of the  Philippines;  Mr.  Cesar  Virtusio,  Executive  Director of 
the  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines;  officers  and  members  of  BMAP;  MBM  Peter 
Favila; former BAP President Gigi Montinola; friends in the banking sector; colleagues from 
the BSP; ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.  
It is my pleasure to join you in launching the new Banking Code for Consumer Protection. 
The Bangko Sentral commends BMAP, as well as the rest of the industry associations for 
working  together  in  updating  the  Code.  This  is  tangible  proof  of  your  responsiveness  and 
commitment to provide the best service possible to your clients.  
It is also evidence of your recognition that the lifeblood of the banking system comes from 
client deposits and investments, and that their trust is something that banks must strive to 
preserve.  This  is  why  bankers,  from  top  management  down  to  the  frontline  staff,  must 
exercise  prudence  and  vigilance  in  ensuring  that  banking  operations  are  optimally  carried 
out.  
The preservation of public trust is likewise the underlying imperative for the Bangko Sentral’s 
policy  and  regulatory  actions.  This  drives  us  to  constantly  emphasize  that  the  business  of 
banking  requires  serious  effort  to  keep  operations  within  the  bounds  of  safety,  soundness 
and professional management. This practice, in itself, is already equivalent to protecting the 
consumers  of financial  services.  However,  responsible  banking  is  more  than  just  business 
savvy and prudent risk management.  
Responsible banking means a conscientious focus on clients by putting their best interest at 
heart. It means recognizing that they deserve the highest standards of service.  
Client-centered  banking  entails  embedding  consumer  protection  in  business  operations. 
Products  and  services  must  be  designed,  priced  and  delivered  in  ways  that  match  client 
needs. Adequate measures must be in place to ensure that the consumers are not unduly 
disadvantaged  by  business  processes.  The  credit  approval  process  should,  for  example, 
prevent over-indebtedness. The features and conditionalities of financial products should be 
clearly communicated. Transparency in information and pricing should be the key principle in 
marketing and client dealings. 
Client-focused  banking  further  means  treating  consumers,  regardless  of  their  economic 
standing,  with  fairness,  dignity  and  respect  in  all  phases  of  transactions.  This  requires 
ensuring the integrity and confidentiality of client information. It also necessitates measures 
that  prevent  fraud  or  abuse.  For  example,  staff  training  in  good  customer  service  is 
important. Incentivizing ethical behavior can positively reinforce staff honesty and reliability. 
Treating  clients  with  respect  at  all  times,  of  course  entails  quite  a  lot  of  patience  and 
tolerance, but this will surely endear you more to your clients. 
Another  important  element  of  client-focused  banking  is  a  straightforward  mechanism  for 
complaints  resolution.  We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral,  encourage  banks  to  institutionalize  a 
system  of  redress that  immediately  addresses  customer  concerns. It  is essential  that  your 
clients know where or who to complain to within your institution.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Complaints should be viewed in a positive light. The complaints or negative comments that 
you receive provide insight to what might be amiss in your products or policies, or to what 
you might be doing wrong in your operations. Providing a formal avenue for complaints, even 
just a humble “suggestion box” in a corner of your branches, is one way for the bank to listen 
and learn directly from clients.  
Information from complaints often carry implications or suggestions for the improvement of 
product  design,  delivery,  branding,  marketing,  communications,  even  for  governance  and 
decision-making. As Bill Gates once said, “Your most unhappy customers are your greatest 
source of learning.” When you make your unhappy customers happy, you ultimately benefit 
from preserving a reputation that your bank cares. 
The Bangko Sentral has established a dedicated unit that attends to complaints against our 
supervised  institutions,  the  Financial  Consumer  Affairs  Group  (FCAG).  Among  the 
complaints  that  FCAG  has  received  is  on  credit  cards,  because  clients  misunderstood  or 
were unaware of the “fine prints” about the fees and charges on their credit card contracts. 
Thus BSP Circular 702 dated 15 December 2010 was issued to address, among others, the 
disclosure of all fees linked to credit card transactions. This is just a simple example of how 
customer  complaints  can  inform  policymaking.  Your  institutions  too,  can  leverage  on 
complaints information in the same way. 
While  you  implement  institutional  procedures  to  ensure  consumer  protection  and  provide 
excellent customer service, do not forget that dealing with clients often require some form of 
financial  education.  It  need  not  be  an  elaborate  training  program  or  a  formal  classroom 
discussion  on  financial  literacy.  When  bank  staff  explain  the  features  of  a  savings  or 
investment product, they are already pointing out the importance of setting aside a portion of 
the clients hard-earned money into productive use.  
It  is  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  dream  that  financial  education  also  become  embedded  in  the 
customer  relations  of  financial  institutions.  Many  have  said  that  the  most  effective  form  of 
financial education happens at the point of transaction.  
For our part, we will do our share in promoting economic and financial awareness through 
our Economic and Financial Learning Program (EFLP). While the EFLP is comprehensive, 
we  know  that  the  Bangko  Sentral  alone  cannot  promote  financial  literacy  to  the  whole 
Philippine population. In this advocacy, we hope that the market players such as yourselves, 
can  do  their  share,  or  even  partner  with  us  to  make  the  average  Filipino  citizen  a 
well-informed financial decision-maker.  
Financial  education  becomes  extremely  important  when  you  tap  new  markets,  particularly 
those  that  are  traditionally  unserved  by  the  banking  system.  Earlier  today,  the  Bangko 
Sentral’s financial inclusion initiatives and the opportunities that arise from these initiatives 
were  discussed.  As  you  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities  and  bring  into  the financial 
system  the  currently  excluded  –  for  example  the  small  businessmen,  farmers,  and 
low-income  sectors  –  bear  in  mind  that  this  market  will  be  less  informed  and  is  more 
vulnerable.  You  will  need,  not  only  to  innovate  products  that  fit  their  needs,  but  also  to 
exercise greater diligence in adequately informing and protecting these clients.  
It is noteworthy to see that the new Banking Code already embodies the basic principles of 
consumer protection and education that I have mentioned. The challenge now is translating 
this Code into actual standard practice. The greater challenge is to get the whole banking 
sector, all the big and small players, to consistently uphold the highest standards of customer 
service  and  responsible  finance.  I  am  confident  that  the  industry  will  again  rise  to  the 
challenge.  
Be likewise confident that the Bangko Sentral is ready to provide the environment that allows 
the industry to become stronger, more stable and more client-focused. We are united in the 
view  that  the  clients  are  our  ultimate  stakeholders,  and  that  their  well-being  as  a  result  of 
what we do, is of primary consideration.  
Thank you and good afternoon. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
