Norman T L Chan: The power of 3Cs 
Address by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Treasury Markets Summit 2012, Hong Kong, 12 October 2012. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, 
I  welcome  you  all  to  this  fifth  Treasury  Markets  Summit  co-organised  by  the  Treasury 
Markets  Association  and  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority.  In  the  past  four  Summits, 
discussions  focused  mainly  on  business  opportunities  available  to  financial  market 
participants.  This  year,  I  am  glad  to  note  that,  the  Summit  will  also  devote  a  session  to 
analysing some of the fundamental elements of a first-class financial centre. Being an ardent 
believer of these fundamental elements, I would like to take this opportunity to share with you 
some of my thoughts on them.  
From time to time visitors from overseas come to see me and, during our conversations, the 
question of how Hong Kong has turned itself into a thriving and dynamic financial centre in 
Asia is often raised.  
It  is  not  surprising  that  Hong  Kong’s  transformation  from  a  trading  port  into  an  IFC  within 
several decades has drawn a great deal of admiration as well as envy from neighbours within 
the region and beyond. This is because of the fact that an IFC will bring about much-desired 
economic growth, employment and prestige. So it is also not surprising that many cities in 
the  region  harbour  ambitions  of  becoming  international  financial  centres.  While  such 
ambitions are quite legitimate, most of them would find achieving this goal very challenging. 
Why? Because an IFC, by definition, serves not only domestic customers on its own turf, it 
also  captures  financial  businesses  and  money-flows  either  from  a  large  hinterland  or  the 
neighbouring areas or both. This is a big challenge because it entails serving customers from 
the  other  jurisdictions  or  cross  border  transactions.  It  also  entails  the  need  to  deliver 
consistent and efficient financial services in order to be competitive in international financial 
business.  The  truth  of  the  matter  is  that  only  a  small  number  of  cities  can  successfully 
become international financial centres because IFCs need a critical mass and market depth. 
It should be noted that international financial transactions and money tend to migrate towards 
those centres that provide the most efficient and competitive services to customers. In other 
words, domestic financial centres will need to go through very fierce competition before a few 
of them can emerge as successful IFCs.  
Given  Hong  Kong’s  accomplishment  as  one  of  the  region’s  premier  IFCs,  there  are  many 
study groups from abroad coming here to learn the tricks that have helped achieve what we 
have today. One visitor actually asked me point-blank when I received him in my office at IFC 
Two: “Give me the name of the architect of your building, and I am confident that we can 
build a taller and bigger building in order to turn my city into an IFC.”  
Of  course,  we  all  know  that  most  international  financial  centres  have  very  imposing,  often 
elegant  high-rise  office  towers.  But  building  an  international  financial  centre  is  not  about 
having  skyscrapers  taller  than  anyone  else’s.  Nor  is  it  about  having  super  computers  or 
optical fibres that can transmit data and information faster than your competitors’. Then what 
is it all about?  
In  the  World  Economic  Forum’s  Global  Competitiveness  Index,  there  are  12 categories  of 
benchmarks  against  which  major  financial  centres  are  assessed  to  determine  their  overall 
rankings or competitiveness. There are items relating to the physical infrastructure, such as 
airports, railroads and optic-fibre cables, which I would label as “hardware”. But they are not 
the  deciding  factor  in  differentiating  the  average  financial  centre  from  the  top  IFCs.  Of 
course, an IFC needs to have first-class hardware. After all, IFCs intermediate financial flows 
and in order to do that well they have to provide a high degree of connectivity linking up a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
large pool of clients and moneys from all over the world. However, it is relatively easy to build 
or  copy  hardware.  There  are  many  architectural  firms  that  have  a  proven  track  record  in 
designing  and  developing  world-class  airports  and  buildings.  There  are many  IT firms that 
can  provide  top-notch  computer  hardware  and  data-transmission  systems.  But  what 
differentiates the top IFCs from the rest is not the hardware but their software. So some have 
argued that to become an IFC is to compete and win in respect of the “soft power”. In other 
words, the race to become an IFC is a “battle of soft power”.  
When  I  say  “soft  power”  I  am  referring  to  a  wide  range  of  qualities  and  strengths,  which 
include the rule of law, protection of property rights, free flow of information, taxation, ease of 
doing business, talent pool, etc. As for Hong Kong, our success has been due to the fact that 
we have managed to build and develop our soft power in the last few decades. It is not my 
intention  to  go  through  the  entire  spectrum  of  qualities  that  constitute  “soft  power”  today. 
What I propose to do now is to focus on how we can ensure that the financial institutions and 
market players, which form the core part of any financial centre, can continue to stand up to 
the  challenge  of  achieving  and,  more  importantly,  maintaining  their  competitive  edge  in  a 
highly  competitive  world.  I  would  like  to  argue  that,  in  the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  the 
success  or  otherwise  of  financial  firms  is  to  a  large  extent  determined  by  their  ability  to 
exercise the power of the “3Cs”. Let me elaborate what the “3Cs” stand for.  
“Competence” 
The first “C” is “Competence”. This is very easy to understand. It goes without saying that, for 
instance, a foreign exchange or bond dealer must possess the technical competence in the 
respective  markets  to  perform  effectively  and  professionally.  By  the  same  token,  a  private 
banker or financial advisor must also have the necessary technical knowledge before he or 
she  can  recommend  or  market  wealth-management  products  to  customers.  However, 
financial  innovation  or  engineering  in  the  last  two  decades  have  greatly  increased  the 
complexity of financial products and market dynamics. Some of the structured products and 
financial derivatives are so complex that it is a big challenge for traders to fully understand 
their features and risks, let alone for the less-sophisticated customers. To maintain technical 
and professional competence, financial firms and practitioners must ensure that they are kept 
up to date on the latest market developments and financial innovations. This is very similar to 
what  other  professions  require.  For  example,  in  the  field  of  medicine,  doctors  will  need  to 
keep  updating  themselves  by  reading  medical  journals  and  attending  seminars  to  keep 
abreast of the latest medical advances.  
“Control” 
The  second  “C”  is  “Control”.  It  refers  to  the  control  and  governance  of  banks,  insurance 
companies,  securities  houses  and  other  firms  engaging  in  financial  services.  In  general 
financial  firms  engage  in  two  main  types  of  business.  The  first  type  is  the  pricing  and 
management of risks, which include credit, foreign exchange, market and maturity mismatch 
risks. Clearly in the process of risk-taking, the prudential soundness of the balance sheets of 
the firms  is  crucial.  They  must  be  able  to  control  the  amount  and types  of  risks  based  on 
prudent parameters. The history of the financial world is littered with staggering examples of 
breakdowns  in  risk  control  by  firms,  all  of  which  inevitably  led  to  disastrous  outcomes  not 
only for the firms themselves, but also for the societies as a whole in many instances. I don’t 
think I need to labour today why control and governance of risk-taking are important to the 
continued success of financial firms, large and small.  
The  second  type  of  business  that  financial  firms  undertake  is  the  provision  of  advisory 
services and distribution of financial products. This category covers a wide range of financial 
services, including investment banking, wealth- and asset- management and brokerage. As 
these firms  are  offering  advisory  services,  or  marketing  and  distributing  financial  products, 
they are not taking risk using their balance sheets. However, control and governance are no 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
less important than for the first type of financial firms because these firms must be able to 
treat their customers fairly and take into account their interests in offering their advice and 
products. Again, we have seen many instances in which a breakdown in the control of the 
sales process has resulted in mis-selling of financial products that were not suitable for the 
customers.  
One point I wish to highlight here is that a good control and governance framework can only 
be established within the financial firms from the top down. No matter how good the financial 
regulations are or how hard the supervisors try, external surveillance can only supplement, 
but not replace, good internal controls. This means that a suitably designed control system 
endorsed by the Board of Directors must be put in place to ensure that there are effective 
checks  and  balances  within  the  firm  to  monitor  and  detect  breaches  of  the  approved  risk 
taking parameters and code of conduct in dealing with clients.  
“Culture” 
The last “C” is “Culture”. This is a more difficult concept to explain than the first two “Cs”. But 
I’ll  try.  Competence  basically  means  having  the  technical  expertise  to  conduct  financial 
businesses. It can be learned through different channels, such as formal education, in-house 
programmes or on-the-job training.  
Control means having a system within a firm that monitors and manages risk-taking or the 
conduct of its staff. People within the firm are required to behave in a way that is prescribed 
by their rules. To put it in another way, people behave properly because they have to or else 
they would face unpleasant consequences if and when they are caught. In contrast, culture 
refers to a set of internal values shared by a group of people that influence and shape their 
mindset and behaviour. Culture and values normally define what is proper and what is not. 
Culture makes people behave in a certain way because they want to behave in that way and 
not  because  they  have  to.  Let  me  use  a  day-to-day  example  to  illustrate  this  point. 
Hong Kong is now a relatively clean city with not a lot of garbage on the streets, which is in 
sharp contrast to the widespread littering of 30–40 years ago. Many people believe that the 
reason  for  this  welcomed  change  is  the  improvement  by  the  Government  in  its  street-
cleaning  procedures  as  well  as  enhanced  efforts  to  catch  and  fine  people  who  are  found 
littering. But this can only explain a small part of the change. The key driving force, in my 
view, that makes Hong Kong streets much cleaner today is the change in people’s values. 
These days, most Hong Kong citizens do not litter the streets not because they are afraid of 
being caught by the health inspectors but because they don’t think it is right or proper to do 
so. This change of culture or values is the result of education of the young generation and 
the “Clean Hong Kong Campaign” that was launched by the Hong Kong Government back in 
the 1970s. If this had not been the case, our streets would still be filthy even if we had ten 
times more health inspectors and street cleaners.  
In the context of building the financial services sector that befits a world-class IFC, I have 
explained earlier why it is very important to have professional competence and good control. 
However,  it  is  equally,  if  not  more,  important  that  our  financial  institutions  and  their 
practitioners  uphold  the  right  values  that  protect  and  serve  the  interests  of  the  customers 
who  make  use  of  Hong  Kong’s  financial  services.  You  may  recall  that  in  the  movie  Wall 
Street, Michael Douglas kept on saying: “Greed is good!” When this kind of mindset, which 
puts the individuals’ interests above the firm’s and the firm’s interests ahead of the client’s, 
becomes prevalent, it will inevitably lead to highly undesirable if not disastrous outcomes not 
just  for  the  users  but  for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  So  while  greed  is  probably  an 
inherent part of human nature, a successful financial firm or an IFC must ensure that it can 
develop and cherish a culture and values that will restrain excessive greed in the interests of 
giving customers a fair deal. Only in doing that will an IFC be able to sustain its position and 
competitive edge over a long period of time. We all understand that an IFC also represents a 
brand,  a  quality  that  customers  trust  in  terms  of  efficiency,  reliability  and  integrity.  It  takes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
decades or even centuries to build a brand, but only days to destroy it if any of the qualities 
of competence, control or culture are eroded.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I have talked about the qualities or power of the 3Cs and I hope you 
will agree with me that, if Hong Kong wishes to remain competitive as the region’s premier 
IFC, we will have to do everything we can to strengthen our “soft power”. More specifically, 
the  financial  services  industry,  the  regulators  and  policy  makers  can  and  should  work 
together to upgrade the 3Cs, which is essential in maintaining our competitiveness against 
other financial centres. Now I would like to name a few initiatives that the HKMA is pursuing 
in this regard in collaboration with the stakeholders.  
(a) 
for  approving 
Competence: in conjunction with the SFC, the industry and professional bodies such 
as the TMA, the Hong Kong Institute of Bankers and the Hong Kong Securities and 
Investment  Institute,  we  are  seeking  to  revamp  and  formalise  the  professional 
qualifications and training for market practitioners in the fields of private banking and 
wealth  management  in  general.  The  HKMA  has  also  stipulated  in  its  supervisory 
circular that banks must ensure that their staff have the necessary qualifications and 
professional  training  in  the  relevant  fields.  We  are  making  good  progress  in  this 
regard and we hope to be able to introduce an enhanced qualification and training 
framework in a few months’ time.  
Control: under the Banking Ordinance, directors and senior management of banks 
must  be “fit  and  proper”, given  the  important roles  they  play  in  ensuring  that  their 
banks  are  run  prudently  and  properly.  In  order  to  enhance  the  control  and 
governance  functions  of  individual  institutions,  the  HKMA  has  recently  refined  the 
procedures 
the  appointment  of  bank  directors  and  senior 
management.  In  addition  to  the  usual  vetting,  we  now  convene  face-to-face 
meetings with some of the nominated candidates. The purpose of these meetings is 
to enable the HKMA to get to know the future directors and chief executives better 
and  to  make  clear  the  HKMA’s  expectations  of  the  roles  and  responsibilities  their 
appointments  will  entail.  It  is  important for  all  of  us to  appreciate that  the  ultimate 
responsibility for ensuring the safety and proper functioning of a financial institution 
rests with the institution itself. Regulation and supervision can only supplement or 
reinforce the process and cannot replace sound control and governance within the 
institution.  
Culture: the latest Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent developments have 
exposed  clearly  the  fact  that  uncontrolled  greed  can  and  did  generate  highly 
undesirable  outcomes.  Not  only  were  financial  firms  badly  hit  by  these  outcomes, 
but in some instances the reputation or brand of well-established financial centres 
has also been tarnished by these events. Of course, after the events many people 
sought to apportion blame. Obviously, the institutions concerned must take the bulk 
of the blame. Inadequate regulation and poor supervision were also culprits. But to 
me there is a much more fundamental issue that needs to be tackled if we wish to 
reduce  the  risk  of  similar  events  recurring.  That  is  the  culture  and  values  of  the 
financial  firms  and  the  market  practitioners.  In  making  our  streets  clean  and  free 
from  litter,  it  is  not  enough  to  station  one  health  inspector  at  the  corner  of  every 
street to catch offenders (there are simply not enough health inspectors to go round 
anyway),  nor  is  it  enough  to  raise  the  fines  against  littering  to  a  draconian  level 
because people will still litter if they think they can avoid being caught. The best way 
to keep our streets clean or cleaner, in my view, is to nurture the value among our 
citizens  that  littering  is  morally  bad  and  should  not  be  indulged  in  even  when  no 
health inspector is around and there is a low chance of being caught. In the context 
of the financial-services sector, the best way to uphold the integrity of the markets 
and trustworthiness of the industry is for the stakeholders to nurture and cherish a 
culture  and  values  that  encourage  and  support  honesty  of  the  practitioners  and 
(b) 
(c) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
restrain the institutions from placing the maximization of profit above the interests of 
the customers.  
This may all sound very idealistic and is “easier said than done”. We all understand that it will 
take a long time, years and even decades, to change people’s mindset and values. However, 
no IFC is built overnight. It has taken London and New York many, many decades to become 
what they are today. The race to become among the top IFCs in the world is a long term 
endeavour. It has taken Hong Kong many decades of untiring efforts to accomplish what we 
have today. There is a lot more that we need to do in order to maintain our niche when so 
many competing centres are trying very hard to catch up. To differentiate Hong Kong from its 
peers, we must maintain those qualities that are hard to copy and yet appeal to users and 
customers  who  can  freely  choose  where  to  conduct  their  financial  businesses.  So  what 
should we do? There are three layers of parameters that help shape behaviour and values.  
The  first  layer  is  what  is  prescribed  in  the  statutes,  regulations  and  rules,  and  with  which 
compliance is compulsory. The second layer is set out normally in codes of conduct issued 
by the various professional or industry bodies. For example, the banking industry has, under 
the  auspices  of  the  HKAB  and  with  the  endorsement  of  the  HKMA,  promulgated  a 
comprehensive  code  of  banking  conduct.  Similarly,  the  TMA  has  also  issued  a  code  of 
conduct for its members. The third layer encompasses everything from what the society does 
in its civic education for children to what individual firms do in managing their business and 
the  behaviour  of  their  employees.  Very  often  we  see  firms  become  overly  aggressive  in 
chasing profits by taking excessive risks or mistreating their customers. Among these firms it 
is common to find that they have a kind of incentive system that encourages and rewards 
excessive risk-taking and high sales-volume without regard to the interests of the firm or of 
the customers.  
Conclusion 
In my view, there is a lot that the boards and senior management of individual firms can do in 
ensuring  that  the  corporate  culture  and  incentive  system  encourage  and  nurture  sound 
practices and appropriate values. The regulators and supervisors should also do their part to 
ensure that firms have in place a proper corporate governance framework. Professional and 
industry  bodies  should  also  play  a  key  role  in  making  sure  that  they  promulgate  suitable 
codes  of  conduct  that  define  the  standard  of  ethics  and  probity  for  their  members.  More 
importantly, professional and industry bodies should collaborate with supervisors to ensure 
that there is adequate policing and enforcement of the relevant codes governing ethics and 
conduct.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating the importance of 
enhancing  the  power  of  the  3Cs,  “Competence”,  “Control”  and  “Culture”,  if  Hong  Kong 
wishes to remain competitive as a world-class IFC. It is a difficult challenge, but competition 
is never easy. It will be a never-ending task as competition never ends. I am confident that if 
all the stakeholders share the same vision and work together to achieve the common goals, 
we can certainly make it.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
