Jwala Rambarran: The current state of the Trinidad and Tobago economy 
and the outlook for 2013 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Trinidad and Tobago Chamber of Industry and Commerce Luncheon Meeting, 
Port-of-Spain, 27 November 2012. 
  
At  the  outset,  I  thank  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this 
luncheon session on the outlook for the Trinidad and Tobago economy. Over the past few 
years, the Chamber has certainly emerged as a strong advocate for promoting the candid 
exchange of views on issues of importance to the national and business community.  
 
In particular, I commend the Chamber for its pioneering efforts to develop a national 
corporate governance code, an issue that revolves around ethical conduct, leadership and 
better management of our economic wealth, and has the potential to affect the success of 
every public and private entity in Trinidad and Tobago. I give the assurance that the Central 
Bank will support the development of such a national governance code.  
 
At a time when genuine partnership and compromise across multiple stakeholders 
seems  to  be  elusive  on  matters  of  national  importance,  I  look  forward  to  the  Chamber 
remaining a strong, respected voice for business in Trinidad and Tobago.  
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  policymakers  around  the  world  have  been  grappling  for 
more than five years with an economic crisis, which has morphed several times over, from its 
origins as a sub-prime crisis in the United States to a sovereign debt crisis in Europe, to its 
current manifestation of a political crisis across both sides of the Atlantic. We are certainly 
witnessing  the  virtues  and  spillovers  of  an  increasingly  complex  and  interconnected  global 
economy.  
 
• 
So, this afternoon I want to talk about three things:  
First,  some  of  the  key  to  global  growth  occupying  our  attention  and  which  have 
implications  for  the  pace  and  strength  of  the  economic  recovery  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago and in the Caribbean;  
Second, recent developments and prospects for the Trinidad and Tobago economy 
in 2013; and  
Third, conclude with some brief thoughts on the medium term challenges ahead.  
  Global and Caribbean economic situation 
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  begin  with  a  brief  overview  of  the  global  growth 
situation.  While  the  first  half  of  2012  was  characterized  by  weaker  global  activity  and  an 
escalation of financial stress in the Euro area, incoming data since September suggest that 
global GDP growth might be stabilizing, albeit slowly, and that financial risk aversion seems 
to be easing following further policy actions by major central banks.  
 
Among the advanced economies, the U.S. economy continued its moderate pace of 
recovery, with GDP growing at an annualized rate of 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2012. 
Although more recent economic indicators have been stronger-than-expected, such as the 
pick-up  in  household  consumption  and  the  housing  market,  U.S.  employment  is  still  more 
than 3 per cent below its pre-crisis peak. Industrial production has partly recovered but it is 
too  early  to  fully  gauge  the  extent  to  which  Hurricane  Sandy  in  late  October  has  affected 
activity.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 
Across  the  Atlantic,  the  situation  remains  volatile.  Indicators  of  activity  and 
confidence in the Euro area continue to deteriorate, despite recent improvement in financial 
market sentiment. Economic conditions remain weakest in Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain 
given  persistent  difficulties  in  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  and  governments  in  these 
countries. Even the stronger economies of the Euro zone are showing signs of deterioration. 
The French economy has hardly grown since March 2011, and growth in Germany is slowing 
further. 
 
Major emerging market economies such as China, India and Brazil are experiencing 
noticeably  lower  growth  rates  in  2012  partly  due  to  contagion  effects  from  the  European 
crisis and slower economic growth in the United States.  
 
Policy  actions  by  major  central  banks  have  supported  an  improvement  in  global 
financial  market  sentiment  since  the  middle  of  2012.  Unconventional  monetary  measures 
have been at the heart of the policy response in advanced economies, while central banks in 
emerging  markets  and  developing  countries  have  either  cut  policy  rates  or  postponed 
interest rate hikes.  
 
Conditions  in  Euro  area  sovereign  debt  markets  improved  markedly  following 
announcements in late July 2012 by the European Central Bank about its willingness to take 
decisive  actions  to  preserve  the  euro,  and  improved  further  after  confirmation  of  its 
willingness  to  purchase  shorter  term  sovereign  bonds  in  secondary  markets  through  the 
Outright Monetary Transaction (OMT) program.  
 
In  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  announced  additional  measures  in 
September  2012  to  ease  monetary  policy  by  expanding  its  asset  purchases  until  a 
substantial improvement in the labor market is seen, and emphasized that its exceptionally 
low level of federal funds rates are likely to be in place until mid-2015.  
 
The picture, Ladies and Gentlemen, is one where policymakers in our major export 
markets  of  the  United  States  and  Europe  are  battling  weak  growth,  stubbornly  high 
unemployment,  widening  fiscal  deficits  and  burgeoning  public  debt.  And  what  about  the 
Caribbean, which accounts for a substantial share of our exports?  
 
While the Caribbean region as a whole appears to be gradually recovering from the 
deep recession caused by the global economic crisis, the twin constraints of low growth and 
high  debt  are  weighing  on  regional  economic  prospects,  and  the  state  of  affairs  in  the 
Eastern Caribbean is not too encouraging.  
Some Caribbean countries have approached the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
 
for  financial  support.  Antigua  and  Barbuda  and  St.  Kitts  and  Nevis  are  receiving  financial 
assistance from the IMF in the context of Standby Arrangements, while Grenada and Haiti 
are under the Extended Credit Facility. In addition, Dominica received IMF financing under 
the Rapid Credit Facility in early 2012 to help manage the economic fall-out from a series of 
natural disasters in July–September 2011.  
 
Jamaica  is  actively  negotiating  a  new  IMF  program.  The  Government  of  Jamaica 
hopes to conclude a new Standby Agreement with the IMF by the end of 2012. Some of the 
outstanding issues revolve around Jamaica’s tax and pension reform, and the need for cuts 
in the public sector payroll.  
 
Other  Caribbean  countries  have  delayed  or  resisted  the  implementation  of  harsh 
austerity measures, preferring to rely mainly on fiscal stimulus to kick-start growth, which, in 
turn, is elevating the risk of debt distress.  
 
Generally,  a  public  debt  ratio  of  below  50  per  cent  of  GDP  is  considered 
comfortable. By this measure, only three countries – Haiti, Suriname and Trinidad & Tobago 
– have low debt. Another six countries have heightened debt vulnerabilities, averaging in the 
range  of  50 to  90  per  cent  of  GDP.  These  countries  are  the  Bahamas,  Belize,  Dominica, 
Guyana, St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
Four  countries  in the  Caribbean  have  accumulated  exceptionally  high public  debt, 
averaging  in  excess  of  90  per  cent  of  GDP:  Jamaica  (143  per  cent),  St.  Kitts  &  Nevis 
(145 per cent), Grenada (105 per cent), and Antigua & Barbuda (98 per cent).  
 
The  gravity  of  the  Caribbean’s  debt  situation  is  generating  debt  restructuring  or 
credit events in a few countries, and placing significant pressure on credit ratings. Already in 
2012, three Caribbean countries have been downgraded by rating agencies.  
Recent economic developments in Trinidad and Tobago 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Trinidad and Tobago economy has shown tremendous 
resilience  against  this  turbulent  backdrop,  but  we  are  yet  to  experience  a  full  and  solid 
recovery from the downturn that started in late 2008.  
Let me give a brief summary of our current economic position.  
 
 
Before  I  do  so,  I  must  engage  in  a  detour.  I  must  emphasize  that  the  Central 
Statistical Office (CSO) is the official source of real annual GDP data, which is published in 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Economy’s  “Review  of  the  Economy”  and  which  is  also 
published in the Central Bank’s “Annual Economic Survey”. On the other hand, the Central 
Bank,  using  a  different  methodology  from  the  CSO,  prepares  and  publishes  quarterly  real 
GDP estimates, which are published in its “Economic Bulletin” and “Monetary Policy Report”.  
 
It is, therefore, foolhardy to treat these two entirely different sets of GDP data as one 
consistent source for the purpose of evaluating economic projections, either of the Bank or 
the  CSO.  In  fact,  a  simple  call  to  the  Research  Department  of  the  Central  Bank  will  shed 
much light on such ignorance. 
 
I now return to the substantive discussion. Based on its revised estimates, the CSO 
indicates  that  real  GDP  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  declined  by  a  much  larger  than  expected 
4½ per  cent  in  2009  and  growth  was  flat  in  2010.  Real  GDP  declined  further  by  just  over 
2½ per cent in 2011. Projections made by the CSO point to a turnaround in 2012, with real 
GDP increasing by just over 1 per cent.  
 
High frequency data compiled by the Central Bank indicate that economic activity is 
still quite sluggish but the pace of contraction of the Trinidad and Tobago economy seems to 
have slowed in the first half of 2012. According to the Bank’s Quarterly Index of Real GDP, 
the  domestic  economy  declined,  on  average,  at  a  slower  rate  of  1  ½  per  cent  in  the  first 
six months of 2012, following a deeper contraction of 2¼ per cent  over the second half of 
2011.  
 
Despite  more  intense  exploration  activity,  longer-than-expected  plant maintenance 
operations and security upgrades at energy sector companies continued to hinder crude oil 
and  natural  gas  production.  Lower  supplies  of  natural  gas  impacted  the  production  of 
petrochemicals. In the first half of 2012, crude oil production fell by 13 per cent, averaging 
82,700 barrels per day, while natural gas output was lower by 6 per cent when compared to 
the same period in 2011.  
 
Activity  in  the  non-energy  sector  was  fairly  robust  although  the  prolonged  strike 
action at Trinidad Cement Limited led to a severe drop in cement output that curbed growth 
in the construction and manufacturing sectors.  
In  fact,  the  non-energy  sector  has  registered  growth  in  three  of  the  past  four 
 
quarters to June 2012, supported mainly by the finance and distribution sectors. Growth in 
the finance sector was driven by an expansion of commercial bank deposits and loans. The 
performance  of  the  distribution  sector  reflected  increased  retail  sales  in  several  industries, 
including dry goods, supermarkets and groceries and motor vehicles.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    Some other notable economic developments are:  
One, some tightening in labor market conditions in the face of still weak economic 
activity. According to the latest official data provided by the Central Statistical Office, 
the  unemployment  rate  rose  to  5.4  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012,  from  a 
historic low of 4.2 per cent in December 2011.  
Supplemental data on retrenchment notices from the Ministry of Labour and Small 
and  Micro  Enterprise  Development  (MLSMED)  suggest  that  this  deterioration  in 
employment might not have extended beyond the first quarter of 2012. These data 
show that retrenchment notices declined by more than 10 per cent during the first 
eight months of 2012, from 567 to 503 notices. Over half of these notices originated 
in the distribution sector; transportation accounted for close to 11 per cent of total 
retrenchment notices registered in 2012.  
Two, inflationary pressures have retreated from the high double digit rates that were 
recorded  earlier  in  the  year  to  more  moderate  levels.  Headline  inflation  slowed  to 
7.7 per cent in September 2012 from 11 per cent in June 2012. Core inflation has 
remained  low  and  fairly  stable  at  just  under  3  per  cent  for  the  past  two  years.  A 
major factor behind this deceleration has been the sharp slowdown in food prices, 
as supply shocks resulting from inclement weather have lessened.  
Three, private sector credit continued to grow at a steady but slow pace for much of 
2012.  On  a  year-on-year  basis,  loans  granted  by  the  commercial  banks  grew  by 
almost  5  per  cent  in  September  2012,  compared  with  6  per  cent  at  the  end  of 
December 2011. Among the major categories of credit, consumer lending grew very 
slowly  while  loan  demand  from  the  business  sector,  which  had  been declining  for 
most of 2011, staged a partial recovery in 2012. Real estate mortgage lending by 
the consolidated system has maintained a strong, steady pace.  
In the face of weak private demand, the government budget has served as the main 
 
stimulus to economic activity over the past few years. In fiscal 2012, the non-energy fiscal 
deficit  increased  to  $31.5  billion  compared  with  $28.4  billion  in  the  previous  fiscal  year, 
suggesting that the magnitude of the fiscal stimulus was higher than envisaged. At the same 
time, the overall deficit of central government operations widened from almost $4 billion in FY 
2011 to $6.6 billion in FY 2012.  
 
As  at  end-September  2012,  public  debt  (exclusive  of  treasury  bills  and  treasury 
notes  issued  for  open  market  operations)  outstanding  increased  to  TT$71.6  billion 
(46.6 per cent of GDP) from TT$54.4 billion (36.2 per cent of GDP) for the same period in 
2011. The increase in public debt resulted largely from financing of the overall fiscal deficit 
and financing of payments to CLICO policyholders.  
 
Given the country’s strong foreign exchange reserves and low debt to GDP ratio, I 
believe  that  the  Government  has  the  fiscal  space  to  promote  a  strong  enough  economic 
recovery by means of a deficit budget.  
 
With headline inflation on a declining trend, the Bank maintained an accommodative 
monetary stance to support a recovery, especially in the non-energy sector. The repo rate 
was held steady at 3.00 per cent since July 2011 before being reduced to an all-time low of 
2.75  per  cent  in  September  2012.  Commercial  banks  have  already  started  to  adjust 
downwards their prime lending rates in response to the reduction in the Bank’s policy rate.  
 
Significant  net  fiscal  injections  along  with  sluggish  credit  demand  continue  to 
influence  the  build-up  of  liquidity  in  the  financial  system  and  helping  to  suppress  interest 
rates.  Commercial  banks’  excess  reserves  peaked  at  $6.6  billion  in  March  2012,  but  fell 
steadily thereafter following Central Bank action, reaching a daily average of $2.1 billion in 
June 2012. Since then, continued fiscal injections have steered excess liquidity back on an 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
upward  trend.  Towards  the  end  of  September  2012,  excess  reserves  reached  a  daily 
average of $3.8 billion.  
 
On  the  external  side,  the  demand  for  imports  of  goods  and  services  is  still  quite 
robust,  even  in  the  sluggish  economic  climate,  prompting  the  Central  Bank  to  intervene 
consistently in the foreign exchange market. The Bank sold US$1.4 billion to the market over 
the period January–October 2012, compared with US$1.2 billion for the corresponding period 
in 2011.  
 
With the Bank increasing its sales of foreign exchange to address imbalances in the 
foreign  exchange  market,  the  level  of  official  reserves,  although  still  quite  substantial,  fell 
slightly  to  US$9.3  billion  at  the  end  of  September  2012,  the  equivalent  of  10.7  months  of 
imports.  
Here  at  home,  certain  domestic  factors  seem  to  suggest  a  cautiously  optimistic 
Outlook for 2013 
 
I would now like to turn to the outlook for 2013.  
 
First, it is evident that uncertainty is weighing heavily on external conditions. Overall, 
global prospects have weakened and in its October 2012 World Economic Outlook, the IMF 
lowered its forecasts for world economic growth to just over 3½ per cent in 2013 (from an 
earlier estimate of almost 4 per cent for 2013). Projections for growth in the United States 
have been trimmed slightly, with a larger downward revision for the Euro area.  
 
The implications of these external conditions for our regional economies are mixed. 
Guyana and Suriname are expected to show robust growth. Jamaica and Barbados are likely 
to experience sluggish growth. What is clear, however, is that policymakers in the Caribbean 
must  begin  to  rethink  their  policy  strategy  and  consider  more  innovative  approaches  to 
financing in order to help solve their onerous debt dilemma.  
 
outlook for 2013.  
• 
First, as noted earlier, there are some underlying signs of an incipient recovery this 
year.  Preliminary  estimates  from  the  Central  Bank  suggest  a  turnaround  in  the 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  economy,  with  real  GDP  growth  expected  to  be  around 
¾ per cent in the third quarter of 2012. A revival in the production of natural gas and 
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) is expected to increase activity in the energy sector by 
some ½ per cent in the third quarter of 2012. A better performance in the finance 
sector  and  a  slight  increase  in  construction  should  support  overall  growth  of 
1 per cent  in  the  non-energy  industrial  base.  The  full  completion  by  firms  in  the 
energy sector of their major maintenance operations would provide a further strong 
boost to growth in 2013.  
Second,  there  have  been  indications  of  a  modest  improvement  in  the  pace  of 
project implementation at the level of the central government. In FY2010, the below 
budget  Public  Sector  Investment  Program  (PSIP)  was  10  per  cent  below  budget. 
This  improved  to  4  per  cent  below  budget  in  FY2011  and  to  around  1½ per  cent 
below budget in FY 2012.  
Third,  for  the  most  part  businesses  should  not  be  facing major  credit  constraints. 
The  launch  of  the  CLICO  Investment  Fund  (CIF)  on  November  1  should  give  a 
cautious boost to overall confidence and reinforce the economic growth trend.  
 
Based on these underlying assumptions and the turnaround in the third quarter, the 
Central Bank is maintaining its projection for real GDP growth of around 1 per cent for all of 
2012, and growth is expected to strengthen to 2 ½ per cent in 2013.  
 
Let me elaborate a bit on this projection.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Barring  any  weather-related  setbacks  or  a  new  round  of  commodity  price  shocks, 
 
If executed as envisaged, the 2012/2013 budget could stimulate a firm recovery in 
construction activity and, by extension, economic growth through certain public construction 
projects and tax incentives for construction of residential and commercial buildings. However, 
contracts would need to be awarded soon and the pace of project execution would need to 
be  accelerated  if  the  planned  programs  are  to  be  implemented  on  schedule.  Continued 
delays in settling the long-standing payment of arrears to  contractors could dampen these 
expectations.  
 
In  principle,  the  sluggish  recovery  should  not  have  a  significant  impact  on 
employment  creation.  However,  the  projects  that  the  Government  has  targeted  for 
implementation  do  have  a  high  labour  intensive  component,  and  could  help  to  somewhat 
ease the current tightening we have seen in the labour market.  
 
I  should  also  point  out  that  the  revival  of  growth  and  substantial  fiscal  deficit 
programme  for  FY  2013  should  not  re-kindle  underlying  inflationary  pressures  because 
considerable  slack  still  exists  in  various  parts  of  the  economy,  as  evidenced  by  excess 
capacity in manufacturing and other activities. Nonetheless, bottlenecks in key sectors such 
as  construction  could  lead  to  escalation  of  prices  in  these  areas  while  the  level  of  wage 
settlements would also influence the pace of household spending.  
 
inflation is projected to remain below double digits in 2013.  
 
Budget 2013 announced the removal of VAT on food. Based on analysis done at the 
Central Bank, we estimate that the immediate impact of the removal of VAT on certain food 
items could reduce by 2½ per cent the cost of food for an average consumer (based on the 
CSO’s basket of goods in the retail price index (RPI)). It should be noted, however, that the 
most volatile food items driving inflation, fruits and vegetables, are already zero-rated.  
 
Budget 2013 also removed the fuel subsidy on premium gasoline. Again, based on 
the Bank’s analysis, we do not expect the reduction in the subsidy of premium gasoline to 
significantly  impact  inflation  in  the  short  term.  The  higher  price  of  premium  gasoline  could 
increase the RPI by around ½ per cent in the first round, with the impact concentrated on the 
users of higher-end vehicles unable to substitute to other fuels. However, as the petroleum 
subsidy is cut across the board over the next few years, the cost of transportation and some 
related goods and services will increase.  
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  there  are,  of  course,  several  downside  risks  to  the  Central 
Bank’s  outlook  for  2013.  The  most  obvious  is  a  pronounced  deterioration  in  the  global 
environment, which could constrain our exports and weaken economic confidence, pushing 
the economy back to scenarios which prevailed during 2009.  
 
The  first  major  setback  to  the  global  recovery  relates  to  policy  uncertainty 
surrounding  resolution  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  Euro  area.  Failure  of  European 
policymakers to deliver on their commitments to deeper fiscal and financial integration would 
not only worsen fears about a black swan scenario in which Greece exits the Euro zone, but 
also set in motion destabilizing forces in which persistent fiscal and debt problems spread 
virulently from Euro area periphery to the core.  
 
Another setback revolves around the ability of President Obama and the Republican 
controlled  Congress  to  resist  the  temptation  for  political  brinksmanship  and  to  agree  on  a 
budget plan that avoids the looming “fiscal cliff”. If expiring tax provisions and expenditure 
cuts come into play, growth in the United States could fall to zero or contract. Moreover, U.S. 
public debt is rapidly approaching its statutory limit which, if not resolved, would curtail the 
options available to the U.S. Treasury to stave off a debt default.  
A  second  downside  risk  is  the  deterioration  in  the  industrial  relations  climate. 
 
Prolonged  industrial  action  similar  to  that  experienced  at  the  TCL  plant  could  setback  the 
incipient growth trend in the non-energy sector.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
Finally,  bottlenecks  in  project  implementation  (for  example,  failure  to  settle 
contractor payment of arrears or to agree on which projects are suited to the P3 model) also 
represent  a  serious  downside  risk  to  the  envisaged  growth  outlook.  The  recovery  in  2013 
depends heavily on a strong fiscal impulse.  
I would like to conclude with some brief thoughts on the economic policy challenges 
Conclusion 
 
for the medium term.  
 
The  first  is  on  fiscal  sustainability.  As  we  are  all  aware,  the  fiscal  programme  for 
2012/2013  is  being  implemented  against  the  backdrop  of  unsettled  economic  conditions 
globally and several years of negative or negligible domestic growth. In this context, the Bank 
supports the Government’s approach to maintaining a fiscal stimulus via temporary deficits 
over the next few years.  
 
At the same time, we firmly believe that it is important for the Government to respect 
its own plan for moving to fiscal balance over the medium term. Indeed, these plans should 
be accelerated once conditions permit, in order to avoid a further build-up of national debt.  
 
This brings me to the second thought, which concerns public debt sustainability. The 
public debt trajectory has important implications for the Government as it would reduce the 
room for maneuver of fiscal policy (given the need to devote more resources to servicing the 
debt). It is estimated that the public debt (Central Government plus Government Guaranteed 
debt, excluding open market operations bills) could reach close to 50 per cent of GDP over 
the course of FY 2012/13. External debt is projected to increase from just over 8 per cent of 
GDP to about 10 per cent over FY 2013.  
 
I,  therefore,  believe  that  the  Central  Government  has  the  opportunity  to  take 
advantage  of  the  current  very  low  interest  rate  environment,  high  liquidity  and  appetite  for 
government paper to finance its operations cost-effectively on the domestic market. Foreign 
borrowing also offers the benefit of increasing foreign exchange availability and if financed on 
the international capital markets, could re-introduce Trinidad and Tobago, which is still a very 
sound credit, to global investors. In any event, it is crucial that the Ministry of Finance and the 
Economy coordinate its borrowing schedule with the Central Bank to allow for proper liquidity 
management.  
 
My final thoughts are on management of the energy wealth. Budget 2013 addresses 
the issue of falling crude oil production by reducing the Supplemental Petroleum Tax (SPT) 
rate on shallow water marine exploration and by granting a 5-year tax holiday on deep water 
exploration. While there could be a boost to exploration and drilling in the near term, the long 
production lag implies that the positive impact of these tax measures on oil output would be 
more felt in the medium term.  
 
Meanwhile,  three  hydrocarbons  discoveries  have  been  announced  in  2012  which 
are  expected  to  positively  affect  energy  output  in  coming  years.  Bayfield  Energy  and 
Petrotrin  announced  discoveries  early  in  the  year  while  BPTT  announced  a  1  trillion  cubic 
feet gas find in mid-November.  
 
I  must  caution  against  the  increasing  euphoria  that  has  accompanied  these 
discoveries.  The  Government  must  resist  the  easy  seduction  of  another  energy  boom. 
Instead,  it  must  treat  any  of  the  associated  revenue  windfalls  from  these  hydrocarbon 
discoveries  as  temporary,  placing  the  windfalls  as  additional  savings  in  the  Heritage  and 
Stabilization Fund, rather than imprudently consuming them. And it must move on with the 
diversification thrust that it has already kick-started if it wants to secure lasting prosperity for 
all.  
 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
