K C Chakrabarty: Transit path for Indian economy – six steps for 
transforming the elephant into a tiger 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
interaction with members of the Delhi Chapter of the Young Presidents Organization, New 
Delhi, 7 December 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Dr. Mridul Saggar in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri  Prabhat  Jain  and  other  members  of  the  Delhi  Chapter  of  the  Young  Presidents 
Organisation! It is my pleasure to be here amidst some of the young captains of the Indian 
industry,  who,  I  believe,  would  continue  to  guide  their  respective  enterprises  for  a 
foreseeable future  and  make  immense  contributions  in  shaping  the  Indian  Economy  going 
forward. I have been asked to speak to you today on “transforming the elephant into a tiger” 
and  in  this  regard,  I  would  suggest  six  steps  that  I  think  are  essential  for  such  a 
transformation.  However,  at  the  outset, I thank the  Delhi  Chapter  of the  Young  Presidents 
Organisation (YPO) for inviting me to share my thoughts on this important topic. YPO has 
really established itself as an extra-ordinary network of young global business leaders and a 
think  tank  on  issues  that  are  critical  to  economy,  businesses  and  society.  I  am  told  the 
network has hosted some illustrious speakers in the past and therefore, I have to live up to 
high expectations. I believe the decades of my experience in commercial banks and in the 
Central Bank have provided me with insights into enterprise, governance, growth and society 
and their impact on nation-building, which, I would share with you today and hope you find 
them interesting and worth emulating. 
Let  us  now  focus  on  the  topic  for  the  evening.  Transforming  the  elephant  into  a  tiger  can 
mean different things to different people. In reality, the state of the art in genetic engineering 
still  cannot  contemplate  such  a  modification.  An  Ang  Lee  or  a  Steven  Spielberg  can,  of 
course, use computer generated special effects to bring about such a transformation. But it is 
time to get real – given that the metaphor of elephant is used to denote the Indian economy 
and deals with our lives and the future of our children.  
In 2007, Dr. Shashi Tharoor wrote an enchanting book, “The Elephant, The Tiger and The 
Cellphone: Reflections on India: – The Emerging 21st Century Power”. The book, ingrained 
in history, culture and socio-economic change, criss-crosses the Indian life from Ajanta-Ellora 
and  cricket  to  cellphones  and  call  centres  and  makes  a  simple  point  of  Indian  growth 
effecting change in daily lives and imparting confidence to the Indian people. In December 
2008,  the  Economist  of  London  published  a  special  report  that  India  was  elephant,  not  a 
tiger.  It  noted  that  for  all  its  chaos,  bureaucracy  and  occasional  violence,  India  has  had  a 
remarkably successful past few  years. But, it wondered how it  will cope  with an economic 
downturn and the general elections that were about to follow. It added that the democracy 
tax was rising and storm-clouds were gathering. The prognosis, however, were proven to be 
off  beam  by  the  events  that  followed.  The  elections  removed  uncertainty  and  the  Indian 
economy  staged  a  V-shaped  recovery  clocking  8.4  per  cent  growth  during  2009–10  and 
2010–11.  Yet,  we  lost  steam  and  the  chinks  in  the  tiger  skin  that  we  tried  wearing,  got 
exposed. 
In  July  2011,  Shri  Swaminathan  Anklesaria  Aiyar,  my  journalist  friend  and  a  profound 
observer  on  the  political  economy  of  India,  wrote  a  paper  for  the  Cato  Institute,  “The 
Elephant  that  Became  a  Tiger”.  In  this  paper  he  persuasively  argued  that  20  years  of 
economic reforms in India had transformed the Indian economy into a tiger. Later the same 
year,  the  Reserve  Bank  Governor  Dr.  Subbarao,  while  delivering  the  Haksar  Memorial 
Lecture, argued that India may be an elephant, but even elephant can dance. The elephant 
dance was disrupted by the zoo party in the form of global financial crisis. He then suggested 
ten steps to get back on course by re-jigging the elephant dance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Growth in India has clearly slowed down since then to 6.5 per cent in 2011–12 and a likely 
5.8  per  cent  in  2012–13,  with  significant  downside  risks.  The  twin  deficits  –  fiscal  and 
balance of payments – have compounded our problems. This may set us thinking on whether 
we  are  an  elephant  or  a  tiger  or  a  goat,  about  to  be  devoured  by  global  forces  and  our 
domestic inaction? So should we at all pursue the tiger dream? If yes, what do we need to do 
to earn the tiger tag? 
The elephant and the tiger: which one should we prefer? 
Before I touch upon what we need to do, the first step is to understand what these metaphors 
mean.  So  let  me  upfront  visit  the  key  attributes  of  elephants  &  tigers.  There  are  four  key 
attributes of an elephant – the size, the herbivores nature, its perceived moderate pace and 
its anatomy that includes large ears, the trunk and the tusks. Tiger, on the other hand, is not 
as large as the elephant, but is largest of the cat species. It is carnivore, and is known for its 
speed and agility. Its anatomy includes the stripes, the powerful jaws and razor sharp teeth, 
sharp  claws  and  a  flexible  backbone.  But,  what  conclusively  differentiates  the  two  is  the 
tiger’s killer instinct. 
I think, in terms of size, the Indian economy is, of course, an elephant. It is also herbivores by 
habit  given  its  democratic  structure,  unlike  the  carnivore  habits  of  tigers  and  dragons.  In 
terms of speed, many people have a misconception that elephants can’t run or walk fast. The 
fact is that elephants can walk as fast as 25 miles per hour (mph), while tigers can run only a 
shade faster. Bengal tigers can run at 35 mph, but for short spurts and they can’t keep this 
pace for long. 
So, in my view, it is not axiomatic that one should try transforming the elephant into a tiger. 
Yes, we could do with an added bit of speed but what we should really aim at is developing a 
tiger’s  killer  instinct.  These,  together  with  a  better  use  of  our  anatomy  or  resources,  both 
human and capital, would help us achieve what the dragons and the tigers have achieved, 
perhaps,  with  a  smaller  downside.  For  this  to  happen,  in  my  view,  we  need  to  take  the 
following six steps: 
Preserve demographic dividends by investing in human capital  
1.  
India’s  demographic  dividend  presents  the  country  with  a  great  opportunity  to  enhance  its 
growth and seek convergence of per capita incomes with that in the developed world. India’s 
birth rate has fallen from 45.6 per 1000 in 1951 to an estimated 21 currently, but still remains 
highly driven by a slowly falling infant mortality rate that remains high at about 46 per 1000. 
The  death  rate  has  fallen  dramatically  from  37.2  per  1000  birth  in  1951  to  an  estimated 
7 currently, but has still not caused population ageing. Median age for India’s population is 
about 27 years compared with over 40 for most OECD economies. It will add significantly to 
its labor pool and, even as the median age bucket rises, it will still be at a relatively young 
30–34  age  bracket  by  2026.  India’s  age-dependency  ratio  (ratio  of  dependents-people 
younger than 15 or older than 64-to the working-age population) is currently about 54. This is 
already lower than Japan and France. 
Most  developed  countries  would  see  a  rapid  ageing  of  their  population  over  the  next  
2–3 decades  putting  severe  pressure  on  their  social  security  systems  with  the  rise  in 
dependency ratio. The overall median age of these countries rose from 29.0 in 1950 to 37.3 
in 2000, and is forecast to rise to 45.5 by 2050. 
Many  developing  countries  like  China,  Brazil  and  Thailand  too  face  issues  of  ageing 
population having passed through the demographic transition. Over the last 60 years, China 
has experienced demographic change at a historic pace that had a profound impact on its 
population  structure.  Baby  boom  began  in  the  mid-1960s  after  the  period  of  “Great  Leap 
Forward” saw famines and a sharp rise in death rate and a fall in birth rate. China is now a 
“post-transitional”  society,  where  life  expectancy  has  reached  new  heights,  fertility  has 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
declined to below-replacement level, and rapid population ageing is expected over the next 
few decades. China’s population will start to shrink after reaching a peak of about 1.4 billion 
by  2025  A.D.  The  median  age  of  its  population  could  touch  50  years  by  then.  India’s 
population would overtake that of China at that point. Its population is expected to peak only 
at 1.7 billion by 2060 A.D. 
Clearly, India has a potential advantage of demographic dividend over its emerging market 
peers. But, this demographic dividend could be a boon or a curse depending upon how we 
exploit it, for, the time to reap these gains is finite. By the turn of this century, India would be 
facing a demographic discount rather than dividend because India’s population would have 
aged and the developed countries’ population would be much younger. So what do we need 
to do to reap the demographic dividend while they exist?  
The very first thing is to invest in the resources that are expected to give us advantage. India 
invests  much  less  than  it  should  in  its  human  capital.  The combined  spend  of  central  and 
state governments  in  education,  is just  about  3.3  per  cent  of GDP,  while  that  on  health  is 
another  1.3  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  contrast,  the  European  Union  (EU)  countries  spend  from 
their general government account, 5.5 per cent of their GDP on education and 7.5 per cent of 
their GDP on health – i.e. nearly three times more of their GDP. Canada’s public spending on 
health alone is over 11 per cent of their GDP and that on education is nearly 5 per cent. India 
needs to step up its public spending on education and health considerably over the next five 
years.  However,  spending  alone  does  not  guarantee  high  quality  human  capital.  We  also 
need  to  focus  on  the  quality  of  this  spending  and  think  whether  we  can  achieve  better 
outcomes with less spending. 
The second step we need to take is for right skilling of our work force. There is shortage of 
trained  manpower  for  the  industry,  both  at  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid  and  higher  up  the 
ladder. India is often considered to be a source for skilled labour supply to the rest of the 
world, given its sheer size of manpower. It is often not recognized that over four-fifths of our 
rural population and over half of our urban population remains unskilled. Women participation 
rate in the labour market remains poor. The biggest problem is the lack of focus on technical 
education that could absorb a large chunk of unskilled labour, if backed by greater push to 
primary education. Less than 11 per cent of the job-seeking population in the age group of 
15–29 receives any form of vocational training in India and only one of every three who do 
get vocational training receive it from specialized training institutes. Furthermore, even in the 
value added segment, where we have the largest pool of skilled manpower i.e. in the area of 
information 
impact  our 
competitiveness.  
The biggest challenge is to ensure jobs for additional supply of labour that comes in to join 
the workforce. On a rough basis, about 10 million people would need a job every year for the 
next 15 years. Though disguised unemployment in agriculture sector has reduced over the 
years, it may not be possible for the sector to provide additional jobs given the rising rural 
wages and the need to shift to a corporate, more mechanized and capital intensive model of 
farming. While  the  services  sector  has  led  India’s  growth  and  employment  story  for  some 
time  now, India’s  growth  pace may  not  be  sustained  unless  the  manufacturing  sector  also 
becomes more competitive and creates lot more jobs. This poses a significant challenge in 
employment generation and skilling our work force.  
technology,  real  wages  are  rising  at  a  pace 
that  may 
Improve productivity and efficiency 
2.  
Productivity  is  an  important  driver  of  growth.  Productivity  depends  on  the  efficiency  with 
which scarce resources are allocated – be it your time, work effort, natural resources, capital 
or  any  other  inputs.  A  great  deal  of  the  growth  for  most  countries  can  be  explained  by 
productivity  growth,  especially  total factor  productivity  growth  (TFPG).  Factor  accumulation 
(such  as  increase  in  labour  or  capital)  explains  a  smaller  part  of  the  growth.  Given  this 
experience,  if  India  were  to  become  a  tiger,  it  would  need  to  focus  on  technological 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
developments to improve its rate of TFPG. Capital deepening may also help, but the key lies 
in overall productivity enhancements. 
In India, output per worker has increased at an impressive rate in the services sector after 
the reforms initiated in early 90s. In this period, TFPG growth has also been impressive for 
this sector, though I will eschew quoting precise numbers as the growth accounting research 
generally  gives  varied  quantitative  estimates.  TFPG  growth  has  also  improved  for  the 
manufacturing sector since the 1980s. So, progress is being made. However, the rate of this 
technical  change,  still,  has  been  lower  than  that  for  the  East  Asian  economies  during  the 
period in which they earned the tag of being East Asian tigers.  
I  would  rather  focus  on  the  issue  of  larger  policy  initiative  that  would  be  necessary  in  the 
quest  to  transform  India  into  a  tiger.  In  this  context,  I  would  make  four  suggestions.  First, 
improving agriculture productivity is necessary as, clearly, increase in area under cultivation 
is  just  not  practical  and,  therefore,  increasing  demand  for  cereals,  pulses,  fruits  and 
vegetables would need to be met by improving yields. Substantial productivity enhancements 
are possible on the farm through adoption of precision farming techniques, better cultivars 
and  optimal  water  management.  Better  adoption  of  modern  technologies  in  the  area  of 
biotechnology,  genomic  tools,  cost-effective  and  eco-friendly  integrated  pest  management 
technologies,  seed-supply  chains  and  systems,  regionally  adapted  varieties  and  hybrids, 
would help.  
Second, we need to focus on issues confronting our Small and Medium Enterprise (SME). 
SME sector accounts for over a third of our industrial output and contributes an equal share 
of our total merchandise exports. In the current downturn, SMEs are facing adverse business 
climate with rising receivables, inadequate credit and high cost of credit. SME sector does 
not enjoy the economies of scale and scope that a large corporation enjoys. It also cannot 
fully reap the benefit of information technology as it has high sunk cost and a high rate of 
obsolescence.  Though  having  strong  links  with  large  firms,  institutional  mechanisms  for 
transfer of technology to SMEs are lacking. If SMEs are to effectively integrate with supply 
chains, we need to ensure that links of finance and technology with large firms work at all 
times. 
Third,  as  I  mentioned  a  little  earlier,  India’s  next  growth  push  has  to  come  from 
manufacturing sector. We had a missed century of opportunities. India cannot boast of one 
big  “home grown”  global  brand  while  much  smaller  nations  like  South  Korea, Taiwan,  etc. 
have plenty of them. Our abundant human capital has not been effectively channelized for 
supporting  the  manufacturing  growth.  But  what  I  would  really  blame  for  this  is  a  lack  of  
“R & D” culture that we suffer from. Globally, India figures at near the bottom in terms of R&D 
intensity. It spends less than one percentage of its GDP on R&D expenditure, Countries like 
Israel,  Finland,  Sweden,  Korea,  Japan,  US  and  Germany  have  R&D  intensities  that  are 
higher by three times or more.  
Fourth, a key issue related to productivity is our attitude to work. It is strange that India, that 
epitomised the dignity of labour in the Early Vedic period, has imbibed a culture that does not 
respect workers. We have forgotten Swami Vivekananda’s contribution in equating work to 
worship. No form of work, whether manual or intellectual is less inferior to the other. As a 
nation, we have been steadily neglecting our respect for dignity of labour. Since the manual 
labour does not receive the same respect as an intellectual work in India, work efforts are 
lost.  This  results  in  lower  GDP  and  lower  Welfare.  Individuals  idle  away  than  take  up  a 
manual  job.  What  else  would  explain  the  fact  that  labourers  from  poor  states  like  Bihar, 
Orissa, UP, etc. migrate and work hard in the agricultural farms in Punjab and Haryana, while 
refusing to do the same in their own locality where the land is more fertile and same amount 
of  labour  would  be  much  more  productive.  We  must  emulate  the  western  society  in  this 
regard where no form of labour is discriminated against. If President Cleveland could accept 
dignity of labour in 1894, more than a century down the line it is time that we give respect to 
casual labour that operates around us – be it our maids, our drivers or the workmen in our 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
factories – a due recognition and respect. If we do so, more women and men would join the 
workforce.  Unemployment  would  be  reduced  and  Indian  industry  would  become  more 
competitive globally.  
Revive infrastructure investments and harness natural resources better  
3.  
Much has been said about India’s infrastructure deficit and rightly so. India does not have 
sufficient roads,  nor sufficient  power. When  I  was  growing  up, I  was  taught  that  India  is  a 
land of poor, but is rich in resources. Today we have made a giant leap in lowering poverty 
and  still  remain  abundant  in  natural  resources.  Yet,  we  have  not  learnt  to  optimally  utilise 
them. Take for example coal, which accounts for India’s 55 per cent of energy needs. We 
have hard coal reserves of around 246 billion tonnes, of which 92 billion tonnes are proven. 
Yet, we are able to produce only 530 million tonnes of coal, leaving supply shortages of over 
150 million tonnes. Coal shortages are constraining our power generation and though about 
55 GW of new capacity was created during the 11th Five Year Plan (FYP), a large part of it 
remains  unutilised  due  to  coal  shortages.  Private  sector  has  failed  to  develop  most  of  the 
new coal blocks that were allotted to them. We ended up with inadequate planning and poor 
execution  in  this  area.  We  are  now  planning  to  create  even  more  thermal  power  capacity 
during  the  12th  FYP,  but  remain  unsure  of  coal  supplies.  At  the  same  time,  banks  have 
heavily extended themselves into lending to power sector both on generation and distribution 
side. On the distribution side, the State distribution companies (discoms) are sitting on huge 
losses  and  bank  debt  that  is  threatening  to  go  bad.  The  end  result  is  a  loss  of  business 
confidence that has brought the investment boom to a premature halt. 
What is most important in this context is to revive the confidence for investing and lending to 
the  infrastructure  sector.  The  government,  in  recent  period,  has  taken  several  steps  to 
facilitate  this.  The  broad  contours  of  the  New  Fuel  Supply  Agreements  (FSAs)  have  been 
worked out, though some thorny issues such as price pooling of imported and domestic coal 
are  still  to  be  resolved.  These  pending  issues  must  be  solved  quickly.  Similarly,  a  debt 
restructuring package for the discoms has been worked out. The private sector must seize 
the  initiative  and  rekindle  the  Schumpeterian  spirit  at  this  juncture.  Banks  also  need  to 
perform  their  core  banking  business  while  balancing  risk  assessment  with  the  functional 
need to support growth. 
We  also  need  to  harness  our  natural  resources  much  better.  Take  the  simple  example  of 
water. We are a country blessed with water resources with a network of perennial rivers and 
abundant rainfall. The rainfall provides four times the water that we use annually. Yet, water 
is  a  scarce  resource  in  India.  We  haven’t  harnessed  our  resources  enough  and  haven’t 
planned the storage and distribution of water efficiently. India’s per capita storage capacity is 
significantly lower than that of other countries. For example, the quantum of water that can 
be stored as a proportion of average river runoff for India is just 50 days of average runoff 
with  wide  variations  – 
the 
Brahmaputra/Barak  Basin.  The  comparable  figures  for  the  Colorado  River  Basin  and 
Australia’s Murray-Darling Basin are 900 days while for South Africa’s Orange River Basin it 
is 350 days. Better water management could radically alter the agriculture situation in India. 
India also needs to utilize its mining, spectrum and air resources better. The importance of 
clean air is often not recognized. We need to strike a right balance between our development 
needs and environmental commitments to ensure long-run growth sustainability. We are not 
among the world’s top polluters. It needs to be recognized that average per square kilometre 
carbon dioxide (CO2) pollution in Japan is 7.5 times more than in India. Similarly, per capita 
CO2 emission by India is amongst the least globally. Nevertheless, we also need to note that 
air  pollution  has  serious  health  costs  and  India  ranks  fourth  in  the  list  of  the  largest  CO2 
pollutants after China, US and Russia. As such, if we want to ensure not just fast growth but 
also  good  quality  growth  sustainable  for  a  fairly  long  period  of  time,  we  must  continue  to 
make efforts to exploit natural resources in an environmentally friendly way.  
from  220  days 
the  Krishna 
two  days 
just 
to 
in 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Improve governance at every level  
4.  
The World Bank’s worldwide governance indicators 2006–11 place India below average on 
key parameters of governance. It scores about 15 per cent on political stability and absence 
of violence, 40 per cent on control on corruption as well as regulatory quality, 55 per cent on 
rule of law as well as government effectiveness, while 60 per cent on vice and accountability. 
Clearly,  there  is  lot  of  scope  for  improvement  on  these  parameters.  Both,  our  overall 
governance  and  corporate  governance  needs  improvement.  In  fact,  we  need  better 
governance at every level – from hospital and schools to polity, firms, non-profit institutions, 
sports, banking and finance, regulation, land records and even in our daily lives. 
Our governance deficit, in some form, is reflected in our ranking on ease of doing business. 
According to the IFC-World Bank Report 2013 released this year, India ranks 132nd on the 
index  measuring  “ease  of  doing  business”  amongst  185  economies.  Singapore  and  Hong 
Kong  got  the  top  and  second  spots  overall.  In  its  sub-components,  India  stands  at  an 
impressive  23rd  on  the  criteria  of  ease  of  getting  credit  and  49th  in  terms  of  protecting 
investors.  However,  it  figures  at  173rd  in  terms  of  starting  a  business,  182nd  in  terms  of 
dealing with construction permits and 184th in contract enforcement.  
According  to  the  same  report,  on  an  average,  in  India  it  requires  173  days  to  start  a 
business,  196  days  for  obtaining  a  construction  permit  and  67  days  to  get  electricity.  In 
Singapore  one  needs  just  3  days  to  start  a  business,  26  days  for  construction  permit  and 
36 days for getting electricity. All other East Asian tigers also have a far superior record than 
India on these parameters. 
If we aspire to become a tiger we must become more business friendly, both for domestic 
and  foreign  firms,  traders  and  tourists.  We,  of  course,  have  an  enviable  record  of  a 
democratic system, a responsive government, an active media and an independent judiciary. 
However, the risk of dealing with India must come down further. We have to reach where the 
East Asian tigers reached. It is for this reason that we advocated the adoption of Singapore 
model in the last RBI Annual Report. In a limited way, this is being attempted in the form of 
National Investment Board (NIB). A well-functioning NIB can go a long way in cutting project 
delays.  However,  in  our  federal  structure,  NIB  would  still  have  some  limitations.  It  will  not 
have  jurisdiction  over  project  clearances  that  are  required  at  sub-national  levels.  The 
Singapore model is a step further. It requires all concerned agencies to sit together in a time 
bound  manner  to  clear  or  reject  projects,  failing  which  the  clearance  is  deemed  to  be 
automatic.  We  must  make  doing  business  easy,  to  unleash  entrepreneurship  and  venture 
capitalism in India. 
We  also  need  to  improve  our  record  of  corporate  governance  in  both  financial  and  non-
financial firms. Barriers to entry must collapse and a more competitive environment needs to 
be  generated.  However,  we  must  develop  a  framework  and  inculcate  practices  of  arms 
length  relationships  that  do  not  permit  connected  lending  and  business  relationships  that 
may promote “looting” behaviour as described by Akerlof (awarded the Nobel Prize in 2001) 
and Romer. They argued that an economic underground can come to life if firms have an 
incentive  to  go  broke for  profit  at  society’s  expense  (to  loot)  instead  of  to  go for  broke  (to 
gamble on success). Bankruptcy for profit will occur if poor accounting, lax regulation, or low 
penalties  for  abuse  give  owners  an  incentive  to  pay  themselves  more  than  their  firms  are 
worth and then default on their debt obligations. There is still a large gap arising from our 
nominal compliance of good corporate governance in accordance with regulatory provisions 
and real compliance of practicing it in law and spirit. We need to bridge this gap.  
Enforce accountability in all walks of life 
5.  
All  the  other  five  steps  that  I  talk  of  in  this  address,  including  real  compliance  of  good 
governance  cannot  be  achieved  unless  we  enforce  accountability.  Just  as  we  need  better 
governance  at  every  level,  we  also  need  to  enforce  accountability  in  all  walks  of  life.  Our 
accountability  structures,  especially  in  public  sector,  are  weak.  In  administration,  the  civil 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
servants  are  insufficiently  incentivized  for  the  risks  they  take,  are  seldom  rewarded  for 
successful  completion  of  their  goals  and  are,  at  best,  merely  transferred  for  poor 
implementation.  Mangers  in  public  sector  enterprises  face  similar  problems  in  addition  to 
bureaucratic interventions that delay decisions or require them to move away from policies 
which  may  be  in  the  best  interests  of  a  public  sector  unit.  It  is  difficult  to  enforce 
accountability in this climate. 
On  corporate  accountability,  the  principal-agent  relationship  between  the  management  or 
those  who  wrest  ownership  and  control  and  the  shareholders  as  actual  owners  is  rather 
weak. We have  seen  asset  stripping  and  bankruptcies  in this  weak  environment. This  has 
been  especially  true  where  a  complex  web  of  companies  within  business  groups  prevail. 
There  is  a  strong  case  for  simplifying  these  structures  that  are  often  developed  to  evade 
taxes, indulge in regulatory arbitrage and to strip assets of the firm for personal use. In recent 
period,  we  have  come  across  instances  where  corporate  debt  restructuring  is  sought  but 
ownership  commitment  of  those  who  have  control  is  rather  left  weak.  We  must  enforce 
accountability in such cases by forcing such business entities to bring in more of their capital. 
There are, sometimes, grave cases of businessmen launching new firms, renaming firms or 
indulging in M&As to garner fresh public money after they misused funds in the first instance. 
The concept of the modern firm based on limited liability principle requires care to prevent 
such practices. 
Our political process ensures a fair deal of accountability through our democratic institutions. 
Yet, there is debate on whether a right to recall should exist. A more fragmented polity and 
existence  of  coalitions  and  minority  governments,  sometimes,  make  matters  worse. 
Accountability at the municipal levels is also lacking. This, in turn, impacts the upkeep of our 
infrastructure that gets built. Roads seldom last more than a year. Drainage systems choke. 
What  is,  therefore,  necessary  in  this  climate  is  to  do  four  things.  First,  stakeholder 
engagement  must  be  intensified  in  all  institutions  –  public  or  private.  Furthermore,  there 
should be a principle of inclusivity in stakeholder engagement so that any sort of regulatory 
capture by interest groups is avoided. Second, individuals, rather than committees or groups, 
should  be  made  accountable  even  where  a  collegiate  approach  is  adopted.  Such 
accountability should not be time barred by transfers of jobs or retirements. Third, financial 
accountability  must  be  enforced  for  all.  For  enhancing  fiscal  transparency,  the  budgetary 
processes  should  be  made  tighter  so  that  slippages  are  eliminated.  Similarly,  financial 
accountability  needs 
institutions.  Fourth, 
accountability should be codified to the degree it can be done and a periodic evaluation must 
be done to assess achievement, failures and correctives.  
firms  and  non-profit 
to  be  promoted 
for 
Make finance more responsive to real sector and promote inclusive growth 
6.  
Let  me,  at  last,  cover  the  role  of finance  in  India’s  transformation  from  elephant  to  tiger. I 
have kept this for the end because this is where finance should belong to. In recent period, 
finance has become big and rather than responding to the real sector needs, it is leading the 
real  sector.  Too-big  to  fail  syndrome,  firms  depending  on  other  incomes  to  shore  up  their 
accounts, market herd behaviour driven by noise rather than fundamentals, are all examples 
of finance sector becoming too big for its boots. Yet, the finance to support real activity is still 
inadequate. Firms and businesses still get crowded out by information asymmetry. Financial 
frictions and financial constraints come in the way of investment and growth in the economy. 
For want of collaterals, the poor cannot access even elementary banking services, resulting 
not  only  in  some  potential  saving  getting  lost  but  leaving  the  society  more  unequal  and 
polarized  with  insufficient  support for  Pareto  superior  outcomes just  because  gainers  can’t 
compensate the losers. 
Finance must be regulated more tightly. This does not require more regulations but perhaps 
less and newer regulations with greater effectiveness. At the same time, those who engage 
in  finance  must  have  an  obligation  towards  promoting  financial  inclusion,  without  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
inclusive  growth  cannot  be  achieved.  Banking  should  have  a  human  face  for  it  is  the 
households  who  provide  the  base  for  all  banking  activities.  They  are  the  only  ones  with 
financial  surpluses  which  can  be  intermediated  to  corporate  and  public  sectors  that  run 
financial deficits. It has been my endeavour to push policies on bank lending with a view to 
encourage credit flows to the vulnerable section of the population that would otherwise get 
financially excluded.  
Over the years, this has been the ethos of the Reserve Bank. The branch licensing policy 
and  the  directed  lending  route  have  been  the  two  pillars  on  which  the  efforts  for  financial 
inclusion have rested for a long time. The bank licensing policy, mandating a certain ratio of 
rural bank branches for each license for urban branch, has often been criticised by banks as 
coming in the way of their business interests. However, there is strong research evidence to 
suggest  that  this  social  banking  experiment  in  India  has  been  successful  in  improving  the 
credit  flows  to  the  rural  population  and  even  in  lowering  poverty  as  a  result.  The  priority 
sector  lending  (PSL)  stipulation  has  also  improved  the  flow  of  credit  to  certain  productive 
sectors  of  the  economy  that  would  otherwise  have  been  crowded  out  of  the  bank  credit 
market  due  to  information  asymmetries.  There  are  reasons  to  believe  that  with  proper 
planning  and  use  of  technology-enabled  efficient  delivery  channels,  banks  can  pursue 
financial inclusion in a profitable way. 
Our  approach  should  not  be  seen  as  being  interventionist.  In  practice,  Reserve  Bank  has 
deftly balanced objectives of equity and efficiency so that financial inclusion is furthered, but 
banks’  financial  health  is  not  impaired.  In  more  recent  period  with  which  I  have  been 
associated,  we  have  redoubled  our  efforts  at  financial  inclusion.  For  instance,  the 
prescription for PSL in respect of foreign banks has been raised from 32 per cent to 40 per 
cent in case of those banks which have 20 or more branches. We have also imparted a more 
human touch to basic banking for those who did not have bank accounts.  
Conclusion 
Let me end by talking about something we need to learn from the East Asian tigers in our 
quest to become one. Growth acceleration in these tigers were supported by liberalization, 
export-led  growth,  high  investment  in  education,  large  share  of  educated  workforce,  high 
public  and  private  savings  rate  and  macroeconomic  discipline  and  governance.  We  are 
pursuing some of these policies and can pursue some more of them. However, these tigers 
also failed to maintain their spurt because of some mistakes they committed. Some of them 
maintained  high  interest  rate  to  attract  foreign  investments,  others  pegged  currency 
arrangements and many of them developed a vulnerable financial system. An unanticipated 
shock from banking and currency side, therefore, resulted in growth collapse for them during 
the East Asian crisis. Corporate failures added to the financial sector woes in some countries 
(especially Chaebols in Korea). While transforming the Indian economy into a tiger, we need 
to calibrate policies taking into account the lessons learnt during the East Asian crisis. 
Thank you for your patient hearing. Downturns come and go away as business cycles run 
their  course.  In  our  present  predicaments  with  macro-economic  stabilization,  we  must  not 
lose sight of our larger goals, whether we walk at an elephant’s pace or run like a tiger. Let 
me assure you that as a society, if we can inculcate an aggressive and tenacious urge to 
attain a set goal – the killer instinct of the tiger – we would definitely earn our rightful place 
under the sun.  
Bibliography 
Aiyar,  Swaminathan  Anklesaria  (2011),  “The  Elephant  That  Became  a  Tiger:  20  Years  of 
Economic  Reform  in  India"  Cato  Institute,  Development  Policy  Analysis,  no.  13,  July  20, 
2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Akerlof,  George  A.  and  Paul  M.  Romer  (1993),  “Looting:  The  Economic  Underworld  of 
Bankruptcy  for  Profit”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  Vol.  1993,  No.  2  (1993), 
pp. 1–73 
Bosworth,  Barry  and  Susan  M.  Collins  (2007),  “”Accounting  for  Growth:  Comparing  China 
and India”, NBER Working Paper No.12943, February. 
Tharoor,  Shashi  (2007),  The  Elephant, The Tiger  and the  Cellphone:  Reflections  on India:  
– The Emerging 21st Century Power, New York: Arcade Publishers 
Subbarao,  Duvvuri  (2011),  “Rejigging  the  Elephant  Dance”,  Haksar  Memorial  Lecture 
delivered  by  Dr.  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  at  the  Centre  for 
Research in Rural & Industrial Development, Chandigarh on November 25, 2011, reprinted in 
RBI Bulletin, December 2011, p.2041–48.  
World  Bank  and  IFC  (2012),  Doing  Business  2013:  Smarter  Regulations  for  Small  and 
Medium Enterprises, Washington, The World Bank  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
