Njuguna Ndung’u: Initiatives to foster the growth of the Kenyan SME 
sector 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at a breakfast 
meeting  celebrating 
the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) to support Kenyan SMEs, adding new focus on very 
small enterprises, Nairobi, 5 October 2012. 
long  collaboration  between  Diamond  Trust  Bank  and 
the 
 Executive Vice President and Chief Executive Officer IFC; 
Jin-Yong Cai Chairman, Diamond Trust Bank Kenya Ltd; 
Abdul Samji Managing Director, Diamond Trust Bank Kenya Ltd; 
Mrs. Nasim Devji Board Members; Management and Staff; Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am pleased to be here this morning and I thank Diamond Trust Bank for the invitation. This 
breakfast  meeting  is  to  celebrate  the  long  standing  collaboration  of  more  than  thirty  years 
between Diamond Trust Bank (DTB) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC). Before 
making  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  Mr.  Jin-Yong  Cai  on  his  appointment  as 
Executive Vice President and Chief Executive Officer of IFC. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: As the world’s leading private sector development institution, IFC 
has  continued  to  support  public  policies  and  investments  that  create  opportunities  for  the 
poor developing economies. The activities of IFC have helped developing countries register 
improved growth by financing investment, mobilizing capital in international financial markets, 
and  providing  advisory  services  to  businesses  and  governments.  In  Financial  Year  2012, 
IFC’s investments reached an all-time high of more than USD20 billion, leveraging the power 
of  the  private  sector  to  create  jobs,  spur  innovation,  and  tackle  the  world’s  most  pressing 
development challenges. This is how DTB’s long-standing relationship with IFC has thrived.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: DTB has operated in East Africa for over 60 years starting off as a 
small  financial  institution  in  Mombasa.  DTB’s  focus  and  commitment  to  enhancing 
convenience for customers through branch network expansion has driven the bank’s growth 
in recent years and it currently has 79 branches in Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Burundi. 
The bank became the first bank in East Africa to join the IFC Africa Micro and Small Micro 
Enterprises  (MSME)  Finance  program  in  2008  which  provides  advisory  services  to 
commercial banks seeking to expand their MSME banking services. I am also informed that 
DTB is working closely with the IFC Advisory Services program to strengthen its positioning 
in the MSME market segment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: IFC became a shareholder of DTB in 1983 and has continued to 
support the bank throughout the thirty years. This is a testament of faith in the institution. IFC 
has  availed  over  USD  75  million  in  funded  and  unfunded  facilities  and  other  forms  of 
technical assistance to the bank aimed at supporting the bank’s expansion plans and fund 
lending to small and medium enterprises. DTB in return has created a strong presence and 
market niche in Kenya and the EAC.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: For us in CBK, Financial inclusion is entrenched in Government of 
Kenya’s  Development  Blueprint,  Vision  2030  and  lies  at  the  core  of  the  CBK’s  strategic 
actions towards implementing this Vision. I believe that banks and other financial institutions 
in the country will continue to play a key role as partners, agents, promoters and advisers to 
firms and households to enhance financial sector development and financial inclusion. We 
are glad that DTB is among the partners.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Central Bank has also introduced initiatives to foster growth of 
the  SME  sector.  These  include  creating  instruments  of  financial  inclusion  appropriate  for 
each market segment. Also among the initiatives are licensing of deposit taking microfinance 
institutions which currently stand at six, two credit reference bureaus (CRBs); introduction of 
Shariah  compliant  banking  products,  the  hugely  successful  mobile  phone  money  transfer 
services  and  the  agency  banking  which  boasts  of  more  than  13,000  agents  countrywide. 
These are financial SMEs. The initiatives have culminated into increased number of deposit 
accounts  from  2.55  million  in  2005  to  16.7  million  in  August  2012,  with  micro  accounts 
growing from 2.14 million in 2005 to 15.8 million accounts at end of August 2012.  
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to thank the IFC for its continued 
support as we celebrate this long collaboration between IFC and DTB, which has a positive 
impact on our economic growth.  
Thank you 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
