Benoît Cœuré: Collateral scarcity – a gone or a going concern? 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  European  Central  Bank-De  Nederlandsche  Bank  joint  central  bank  seminar  on 
“Collateral and liquidity”, Amsterdam, 1 October 2012. 
 I would like to thank Pontus Aberg for his contribution to the speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
expressed herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  speak  here  today  at  this  conference,  kindly  hosted  by 
De Nederlandsche Bank. 
1. 
The  use  of  collateral  is  as  old  as  economic  transactions,  and  is  mentioned  in  the 
Bible: 
“If thou at all take thy neighbour’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by 
that the sun goeth down: For that [is] his covering only, it [is] his raiment for his skin: 
wherein shall he sleep?”1 
The  importance  of  collateral  in  the  economy  may  have  been  neglected  in  earlier 
academic  work,  but  has  been  well  recognised  lately.  In  his  seminal  work2  on  the 
topic John Geanakoplos says that: 
2. 
3. 
“…the main business of Wall Street is to help people make and keep promises. 
Over time, as more people have been included in the process, punishment and 
reputation  have  been  replaced  by  collateral.  This  enabled  a  proliferation  of 
promises,  but  has  led  to  a  scarcity  of  collateral.  The  ensuing  efforts  of  Wall 
Street, in conjunction, of course, with the government and in particular the courts 
and the tax code, to stretch the available collateral has significant and surprising 
effects on the working of the economy, including the cyclical or volatile behavior 
of prices…” 
Today, in my opening remarks I would like to consider one issue regarding collateral that was 
mentioned in that quote, namely the scarcity of eligible collateral. 
One reason that makes collateral scarce is that the supply of “sound” collateral is in principle 
limited.  Collateral  is  sound  if  it  guarantees  a  quasi-certain  stream  of  revenues.  Indeed  if 
investors’  trust  in  the  creditworthiness  of  assets  decreases,  then  the  amount  of  collateral 
gauged sound reduces. During the crisis there has been a widespread flight to quality, out of 
certain asset classes, which used to be considered sound. 
Collateral scarcity is a somewhat more topical issue in the euro area than elsewhere. It can 
affect the functioning and stability of the financial system in several ways, possibly resulting 
in: i) persistent changes in the relative cost of different forms of bank funding, a phenomenon 
that we have observed for some time; ii) changes in bank balance sheets with implications 
on lending behaviour; and iii) a greater sensitivity of financing conditions to changes in the 
value  of  collateral  assets.3  That  said,  let  me  emphasise  upfront  that  there  is  a  difference 
between scarcity and shortage. Scarcity is a fact and not a problem per se. Allocating scarce 
                                                
1  Exodus 22:26–27, King James’ Bible. 
2  Geneakoplos, J, “Promises, Promises,” in W. B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D. Lane, eds., The Economy as an 
Evolving Complex System, II, Addison-Wesley, Reading MA, 1997, pp. 285–320. 
3  On collateral scarcity, see, for instance, Levels A. and J. Capel: "Is collateral becoming scarce? Evidence from 
the euro area", DNB Occasional Studies, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
resources through prices is the way our economies work. The problem would be a shortage 
of collateral and/or an impaired price mechanism. I will argue that is not the case in the euro 
area, where there is no aggregate shortage of collateral; local tensions may arise but they 
are being addressed in various ways. In this context, the Eurosystem has taken a number of 
measures to make the supply of collateral assets more elastic, which ultimately should help a 
smooth transmission of monetary policy impulses, and support financial stability. 
But first, allow me to say a few words on the collateral framework of the Eurosystem, and 
how it is developing, as this is relevant when discussing collateral scarcity. 
The collateral framework of the Eurosystem: general principles and reaction to the 
crisis 
As you know, the Eurosystem has always implemented a “broad” collateral framework, i.e. it 
has  chosen  to  accept  a  broad  range  of  asset  types  as  collateral  in  its  credit  operations 
reflecting:  i)  the  large  number  of,  and  differences  among,  its  eligible  counterparties,  ii)  the 
heterogeneity  of  financial  markets  in  Europe,  in  particular  in  the  early  times  of  EMU,  and 
iii) the  differences  in  business  models  of  European  banks.  Despite  this  broad  pool  of 
collateral accepted even in normal times, the collateral framework is by no means static in 
nature.  In  fact,  the  Eurosystem  has  made  a  considerable  number  of  amendments  to  its 
framework for  conducting monetary  policy,  including  an  extension  of  collateral  eligibility  by 
accepting  more  asset  types  and  reducing  rating  thresholds  both  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
Lehman default and, more recently, in response to the sovereign crisis. 
What  are  the  guiding  principles  of  our  collateral  framework  and  what  factors  drive 
amendments  to  it?  First,  in  accordance  with  the  Statute  of  the  ESCB  and  the  ECB,  the 
collateral  accepted  by  the  Eurosystem  in  all  credit  operations  must  be  “adequate”.  In 
determining this “adequacy”, the Eurosystem has to achieve two goals. The first goal is to 
provide  the  necessary  funding  to  the  banking  sector  which,  in  turn,  requires  that  sufficient 
quantities  of  eligible  collateral  be  available  on  the  balance  sheet  of  counterparties.  The 
second goal is the integrity of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet, which requires that risks in 
lending to banks be kept under control. To achieve this goal the Eurosystem applies a set of 
eligibility  criteria  for  collateral  and  implements  appropriate  risk  mitigating  measures.  The 
principle underlying these measures is the effort to equalise the “post-mitigation risk” of any 
eligible asset, i.e. the remaining risk after the implementation of risk control measures, while 
being aware that we can never perfectly achieve this result. This would mean, for example, 
that by applying a haircut of 0.5% to a Treasury bill, we achieve the same protection as when 
we  apply  a  haircut  of  60%  or  more  to  a  10-year  bank  loan,  when  both  these  assets  are 
accepted as collateral in central bank operations.  
The second guiding principle is that the Eurosystem should closely follow and respond to 
market  developments,  financial  innovation  and  counterparties’  behaviour.  To  do  so,  the 
Eurosystem  must  remain  ready  to  adapt  its  framework  to  such  developments  at  any  time. 
This  may  require  changes  in  the  eligibility  criteria,  including  the  acceptance  of  additional 
asset  classes  or  rejection  of  existing  asset  classes,  or  adjustments  in  the  risk  control  and 
valuation framework. 
There  are  several  reasons  why  central  banks  may  need  to  adopt  a  broad  collateral 
framework,  particularly  in  a  crisis,  and  to  have  it  broader  relative  to  the  interbank  repo 
collateral set. First, the role of a central bank as a backstop facility avoids a worsening crisis 
of  confidence,  i.e.  it  avoids  a  negative  feedback  loop-of-liquidity  crisis.  Second,  a  central 
bank is the only player that never has liquidity constraints. Therefore, in case of counterparty 
default, the central bank has ample time to liquidate collateral and await mean reversion of 
values. Third, central banks can impose haircuts that protect them from adverse scenarios in 
the collateral liquidation process, as they are considered risk-free.  
For these reasons, it makes economic sense that, in a liquidity crisis, central banks continue 
to accept what is no longer accepted in the interbank market. They nevertheless should still 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
act  with  prudence.  This  means  adequate  risk  protection,  careful  monitoring  of  submitted 
collateral and adjusted eligibility criteria if necessary. 
Collateral scarcity 
Collateral scarcity may be driven by regulatory changes but also by increased risk aversion 
and counterparty risk. We see the move from unsecured to secured transactions on several 
layers,  for  example  in  money  markets,  the  longer-term  wholesale  funding  markets,  in  an 
increased  use  of  CCPs  as  mandated  by  the  G-20,  and  a  larger  recourse  to  central  bank 
liquidity. This move, together with asset purchase programmes by central banks, is likely to 
increase the demand for high-quality assets. However, while collateral scarcity has become a 
concern for many euro area banks, this does not seem to be the case in other regions. 
The  average  amount  of  eligible  collateral  for  Eurosystem 
liquidity  operations  was 
€14.3 trillion  during  the  second  quarter  of  this  year.  However,  only  €2.5  trillion  was  put 
forward as collateral4 by counterparties to be used in our liquidity operations that came to an 
average outstanding amount of around €1.3 trillion (see Chart 1). This shows that, despite 
the fears of collateral scarcity in the euro area, there is some leeway in collateral availability. 
Naturally,  this  aggregate  view  masks  country  differences.  Indeed,  the  concerns  about 
collateral  scarcity  is  characterised  by  heterogeneity  in  the  euro  area  since  some  credit 
institutions have a sufficient collateral pool, while others have less leeway. Not surprisingly, 
the  latter  are  usually  located  in  those  Member  States  that  are  hit  particularly  hard  by  the 
sovereign debt and banking crisis.  
To  some  degree,  the  composition  of  assets  used  as  collateral  in  Eurosystem  liquidity 
operations mirrors the state of the financial markets (see Chart 2). First, as a result of the 
dried-up market activity in the securitisation market starting in late 2007, the share of ABSs 
as  collateral  quickly  increased,  from  around  16%  in  2007  to  28%  the  following  year, 
indicating that such securitisation transactions were increasingly being held on the balance 
sheet  of  the  originator  bank  and  pledged  as  collateral  with  the  central  bank.  Second, 
non-marketable assets and above all, credit claims (i.e. normal bank loans) have become the 
largest single asset class in our collateral portfolio. Third, uncovered bank bonds constituted 
the  largest  marketable  asset  type  in  2009,  mostly  in  non-guaranteed  forms.  However,  the 
absolute  amounts  and  the  share  started  to  decline  sharply  thereafter,  due  to  subdued 
issuance  volumes,  increased  risk  aversion  and  concerns  about  the  counterparty  risk.  In 
addition to the decrease in issuance, downgrades of banks have rendered a large part of this 
collateral  non-eligible  for  Eurosystem  operations.  As  a  result,  guaranteed  unsecured  bank 
bonds now dominate non-guaranteed bank bonds. Finally, due to the implementation of the 
two  36-  month  refinancing  operations  conducted  in  December  2011  and  February  2012, 
posted  collateral  in  general  increased,  and  in  particular  the  use  of  covered  bank  bonds, 
which has lately become the largest marketable asset type in our collateral framework. 
It is equally important to analyse whether the observed scarcity of collateral in some regions 
follows a cyclical or a structural pattern.  
If  it  is  cyclical  it  is  mainly  the  result  of  the  prevailing  uncertainties  in  the  markets  and  the 
perceived  heightened  counterparty  risk  that  leads  market  participants  to  move  from 
unsecured to secured funding, thus increasing their needs for collateral. Such moves could in 
principle  be  reversible,  once  confidence  in  banks’  resilience  improves  again.  It  has  been 
argued however that a continued decline in, or even disappearance of, unsecured funding 
could have permanent effects on the balance sheet structure of banks. So, although central 
banks  may  have  taken  a  number  of  measures  to  address  the  current  stress  on  banks’ 
balance sheets (enlarging the collateral framework, purchasing assets, extending longer term 
                                                
4  This figure includes the haircuts applied by the Eurosystem. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
liquidity, implementing non-recourse repos or swapping them with more liquid assets), these 
measures can be rolled back or discontinued as soon as the crisis subsides. 
A structural change in the demand for collateral, on the other hand, would be more the result 
of  a  series  of  regulatory  changes  (such  as  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio  under  Basel  III, 
regulatory  changes  on  derivatives  trading,  the  proposed  capital  charges  in  Solvency  II  for 
insurers, making it more attractive to hold covered bonds, and the Dodd-Frank Act) as well 
as a structural move away from unsecured towards secured funding arrangements. It would 
be of a permanent nature. This may warrant changes to central banks’ eligibility criteria for 
collateral to prevent central bank operations adding to the overall demand and competition 
for high-quality and liquid collateral for banks. Thus, central banks would need to consider 
extending collateral eligibility beyond these demanded assets. In fact, central banks are not 
subject to liquidity risk in their national currency, implying that they could choose to accept 
high-quality  assets,  but  not  necessarily  liquid  assets.  In  any  case,  the  optimal  choice  of 
eligible  assets for  a  central  bank  would  be  the one  minimising  cost for the  whole  financial 
system,  taking  into  account  the  need  to  protect  its  own  balance  sheet  to  ensure  its 
independence and maintain confidence in the currency. 
Potential policy measures – concluding remarks 
In general, to increase access to available collateral, for use in central banks operations and 
in  private  repo  markets,  the  three  typical  medium  to  long-term  wholesale  funding  sources 
need to function properly, adding value to both issuers and investors. During the crisis, the 
importance of being able to have recourse to the three sources of funds (secured, unsecured 
and  securitisation)  was  confirmed.  Indeed,  the  force  of  diversification  works  fully  on  the 
liability side. This is due to the fact that each type of security slices risk in a different way. 
This factor makes these three markets for long-term instruments act as complements rather 
than  substitutes.  This  may  be  of  particular  relevance  to  the  ABSs,  since  unlike  covered 
bonds, they are based on an extremely versatile underlying pool of assets, and therefore the 
underlying  economic  sector  that  it  is  funding.  This  makes  it  somewhat  different  to  other 
secured  assets,  for  example,  covered  bonds.  Maintenance  work  is  ongoing  especially  in 
respect  of  the  covered  bond  and  the  ABS  market  segments,  which  is  indeed  a  welcome 
move. 
But  let  me  finally  offer  you  some  potential  policy  responses  to  mitigate  or  to  address  the 
negative effects of collateral scarcity, and some forward-looking thoughts.  
Addressing collateral scarcity 
As regards the supply of collateral assets by financial institutions, the Eurosystem has taken 
several steps to make it more elastic by encouraging the creation of new assets or making it 
easier to mobilise existing ones. These steps have also contributed to restore the impaired 
monetary policy transmission mechanism. Let me list five of them here.  
i)  
its interventions in support of the covered bond markets through the two Covered 
Bond  Purchase  Programmes  (CBPPs),  aiming  at  reactivating  the  primary  market. 
Both programmes had the objective of easing funding conditions and encouraging 
institutions to maintain or expand lending to their clients, thereby contributing to the 
Eurosystem’s role in supporting the functioning of financial markets. By performing 
this  catalytic  function,  the  first  purchase  programme  was  very  successful  in 
restarting  activity  in  primary  covered  bond  markets,  and  thus  creating  private 
collateral of good quality; 
lowering  the  minimum  rating  requirements  at  issuance  for  specific  ABSs  and 
allowing the use of additional credit claims, and  
leading or acting as a catalyst in efforts to improve financial market conditions and to 
increase  transparency  and  standardisation  in  some  market  segments  such  as  the 
ii)  
iii) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
iv) 
v) 
is 
the 
fourth 
thereby  making 
them  equally  available 
implementation  of  cross-border 
Prime  Collateralised  Securities  (PCS)  initiative  in  the  ABS  market,  our  own 
loan-level data requirements for ABSs, and the covered bond label initiative, initiated 
by the European Covered Bond Council. A common objective for these market-led 
initiatives is to restore confidence among investors in these market segments, and 
to re-introduce them as sustainable funding tools for banks. We would be happy to 
engage in further initiatives to foster market functioning and the creation of good and 
fairly safe assets that could be used in various collateral systems. In this regard I 
take the opportunity to refer to a fourth initiative which is currently being worked on 
by the Eurosystem. 
A 
triparty  collateral 
initiative 
management  services  within  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  framework.  Today,  these 
services  are  only  available  to  a  limited  number of  Eurosystem  counterparties  in  a 
small number of countries (Germany, Luxembourg, France and very recently, Italy). 
In 2014 however, the Eurosystem will go-live with the support of cross-border use of 
triparty  collateral  management  services  via  the  Correspondent  Central  Banking 
Model  (CCBM), 
to  all  euro  area 
counterparties. While triparty services do not increase the availability of collateral as 
such,  they  allow  for  a  considerably  more  efficient  delivery  of  collateral  to  the 
Eurosystem,  in  turn  allowing  counterparties  to  optimise  the  use  of  their  collateral 
assets with central banks and in the market. To enhance this process even further, 
the  Eurosystem  is  also  cooperating  with  the  market  to  achieve  interoperability 
between the different triparty offerings. 
In addition, the Governing Council of the ECB decided on 6 September to widen its 
collateral framework to accept marketable assets denominated in foreign currencies. 
In fact, looking beyond this non-standard and temporary measure, it is a moot point 
whether these types of collateral denominated in internationally accepted currencies 
and stemming from efficient financial systems should be allowed on a longer-term 
basis,  in  particular  if  collateral  becomes  scarce  across  several  regions.  More 
generally, some studies have highlighted the relative scarcity of high-quality financial 
assets. In particular, while advanced economies are able to generate relatively safe 
assets which appeal to international investors, emerging market economies are less 
able  to  do  so.5  In  this  context,  fostering  the  international  role  of  the  currencies  of 
some emerging economies could help the creation of safe, liquid and internationally 
accepted 
the  positive  aspects  of  accepting 
foreign-denominated  collateral  are  fairly  clear  in  terms  of  collateral  availability  for 
counterparties  and  for  monetary  policy,  payment  systems  and  financial  stability, 
several  challenges  nevertheless  emerge,  such  as  legal  complications,  exchange 
rate risks and operational risks, as pointed out in a study by our host.6 
instruments.  While 
transaction 
Last  but  not  least,  in  order  for  banks  to  attract  investors  to  the  unsecured  bank  funding 
market  as  well,  confidence  in  the  euro  area  must  be  restored.  Through  the  restoration  of 
fiscal  discipline  and  implementation  of  structural  reforms,  euro  area  sovereign  debt  will  be 
viewed once again as risk-free and thus contribute to a collateral supply of good quality. In 
addition,  in  the  last  couple  of  years  we  have  also  made  significant  progress regarding  the 
institutional framework, with the establishment of the EFSF, the launching of the ESM, the 
approval  of  the  “six-pack”  legislation  and  of  the  fiscal  compact,  and  the  steps  towards  a 
banking  union  including  the  single  supervisory  mechanism.  But  let me  emphasise  that  the 
                                                
5  See,  for  instance,  Caballero,  R.  J.  (2006),  “On  the  Macroeconomics  of  Asset  Shortages”,  NBER  Working 
Paper  No  12753;  Caballero,  R.  J.,  E.  Farhi,  and  P.  O.  Gourinchas  “An  Equilibrium  Model  of  ‘Global 
Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review 2008, 98:1, pp. 358–393. 
6  Capel, J. “How does cross-border collateral affect a country’s central bank and prudential supervisor?”, DNB 
Occasional Studies, Vol. 7/No. 1. 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
only  fundamental  way  to  overcome  collateral  scarcity  is  to  ensure  private  and  public 
de-leveraging  as  well  as  sustainable  growth.  It  is  growth  that generates  sound  assets,  i.e. 
securities which guarantee a high likelihood stream of revenues. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
