Daniel Mminele: Flourishing in financial markets post crisis – how do we 
achieve this? 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Gordon Institute of Business Science Conference on “Flourishing in Financial Markets Post 
Crisis – How do we achieve this?”, Johannesburg, 2 October 2012. 
 in 
the 
Introduction  
financial  market 
financial  markets  and 
1. 
Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen  and  thank  you  to  the  Gordon  Institute  of  Business 
Science (GIBS), Payments Association South Africa (PASA) and Strate, for the invitation to 
provide the opening remarks this morning. Let me at the outset congratulate the organisers 
for putting together a programme that is quite wide-ranging in terms of content, and brings 
together a broad spectrum of speakers to provide different perspectives from their respective 
vantage  points 
infrastructure  space. 
Unfortunately, I will not be able to stay for the rest of the day.  
The  theme  of  the  conference:  “Flourishing  in  Financial  Markets  Post  Crisis  –  How  do  we 
achieve this?” is encouragingly forward-looking and results- oriented – how do we get there, 
how do we achieve this? Allow me, however, to sound a word of caution when it comes to 
post crisis, because such a characterisation would be pre-mature at this stage. The crisis is 
not over yet, and in fact may be deepening.  
Global economic prospects and financial market conditions have been deteriorating in recent 
months, growth projections for 2012 and 2013 are being adjusted lower, and indications are 
that  the  balance  of  risks  is  firmly  on  the  downside.  The  three  main  risks  to  a  sustained 
recovery of the global economy on our way to a post crisis environment are: (i) the on-going 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area (with feedback loops into the banking system), (ii) the 
fiscal situation in the United States with regard to the so-called “fiscal cliff”, and (iii) resurgent 
oil prices and rapidly rising global food prices. All three factors represent external shocks that 
weigh on household disposable income and economic growth, with a disproportionate impact 
on  emerging  markets  and  lower  income  households  (where  food  is  a  larger  share  of  the 
consumption basket).  
While the authorities in the euro area have recently made significant efforts to help address 
weaknesses in their economies, such as through the recent announcement of the European 
Central  Bank’s  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  programme  and  the  ratification  of  the 
European Stability Mechanism by the German Federal Constitutional Court, the success and 
credibility of these efforts, which have resulted in near-term risks to global financial markets 
at  least  subsiding  somewhat,  is  critically  dependent  on  timeous  activation  and  effective 
implementation.  
But, let me not divert too much and turn to the topic I have been asked to speak on, namely, 
the  importance  of  inter-regulatory  harmonisation  in  the  Financial  Markets  including 
cooperation at the industry level.  
The importance of cooperation and collaboration  
2. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  brought  to  the  fore  and  encouraged  an  environment  of 
increased  cooperation  and  coordination  among  regulatory  authorities,  with  the  view  of 
preventing  or  at  least  minimising  the  impact  of  possible  market  disruptions  arising  out  of 
financial  crises.  In  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  international  community 
embarked on various initiatives aimed at improving the regulation of the financial sector, and 
by so doing, creating an environment that fosters financial stability, in support of growth and 
development. In addition, a number of changes are also envisaged in the areas of market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
conduct,  consumer  protection  and  financial  inclusion.  South  Africa  participates  in  various 
international  fora  (such  as  the  G20,  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision,  the 
Financial  Stability  Board)  and  standard  setting  bodies  where  these  initiatives  are  being 
undertaken,  and  thereby  contributes  towards  building  a  safer  and  more  efficient  global 
financial system.  
The G20 in particular has been at forefront of international efforts to harmonise regulation. 
G20 Leaders have endorsed the broadening of the regulatory net to all markets, institutions, 
and  infrastructures  that  are  systemic  (like  hedge  funds,  credit  rating  agencies,  OTC 
derivatives,  and  the  catch-all  phrase  of  “shadow  banking”),  thereby  encouraging  agreed 
international standards in this regard to be translated into domestic environments.  
While South Africa’s financial sector may have come through the crisis relatively unscathed, 
we are part of the global community and are also undertaking various regulatory reforms to 
ensure  that  our  financial  sector  is  further  strengthened.  To  this  end,  in  early  2011,  the 
National  Treasury  published  a  document  entitled  “A  safer  financial  sector  to  serve  South 
Africa better”, which is the guiding document in migrating South Africa towards a twin-peak 
approach to financial regulation, addressing both prudential regulation and market conduct. 
Collaborative  engagements  are  underway  among  various  South  African  regulators  and 
stakeholders to ensure the successful implementation of these regulatory reforms in the near 
future.  
A safe and effective financial system supports the regulators’ objective of ensuring financial 
stability.  Systemic  and  prominent  market  participants  and  infrastructures  (such  as  the 
National  Payments  System,  which  my  colleague  Dave  Mitchell  will  provide  more  detail  on 
later)  require  appropriate  regulation,  supervision  and  oversight.  It  is  thus  imperative  that 
relevant  regulatory  authorities  have  the  oversight  powers  and  resources  to  carry  out  this 
task. In exercising these powers, authorities should be transparent, adopt relevant standards 
and  principles  and  apply  them  consistently.  It  is  also  crucial  for  central  banks,  market 
regulators  and  other  authorities  to  cooperate  in  undertaking  these  tasks.  The  need  for 
increased cooperation also stems from the fact that the crisis has made us appreciate more 
the interconnectedness (domestically and internationally) of the various parts of the financial 
system we operate in, and how, in the absence of cooperation and coordination, regulatory 
arbitrage (on the back of financial innovation) can lead to a rapid build-up of systemic risks.  
Market regulators should always strive to implement interventions that are in the interest of 
the system as whole and do not serve the interest of individual participants only, or certain 
sections  of  the  market.  Although  it  is  recognised  that  a  disorderly  failure  in  the  financial 
market infrastructure or problems with systemic market participants can interrupt or impede 
the  effective  operation  of  markets,  and  cause  severe  systemic  disruptions  and  financial 
instability, it is imperative that all regulatory actions or interventions should still maintain the 
correct balance. This is of course easier said than done! In most instances the impact of any 
crisis would differ across jurisdictions, depending on the stance of the relevant authorities on 
regulation and oversight, that is, whether regulators adopt more of an intrusive approach or 
take an arms length approach. Depending on the approach taken, the market participant’s 
risk management practices will be different and therefore the impact will differ accordingly. A 
coordinated  approach  by  regulators  is  thus  imperative  to  ensure  that  the  swing  does  not 
move  to  over-regulation,  based  on  the  experience  of  only  one,  thereby  having  detrimental 
effects  or  even  introducing  systemic  risk  in  other  jurisdictions.  It  is  therefore  imperative  to 
ensure  that  any  changes  in  the  regulatory  environment  in  different  parts  of  the  financial 
sector, whether within one country or across countries, are not in conflict with each other.  
The potential for spill overs has increased substantially over recent years, as global financial 
market  systems  have  become  highly  interlinked,  creating  significant  dependencies.  Under 
these circumstances, it thus becomes crucial that regulators have formalised arrangements 
to  harmonise  their  regulatory  practices  and  align  these  to  appropriate  best  practice. 
Appropriate international standard setting bodies thus become key in driving the agenda to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
achieve these practices. These platforms should have appropriate structures that will foster 
effective  consultation,  so  as  to  ensure  the  appropriateness  of  the  desired  harmonised 
standards or regulatory frameworks and avoid unintended consequences. That is where the 
role  of  the  G20,  the  Basel  Committee,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  IOSCO  becomes 
very important.  
Once appropriately harmonised standards or regulatory frameworks have been adopted and 
implemented,  a  consistent  assessment  of  implementation  should  be  undertaken.  These 
assessments could take three forms:  
• 
Systemic  participants  and financial  market  infrastructure  operators should  conduct 
periodic  formal  full  or  partial  self  assessments  of  their  observance  of  the  set 
standards  and  principles.  The  outcome  of  these  assessments  would  lead  to 
continuous  improvement  or  enhancement  of  risk  management  practices,  which 
should  also  meet  organisational  objectives  rather  than  being  just  relevant  for 
regulatory compliance purposes.  
Regulatory and oversight authorities, as part of discharging their mandates, should 
regularly assess adherence to standards and observance of relevant principles by 
entities that they regulate or oversee  
Independent assessments could be undertaken by international financial institutions 
(IFI) such as the IMF and World Bank, or take the form of country peer reviews, also 
in order to ensure that there is a standardisation of assessments to determine best 
practice.  
  Current requirements that  have  been  set for  banking  institutions  are  being  interrogated  by 
various jurisdictions to see how best they could be adopted and to ensure implementation. 
As many of you will be aware, a second draft of revised regulations to give effect to the Basel 
III  Accord  in  South  Africa  was  released  in  September  2012.  The  revised  regulations  will 
come into effect on 1 January 2013, and steps had been taken to ensure that South African 
banks will be in a position to comply with the Liquidity Coverage Ratio by 2013.  
Some  jurisdictions  and  entities  viewed  international  standards  as  only  the  minimum 
benchmark  and  rather  strive  to  achieve  higher  goals,  an  approach  that  South  Africa  has 
tended to follow when it comes to capital adequacy. It is also important to always reiterate 
that in the implementation of standards and principles, as much as there is an important role 
for  regulators,  similarly,  there  is  also  an  important  role  for  market  participants.  It  is  in  the 
interest of market participants to cooperate with regulators to ensure a safer financial system 
in which they operate.  
Areas of cooperation and collaboration by regulatory authorities  
3. 
Cooperation  among  regulatory  authorities  should  be  fostered  both  domestically  and 
internationally. This should happen in normal times where ideas and experiences are shared 
with  a  view  to  strengthening  the  overall  financial  system. This  also  allows for  building  and 
strengthening of relationships that would be useful in more stressful situations.  
Due to the interlinkages of the various markets and their financial systems as well as global 
financial institutions that operate in multiple jurisdictions, the need for cooperation will also be 
crucial  in  crisis  situations.  It  is  specifically  in  such  times  that  it  is  in  the  interest  of  all  the 
regulatory  authorities  to  coordinate  their  actions  in  the  interest  of  achieving  a  smooth 
recovery or resolution that could have affected entities or infrastructures in which they have 
some form of regulatory authority. In the implementation of standards and principles, various 
authorities  with  common  interests  will  have  to  cooperate  and  collaborate  in  various  areas 
such as oversight, supervision and recovery and resolution.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Regulation of financial market infrastructures  
4. 
As mentioned earlier, financial market infrastructures went largely unnoticed until the global 
financial crisis broke, and although they performed well through the crisis, it was only then 
that an appreciation was found for the true importance of such infrastructures, reflecting the 
fundamental role they play in ensuring financial stability.  
With this in mind, in April 2012, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems at the 
Bank for  International  Settlements  (CPSS)  and the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO)  published  new  international  standards  for  payment  and  securities 
clearing and settlement systems, including central counterparties. The main objectives of the 
new  principles  are  to  ensure  a  robust  global  financial  market  infrastructure,  which  if  faced 
with the financial shocks of the magnitude experienced in 2007/2008, will continue to operate 
effectively.  
South Africa is expected to adopt these principles and ensure that systemic and prominent 
financial market infrastructures in its jurisdiction do observe them. These principles will apply 
to  payment  systems,  securities  settlement  systems,  central  security  depositories,  central 
counter  parties  as  well  as  trade  repositories.  The  principles  will  in  most  probability  be 
adopted in either of the following ways:  
• 
through policy positions that are outlined by regulatory authorities in a transparent 
manner;  
incorporated in relevant regulation applied by the relevant regulatory authorities; or  
incorporated in law or legal provisions administered by the relevant authority.  
• 
• 
This  will  happen  in  parallel  with  the  regulatory  reforms  that  South  Africa  has  chosen  to 
undertake in the effort to drive towards “A safer financial sector to serve South Africa better” 
as  stated  earlier,  and  it  is  envisaged  that  the  two  objectives  will  be  complementary  and 
aligned. South Africa also sees itself as part of the broader region as well as the international 
community and thus also strives to drive its financial sector development initiatives with this 
goal in mind.  
Concluding remarks  
5. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  going  forward  we  need  better  and  appropriately  regulated 
financial markets, institutions and infrastructures, such that strong, sustainable and balanced 
growth can be achieved in order to support our national objectives. Luckily when it comes to 
regulatory reform in South Africa it is the case of making good even better, or great, rather 
than having to fix what is broken. South Africa’s financial system is rated among the best in 
the  world.  In  the  recent  World  Economic  Forum’s  (WEF)  Competitiveness  Survey,  South 
Africa ranked third on overall financial market development, first in the regulation of securities 
exchanges and first in the strength of auditing and reporting standards. But there is no room 
for complacency, and the need for various regulators to work together more closely is crucial. 
We also have our work cut out in the area of financial inclusion, to address the challenge of a 
large  proportion  of  the  population  not  having  access  to  formal  banking,  insurance  and 
investment products.  
Financial Market Infrastructures are a source of strength for the financial system, but could 
also  bring  risk  that  could  be  catastrophic.  It  is  heartening  to  say  that  the  South  African 
regulatory  environment  is  well  developed  and  should  foster  confidence  in  our  financial 
institutions  as  well  as  our financial  market  infrastructures. These  institutions  strive  to meet 
international  standards  and  best  practice  in  order  to  be  open  for  integration  with  other 
markets  to  ensure  that  we  take  advantage  of  opportunities  that  present  themselves  and 
manage  risks  appropriately.  It  is  also  encouraging  to  note  that  some  of  our  domestic 
Financial Market Infrastructure operators are already conducting self assessments based on 
the recently released international principles in the positive spirit of accepting the standards 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as being good for their risk management rather than viewing them as something that is being 
imposed on them by regulatory authorities.  
Our participation in regional formations, international standard setting bodies and oversight 
arrangements  also  offers  a  platform  for  us  to  gain  insight  and  learn  from  developments 
elsewhere. This also offers us an opportunity to make a contribution to these regional and 
international developments and shape them.  
I thank you for the opportunity to share these thoughts and trust that you will have a good 
conference.  
References:  
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, BIS CPSS & IOSCO, April 2012  
A  safer  financial  sector  to  serve  South  Africa  better,  National  Treasury  Policy  Document, 
Republic of South Africa, February 2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
