Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Living with capital flows – a delicate balancing 
act 
Speech by Mr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 5th Annual 
Euromoney  Thailand Investment Forum, Living with capital flows: a delicate balancing act, 
Bangkok, 22 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s an honor to speak before you today in the 5th Annual Euromoney Thailand Investment 
Forum. Since yesterday, you must have already heard many interesting discussions about 
Thailand’s  prospects.  Here,  I  would  like  to  reaffirm  that  Thailand  is  indeed  on  a  recovery 
path. Over a longer horizon, the prospects of ASEAN integration and the rise of Asia are also 
offering causes for optimism. 
As  international  investors,  you  naturally  would  want  to  participate  in  Thailand’s  exciting 
prospects. Before putting more money into Thailand, however, I suspect that you would want 
to  understand  our  macro-policy  environment.  Our  recovery  has  been  gaining  momentum, 
and  the  central  bank  has  been  echoing  more  vigilance  regarding  inflationary  pressures. 
Meanwhile,  the  global  environment  suggests  that  more  capital  is  likely  to  flow  into  our 
economy. In this complex situation, I believe that you might want to know what the central 
bank’s view and stance are. Since the majority of you are in the capital markets, the focus of 
my talk today will be related to capital inflows. 
Capital inflows have always been and will continue to be welcomed into Thailand. Indeed, 
capital  inflows  have  been  vital  for  Thailand’s  development.  For  the  past  30  years,  capital 
inflows  have  helped  finance  our  country’s  productive  capacities  and  thus  helped  raise  the 
standard of living for millions of Thais. 
Going  forward,  more  capital  is  expected  to  flow  into  the  region  for  at  least  two  reasons, 
namely,  the  growth  differential  between  emerging  Asia  and  advanced  economies  and  the 
changing nature of global liquidity.  
On  the  first  reason,  the  strong  growth  momentum  in  Asia  is  likely  to  draw  in  more 
capital.  This  factor  is  especially  strong  as  advanced  economies  continue  to  cope  with 
legacies from the crisis. In contrast, Asia has survived the global crisis relatively well. Recent 
numbers show that Asia’s growth during the past year has been driven by both external and 
internal  demand.  For  this  year,  the  momentum  is  expected  to  continue,  while  the  rapid 
growth  of  the  middle  class  in  large  Asian  economies  such  as  China  and  India  makes  the 
prospect of intra-regional demand even more hopeful over the longer horizon. 
Another development worth noting is the changing nature of global liquidity, in particular, the 
increase  in  fluidity  that  is  likely  to  push  capital  flow  into  emerging  Asia  more  easily  but 
could also lead to easier capital flow reversals when conditions change. This rise in fluidity of 
global  liquidity  seems  to  have  its  roots,  at least  in  part,  in  the  macro policies  of  advanced 
economies.  Specifically,  large  fiscal  debts  and  quantitative  easing  in  advanced  economies 
help contribute to the rising fluidity. 
First, large fiscal burdens in many advanced economies have altered the risk profile of 
the  supposedly  risk-free  assets  such  as  their  government  securities.  As  the  line  between 
traditionally risk-free and riskier assets becomes blurred, investors would be more willing to 
search for yields and switch back and forth between assets more easily. 
Second,  although  the  money  used  by  advanced  economies’  central  banks  to  purchase 
securities  has  ended  up  mainly  in  the  banking  system  for  the  time  being,  quantitative 
easing does help raise investors’ risk appetite. On the one hand, QE is likely to make the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
recovery  of  advanced  economies  a  bit  firmer  through  improved  consumer  and  business 
sentiment.  With  that,  investors’  risk-appetite  has  risen,  driving  investors  to  riskier  assets, 
including commodities and emerging market securities. On the other hand, QE drives down 
yields  in  advanced  economies.  The  combination  of  rising  risk-appetite  and  low  yields  in 
advanced economies pushes investors to search for higher yields elsewhere and thus makes 
commodities and emerging market securities more attractive. 
Of course, we must note here that despite the altered risk profiles, government securities of 
advanced economies are likely to remain the ultimate safe haven assets. As such, portions 
of capital flows could reverse themselves very easily when risk appetite wanes. Experiences 
have shown that the so-called “risk aversion” episode could coincide with large withdrawals 
of funds from emerging markets back to advanced economies. These fluctuations in capital 
flows could potentially pose important challenges for emerging markets. 
While  capital  inflows  are  generally  beneficial,  they  are  by  no  means  cost-free. 
Potentially,  large  inflows  of  capital  can  lead  to  exchange  rate  overshooting,  hurting  some 
segments of the real sector that may have trouble adjusting. Moreover, they could seep into 
speculative activities and drive up asset prices. Especially vulnerable are the real estate and 
equity  markets.  As  these  markets  heat  up,  more  capital  inflows  often  find  their  ways  in, 
creating  potential  bubbles.  Invariably  as  the  bubbles  burst,  balance  sheets  of  firms, 
individuals, banks  as  well  as  the  government  will  be  affected.  The  burst  of  these  bubbles, 
when coupled with capital outflows, could have devastating effects. The Asian crisis over a 
decade ago is a good reminder for us. 
Currently, the Bank of Thailand has a set of tools at its disposal to help the economy 
deal effectively with capital inflows. These tools include (1) the flexible exchange rate and 
foreign  exchange  market  intervention,  (2)  macro-prudential  measures,  and  (3)  capital 
account regulations. Together, these tools are indeed powerful, and a careful coordination is 
required when using them. Let me briefly elaborate on the use of each. 
In our framework, a flexible exchange rate is a core tool, since it can act as an automatic 
stabilizer  towards  capital  inflows  in  general.  As  capital  pours  in,  especially  if  driven  by 
favorable growth potential of the economy, a flexible exchange rate can act as an automatic 
stabilizer that would help lessen the chance of overheating and dampen pressures on other 
asset prices which otherwise might turn into a bubble. Exchange rate adjustments in the face 
of large capital inflows, however, are not without costs. An excessively rapid appreciation of 
the currency could be disruptive to the real economy, since there often are constraints in the 
adjustments of the real economy, from labor market frictions to pricing behaviors.  
Here we have a challenge and need to balance well. In general, we would allow the currency 
to  appreciate  to  the  extent  that  the  movements  are  broadly  consistent  with  the  economic 
fundamentals  and  that  they  would  not  cause  undue  disruptions  in  the  real  sector.  Let  me 
note here that I think the Thai economy, over the years, has become more capable in coping 
with exchange rate movements. We see more risk protection via financial market instruments 
on the part of the private sector. Exporters, in particular, have been able to diversify in terms 
of product lines and market destinations.  
Nevertheless,  from  time  to  time  there  is  still  a  need  to  dampen  the  pressures  on  the 
exchange rate, and central banks often resort to exchange rate intervention. While such 
intervention could help contain excess exchange rate volatility, its focus is at the end of the 
process.  In  other  word,  FX  intervention  is  a  “passive”  mechanism  in  dealing  with  capital 
inflows.  By  the  time  of  intervention,  capital  would  have  already  flowed  into  the  economy. 
Imbalances  could  have  already  built  up.  Furthermore,  if  market  expectations  of  upside 
currency gains persist, it could invite even more capital inflows, along with greater pressures 
on the exchange rate and higher chances of imbalance buildups in the future. For the real 
economy,  it  may  delay  some  of  the  necessary  adjustments.  Finally,  FX  intervention  is  not 
costless. We have to fund the intervention with local interest rates that are higher than what 
we would earn from our international reserves. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Experiences have also shown that, even after a large appreciation of the currency, capital 
inflows could still seep in and fuel speculative activities in markets such as real estate and 
equity. To help deal with specific pockets of the economy showing signs of potential bubbles, 
macro-prudential  measures  could  be  used.  A  recent  example  is  the  risk-weights 
adjustment related to the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of loans made to property purchases.  
While macro-prudential measures aim to help lessen the effects of capital that has already 
flowed into the economy, capital account regulations can be used to deal directly with the 
size and type of incoming and outgoing flows. With an aim of creating more balanced capital 
flows,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  continued  to  liberalize  our  capital  outflows,  while  on  the 
inflow side we at times resort to tighter regulations when the situation deems necessary. 
Implementing a capital account regulation, or less of it, requires a delicate balancing act. For 
outflow liberalization, on the one hand allowing more Thai resident outflows is beneficial as it 
helps lessen upward pressure on the currency as well as improve the investment profile of 
the  Thai  private  sector  toward  a  more  diversified  and  possibly  more  efficient  one.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  risk  assessment  capacity  of  local  investors  remains  low,  too  rapid  outflow 
liberalization  could  make  the  country’s  balance  sheet  more  vulnerable  rather  than  more 
robust. A balancing act is even more difficult when applying re-regulation on capital inflows. 
A measure that is too mild would lack effectiveness, while too drastic a measure would be 
too costly. For one thing, its distortionary effects would be large; for another, increased policy 
uncertainty could turn away productive investors and raise the country’s risk premium. Aware 
of these undesirable side effects of controls, we would limit their use to only when absolutely 
necessary and only on a temporary basis.  
On the use of interest rate policy, some may view the policy interest rate as another tool to 
deal with capital flows, and there have been public debates whether the recent hikes in the 
policy  interest  rate  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand  were  consistent  with  our  thinking  on  recent 
capital  flow  developments.  Specifically,  many  have  argued  that  the  hikes  would  actually 
induce more capital inflows that add pressures on the currency. On this issue, let me say the 
following. 
Under  inflation  targeting,  the  policy  interest  rate  is  used  primarily  to  help  maintain  price 
stability  to  achieve  long-term  balanced  growth  of  the  domestic  economy.  Designating  the 
policy rate to another role, like managing capital flows, would then confuse its primary role, 
especially  when  the  risk  of  overheating  together  with  a  surge  in  capital  inflows  presents 
policymakers with a dilemma. Thus, our interest rate policy is not meant to deal directly with 
capital flows. Its side effect on capital flows is, however, not to be ignored. A fine balancing 
act is also needed when it comes to making interest rate decision given this dilemma. 
Perceivably, large interest rate differential may be a push factor for capital flows. However, 
given relatively small interest rate differentials between Thailand and major economies, we 
view that a gradual increase in the policy rate should not in and of itself be a cause of further 
inflows. In fact, we have empirically found that other factors such as growth differential and 
global  risk  appetite  and  liquidity  are  far  more  important  than  interest  rate  differential  in 
explaining  the  recent  surge  of  capital  inflows  to  the  country.  On  the  other  hand,  given  the 
pickup in global and domestic demand recovery, the risk of inflation has recently materialized 
and  posed  increasing  threat  to  domestic  price  stability.  With  all  these  considerations,  we 
deem that the recent interest rate normalization was necessary and was consistent under our 
inflation targeting, while its impact on further capital inflows should be minimal. 
So let me recap our challenge. Capital inflows are beneficial but they are not cost-free. To 
help deal with capital inflows and their effects on the macro economy, we have the flexible 
exchange rate, macro-prudential measures, and various forms of capital account regulations 
as  our  tools,  while  the  policy  rate  is  preserved  for  its  primary  objective  of  domestic  price 
stability.  Each  of  the  tools  has  its  own  advantages  and  disadvantages.  To  deal  with  this 
challenge, as you may already notice, a balanced use of tools is needed, and that balance 
could very well evolve over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  live  successfully  with  capital  flows  will  require  not  only  the  central  bank  to  do  its  work 
properly. For all of us at this Forum, I believe that we can make it easier for Thailand to cope 
with  capital  flows,  at  least  partly,  through  capital  market  development.  An  efficient  capital 
market is like a good irrigation system that helps channel flows into productive uses. Such a 
market, with enough breadth, could also become a shock-absorber towards capital inflows, 
quantity-wise, and would be a complement to the flexible exchange rate that acts as a “price-
wise” shock absorber. A market that has a wide variety of products and instruments, varied 
types  of  investors,  as  well  as  competitive  services  will  likely  be  more  stable  by  itself  and 
benefit us all. An efficient capital market is thus one we should aim to strive for.  
I hope that I have so far convinced you that living with capital inflows is not easy and will 
require  efforts  from  the  public  as  well  as  private  sector.  Indeed,  to  successfully  live  with 
capital flows is a delicate task, as the title of this speech suggests. On my part, what I want to 
assure you is that we at the Bank of Thailand are aware of the interrelated issues and always 
take them into account when making a policy. Tough choices, however, will always have to 
be made. We will try our best to balance between different stakeholders’ needs. For you, as 
investors, we take to the point that you value policy transparency, and we aim to provide you 
as such, in addition to macro-stability which is our overriding mandate. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
