Caleb M Fundanga: Innovative financial products on the Zambian market 
in relation to credit interest rates and the private sector development 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Zambia 
International Trade Fair Symposium on “Innovative financial products on the Zambian market 
in relation to credit interest rates and the private sector development”, Ndola, 30 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
1.0 
Financial development contributes to economic growth in a very significant way and it has 
been demonstrated that countries with more developed financial systems tend to grow faster. 
Therefore,  the  financial  sector  is  key  to  economic  development  and  policies  aimed  at 
developing the sector would be expected to contribute to economic growth.  
The current financial sector policy environment in Zambia 
2.0 
During the 1970s and 1980s Zambia pursued a policy of fixing interest rates for long periods 
and at relatively low levels, with the ostensible purpose of promoting growth. However, these 
administrative  actions  introduced  economic  distortions  into  the  financial  structure  of  the 
economy including the following:  
 
The hindrance to economic growth arising from the inefficiency in the allocation of 
resources  (with  credit  controls  and  distorted  price  indicators).  These  controls 
resulted  in  both  low  levels  of  domestically  generated  savings  and  investment, 
thereby reducing the economy’s growth rates.  
The  financial  system  remained  generally  under-developed  with  inefficient  lending 
patterns that failed to achieve their distributional goals. With interest rates set at low 
levels, financial repression curtailed domestic resource mobilization thus making the 
economy dependent on foreign savings as reflected in huge foreign debt at the time. 
Low  interest  rates  provided  an  incentive  for  fiscal  indiscipline  as  the  government 
obtained  almost  zero-interest-denominated  resources  to  finance  its  deficit.  In  the 
state-owned banking sector, poor lending decisions (often politically influenced) and 
low repayment rates ultimately led to large budgetary bailouts. 
In the face of high inflation rates and fixed nominal interest rate, real interest rates 
remained negative for the larger part of the period, leading to low domestic savings 
and other forms of capital flight. 
   A growing awareness of these economic costs led to financial “liberalization” as the dominant 
policy  paradigm.  Zambia  embraced  financial-sector  liberalization  policy  prescription  and 
embarked on a fairly ambitious reform program. This program entailed a variety of measures 
including  the  liberalization  of  interest  rates;  the  establishing  of  the  freedom  and  the 
procedures  for  entry  into  and  orderly  exit  from  the  financial  sector;  the  reduction  of 
commercial  banks’  reserves  and  liquidity  requirements;  the  elimination  of  credit  allocation 
directives; 
the 
liberalization  of  the  exchange  rate;  and  the  removal  of  controls  on  the  current  and  capital 
accounts of the balance of payments.  
Due to liberalisation, the banking environment in Zambia has become competitive as banks 
compete for the share of the customer deposits and good quality credit. Prior to 2005, the 
banking  industry’s  balance  sheet  was  largely  concentrated  in  Government  Securities.  This 
was  because  Government  Securities  offered  highly  attractive  yield  rates  (with  zero  credit 
risk) compared to other asset classes. Recently Government has maintained prudent fiscal 
the  elimination  of  preferential  credit  at  concessional 
interest  rates; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
policies  and  has  reduced  its  borrowing  to  1.8%  of  GDP  leading  to  a  significant  fall  in 
Government Securities yield rates.  
The reduction in yields rates on government securities has made it increasingly difficult for 
banks to sustain their profitability. Therefore, in order to remain profitable, banks have had to 
become  innovative  and  resorted  to  riskier  banking  activities.  This  resulted  in  a  shift  in  the 
asset  structures  of  most  banks  from  government  securities  holdings  to  an  expanding  loan 
portfolio, which offers higher returns.  
The role of financial innovation in promoting the private sector  
3.0 
Innovation  can  generally  be  defined  as  a  continuous  process  where  enterprises  and 
individuals seek new and improved products, processes, and organisation structures in order 
to reduce costs of production, better satisfy customer demands, and yield greater profits for 
themselves.  
When specifically referred to banks and other financial institutions, innovation, commonly is 
known  as  financial  innovation,  refers  to  any  change  in  the  scale,  scope  and  delivery  of 
financial  services.  Financial  innovations  can  therefore  be  grouped  as  new  products 
(e.g. adjustable rate mortgages; personal loans); new services (e.g., internet banking); and 
new production processes (e.g., electronic record-keeping for securities; credit scoring); or 
new organisational forms (e.g., Internet-only banks).  
Whereas the need for better risk management has been the main driving force behind the 
recent wave in innovation in more  advanced financial markets, this is not the case in less 
developed markets. The drive towards financial innovation in some instances can largely be 
attributed to the need to improve or maintain profitability.  
When talking about financial innovation, an important aspect that one needs to consider is 
whether  or  not  the  process  is  resulting  in  a  reduction  in  the  cost  of  doing  business  and 
providing banking services, on one hand, and whether it is translating into better pricing, on 
the other hand. We should therefore, not be surprised that innovation does not always yield 
the expected benefit of reduced prices.  
Innovation  is  clearly  an  important  phenomenon  of  any  sector  of  a  modern  economy. 
Successful  financial  innovation  must  reduce  costs  and  result  in  the  provision  of  improved 
services and affordable financial resources to users, particularly to the productive sector. A 
low level of innovation and development in the financial sector produces a weak impact of 
financial intermediation on economic growth.  
The right kind of innovation obviously would help the financial sector fulfill its core functions; 
and if the financial sector fulfilled its functions better and at lower cost, it would almost surely 
contribute to growth and societal well-being. It is essential to realise that for the most part, 
the financial system is not an end in itself but a means to an end and the measure of the 
success of the financial system must relate to its success in accomplishing broader societal 
functions. Innovations in the financial system that help it perform these tasks better and at 
lower cost almost surely lead to increased societal well-being, and to the extent that our GDP 
measures capture these benefits, in higher measured growth.  
Notwithstanding the benefits of innovation, it is important to note that the opening up to new 
activities and products, particularly the expansion of the credit portfolio, brings in a myriad of 
new  risks  associated  with  the  new  activities.  Studies  have  shown  that  increasing  financial 
innovation and deepening of financial markets brings with it challenges and risks, which if not 
well addressed, can threaten the health of the financial system and may cause havoc to the 
stability of a financial system.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The role of the Bank of Zambia in promoting innovation and competition 
4.0 
The Bank of Zambia (BoZ) acknowledges that a stable, sound and efficient financial sector 
has to be underpinned by infrastructure development. The BoZ achieves this by creating an 
enabling  environment  through  the  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  that  promote  financial 
systems  stability  and  development.  The  BoZ  also  regulates  the  conduct  of  the  banks  to 
ensure that players in the sector have a level play-field in order to safeguard the interests of 
both investors and customers of the banks.  
It  is  against  this  background  that  one  of  the  key  functions  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  to 
regulate the activities of banks and financial institutions so as to promote safe, sound and 
efficient operations of financial institutions and the development of the financial system.  
 
In  2004  the  BoZ  and  the  Government  in  consultation  with  other  stakeholders, 
formulated  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP),  which  is  a  long  term 
vision  and  development  strategy  aimed  at  addressing  major  constraints  to  the 
development of the financial sector.  
Among  the  constraints  that  the  FSDP  seeks  to  address  is  high  cost  of  banking 
services and unattractive interest rates, low savings, insufficient access to financial 
services by the vast majority especially in rural areas, insufficient access to credit, 
lack of long term credit, etc. The vision of the FSDP is to develop a stable, sound 
and  market-based  financial  system  which  would  support  efficient  mobilisation  and 
allocation  of  resources  necessary  for  economic  diversification,  sustainable  growth 
and poverty reduction.  
The  FSDP,  which  is  currently  in  its  second  phase  of  implementation,  has  three 
components, namely:  
– 
– 
– 
Increasing Market infrastructure;  
Increasing Competition; and  
Access to Finance.  
  18 commercial banks,  
10 leasing finance companies,  
3 building societies,  
51 bureaux de change,  
1 savings and credit bank,  
1 development finance institution,  
26 microfinance institutions (MFIs) and  
1 credit reference bureau (CRB).  
Over the years, the number of financial institutions under the supervisory ambit of the BoZ 
has increased significantly. In 2008, the Bank of Zambia issued banking licences to 5 new 
banks  to  operate  in  Zambia.  As  at  31  May  2011,  Institutions  under  Bank  of  Zambia 
supervision as at 31 May 2011 were:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  sector  has  also  recorded  tremendous  growth  in  business  with  growth  witnessed  in 
various innovative activities carried out by the banks in order to meet the needs of increasing 
number of customers. Some of the innovations include:  
 
 
 
An increase in automated teller machines (ATMs) including deposit taking ATMs;  
E-banking;  
Telephone banking services;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
    In-store  banking  services  –  banks  can  provide  some  banking  services  within  the 
premises of stores;  
Mobile top-up services – banks can sell airtime on behalf of mobile phone providers 
through ATMs;  
Truck-banking services – the model entails engagement of agents for provision of 
cash-in/cash-out transactions for clients where banks have no footprint;  
Bancassurance  –  banks  can  sell  insurance  products  on  behalf  of  insurance 
companies; and  
Introduction of Visa debit and credit cards.  
 
These innovations have resulted in notable developments in the financial sector, such as:  
(i) 
Growth  in  Investments  in  Loans  and  Leases:  total  loans  and  leases  have 
increased  to  K10,182  billion  as  at  31st  May  2011  from  K1,079  billion  as  at 
31st December  2001.  The  843%  increment  has  resulted  in  the  introduction  of 
various credit facilities, for example employer backed salaried loans, trade finance 
products, vehicle finance leasing, SME loans, invoice discounting, mortgages, etc;  
Growth  in  Bank’s  Total  Assets:  total  assets  have  increased  by  614%  to 
K24,693 billion as at 31st May 2011 from K3,460 billion as at 31st December 2001.  
Growth in Deposits: total deposits have increased by 661% to K18,297 billion as at 
31st May 2011 from K2,405 billion as at 31st December 2001.  
Growth  in  Branch  Network:  currently  there  are  237  branches  and  agencies 
countrywide. Ten years ago, there were a total of 161 outlets.  
Continuous Improvement of Risk Management Systems resulting in the creation 
and  update  of  the  range  and  quality  of  the  products  and  services;  for  example 
hedging  products,  derivatives,  credit  risk  rating  systems, 
interest  rate  risk 
management.  
Introduction  of  the  Credit  Reference  Bureau  is  expected  to  provide  key 
information to lenders on borrower’s credit history.  
Access to credit has been further enhanced through the Country’s membership in 
international multilateral financial institutions such as the African Development Bank, 
the  African  Export-Import  Bank,  PTA  Bank  and 
International  Finance 
Corporation (IFC). Access to other institutions like the European Investment Bank is 
also possible.  
Development of the capital markets has also made it possible for corporates to 
raise long term finance. Stock markets enable firms to acquire much needed capital 
at relatively lower cost, hence facilitating capital allocation, investment and growth.  
Other  innovative  financial  products  introduced  on  the  international  capital 
markets  include  diaspora  bonds  and  carbon  credit  financial  instruments.  There  is 
need  for  Zambian  businesses  to  take  advantage  and  understand  these  financial 
products in order to access funding from multilateral institutions.  
the 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
Competition in the Zambian financial sector 
5.0 
The  BoZ  recognises  that  competition  is  an  essential  element  in  the  effective  and  efficient 
operation  of  a  market  economy.  In  this  regard,  the  licensing  regime  encourages  entry  of 
players that will foster integrity, innovation and competition while deepening and widening the 
financial sector.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The presence of reputable financial intermediaries is expected to increase competition, which 
in  turn  would  lead  to  an  improvement  in  the  quality  of  domestic  financial  services  and 
allocative efficiency, reflected by lower operating costs and narrower margins. The increased 
efficiency  of  financial  intermediation  would  eventually  be  translated  into  higher  returns  for 
domestic  savings  and  greater  efficiency  in  the  pricing  of  credit  and  other  risks  and  in  the 
allocation of credit.  
However, despite the growth in number of financial institutions in Zambia, this development 
has  not  had  a  very  significant  impact  on  promoting  competition,  as  most  of  the  banks  are 
small in terms of size. A few banks continue to enjoy an oligopolistic position and this in a 
way explains why some inefficiency remains in the provision of services.  
The  banking  sector  has  remained  fragmented,  with  insufficient  and  distorted  competition, 
thereby  rendering  it  rigid  in  its  activities.  Competition  is  not  strong  enough  to  lead  to  a 
convergence of prices, which would ensure that banks have more or less the same prices for 
their services and products, affordable to most people. This could also partially explain why 
finance service providers are not revising their interest rates and charges in tandem with the 
movements in key macroeconomic indicators such as inflation.  
Whereas  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  conscious  to  the  fact  that  the  financial  institutions  are  in 
business  and  are  therefore  expected  to  make  profits,  there  is  a  need  to  make  financial 
services  more  affordable  in  order  to  provide  an  impetus  to  promote  economic  growth  and 
reduce  poverty  levels  in  the  country.  Low  interest  rates  reduce  the cost  of  doing business 
and encourage investments in key sectors of the economy.  
Legislative provisions on interest rates and the cost of borrowing 
6.0 
The  Banking  and  Financial  Services  Act  (BFSA)  does  not  have  any  provision  for  the 
regulation of interest rates that financial service providers can charge. This is in line with the 
principles of liberalisation and a market driven economy.  
However,  in  accordance  with  the  Banking  and  Financial  Services  (Cost  of  Borrowing) 
Regulations of 1995, all credit providers are mandated to disclose their costs of borrowing in 
full before issuing a loan. Credit providers are required to disclose the annual interest rate 
charged on a loan.  
Although,  interest  rates  on  loans  and  charges  on  services  and  products  may  vary 
significantly  from  one  institution  to  another,  it  is  incumbent  upon  all  financial  services 
providers to provide clear information and full disclosure on the costs and options available. It 
is also important for institutions to sensitise customers on what products may best suit their 
incomes and to educate them to borrow prudently. In this way, transparency is enhanced and 
consumers would have a clear picture of precisely how much they need to borrow relative to 
their  income  levels.  This  would  result  in  responsible  lending  and  a  more  competitive  and 
transparent financial industry.  
However,  financial  education  needs  in  Zambia  are  many  and  varied.  They  stem  from 
inadequate understanding, by a good proportion of the population, of basic financial terms 
and concepts on the one hand, and a lack of knowledge of financial products and services 
that  are  increasingly  available,  on  the  other.  To  this  end  the  Bank  of  Zambia  through  the 
FSDP  in  collaboration  with  stakeholders  has  developed  a  national  financial  education 
strategy  for  Zambia.  The  proposed  national  strategy  for  Zambia  clearly  identifies  all  the 
possible financial education delivery channels and responsible institutions in order to avoid 
duplication and waste of efforts during the implementation stage of the strategy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Measures to reduce interest rates 
7.0 
Although interest rates have trended downwards in the recent past with commercial banks 
average  lending  rate  at  26.2%  in  March  2011  from  54.5%  in  2001,  the  reduction  is  not  in 
tandem with the fall in inflation and yield rates on government securities. The Government 
and  the  Bank  of  Zambia  continue  to  take  measures  to  provide  macroeconomic  stability 
necessary for the reduction of interest rates in Zambia. Some of the measures undertaken so 
far include the following:  
(i) 
Inflation: the other challenge with regard to lowering lending rates is to attain and 
sustain low (preferably single digit) annual inflation. An upward trend in inflation is 
undesirable,  as  it  raises  inflationary  expectations  causing  banks  to  increase  their 
lending  rates.  Prior  to  2006  inflation  in  Zambia  was  persistently  high  and  above 
single digit. However, from 2006 inflation has been contained in single digit except 
from the 2008 when the financial crisis resulted in the increase of inflation to 16.6%. 
Inflation was recorded at 7.9% in December 2010 from 30.1% in January 2001. This 
has  resulted  in  a  fall  in  interest  rates  with  banks  Average  Lending  Rate  coming 
down to 26.2% in March 2011 from 54.5% in December 2001.  
Domestic  financing:  to  contribute  to  efforts  aimed  at  lowering  lending  interest 
rates, the Government has adopted prudent fiscal policies with domestic borrowing 
significantly  reducing  over  the  recent  years.  The  reduction  of  borrowing  by  the 
Government reduces the crowding out effect and more resources are available to 
lend to the private sector. This has also contributed to the lowering of yield rates on 
Government  securities  which  is  the  opportunity  cost  for  loanable  funds.  The 
composite yield rate for Treasury bills was 8.2% at end-December 2010, down from 
49.1% recorded at the end of 2001. The fall in yield rates on government securities 
reflected reduced inflationary expectations and improved fiscal management.  
Reduction of Statutory Reserve Ratios: banks argue that statutory reserve ratio is 
a critical in determining interest rates as a high ratio tend to raise the operating cost 
for  banks  by  locking  up  loanable  funds  in  a  non-interest  earning  asset.  The 
opportunity  cost  of  these  funds  is  therefore  included  in  the  cost  of  conducting 
banking  business.  On  1st  October  2007,  Bank  of  Zambia  reduced  the  statutory 
reserve ratios on both Kwacha and foreign currency deposits from 14.0% to 8.0%. 
This  followed  the  earlier  reduction  in  October  2003  from  17.5%.  The  reduction  in 
statutory reserve ratios entails a release of more liquidity into the financial system 
which  is  expected  to  provide  more  loanable  funds  to  banks  and  contribute  to 
lowering interest rates.  
Establishment  of  Credit  Reference  Bureau:  the  first  and  only  credit  reference 
bureau  (CRB)  in  Zambia,  Credit  Reference  Bureau  Africa  Limited  (CRBAL)  was 
licensed  in  2006  and  commenced  operations  in  2008.  The  CRB  is  expected  to 
enhance  positive  credit  behaviour  by  providing  lenders  with  information  on 
borrowers’  payment  histories.  The  CRB  provides  an  essential  service  that  aids 
lenders  to  be  able  to  evaluate  and  price  loans  better.  Good  borrowers  with  a 
perceived low risk premium should have access relatively cheaper credit while bad 
borrowers can be denied credit thus reducing default rates and ultimately the price 
of credit.  
Sovereign Credit Rating: Fitch Rating and Standard and Poors both assigned the 
country  with  a  B+  Sovereign  Credit  Rating.  The  rating  is  expected  to  provide  an 
opportunity for both the Government and the private sector to access cheaper funds 
on the international financial markets.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
8.0 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  acknowledges  that  there  has  been  remarkable  development  in  the 
financial  sector  over  the  past  years,  as  evidenced  by  the  various  new  products  and 
innovations. However, despite the growth in products and services being offered, customers 
are still faced with high costs of borrowing. The challenge for the financial sector therefore is 
to improve on their operations by engaging in innovative activities that will reduce their cost 
of operations and pass on the efficiencies to borrowers.  
From the foregoing, it is clear that the challenges of reduction of interest rates to levels that 
would  facilitate  economic  development  through  an  efficient  savings  mobilisation  and  credit 
allocation system are numerous. However, they are not insurmountable. The solutions are in 
the hands of all stakeholders in the financial sector.  
The Government and the Bank of Zambia have implemented initiatives aimed at lowering the 
cost  of  borrowing,  specifically,  inflation  has  been  reduced,  yield  rates  on  Government 
securities are low due to reduced rate of Government borrowing and falling inflation rates, 
statutory reserve ratios have been reduced to low levels and a credit reference bureau is in 
place to deal with perceived high default risks. International access to funding has also been 
improved.  
The Bank of Zambia continues to engage commercial banks to come up with measures that 
will lower the cost of credit. Whereas blue chip corporate customers are getting favourable 
rates, usually below lending base rates, other categories of borrowers still face high lending 
rates. Accordingly commercial banks prudential returns are being revised to show different 
rates to various categories of borrowers.  
Support to the productive sectors by the financial system is critical to spur the economy to 
further  growth  and  development.  In  this  regard,  banks  are  challenged  to  continue  playing 
their part by reducing lending rates to affordable levels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
