Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB’s response to the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  WDR 
Europa-Forum, Berlin, 26 May 2011. 
 Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
ich freue mich sehr, heute hier zu sein. Vielen herzlichen Dank für die Einladung.  
Ich freue mich besonders, zu einem so wichtigen Thema – der europäischen Antwort auf die 
Wirtschafts- und Finanzkrise – zu sprechen. 
* * * 
Wie Sie wissen, ist das primäre Mandat der EZB, für Preisstabilität im Eurogebiet zu sorgen. 
So  ist  es  von  den  Europäischen  Staats-  und  Regierungschefs  in  den  Verträgen  zur 
Europäischen Union 1992 festgeschrieben worden. Und dementsprechend strebt der EZB-
Rat eine mittelfristige Inflationsrate von unter, aber nahe bei 2% an. 
Die  EZB  ist  diesem  Mandat  in  den  vergangenen  zwölf  Jahren  gerecht  geworden.  Die 
jährliche Teuerungsrate betrug über diesen Zeitraum im Eurogebiet 1.97%. In Deutschland 
lag sie mit 1.5% seit 1999 sogar noch deutlich darunter. Für Deutschland ist dies das beste 
Ergebnis über einen vergleichbaren Zeitraum seit 50 Jahren mit der D-Mark. „Stark wie die 
Mark” sollte der Euro sein – und stark wie die Mark ist er geworden.  
It is important to understand the significance of this achievement. Over the past 12 years, the 
ECB has faced many challenges in the pursuit of our goal of price stability. They include the 
bursting  of  the  internet  bubble,  the  aftermath  of  11  September  2001,  sharp  volatility  in 
commodity prices and of course the worst financial crisis since World War II.  
Today  I  would  like  to  focus  specifically  on  our  response  to  the  crisis  –  and  on  the 
programmes of reform of financial regulation and economic governance on which the euro 
area and the European Union as a whole are engaged.  
While  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  scale  of  the  challenge  that  the  crisis  has  posed  for  all 
advanced economies, including the US and Japan, there is also no doubt that we have taken 
significant measures in responding to that challenge. But much more needs to be done. 
Financial and economic reform prompted by the crisis 
I. 
Let me begin with financial regulation. The crisis calls for a comprehensive agenda of reform 
of virtually every aspect of the global financial system. We must control the forces that led 
the  system  to  become  absorbed  with  itself  and  ensure  instead  that  it  serves  the  real 
economy.  And  we  must  be  assured  that  the  financial  system  provides  a  sustainable 
contribution to economic growth.  
At this point, we have achieved a blueprint of more stringent bank regulations, which includes 
more  loss-absorbing  capital,  better  risk  coverage  and  limitations  on  undue  leverage. 
Countercyclical capital buffers are intended to lower pro-cyclicality.  
The oversight of financial institutions, financial markets and market infrastructure are being 
strengthened, and the organisational structure of financial supervision is being overhauled.  
But  much  remains  to  be  done.  The  most  important  aspect  is  implementation  of  these 
reforms.  Moreover,  the  issue  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  still  requires 
decisions,  and  oversight  of  financial  markets  must  be  strengthened.  We  cannot  afford  the 
consequences  of  limited  transparency  and  excessive  influence  of  dominant  players  and 
oligopolistic market structures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The new European System of Financial Supervision is an important step forward. The three 
new European Authorities – for banking, for insurance and occupational pensions, and for 
securities and markets – are strengthening our focus on interlinkages and spillovers within 
the EU’s financial system. And the European Systemic Risk Board is developing the tools it 
needs to issue warnings and make recommendations for action on potential future sources of 
systemic risk. 
Inattention to financial risk was the prime cause of the crisis. Inattention to macroeconomic 
risk – and the many ways in which such risk interacts with fragile fiscal structures – prepared 
the ground for the budgetary troubles that some euro area countries are facing today. This 
brings me to reform of economic governance. 
The  EU  is  about  to  introduce  surveillance  focused  on  imbalances  and  divergences  in 
competitiveness across the euro area. This is long overdue. Since 2005 within the Eurogroup 
and  –  shortly  thereafter  –  publicly,  the  ECB  has  warned  that  such  divergences  create 
considerable risks and must be corrected.  
If  fully  implemented,  macroeconomic  surveillance  will  make  a  strong  contribution  to  the 
smooth  functioning  of  EMU.  It  will  compel  Member  States  to  take  measures  to  counter 
emerging macroeconomic imbalances at an early stage, before they become a drag on their 
macroeconomic prospects and potentially escalate to systemic proportions.  
Governments had agreed on the Stability and Growth Pact to prevent a debt crisis. But in 
2005  the  Member  States  agreed  on  a  reform  of  the  Pact.  At  the  request  of  Germany  and 
France, more discretion and flexibility was added to the surveillance procedures. This turned 
out to be to the detriment of the Pact. It weakened the Pact considerably. 
At that time, the ECB expressed serious concerns about the negative effect of these reforms 
on the functioning of EMU.  
It is important that Member States have acknowledged this mistake and intend to strengthen 
the Pact again. The new focus on fiscal sustainability and reducing government debt levels, 
backed by more effective sanctions, certainly goes in the right direction. 
The euro is unique among international currencies. It is the only major currency that is issued 
not by a single sovereign state but by a union of states. Fiscal policies remain largely the 
competence  of  national  governments  and  reflect  national  political  preferences.  Monetary 
policy is inherently indivisible in a monetary union, and in the euro area it is thus conducted 
at the European level. 
The current crisis is not a crisis of the euro. Neither is it a crisis of monetary union. Rather, it 
is  a  crisis  of  the  economic  policies  in  some  Member  States  and  a  crisis  of  mutual 
surveillance.  If  we  recall  that  EMU  stands  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  it  is  not  the 
monetary pillar of EMU that is under scrutiny at present, but the economic pillar. Speaking in 
terms of letters, the “E” and not the “M” in EMU is giving cause for concern.  
Our economic governance framework has not been sufficient to ensure sound policies are 
conducted  in  all  Member  States.  The  Treaty  clearly  specifies  that  Member  States  have 
committed to economic policies geared to contributing to the objectives of the Union, one of 
which is a stable single currency. They have yet to live up to this commitment fully. 
The Governing Council of the ECB is concerned that the reforms to economic governance 
currently  under  discussion  are  a  step  in  the  right  direction  but  do  not  go  far  enough  to 
address the structural weaknesses of fiscal and broader macroeconomic governance in the 
euro area. At the very least, we require more automaticity in the sanctioning mechanisms. 
Euro area countries that are breaching our common rules should be called to account, with 
as little room for discretion and flexibility as possible. This implies less room for halting or 
suspending procedures and stricter deadlines. 
Behind this we argue in favour of stronger sanctions to encourage compliance. This would 
require, on the one hand, a wider range of financial and non-financial measures, and on the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
other hand, less discretion to reduce or suspend them. Such a strengthening would improve 
effectiveness and set the right incentives.  
At the same time, more ambitious policy requirements would better match the current reality 
of the euro area. This means having ambitious benchmarks when establishing an excessive 
deficit and when setting the adjustment path towards a “safe” budgetary position. It is very 
important  for  macroeconomic  surveillance  to  have  a  clear  focus  on  the  countries  with  the 
greatest vulnerabilities.  
Anchoring  these  new  rules  at  the  national  level  would  forcefully  anchor  them  in  national 
legislation. Binding commitments by Member States to implement strong national budgetary 
frameworks  are  key  to  ensuring  national  ownership.  Finally,  further  improvements  in  the 
production of fiscal statistics are in our view warranted. 
These are all areas in which the ECB is presenting arguments. In the end, these matters are 
decided by the Council and the Parliament, and they have therefore the key responsibility in 
shaping the new framework. 
The ECB’s response to the crisis 
II. 
Let me now turn to my final topic – the “M” in EMU, which is the direct responsibility of the 
ECB.  During  the  crisis,  along  with  central  banks  around  the  world,  the  ECB  has  had  to 
operate in uncharted waters.  
The ECB demonstrated its alertness from the very first day. When the problems in financial 
markets first became apparent on 9 August 2007, we were the first central bank to respond, 
acting within hours. 
While  the  crisis  required  fast  and  unprecedented  action  we  have  never  lost  sight  of  our 
primary objective: to maintain price stability over the medium term for the 331 million citizens 
of the euro area. All – and I emphasise all – our monetary policy decisions during the past 
twelve and a half years have aimed at delivering on that commitment. 
As  you  know,  in  normal  times  central  banks  mainly  influence  the  economy  and  inflation 
through the setting of short-term interest rates.  
In practice, identifying risks to price stability at an early stage is far from trivial. To accomplish 
this task the ECB relies on a robust monetary policy strategy that draws on several sources 
of  information.  Economic  analysis  allows  us  to  synthesise  information  on  short-term 
inflationary pressures from a multitude of economic indicators. Monetary analysis allows us 
to  cross-check  this  information  with  information  on  medium-term  inflationary  pressures 
extracted  from  monetary  and  financial  indicators.  It  is  on  this  basis  that  we  decide  on  the 
appropriate monetary policy stance and adjust interest rates accordingly.  
Our positive track record has endorsed our approach. Over the past twelve and a half years 
we have built a strong reputation for setting interest rates as appropriate to maintain price 
stability.  
Our decisions in the face of political pressure have demonstrated our fierce independence. 
We refused to decrease rates at the beginning of 2004 when Germany, France and Italy, in 
particular, asked us to do so. We did not hesitate to raise interest rates in December 2005. At 
that point, ten euro area governments out of 12 and many international observers pressured 
us to keep rates on hold.  
The IMF, for example, was emphasising the risks that tightening – after a prolonged period of 
policy  accommodation  –  could  pose  for  the  recovery.  We  tightened  policy  despite  these 
warnings, and we were vindicated – by the IMF’s own admission.  
We also did not hesitate to raise interest rates in July 2008. Then, our analysis indicated that 
past oil price increases threatened to create second-round effects on wages and prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
After  the  intensification  of  the  crisis  in  mid-September  2008,  as  inflationary  pressures 
receded, in full consistency with our mandate, we decided to reduce our policy interest rate 
rapidly between October 2008 and May 2009, from 4.25% to 1%.  
We reduced the interest rate to a level and at a pace that has not been experienced in the 
countries of the euro area at any time in recent history.  
With the benefit of hindsight, the interest rate decisions we took during the crisis have proved 
successful. Over the past four years we have maintained a very solid anchoring of inflation 
expectations. Our determination to preserve price stability in the medium term has allowed 
us to avoid the materialisation of the risk of inflation as well as of the risk of deflation.  
In most recent months, with the overall recovery more firmly established, we have witnessed 
the  emergence  of  upside  risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  stability.  Once  more, 
strong  increases  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  have  had  a  strong  impact  on  headline 
inflation. Once more, we have to avoid commodity price increases becoming entrenched in 
longer-term  inflation  expectations,  which  could  have  second-round  effects  on  wages  and 
prices.  
It  is  against  this  background  that  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  raise  interest  rates  in 
April.  And  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  this  decision  was  unanimous.  The  Governing 
Council is united by a common purpose.  
We are carefully monitoring the situation and we stand ready to do whatever is necessary to 
fulfil our mandate – just as we have done over the past twelve and a half years. 
This logic applies not only to our policy interest rate but also to the other measures we have 
adopted  in  response  to  the  crisis.  When  the  crisis  hit,  dysfunctional  financial  markets 
threatened  our  ability  to  steer  the  outlook  for  price  stability  with  our  standard  interest  rate 
instrument. In response, we adopted a number of non-standard measures to ensure that our 
interest rate decisions were transmitted to the broader economy, despite the problems in the 
financial sector and financial markets. In particular, the aim has been to enable banks – at 
any level of the monetary policy interest rate – to continue lending to household and firms.  
Let  me  emphasise  that  our  non-standard  measures  do  not  in  any  way  impinge  on  our 
capacity to tighten our monetary policy stance in response to inflationary pressures.  
There is a clear separation principle between our non-standard measures and our interest 
rate  policy.  Interest  rate  policy  depends  on  the  outlook  for  price  stability.  The  use  of  non-
standard measures depends on the functioning of the monetary policy transmission and must 
be  commensurate  with  the  level  of  malfunctioning  or  disruption  of  money  and  financial 
markets and segments of markets.  
This  separation  principle  is  strictly  applied.  To  give  you  a  recent  example,  the  Governing 
Council decided in March and April both that it was now time to increase interest rates and, 
at the same time, that it was appropriate to maintain in the second quarter the full allotment 
at fixed price refinancing on a 3 month duration. 
Conclusion 
III. 
Damit komme ich zum Schluss. Die Krise hat den Euroraum vor große Herausforderungen 
gestellt.  Aber  wir  haben  diese  Herausforderungen  angenommen.  Der  Euro  hat  sich  als 
Stabilitätsanker in stürmischer See erwiesen. Davon haben alle – ich betone, alle – Länder 
des Euroraums profitiert. 
Bei alledem sollten wir nicht übersehen, dass der Euroraum als Ganzes in den vergangenen 
zwölf Jahren erhebliche Fortschritte gemacht hat. Die wirtschaftliche Dynamik im Euroraum 
hat derjenigen in den Vereinigten Staaten in nichts nachgestanden. In beiden Regionen ist 
das  Pro-Kopf-Einkommen  im  Jahresdurchschnitt  um  etwa  1%  gestiegen.  Dabei  hat  der 
Euroraum deutlich mehr Beschäftigung geschaffen als die Vereinigten Staaten. Im Euroraum 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
als Ganzes ist die Beschäftigung in den vergangenen zwölf Jahren um mehr als 14 Millionen 
gestiegen. In den Vereinigten Staaten betrug der Anstieg 8 Millionen. Und all das haben wir 
erreicht  vor  dem  Hintergrund  von  Inflationserwartungen  im  Eurogebiet,  die  auf  einem 
niedrigen Niveau verankert sind. Dies ist eine mehr als beachtliche Bilanz. 
Ich kann Ihnen versichern, dass die Europäische Zentralbank auch in Zukunft ihren Teil zum 
reibungslosen Funktionieren der Wirtschafts- und Währungsunion beitragen wird: wir werden 
ohne Wenn und Aber die Preisstabilität sichern.  
Ich danke Ihnen für Ihre Aufmerksamkeit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
