Duvvuri Subbarao: Policy discipline and spillovers in an inter-connected 
global economy 
Comments  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  High-
Level Conference on the International Monetary System, Zurich, 10 May 2011. 
 1. 
The interconnected world is not new. We have been living in it for some time. For 
half a century, exports, international capital flows, and foreign direct investment have been 
growing much faster than GDP, binding economies ever more tightly together. In many ways, 
this process has been a tremendous force for good. My own country, India, is testament to 
that. Integration with the world contributed to growth, lifting hundreds of millions of people out 
of  poverty.  But  in  the  past  few  years,  we  have  seen  that  these  linkages  can  also  have 
tremendous  costs:  developments  in  other  countries,  over  which  we  have  no  control,  can 
without warning plunge countries into difficulty or even crisis. 
2. 
So, we need to find ways to maximize the benefits of globalization while minimizing 
its costs. To do this, there are two basic imperatives. First, we need to better understand the 
ways in which we are linked together. And then, we need to translate this understanding into 
coordinated policy action. That is, we need to consider ways in which countries can impose 
policy  discipline  on  one  another’s  behaviour,  to  minimize  the  risks  that  their  policies  could 
pose  for  others.  I  would  like  to  focus  my  brief  remarks  today  on  these  two  tasks: 
understanding the nature of linkages and doing something about them. 
Understanding linkages 
3. 
We  cannot  begin  to  impose  policy  discipline  on  countries  until  we  improve  our 
understanding  of  the  linkages  amongst  economies.  Recent  experience  shows  that  our 
understanding  of  the  nature  of  these  linkages  is  seriously  deficient.  In  fact,  standard 
econometric models still suggest that shocks in one country have very small effects on other 
countries.  They  do  that  because  they  assume  that  trade  is  the  primary  channel  for 
transmitting these shocks across countries, and trade moves in line with GDP. Both these 
assumption are flawed. As we all know, the 2008 crisis originated in the housing sector which 
is a quintessentially non-traded good. 
4. 
In  addition,  we  saw  during  the  crisis  that  the  financial  channel  is  tremendously 
important,  in  ways  that  are  still  poorly  understood.  For  example,  after  Lehman  collapsed, 
interbank rates in India soared, by much more than in many other emerging markets, even 
though India’s banking system is relatively closed. 
5. 
Finally, there is another channel, little analysed and even less understood, arising 
from  the  global  nature  of  modern  industries.  For  example,  in  2001  the  collapse  of  the  IT 
industry was a world-wide phenomenon, one that was felt even in India, with a magnitude 
that  would  never  have  been  predicted  by  trade  or  financial  equations.  Right  now,  we  are 
worrying about the implications of Japan’s difficulties for global supply chains. But we have 
no framework for analyzing these effects. So, further research into linkages is needed, and 
the IMF is well-placed to lead such an effort. 
Dealing with spillovers 
Once  we  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  way  in  which  economies  are  linked 
6. 
together,  we  can  begin  to  devise  better  ways  of  dealing  with  them.  But  this  will  also  be  a 
difficult task. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Consider first the relatively straightforward case where bad policies in one country 
7. 
can have negative consequences for the rest of the world. The most obvious example is poor 
financial regulation, which was one of the root causes of the 2008 global crisis. In principle, it 
should be easy to deal with this problem since bad policies are harmful for all. Yet as we are 
seeing,  there  are  immense  difficulties  in  agreeing  what  good  financial  regulation  entails. 
Perhaps this is not surprising. After all, it was not too long ago that the systems in advanced 
countries were considered “best practices”, which Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) were 
advised to emulate. So, we now need some fundamental research into what good regulation 
really entails, and this research would do well to consider our total experience – not just that 
of advanced economies but also of EMEs. 
8. 
Consider  now  a  more  complex  case,  where  there  are  both  positive  and  negative 
spillovers to analyse. A prominent example is the second round of US quantitative easing, 
QE2. From the perspective of EMEs, QE2 may have had significant negative externalities. 
After QE2 was announced in August 2010, the prospect of easy liquidity in the US seemed to 
prompt a large increase in capital flows to EMEs, threatening domestic price and financial 
stability.  It  also  seemed  to  contribute  to  rising  global  commodity  prices,  intensifying 
inflationary  pressures.  This  combination  has  put  some  EMEs  in  a  policy  bind,  as  rising 
inflation  necessitates  tighter  monetary  policy,  but  higher  interest  rates  will  only  intensify 
volatile  capital  inflows,  potentially  putting  more  pressure  on  exchange  rates  and  domestic 
stability. In India’s case, the concerns on this account currently are less acute since capital 
inflows are needed to finance our current account deficit. Yet even for us, the composition of 
the inflows remains an issue. About three-quarters of the current account deficit since 2009 
has been financed by volatile capital inflows. 
9. 
At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  QE2  has  also  had  positive 
externalities. It seems to have improved confidence in the US economy, especially by putting 
an end to deflationary fears. So, to the extent that it has contributed to a stronger and more 
durable recovery in the US, it has also benefitted EMEs, including India. 
10. 
This case illustrates that before one imposes discipline on spillovers, it will be critical 
to assess their impact. First, one would need to identify the various external effects, quantify 
them,  and  find  some  way  of  netting  them,  to  see  whether  the  overall  impact  has  been 
positive or negative. Then, one would need to balance these external considerations against 
the  purely  domestic  benefits.  Merely  to  state  these  issues  is  sufficient  to  illustrate  the 
magnitude of the challenge before us. 
11. 
Finally, consider the case where one country’s policy has a positive impact on the 
domestic  economy,  but  a  negative  one  on  the  rest  of  the  world.  A  well-known  example  is 
when  a  country  maintains  an  undervalued  exchange  rate.  In  India’s  case,  the  rupee’s 
exchange rate has been virtually flexible in the past two years, as we have not intervened in 
the  foreign  exchange  market.  The  small  increase  in  reserves  reflects  various  accruals, 
interest earnings and valuation changes. This policy has served the economy well, as it has 
allowed the exchange rate to serve as a buffer, depreciating to help the economy  when it 
was  weak  and  appreciating  to  reduce  excess  demand  when  it  was  strong.  The  policy  has 
also  minimized  the  danger  that  foreign  inflows  would  be  attracted  by  “one-way  bets”  on 
appreciation, or that domestic firms would borrow excessively from abroad without hedging 
their  exposure.  But  at  the  same  time,  India’s  policy  means  that  it  is  subject  to  negative 
externalities  from  countries  that  maintain  undervalued  exchange  rates,  undermining  our 
competitiveness in these markets and our efforts to contain the current account deficit. 
12. 
The  underlying  question  is  about  when  and  in  what  circumstances  countries  can 
intervene in the forex market to manage the exchange rate. In particular, is it appropriate to 
maintain  an  undervalued  exchange  rate  for  purely  trade  advantage?  But  equally,  we 
recognize  that  there  will  be  numerous  difficulties.  How  can  undervaluation  be  proved  in  a 
rigorous way? And where would one draw the line between an acceptable undervaluation, 
and a more serious one? The challenge is even more complex if the problem is defined in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
terms of current account surpluses, because there can be surpluses for good reasons (such 
as  when  the  population  is  aging,  leading  the  country  to  lend  to  younger,  more  dynamic 
countries that need to borrow) or bad ones, where the surpluses arise because of distortions. 
Establishing a code of discipline 
13. 
step would be to develop a consensus on a code of discipline. As one IEO study noted :  
But let’s say that we establish a case for doing something about a spillover. The first 
It  is  now  recognized  that  a  world  economy  dominated  by  integrated  markets,  and 
with  countries  at  very  different  levels  of  economic  and  institutional  development, 
requires a system of global, yet non-binding, rules of conduct (“soft law”) that are 
internationally  promulgated  and  nationally  implemented….IMF  surveillance  has 
been seen as the instrument to disseminate the new sets of rules across the Fund’s 
near-universal  membership,  and  to  facilitate  their  implementation  by  member 
countries.1  
14. 
Still,  developing  consensus  on  a  code  of  discipline  will  be  challenging.  I  have 
already alluded to the difficulties in reaching international agreement just in the specific field 
of  financial  regulation.  It  will  be  even  more  difficult  to  reach  a  consensus  on  broader 
economic  policy.  Indeed,  the  history  of  the  past  few  decades  is  an  object  lesson  in  how 
problematic  such  a  process  could  be.  The  first  major  code  that  emerging  countries  were 
expected  to  follow  was  the  Washington  Consensus  of  the  1990s.  But  not  all  countries 
benefitted  sufficiently  from  these  policies  and  at  some  point,  there  was  a  backlash.  The 
second wave of consensus came during the 2000s in the form of a plethora of international 
standards and codes. There was also a consensus that fiscal policy should aim at low levels 
of  public  debt,  that  monetary  policy  should  target  inflation,  and  that  regulation  should  be 
separated  from  monetary  policy,  and  used  to  preserve  financial  stability.  The  crisis  has 
forced a rethinking on all of these. But a new consensus to replace the old one has not yet 
emerged, as the IMF conference held in March 2011 amply demonstrated. 
Imposing discipline 
15. 
But assume we overcome this hurdle and reach a consensus on “the rules of the 
game”,  at  least  in  a  particular  area  such  as,  say,  exchange  rate  policy.  How  could  the 
international community impose discipline on a country? Trying to do so through international 
agreements  could  confront  two  major  challenges.  First,  countries  could  be  reluctant  to 
commit, because they are unsure how the commitments would affect the domestic economy. 
Second, the effectiveness of such commitments could be diluted if there is no true “buy in” by 
countries.  The  experience  at  the  IMF  with  the  2007  Surveillance  Decision,  which  proved 
impossible to implement is a cautionary tale. So, too, is the experience of the WTO, where 
countries  have  often  evaded  the  spirit  of  trade  commitments  by  resorting  to  protectionist 
measures  on  which  no  commitments  were  given,  such  as  undervalued  exchange  rates, 
taxation  and  subsidies,  labour  laws,  investment  norms,  intellectual  property  rights  and 
environment laws. 
Conclusion 
16. 
out a road map. 
So, how do we move forward? The way ahead is far from clear. But let me sketch 
                                                 
1  
IEO Background Paper BP/08/10 “IMF Surveillance: A Case Study on IMF Governance”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  first  step,  as  I  mentioned,  is  to  develop  a  framework  for  understanding  the 
17. 
linkages amongst economies. This is currently being done through the IMF spillover reports, 
a  most  welcome  initiative.  But  let  me  put  the  challenge  squarely.  We  need  to  develop  a 
proper framework for analyzing these linkages. And we cannot do this by using the existing 
trade  equations,  and  attributing  all  the  other  spillovers  to  exogenous  financial  shocks.  We 
need  a  deeper,  truer,  understanding  of  the  channels  and  mechanisms  that  link  our 
economies  together.  So,  the  IMF  has  an  important  opportunity  to  contribute  to  this 
understanding through its own research. 
18. 
Second, we need to move toward a new consensus on economic policies, that is to 
say  new  norms  against  which  country  behaviour  can  be  assessed.  We  have  made 
considerable progress – though still not enough – on financial regulation. But we have only 
just started developing a new framework for macroeconomic policy, and defining the proper 
relationship  between  macro,  growth,  and  financial  policies.  Again,  the  Fund  could  make  a 
valuable contribution in this area, as well, both by advancing our theoretical understandings 
and  by  synthesizing  the  policy  lessons  learned  by  its  member  countries.  As  I  mentioned, 
there is much for the world to learn by studying the experiences of the EMEs, as well as the 
most advanced countries. 
19. 
Third, because our understanding of spillovers and best practices remains limited, it 
is far too early to think of reaching new formal international agreements on policy behaviour. 
Instead, countries will prefer to proceed through more exchange of information, peer review 
processes and ad hoc international agreements depending on the situation prevailing at any 
point of time. In other words, we will have to proceed by encouraging voluntary compliance 
by  members,  while  also  using  peer  group/multilateral  spillover  assessments  as  a  soft 
pressure.  The  template  for  such  an  approach  is  the  G-20  MAP  process.  The  forthcoming 
reports on country imbalances, and how they might affect the other G-20 members, will give 
us an opportunity to exert peer pressure on countries whose policies may lead to dangerous 
spillovers. 
20. 
Finally,  we  will  need  to  come  up  with  enforcement  mechanisms  on  countries  that 
create negative externalities for the global economy despite multilateral or peer assessment 
cautioning them about the spillover costs their policies generate for other economies. Since 
we are far away from a situation where sanctions could be employed, we will need to use 
incentives.  For  example,  perhaps  policy  agreements  could  be  reached  whereby  some 
countries abandon policies that are creating negative spillovers in return for other countries 
taking  policy  action  with  positive  external  spillovers  for  them.  Designing  such  deals  and 
getting countries to agree to them, however, will remain a major challenge. 
21. 
In sum, before we can start imposing policy discipline, we will need to put in place 
the  needed  building  blocks.  We  need  to  identify  linkages,  assess  spillovers,  and  establish 
norms of behaviour. Then, once these norms are established, we can proceed to a code of 
discipline, with rewards and eventually perhaps even sanctions. It is a long road ahead. But 
the journey is not only worthwhile; in our interdependent world, it is necessary. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Annex 
In the G-20 debate on spillovers, EME’s have emphasized that: 
(a) 
even  among  G-20  countries,  policy  shapers  are  different  from  policy  takers,  and 
most EMEs fall in the latter category (the policies of EMEs taken together, though, 
could have major global ramifications unlike the actions of a single EME),  
the available policy space may vary across countries and over time (i.e. countries 
with managed capital account and exchange rate could enjoy greater policy space 
than countries with open capital account and flexible exchange rate), 
spillover  management  that  may  involve  some  sacrifice  of  domestic  policy  goals 
could  be  feasible  only  when  every  country  pursues  spillover-sensitive  national 
policies, and the global governance structure would need to ensure that, using a mix 
of both persuasion and multilateral enforcement, and most importantly 
global safety nets should be strong enough with easier access norms to encourage 
countries to voluntarily adopt the multilateral norms. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
