Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Il  Sole 
24 Ore, conducted by Mr Beda Romano on 31 August 2011, and published on 2 September 
2011. 
 Well-informed politicians are not hesitating to talk about a possible break-up 
1. 
A compatriot of yours, Jacques Delors, the former president of the European 
Commission, has said in recent days that the euro area is “on the brink of the abyss”. 
It’s a very pessimistic view, undoubtedly coloured by a sense of disappointment. Do 
you share it? 
I  have  great  admiration  for  Jacques  Delors.  But  let  me  sum  up  some  of  my  present 
observations. First, we have a credible single currency which over the last 12 years has kept 
its  value  in  terms  of  price  stability  in  a  remarkable  way  in  comparison  with  the  previous 
national currencies in the last 50 years. The solidity of the currency itself is not disputed and 
our  fellow  citizens  all  over  Europe  are  calling  on  us  to  continue  preserving  price  stability. 
Second, the euro area, taken as a whole, is in a better position from a fiscal standpoint than 
other economies. In 2011, the public finance deficit of the euro area should be around 4.5% 
of GDP, while in the United States or Japan it will be about 10% of GDP. But we had a very 
serious  weakness  in  terms  of  economic  and  fiscal  governance  inside  the  euro  area  which 
has been revealed by the global crisis. 
2. 
of the euro area. The weaknesses cannot be denied. 
The  weaknesses  have  to  be  corrected.  Loose  fiscal  policies  and  insufficient  attention  to 
competitive indicators have not been surveyed rigorously and corrected in time. Individually 
and collectively the European countries have to correct the present situation. Individually by 
adjusting  their  domestic  policies  –  as  all  the  advanced  economies,  including  the  US  and 
Japan  are  called  on  to  do  –  and  collectively  by  considerably  reinforcing  their  mutual 
surveillance and their governance.  
3. 
On the subject of governance, there’s a discussion in various quarters about 
the  possibility  of  creating  European  bonds.  Former  Italian  Prime  Minister  Romano 
Prodi  has  proposed  the  creation  of  a  fund  guaranteed  by  the  gold  reserves  of 
countries  that  would  issue  bonds  to  buy  back  national  debt  and  make  new 
investments. 
At this stage, we have the EFSF bonds, which are bonds with a European signature. The 
main message of the ECB Governing Council to governments is to implement rapidly, fully, 
comprehensively  the  decisions  taken  by  the  European  heads  of  state  and  government  on 
21 July.  
4. 
ratification of which in some countries, such as Germany, is proceeding very slowly? 
I will not mention any particular country. All 17 countries are called upon to implement all the 
decisions  taken  by  the  heads  of  state  and  government.  This  comprehensive  and  quick 
implementation is important, including for the confidence of our fellow citizens.  
5. 
So  the  idea  of  European  bonds  doesn’t  attract  you?  Some  people  are 
convinced that in the current circumstances we need to consider the most innovative 
and ambitious solutions.  
As I already said, it’s important to note that the EFSF is financed through the issuance of 
bonds guaranteed by the European states. The Governing Council of the ECB considers that 
it  is  important  that  individual  countries  feel  responsible  for  their  own  fiscal  policies.  At  the 
Are you talking about the decisions taken by the European Council in July, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
same time, the Council judges it as essential that peer surveillance is conducted in the most 
rigorous way. Since the inception of the euro, we have called for a major strengthening of 
collegial governance. And long before the crisis, in 2004 and 2005, we defended the Stability 
and Growth Pact when it was attacked by the big countries of the euro area. The European 
Council, Commission and Parliament are working on the development of six draft secondary 
legislation texts to reinforce supervision of economic, fiscal and competitiveness policies. We 
are in the final stages of negotiations and I urge the parties to reach an agreement as quickly 
as possible. 
6. 
A few weeks ago, in Aachen on the occasion of the Charlemagne Prize, you 
launched  the  idea  of  a  finance  minister  for  Europe.  How  realistic  is  this  proposal? 
When do you think Europe can become a fully fledged federation?  
I said that not for tomorrow but perhaps for the day after tomorrow the European Union could 
be  a  confederation  of  a  new  type,  not  like  the  United  States  of  America,  but  with  a 
government  of  the  confederation,  including  a  finance  minister.  But  this  depends  on  our 
people. The people of Europe will decide what will be the future of their history.  
7. 
Over the past ten years, the ECB has succeeded in maintaining price stability 
in  the  euro  area.  But  low  inflation  has  not  been  enough  to  avoid  the  turbulence  of 
these years. In your view, is it enough to monitor inflation? Doesn’t the crisis perhaps 
show that, in addition to looking at the euro area as a whole, the ECB should also take 
greater account than it did in the recent past of economic developments in individual 
countries?  
First of all, as you know, the Treaty requires us to maintain price stability in the euro area as 
a whole, not to monitor the economic policies of different countries. This is the task of the 
Eurogroup  and  of  the  Commission  according  to  the  Treaty.  And  we  have  delivered  price 
stability,  which  was  our  Treaty  responsibility.  But  since  the  inception  of  the  euro  we  have 
constantly  asked 
their 
responsibilities. As I said, we fought to defend the Stability and Growth Pact in 2005 when 
three main euro area countries wanted to water it down. And since then we have been giving 
the Eurogroup detailed information on the evolution of the competitiveness of member states 
and we are calling for rigorous monitoring of fiscal and economic policies.  
8. 
In  your  opinion  then,  national  governments  are  to  blame  for  the  current 
situation.  Let’s  talk  about  Italy.  From  your  perspective,  how  do  you  judge  the 
country’s efforts in the eight years of your presidency? 
The Italian economy has tremendous potential given the quality of its human resources and 
its  corporate  culture.  And  yet  economic  growth  has  been  disappointing.  For  this  reason,  I 
believe in particular that structural reforms are necessary to increase the growth potential of 
an economy held back by too many obstacles – and they prevent it from achieving its full 
potential. 
9. 
Italy  has  been  the  subject  of  intense  market  turmoil  this  summer.  In  this 
regard, how do you view the recent package of austerity measures proposed by the 
Italian government? 
These  measures  decided  by  the  government  in  its  announcement  on  5 August  are  of 
extreme importance to rapidly reduce public finance deficits and enhance the flexibility of the 
Italian  economy.  It  is  therefore  of  the  essence  that  the  overall  goal  in  terms  of  the  public 
finance  improvement  that  was  announced  be  fully  confirmed  and  substantiated.  This  is 
decisive to consolidate and reinforce the quality and the credibility of the Italian strategy and 
of the Italian signature.  
individually  and  collectively 
the  governments 
live  up 
to 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
And  what  about  structural  reforms?  The  serious  situation  in  Italy,  like  the 
10. 
dramatic drifting in Greece, might it not be linked to an obsolete economic structure, 
not only to the high public debt? 
My  message  is  clear:  it  is  essential  that  all  those  measures  that  allow  full  exploitation  of 
Italy’s  medium  and  long-term  economic  potential  are  introduced.  Today  there  is  a  huge 
potential that is not tapped as it should be. 
11. 
The message that you sent to the Italian government in early August to urge it 
to  take  further  restructuring  measures  has  sparked  controversy  in  Italy.  Why  this 
unusual decision? 
The view of the Governing Council was that the market turmoil at the beginning of the month 
required  a  message  to  be  sent  to  the  Italian  government.  We  were  seeing  a  progressive 
weakening  of  investor  confidence  and  we  felt  it  would  be  useful  to  share  with  the  Italian 
authorities  our  thoughts  on  the  most  appropriate  measures  to  help  restore  market 
confidence.  
12. 
Some  commentators  have  claimed  that  there  was  a  quid  pro  quo:  new 
consolidation measures in exchange for a launch of bond purchases in order to lower 
Italian bond yields.  
No. There was no negotiation. We sent our message based upon our analysis of the reasons 
for the market disruption. We analysed the decision taken by the government. Our decision 
to  activate  our  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  is  designed  to  help  restore  a  better 
transmission of our monetary policy.  
13. 
and controversial decision in recent years at the helm of the ECB ...  
Even in normal times all our decisions are very difficult. It is not by chance that you preserve 
price stability for 332 million fellow citizens over almost 13 years as we have done. Now we 
are  experiencing  a  global  crisis  –  the  worst  since  the  Second  World  War.  And  in  these 
exceptionally demanding circumstances we had to take non-standard measures for monetary 
policy  reasons.  In  particular,  the  decision  to  supply  liquidity  in  full  allotment  mode  and  to 
purchase securities.  
14. 
But the decision to buy bonds was particularly delicate because of criticism in 
Germany, worried by any form of debt monetisation, and because it exposed divisions 
in the Governing Council. Your detractors level an unfair accusation against you: they 
claim that you will be remembered as the President who caused the bank to lose its 
independence.  
I have just returned from the European Parliament and I can tell you that our decisions were 
commented on favourably by the members of Parliament, as all journalists could see. Having 
said  that,  the  Governing  Council  acts  very  prudently,  also  in  the  use  of  non-standard 
measures,  so  as  not  to  endanger  the  credibility  and  solidity  of  the  ECB  and  of  the 
Eurosystem.  Bear  in  mind  that  since  the  crisis erupted  in August  2007,  our  balance  sheet 
has increased by around 77%, while the Federal Reserve’s has risen by 226%, and that of 
the Bank of England by 200%. In other words, the crisis has caused us to take a number of 
non-standard steps, but we took them cautiously and always with a view to ensuring a better 
transmission of monetary policy. Everybody knows as well that we are fiercely independent. 
The  Governing  Council  has  proved  its  independence  through  all  its  decisions  and  also 
through its firm and explicit messages to governments on all occasions.  
And yet, the purchase of government bonds was probably your most painful 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
President Trichet, you will leave at the end of October after eight years as the 
15. 
head  of  the  ECB.  Mario  Draghi,  the  governor  of  the  Banca  d’Italia,  will  replace  you. 
How has the bank that you will pass on to him changed in recent years? Do you have 
any tips to give him? 
Mario Draghi has been a wise and strong member of the Governing Council for many years. 
He knows the institution extremely well and, of course, was a party to all the decisions we 
have taken. What matters is the permanence of the institution. I am certain that Mario Draghi 
will ensure the institution’s continuity and credibility over the long term. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
