Janet L Yellen: The Federal Reserve’s asset purchase program 
Speech by Ms Janet L Yellen, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, at the Brimmer Policy Forum, Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, 
Denver, Colorado, 8 January 2011. 
 I am delighted to participate in this Brimmer Policy Forum, not least because this year marks 
the 45th anniversary of Andrew’s appointment by President Johnson as a Governor of the 
Federal Reserve Board. Andrew’s ongoing work in organizing this annual forum reflects his 
long-standing commitment to fostering economic analysis and public discourse on key policy 
issues.  
In my remarks today, I will discuss the rationale for the decision by the Federal Open Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  in  November  to  initiate  a  new  program  of  asset  purchases,  and  I  will 
address  some  frequently  asked  questions  (FAQs)  regarding  the  program’s  economic  and 
financial effects both here and abroad.1 The purpose of the new asset purchase program, 
like  all  of  the  monetary  policy  actions  taken  by  the  FOMC  since  the  onset  of  the  global 
financial  crisis,  is  to  fulfill  our  congressionally  mandated  objectives  of  promoting  maximum 
employment  and  price  stability.  In  pursuit  of  these  goals,  the  FOMC  brought  the  target 
federal  funds  rate  down  close  to  zero  by  late  2008;  conducted  large-scale  purchases  of 
longer-term  securities  during  2009  and  early  2010;  and,  last  summer,  modified  its 
reinvestment  policy  to  keep  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  from  shrinking  as 
mortgage-related securities matured or were redeemed. In early November, the Committee 
announced  that  it  intends  to  purchase  an  additional  $600  billion  in  longer-term  Treasury 
securities by the middle of this year.  
The rationale for the asset purchase program  
Macroeconomic conditions 
To  understand  the  rationale  for  our  asset  purchase  program,  it  is  helpful  to  review  the 
evolution of macroeconomic conditions over the past several years. The National Bureau of 
Economic Research has dated the recession  as having begun in December 2007, but the 
pace of economic contraction accelerated in the wake of the Lehman  Brothers collapse in 
September 2008 and the ensuing disruption to global financial markets. As shown in figure 1, 
the unemployment rate rose from around 5 percent in the spring of 2008 to about 10 percent 
by  the  autumn  of  2009  and  has  stayed  well  above  9  percent  since  then.  Most  observers, 
including myself, judge this level of unemployment to be much higher than levels consistent 
with  full  employment  and  stable  inflation.  For  example,  in  a  recent  Survey  of  Professional 
Forecasters conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median estimate of 
the  current  level  of  structural  unemployment  –  often  referred  to  as  the  non-accelerating 
inflation  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)  –  stood  at  about  5–3/4  percent,  implying  that  the 
unemployment gap is nearly 4 percentage points.  
In addition, a historically large fraction of the unemployed have been out of a job for a very 
long time. For example, roughly 4 percentage points of today’s unemployment rate reflects 
                                                 
1   These remarks solely reflect my own views and not necessarily those of any other member of the FOMC. I 
appreciate  assistance  from  members  of  the  Board  staff  –  David  Bowman,  James  Clouse,  William  English, 
Andrew Figura, Steven Kamin, Yuriy Kitsul, Andrew Levin, Fabio Natalucci, David Reifschneider, Clara Vega, 
William Wascher, and David Wilcox – who contributed to the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
individuals who have been unemployed for half a year or more. Those who experience an 
extended period of unemployment face a risk of losing their ability to participate successfully 
in the workforce, lending additional urgency to the task of reviving the demand for labor.  
Such  low  rates  of  resource  utilization  are  typically  accompanied  by  falling  inflation.  And, 
indeed, as shown in figure 2, measures of inflation for personal consumption expenditures 
(PCE) have declined significantly since 2008. For the total PCE inflation rate, the underlying 
trend is obscured to some extent by large swings in energy prices. However, the downward 
trend is clearly evident from the evolution of core PCE inflation, which excludes the volatile 
prices  of  food  and  energy.  The  12-month  change  in  core  PCE  prices  dropped  from  about  
2–1/2 percent in mid-2008 to around 1–1/2 percent in 2009 and declined further to less than 
1 percent by late 2010.2  
As inflation has trended downward, measures of underlying inflation have fallen somewhat 
below the levels of about 2 percent or a bit less that most Committee participants judge to be 
consistent,  over  the  longer  run,  with  the  FOMC’s  dual  mandate.  In  particular,  a  modest 
positive rate of inflation over time allows for a slightly higher average level of nominal interest 
rates, thereby creating more scope for the FOMC to respond to adverse shocks. A modest 
positive inflation rate also reduces the risk that such shocks could result in deflation, which 
can be associated with poor macroeconomic performance.  
Of course, if incoming information last autumn had been pointing to greater momentum in the 
prospects for economic growth or to a rapid escalation in inflation, then the case for further 
monetary policy easing might have seemed less pressing. However, such was not the case. 
The Federal Reserve publishes a Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) four times a year 
in  conjunction  with  the  FOMC  minutes.  As  shown  in  the  November  SEP,  most  Committee 
participants anticipated that the economy would recover only gradually and projected that the 
unemployment rate would still be at around 8 percent at the end of 2012 – an outlook that is 
shared  by  most  outside  forecasters.  Similarly,  Committee  participants  generally  expected 
inflation to rise very gradually toward levels consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate. 
Moreover,  continuing  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  inflation 
strengthened  the  case  for  providing  additional  monetary  policy  accommodation,  thereby 
reducing the risk of another downturn in economic activity or a further decline in inflation.  
The design of the asset purchase program 
In weighing its policy options last autumn, the Committee gave careful consideration to the 
question  of  whether  further  purchases  of  longer-term  Treasury  securities  were  likely  to  be 
effective in fostering economic recovery and bringing inflation back up to levels judged to be 
consistent with the dual mandate.3 In my judgment, both theoretical analysis and empirical 
evidence suggested that such purchases could provide effective stimulus by keeping longer-
term interest rates lower than they would otherwise be.  
                                                 
2   This  downward  trend  in  inflation  has  not  been  confined  to  any  specific  sectors  of  the  economy,  such  as 
housing. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas constructs a trimmed-mean rate of PCE inflation 
by removing the tails of the distribution of monthly price changes for disaggregated spending categories. That 
measure  of  underlying  inflation  has  also  declined  fairly  steadily  since  mid-2008  and  dipped  slightly  below 
1 percent last autumn. Moreover, diffusion indexes of price changes – which subtract the percentage of items 
in the consumption basket with price increases from the percentage of items with price decreases – also fell 
noticeably over this period, providing further evidence that the decline in inflation has been widespread across 
many categories of consumer spending. 
3   As indicated in the minutes of the November FOMC meeting, the Committee has also considered the potential 
costs and benefits of setting a peg for a term interest rate. While targeting the yield on a term security could be 
an effective way to reduce longer-term interest rates, such an approach might require the Federal Reserve to 
make an open-ended commitment to purchasing longer-term securities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The underlying theory, in which asset prices are directly linked to the outstanding quantity of 
assets, dates back to the early 1950s.4 For example, in preferred-habitat models, short- and 
long-term  assets  are  imperfect  substitutes  in  investors’  portfolios,  and  the  effect  of 
arbitrageurs is limited by their risk aversion or by market frictions such as capital constraints. 
Consequently, the term structure of interest rates can be influenced by exogenous shocks in 
supply and demand at specific maturities. Purchases of longer-term securities by the central 
bank can be viewed as a shift in supply that tends to push up the prices and drive down the 
yields on those securities.  
In the context of such an analytical framework, the effect of an asset purchase program also 
depends on investors’ perceptions of the future path of short-term interest rates as well as 
their perceptions of the timing and pace of the central bank’s eventual unwinding of its asset 
purchases. Thus, central bank communication may play a key role in influencing the financial 
market response to such a program.  
Recent  empirical  work  provides  a  rough  gauge  of  the  quantitative  effects  of  longer-term 
securities purchases.5 For example, event studies have investigated the short-term response 
of  asset  prices  to  announcements  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England 
regarding their respective asset purchase programs. And regression analysis has been used 
to estimate statistical models that embed predictions from a specific theoretical framework.  
Table  1  summarizes  the  response  of  selected  financial  variables  on four  dates  associated 
with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  first  round  of  asset  purchases.  On  November  25,  2008,  the 
Federal Reserve announced that it would purchase up to $600 billion in agency mortgage-
backed  securities  (MBS)  and  agency  debt.  On  December  1,  Chairman  Bernanke  provided 
further  details  in  a  speech.6  On  December  16,  the  program  was  formally  launched  by  the 
FOMC.7 On March 18, 2009, the FOMC announced that the program would be expanded by 
an additional $850 billion in purchases of agency MBS and agency debt and $300 billion in 
purchases of Treasury securities. As is evident from the table, these announcements were 
generally associated with a substantial decline in the 10-year Treasury yield and the yield on 
10-year Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) as well as in rates on agency MBS and 
corporate debt.  
Turning  now  to  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  securities  purchases, 
there  are  several  distinct  channels  through  which  these  purchases  tend  to  influence 
aggregate demand, including a reduced cost of credit to consumers and businesses, a rise in 
asset  prices  that  boosts  household  wealth  and  spending,  and  a  moderate  change  in  the 
foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  that  provides  support  to  net  exports.  The  quantitative 
magnitude  of  these  effects  can  be  gauged  using  a  macroeconometric  model  such  as 
FRB/US – one of the models developed and maintained by Board staff and used routinely in 
simulations of alternative economic scenarios.  
Figure 3 depicts the results of such a simulation exercise, as reported in a recent research 
paper by four Federal Reserve System economists.8 For illustrative purposes, the simulation 
                                                 
4   Examples include Culbertson (1957), Tobin (1958), and Modigliani and Sutch (1966); see also Vayanos and 
Vila (2009). 
5   A burgeoning literature focuses on the experience of asset purchase programs of the Federal Reserve and 
other central banks; for example, see D’Amico and King (2010); Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2010); 
Hamilton and Wu (2010); and Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens, and Tong (2010). 
6   See Ben S. Bernanke (2008), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited,” speech delivered at the Greater 
Austin Chamber of Commerce, Austin, Tex., December 1. 
7   The December 2008 FOMC announcement also reported the Committee’s decision to reduce the target for 
the federal funds rate to a range of 0 to 1/4 percent. 
8   See Chung and others (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
imposes the assumption that the purchases of $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities 
are  completed  within  about  a  year,  that  the  elevated  level  of  securities  holdings  is  then 
maintained for about two years, and that the asset position is then unwound linearly over the 
following five years.9  
This  trajectory  of  securities  holdings  causes  the  10-year  Treasury  yield  to  decline  initially 
about  1/4  percentage  point  and  then  gradually  return  toward  baseline  over  subsequent 
years.  That  path  of  longer-term  Treasury  yields  leads  to  a  significant  pickup  in  real  gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth relative to baseline and generates an increase in nonfarm 
payroll employment that amounts to roughly 700,000 jobs.10 It should also be noted that this 
exercise is performed as a deterministic simulation and hence does not capture the potential 
benefits of the asset purchase program in mitigating downside risks to economic activity and 
inflation.  
I would also like to note that the same research paper analyzed the macroeconomic effects 
of  the  FOMC’s  full  program  of  securities  purchases,  including  the  first  round  of  purchases 
that was initiated in late 2008 and early 2009, the modification of the reinvestment policy that 
was  announced  last  August,  and  the  second  round  of  purchases  that  was  initiated  in 
November.  Those  simulation  results  indicate  that  by  2012,  the  full  program  of  securities 
purchases will have raised private payroll employment by about 3 million jobs. Moreover, the 
simulations  suggest  that  inflation  is  currently  a  percentage  point  higher  than  would  have 
been the case if the FOMC had never initiated a securities purchases, implying that, in the 
absence of such purchases, the economy would now be close to deflation.11  
Addressing some FAQs about the asset purchase program  
Has the program been effective in promoting the economic recovery? 
Is the program actually proving effective? My short answer is yes. Table 2 depicts financial 
market responses during three key phases in the rollout of the program: (1) August 10, 2010, 
when  the  FOMC  announced  that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  begin  reinvesting  principal 
payments on agency MBS and agency debt by purchasing Treasury securities; (2) the period 
between  August  11  and  November  2;  and  (3)  November  3,  the  date  on  which  the  FOMC 
meeting statement announced the commencement of the program.  
As  shown  in  the  table,  the  initiation  of  the  securities  purchase  program  at  the  November 
FOMC meeting occasioned only minimal market response. The reason is that it was largely 
anticipated by investors, having been the subject of extensive public discussions by Federal 
Reserve officials during late summer and early autumn. Importantly, as expectations of the 
program gradually became embedded in asset prices during late summer and early autumn, 
the  10-year  TIPS  yield  dropped  nearly  1/2  percentage  point  over  the  period  between  the 
August  and  November  FOMC  meetings;  moreover,  equity  prices  rose  and  corporate  bond 
spreads  narrowed.  Over  that  period,  of  course,  asset  prices  were  also  responding  to 
economic news and some favorable corporate earnings reports, but the overall pattern of the 
financial market data bolstered my confidence in the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve’s 
                                                 
9  
In addition, the federal funds rate is assumed to remain unchanged from baseline for several years and then 
to follow the prescriptions of a simple estimated policy rule; for further details, see Chung and others (2011). 
10   The simulation results are reported as deviations from baseline and hence eventually return to zero. In effect, 
under circumstances in which the baseline path involves a large and relatively persistent unemployment gap, 
these results can be interpreted as gauging the extent to which the policy stimulus accelerates the pace at 
which  the  economy  returns  to  its  balanced-growth  path  with  maximum  sustainable  employment  and  low, 
stable inflation. 
11   See Chung and others (2011) for further details. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
securities purchases in providing additional monetary policy accommodation. Indeed, market 
rates might well have backed up significantly following the November FOMC meeting if the 
Committee had decided not to move ahead with the program.12  
As  shown  in  figure  4,  longer-term  Treasury  yields  have  risen  substantially  over  the  past 
couple of months since the FOMC initiated this round of asset purchases. I believe that this 
increase in Treasury yields likely reflects a number of significant factors, including incoming 
information suggesting a somewhat stronger economic outlook and the fiscal package that 
was  announced  by  President  Obama  in  early  December  and  approved  by  the  Congress 
about two weeks later; that package will not only support economic growth next year but will 
also  increase  the  amount  of  federal  debt  issuance.  Also,  investors  appear  to  have  scaled 
back their expectations about the extent to which the FOMC will engage in further purchases 
beyond those already announced; however, the effect of that reassessment on market rates 
tends to bolster the view that the Federal Reserve’s securities purchases do indeed affect 
yields in the direction indicated by analytical and empirical studies.13  
Will the asset purchase program lead to excessive inflation? 
A  concern  voiced  by  some  observers  is  that  the  asset  purchase  program  will  lead  to 
excessive inflation. One rationale for this view is that the economy is currently operating with 
little slack – that is, an unemployment rate that is not far from the NAIRU. A second rationale 
is  that  asset  purchases  have  ballooned  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  and  the  supply  of  bank 
reserves. I will consider each argument in turn.  
Extent of slack in the economy. Some proponents of the view that the U.S. economy is 
operating close to the NAIRU point to an apparent outward shift in the Beveridge curve – the 
relationship  between  job  vacancies  and  unemployment  –  as  indicating  an  increase  in  the 
structural level of unemployment. In the simplest framework, movements along a downward 
sloping  Beveridge  curve  are  typically  characterized  as  cyclical  movements  in  labor  market 
conditions, while persistent inward and outward shifts in the curve are frequently attributed to 
structural forces.  
As  shown  in  figure  5,  the  Beveridge  curve  appears  to  have  shifted  out  in  recent  years. 
However, the Beveridge curve can shift out for a variety of reasons, including some that are 
essentially cyclical in nature, so it is important to understand the sources of a shift to assess 
whether it represents persistent structural forces.  
There  is  some  evidence  suggesting  that  structural  factors  account  for  a  portion  of  the 
Beveridge  curve’s  outward  shift.  In  particular,  the  shift  may  partly  reflect  a  decline  in  the 
efficiency with which unemployed workers are matched to vacant jobs.14 However, given that 
the apparent decline in matching efficiency coincided with a large reduction in job vacancies, 
the two developments may be related. In particular, weak labor demand may be causing the 
labor  market  to  operate  less  efficiently  than  would  typically  be  the  case,  and  matching 
efficiency  may  return  to  normal  as  demand  for  workers  improves.  Indeed,  historically, 
                                                 
12   Consistent with the conjecture that bond yields are affected by expected purchase size, the 30-year Treasury 
yield  increased  markedly  in  the  days  following  the  November  FOMC  meeting,  as  market  participants 
reportedly revised  downward their expectations  of the amount  of purchases by the Federal Reserve  in this 
maturity sector. 
13   The backup in rates may have been amplified by technical factors such as mortgage-related hedging flows 
and year-end positioning by leveraged investors. 
14   On changes in matching efficiency, see Barnichon and Figura (2010) and Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger 
(2010). Possible reasons for a decline in matching efficiency include decreased mobility of workers due to the 
drop in house prices and a mismatch between the skills demanded by businesses and the skills offered by 
unemployed workers. On the issue of migration rates and mobility, see Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
matching efficiency does appear to move back toward its long-run average over time.15 That 
said, a persistently high level of long-term unemployment could lead to a significant increase 
in structural unemployment over time as individuals who are out of work for long periods face 
the erosion of their skills. However, such effects would take time to materialize and, in any 
event, would argue for aggressive policies to reduce unemployment promptly.  
Another portion of the recent outward shift in the Beveridge curve is likely due to increases in 
the  maximum  duration  of  unemployment  benefits,  which  may  have  induced  some 
unemployed  workers  to  be  more  selective  in  the  job  offers  they  accept.  However,  recent 
research suggests that the increase in unemployment due to extended benefits is probably 
small relative to the overall increase in unemployment, and, regardless of its magnitude, the 
influence of extended unemployment benefits will disappear as the economy improves and 
extended benefits expire.16  
Moreover, at least some of the recent outward shift in the Beveridge curve appears to reflect 
cyclical  rather  than  structural  influences.  For  example,  vacancies  typically  adjust  more 
quickly  than  unemployment  to  changes  in  labor  demand,  causing  counterclockwise 
movements in vacancy-unemployment space that can look like shifts in the Beveridge curve. 
Indeed,  as  is  evident  from  the  figure,  such  counterclockwise  movements  have  occurred  in 
most previous recessions.  
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that most of the co-movement between unemployment and 
vacancies in recent years does not appear especially unusual. In particular, low vacancies 
and  elevated  layoffs  –  likely  driven  by  weak  labor  demand  –  can  account  for  much  of  the 
increase in unemployment that has occurred since mid-2008.17 This observation is in accord 
with the recent behavior of inflation, which, as noted above, has trended down over the past 
three years, consistent with a decline in rates of resource utilization. Likewise, nominal wage 
growth has fallen noticeably over the past several years and remains quite low.  
In  sum,  while  deficient  labor  demand  may  not  be  the  only  factor  boosting  unemployment 
currently,  and  while  disentangling 
is  not 
straightforward,  weak  labor  demand  appears  to  be  the  predominant  factor  keeping  the 
unemployment rate elevated. This weakness, in turn, implies that current resource utilization 
is likely well below normal levels, mitigating the risk that the policy stimulus from our asset 
purchase program will lead to excessive inflation.  
Inflation  and  bank  reserves.  A  second  reason  that  some  observers  worry  that  the  Fed’s 
asset  purchase  programs  could  raise  inflation  is  that  these  programs  have  increased  the 
quantity of bank reserves far above pre-crisis levels. I strongly agree with one aspect of this 
argument  –  the  notion  that  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  left  in  place  too  long  can 
cause inflation to rise to undesirable levels. This notion would be true regardless of the level 
of bank reserves and pertains as well in situations in which monetary policy is unconstrained 
by the zero bound on interest rates. Indeed, it is one reason why the Committee stated that it 
will review its asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and adjust 
the program as needed to meet its objectives. We recognize that the FOMC must withdraw 
monetary  stimulus  once  the  recovery  has  taken  hold  and  the  economy  is  improving  at  a 
healthy pace. Importantly, the Committee remains unwaveringly committed to price stability 
influences  on  unemployment 
the  various 
                                                 
15   See Barnichon and Figura (2010). 
16   On the effect of extended unemployment benefits on the unemployment rate, see Kuang and Valleta (2010). 
17   Declining  demand  leads  businesses  with  positive  trend  growth  in  employment  to  reduce  vacancies  –  a 
movement  down  the  Beveridge  curve--and  businesses  with  flat  or  downwardly  trending  employment  to 
increase  layoffs  –  an  outward  shift  in  the  Beveridge  curve.  For  the  response  of  vacancies  and  layoffs  to 
changes in firm-level employment, see Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2010). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and does not seek inflation above the level of 2 percent or a bit less than that, which most 
FOMC participants see as consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate.  
In contrast, I disagree with the notion that the large quantity of reserves resulting from our 
asset purchases poses some special barrier to removing policy stimulus when the right time 
comes. The FOMC will be able to increase short-term rates by raising the interest rate that 
we pay on excess reserves – currently 1/4 percent. That ability will allow us to manage short-
term interest rates effectively and thus to tighten policy when needed, even if bank reserves 
remain high.  
Given the very high level of reserve balances, changes in the interest rate on reserves might 
not  be  fully  reflected  in  the  federal  funds  rate  and  other  short-term  market  rates.  In  that 
event, the Federal Reserve can use tools it has developed and tested to drain or immobilize 
bank  reserves,  thereby  enhancing  our  control  over  the  federal  funds  rate.  To  build  the 
capability to drain large quantities of reserves, the Federal Reserve has expanded the range 
of its counterparties for reverse repurchase operations beyond the primary dealers and has 
developed the infrastructure necessary to use agency MBS as collateral in such transactions. 
The Federal Reserve has also put in place a Term Deposit Facility through which it can offer 
deposits to member institutions that are roughly analogous to the certificates of deposit that 
these institutions offer to their customers. We have tested both of these tools by conducting 
several small-scale operations and have the ability to initiate them quickly if needed. The use 
of  reverse  repurchase  operations  and  the  Term  Deposit  Facility  would  allow  the  Federal 
Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves from the banking system should 
conditions necessitate. We don’t think that draining such large amounts of reserves will be 
necessary for a smooth exit, but it makes sense to be prepared, and hence we have followed 
this “belt and suspenders” approach.  
Finally, we can sell portions of our holdings of MBS, agency debt, and Treasury securities if 
we determine that doing so is an appropriate way of tightening financial conditions when the 
time comes. The redemption or sale of securities would have the effect of reducing the size 
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as well as further reducing the quantity of reserves in 
the  banking  system.  Restoring  the  size  and  composition  of  the  balance  sheet  to  a  more 
normal configuration is a longer-term objective of our policies. Any such sales would be at a 
gradual  pace,  would  be  clearly  communicated  to  market  participants,  and  would  entail 
appropriate consideration of economic conditions.  
In short, the range of tools we have developed will permit us to raise short-term interest rates 
and drain large volumes of reserves when it becomes necessary to achieve the policy stance 
that  fosters  our  macroeconomic  objectives  –  including  the  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability.  
Will the asset purchase program result in adverse financial imbalances? 
The  Committee’s  intention  in  implementing  asset  purchases  is  to  hold  down  the  level  of 
longer-term interest rates to make credit more affordable for businesses and households. A 
reasonable  fear  is  that  this  process  could  go  too  far,  encouraging  potential  borrowers  to 
employ excessive leverage to take advantage of low financing costs and leading investors to 
accept less compensation for bearing risks as they seek to enhance their rates of return in an 
environment of very low yields.  
This concern deserves to be taken seriously, and the Federal Reserve is carefully monitoring 
financial indicators for signs of potential threats to financial stability. While there is no single 
metric  we  can  use  to  assess  these  threats,  standard  financial  market  indicators  do  not 
currently signal significant excesses or imbalances in the United States. In the stock market, 
for example, price-to-earnings ratios, by some measures, remain below their averages over 
the past several decades, and other valuation measures also indicate that equity prices are 
not  significantly  out  of  alignment  with  past  norms.  In  the  real  estate  market,  price-to-rent 
ratios for both residential and commercial real estate are now within a reasonable range of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
their  long-run  averages,  in  contrast  to  the  severe  misalignment  that  occurred  prior  to  the 
crisis. Again, there is little sign here of imbalances relative to fundamentals, at least if history 
is used as a guide. In fixed-income markets, narrow risk spreads and risk premiums could be 
signs  of  excessive  risk-taking  by  investors,  and  indeed  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  have 
dropped  dramatically  since  the financial crisis,  as  the  economic  outlook  has improved  and 
investor  sentiment  has  picked  up.  Risk  premiums  on  nonfinancial  corporate  bonds,  as 
measured  by  forward  spreads  far  in  the  future,  are  relatively  low  compared  with  historical 
norms, although other indicators for this market do not point to overvaluation.  
An alternative way to identify imbalances is to focus more directly on measuring credit flows 
and exposures to credit risk. Extraordinarily rapid credit growth may be a sign that financial 
institutions are taking greater risks onto their balance sheets. In recent months, nonfinancial 
corporations  have  issued  large  amounts  of  bonds  and  syndicated  leveraged  loans,  and 
banks’  provision  of  consumer  credit  has  shown  some  signs  of  reviving.  Nonetheless,  a 
portion of the recent corporate issuance has been used to refinance existing debt, including 
leveraged  loans;  small  business  lending  remains  especially  weak;  and  commercial  and 
residential  mortgage  originations  continue  to  shrink.  Thus,  there  is  little  evidence  that 
financial  institutions  are  significantly  expanding  the  level  of  credit  and  liquidity  provided  to 
households and businesses on net. Indeed, given the current very low level of interest rates 
and the continuation of the economic recovery, credit flows remain stubbornly sluggish.  
Of  course,  such  aggregate  measures  provide  only  an  imperfect  picture  of  overall  credit 
conditions. Another type of evidence comes from surveying market participants about their 
practices.  For  bank  lending,  we  have  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion 
Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which provides information about changes in supply and 
demand for bank loans to businesses and households. Recent surveys have indicated that 
banks have only just begun to reverse the historically large tightening in standards and terms 
that  they  implemented  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis.  In  fact,  considerably  more  easing  of 
terms and standards will probably be required before lending conditions return to normal.  
To  monitor  leverage  provided  by  dealers  to  financial  market  participants,  last  June  the 
Federal  Reserve  launched  the  Senior  Credit  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Dealer  Financing 
Terms. This survey provides information on credit terms and availability of various forms of 
dealer-intermediated  financing,  including  funding  for  securities  positions  and  over-the-
counter derivatives. The survey results suggest that over the past several months there has 
been  some  easing  of  terms  applicable  to  financing  for  a  range  of  counterparty  types  and 
many types of collateral, as well as an increase in demand from clients to fund most types of 
securities.  These  results  indicate  that  the  availability  and  use  of  leverage  by  nonbank 
financial  institutions  increased  somewhat  last  year.  Overall,  a  variety  of  indicators  suggest 
that leverage generally remains well below the levels reached prior to the financial crisis, but 
these  measures  are  worth  watching  closely,  and  the  new  survey  reflects  our  strong 
commitment to developing additional tools for this purpose.  
The Federal Reserve is closely monitoring many indicators of financial conditions to better 
understand  the  implications  of  financial  market  developments  for  the  economy  as  well  as 
risks to the financial system itself. We are working with other regulators to make the financial 
system  more  robust  and  are  attentive  in  our  supervision  to  developments  that  may  affect 
systemic risk. If evidence of financial imbalances were to develop, I believe that supervision 
and  regulation  should  provide  the  first  line  of  defense  so  that  monetary  policy  can 
concentrate on its longstanding goals of price stability and maximum employment. That said, 
we cannot categorically rule out using monetary policy to address financial imbalances, given 
the damage that they can cause.  
Will the asset purchase program have adverse effects on foreign economies? 
My final FAQ relates to the concerns that some observers have expressed over the potential 
for  the  Federal  Reserve’s  asset  purchase  program  to  have  adverse  effects  on  foreign 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economies.  One  specific  concern  is  that  these  securities  purchases  might  drive  down  the 
value  of  the  U.S.  dollar,  thereby  diverting  demand  from  our  trading  partners.  Although 
purchases of longer-term securities are a less conventional means of conducting monetary 
policy than the more familiar approach of managing short-term interest rates, the goals and 
transmission mechanisms are actually very similar, and there is nothing special about these 
asset purchases that would make them especially likely to weigh on the dollar.  
In  fact,  the  evidence  available  to  date  suggests  that  the  asset  purchases  have  had  only 
moderate  effects  on  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar.  This  point  is  illustrated  in 
table 3, which reports the change in U.S. dollar exchange rates against four other currencies 
(the Canadian dollar, pound sterling, euro, and yen) on each of the four dates referred to in 
table 1. These movements in exchange rates are not particularly large when compared with 
the  fluctuations  that can  occur in  any  given  week  or  month.  Indeed,  as  shown  in  figure  6, 
these  exchange  rate  movements  are  very  modest  in  the  broader  context  of  developments 
over the past several years.  
A related concern raised by some observers is that the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases 
may induce excessive capital inflows to emerging market economies (EMEs) – inflows that in 
turn could put unwelcome upward pressure on the currencies of those EMEs and perhaps 
even contribute to asset price bubbles. As shown in figure 7, net private capital flows to Latin 
American and Asian EMEs (reported as a share of the aggregate GDP of those EMEs) were 
substantial  in  the  second  half  of  2009  and  the  first  half  of  2010  but  were  not  obviously 
outsized  compared  with  levels  prior  to  the  crisis.18  A  similar  pattern  is  evident  in  figure  8, 
which  depicts  the  net  inflows  since  2007  into  mutual  funds  investing  in  EME  bonds  and 
equities. In each case, the strong inflows over the past year or so reflect a recovery in the 
wake  of  the  large  outflows  that  occurred  during  the  crisis.  In  fact,  the  stock  of  claims  on 
EMEs has only returned to its pre-crisis trend.  
Accommodative  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced  economies,  including  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  asset  purchases,  have  likely  played  some  role  in  widening  interest  rate 
differentials and encouraging capital flows to EMEs. But this role should not be exaggerated. 
Other  factors  –  including  a  reversal  of  the  capital  outflows  from  EMEs  during  the  financial 
crisis  and  the  EMEs’  longer-term  favorable  growth  prospects  –  likely  have  also  been 
important. Moreover, it would be a mistake to portray these capital flows as an unmitigated 
negative  for  the  EMEs.  A  rebalanced  global  economy  in  which  EMEs  depend  more  on 
domestic demand for their growth will likely involve ultimately stronger and more sustained 
capital flows to these economies.  
Finally, I would like to comment on the critique that our asset purchase program is meant to 
promote  U.S.  growth  at  the  expense  of  other  nations  by  depreciating  the  dollar  and 
enhancing U.S. competitiveness. That argument ignores the fact that stimulating growth in 
the United States is also likely to boost our demand for foreign goods and promote growth 
abroad. This effect will provide an important offset to the other implication of U.S. monetary 
stimulus  that  I  discussed  earlier  –  that  it  may  lead  to  moderate  movements  in  the  foreign 
exchange  value  of  the  dollar  that  tend  to  lower  U.S.  demand  for  foreign  goods.  Whether 
foreign demand is ultimately boosted or diminished by U.S. monetary policy depends on the 
relative sizes of these two effects and is ultimately an empirical question.19 However, given 
the moderate exchange rate effects that we believe the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases 
                                                 
18   For  the  purposes  of  this  discussion,  the  EMEs  comprise  Argentina,  Brazil,  Chile,  China,  Colombia, 
Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, 
and Venezuela. 
19   Kim (2001), Canova (2005), and Uribe and Yue (2006), among others, find that U.S. monetary stimulus affects 
aggregate output in emerging market and advanced foreign economies positively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
have had, it seems likely to me that, as seems to be the case with conventional monetary 
easing achieved by lowering interest rates, our decision to purchase assets will not hinder 
foreign  growth.  In  particular,  given  the  importance  of  the  United  States  in  the  global 
economy, it is hard to believe that any foreign country would gain if our economy were to fall 
back  into  another  recession.  Over  the  longer  term,  the  health  and  vitality  of  the  global 
economy  will  depend  importantly  on  the  sustained,  vigorous  recovery  in  the  United  States 
that our asset purchase program is intended to support.  
Conclusion 
In closing, let me reiterate that the program of asset purchases initiated by the Federal Open 
Market  Committee  in  November  is  intended  to  support  economic  recovery  from  an 
exceptionally  deep  recession  and  to  restore  inflation  to,  but  not  above,  levels  that  FOMC 
participants consider consistent with price stability. It will not be a panacea, but I believe it 
will be effective in fostering maximum employment and price stability. 
in 
(2010). 
“What  Drives  Movements 
References  
Barnichon,  Regis,  and  Andrew  Figura 
the 
Unemployment Rate? A Decomposition of the Beveridge Curve (399 KB PDF),” Finance and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2010–148.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, September.  
Canova,  Fabio  (2005).  “The  Transmission  of  U.S.  Shocks  to  Latin  America,”  Journal  of 
Applied Econometrics, vol. 20 (2), pp. 229–51.  
Chung,  Hess,  Jean-Philippe  Laforte,  David  Reifschneider,  and  John  C.  Williams  (2011). 
“Have We Underestimated the Probability of Hitting the Zero Lower Bound? (568 KB PDF)” 
Working Paper 2011-01. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January.  
Culbertson,  John  M.  (1957).  “The  Term  Structure  of  Interest  Rates,”  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, vol. 71 (November), pp. 485–517.  
D’Amico,  Stefania,  and  Thomas  B.  King  (2010).  “Flow  and  Stock  Effects  of  Large-Scale 
Treasury  Purchases,”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2010-52,  Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.  
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger (2010). “The Establishment-
Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring,” NBER Working Paper Series 16265. Cambridge, 
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August.  
Gagnon,  Joseph,  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack  (2010).  “Large-Scale 
Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? “ Staff Report No.441. New York: 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March.  
Hamilton,  James  D.,  and  Jing  (Cynthia)  Wu  (2010).  “The  Effectiveness  of  Alternative 
Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment (467 KB PDF),” working paper. 
San Diego: University of California, San Diego, August (revised October).  
Joyce,  Michael,  Ana  Lasaosa,  Ibrahim  Stevens,  and  Matthew  Tong  (2010).  “The  Financial 
Market Impact of Quantitative Easing (748 KB PDF),” Working Paper 393. London: Bank of 
England, July (revised August).  
Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2010). “Interstate Migration Has Fallen Less than 
You Think: Consequences of Hot Deck Imputation in the Current Population Survey,” NBER 
Working  Paper  Series  16536.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
November.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Kim, Soyoung (2001). “International Transmission of U.S. Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence 
from VAR’s,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 48 (October), pp. 339–72.  
Kuang,  Katherine,  and  Rob  Valleta  (2010).  “Extended  Unemployment  and  UI  Benefits,” 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter, 2010-10, April 19.  
Modigliani,  Franco,  and  Richard  Sutch  (1966).  “Innovations  in  Interest  Rate  Policy,” 
American Economic Review, vol. 56 (March), pp. 178–97.  
Tobin, James (1958). “Liquidity Preference as Behavior towards Risk,” Review of Economic 
Studies, vol. 25 (February), pp. 65–86.  
Uribe,  Martin,  and  Vivian  Z.  Yue  (2006).  “Country  Spreads  and  Emerging  Countries:  Who 
Drives Whom? “Journal of International Economics, vol. 69 (June), pp.6–36.  
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila (2009). “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure 
of Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper Series 15487. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, November. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
 14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
  16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
