European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main,  
3 February 2011. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting. 
Based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council confirmed that 
the  current  key  ECB  interest  rates  still  remain  appropriate.  It  therefore  decided  to  leave 
them  unchanged.  Taking  into  account  all  the  new  information  and  analyses  which  have 
become  available since our  meeting  on  13  January  2011, we  continue  to  see  evidence  of 
short-term  upward  pressure  on  overall  inflation,  mainly  owing  to  energy  and  commodity 
prices. This has not so far affected our assessment that price developments will remain in 
line  with  price  stability  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  At  the  same  time,  very  close 
monitoring is warranted. Recent economic data confirm the positive underlying momentum of 
economic  activity  in  the  euro  area,  while  uncertainty  remains  elevated.  Our  monetary 
analysis  indicates  that  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  to  long  term  should  remain 
contained.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The continued firm anchoring of 
inflation expectations is of the essence.  
Overall,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  and  the  current 
monetary  policy  stance  remains  accommodative.  The  stance,  the  provision  of liquidity  and 
the allotment modes will be adjusted as appropriate, taking into account the fact that all the 
non-standard  measures  taken  during  the  period  of  acute  financial  market  tensions  are,  by 
construction,  temporary  in  nature.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to 
monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following the 0.3% quarter-on-quarter increase in euro area real GDP in the third quarter of 
2010,  recent  statistical  releases  and  survey-based  evidence  for  the  fourth  quarter  and  the 
beginning  of  the  year  continue  to  confirm  the  positive  underlying  momentum  of  economic 
activity in the euro area. Looking ahead, euro area exports should benefit from the ongoing 
recovery in the world economy. At the same time, taking into account the relatively high level 
of business confidence in the euro area, private sector domestic demand should increasingly 
contribute  to  growth,  supported  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  the 
measures adopted to improve the functioning of the financial system. However, the recovery 
in activity is expected to be dampened by the process of balance sheet adjustment in various 
sectors. 
In  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment,  the  risks  to  this  economic  outlook  are  still  slightly 
tilted  to  the  downside,  while  uncertainty  remains  elevated.  On  the  one  hand,  global  trade 
may  continue  to  grow  more  rapidly  than  expected,  thereby  supporting  euro  area  exports. 
Moreover,  strong  business  confidence  could  provide  more  support  to  domestic  economic 
activity in the euro area than is currently expected. On the other hand, downside risks relate 
to the tensions in some segments of the financial markets and their potential spillover to the 
euro area real economy. Further downside risks relate to renewed increases in oil and other 
commodity  prices,  protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of 
global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  2.4%  in  January 
2011, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, after 2.2% in December. This further increase 
was broadly anticipated and largely reflects higher energy prices. Looking ahead to the next 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
few  months,  inflation  rates  could  temporarily  increase  further  and  are  likely  to  stay  slightly 
above 2% for most of 2011, before moderating again around the turn of the year. Overall, we 
continue to see evidence of short-term upward pressure on overall inflation, mainly owing to 
energy and commodity prices. Such pressure is also discernible in the earlier stages of the 
production process. These developments have not so far affected our assessment that price 
developments will remain in line with price stability over the policy-relevant horizon. At the 
same  time,  very  close  monitoring  is  warranted.  Inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to 
longer  term  continue  to  be  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments are still broadly balanced but, as 
already  indicated  in  January,  could  move  to  the  upside.  Currently,  upside  risks  relate,  in 
particular,  to  developments  in  energy  and  non-energy  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases in indirect taxes and administered prices may be greater than currently expected, 
owing  to  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  coming  years,  and  price  pressures  in  the 
production  chain  could  rise  further.  On  the  downside,  risks  relate  mainly  to  the  impact  on 
inflation of potentially lower growth, given the prevailing uncertainties.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  declined  to  1.7%  in 
December  2010,  from  2.1%  in  November.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private 
sector also declined, albeit marginally, to 1.9% in December, after 2.0% in November. These 
declines partly reflect the reversal of special factors that operated in November and do not 
indicate  a  general  weakening  of  monetary  dynamics.  Overall,  however,  broad  money  and 
loan  growth  is  still  low,  confirming  the  assessment  that  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary 
expansion is moderate and that inflationary pressures over the medium to long term should 
remain contained. 
Looking  at  M3  components,  annual  M1  growth  moderated  further  to  stand  at  4.4%  in 
December  2010,  reflecting  the  prevailing  low  remuneration  of  overnight  deposits.  At  the 
same time, the yield curve has steepened somewhat further, implying that the attractiveness 
of  short-term  instruments  included  in  M3  continues  to  decline  compared  with  more  highly 
remunerated longer-term instruments outside M3. 
On the counterpart side, the annual growth rate of bank loans to the private sector continued 
to  conceal  differences  in  the  magnitude  of  growth  across  sectors.  The  growth  of  loans  to 
non-financial corporations stood at –0.2% in December, after –0.1% in the previous month, 
while the growth of loans to households strengthened to 3.0% in December, after 2.8% in 
November. Taking into account the effect of derecognition of loans from bank balance sheets 
and  looking  through  short-term  volatility,  the  latest  data  confirm  a  continued  gradual 
strengthening in the annual growth of lending to the non-financial private sector. 
At  the  same  time,  the  latest  data  point  to  the  overall  size  of  bank  balance  sheets  having 
contracted  again  after  expanding  for  most  of  2010,  mainly  on  account  of  a  reduction  in 
lending between banks. It is important that banks continue to expand the provision of credit 
to  the  private  sector,  in  an  environment  of  increasing  demand.  To  address  this  challenge, 
where  necessary,  it  is  essential  for  banks  to  retain  earnings,  to  turn  to  the  market  to 
strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  or  to  take  full  advantage  of  government  support 
measures for recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates still remain appropriate. We therefore decided 
to leave them unchanged. Taking into account all the new information and analyses which 
have become available since our meeting on 13 January 2011, we continue to see evidence 
of  short-term  upward  pressure  on  overall  inflation,  mainly  owing  to  energy  and  commodity 
prices. This has not so far affected our assessment that price developments will remain in 
line  with  price  stability  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  At  the  same  time,  very  close 
monitoring is warranted. Recent economic data confirm the positive underlying momentum of 
economic activity in the euro area, while uncertainty remains elevated. A cross-check of the 
outcome  of  our  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  indicates  that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  to  long  term  should  remain  contained.  Inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. The continued firm anchoring of inflation expectations is 
of the essence.  
Turning to fiscal policies, it is now essential that all governments fully implement their fiscal 
consolidation  plans  in  2011.  Where  necessary,  additional  corrective  measures  must  be 
implemented  swiftly  to  ensure  progress  in  achieving  fiscal  sustainability.  Beyond  2011, 
countries  need  to  specify  concrete  policy  measures  in  their  multi-year  adjustment 
programmes so as to underpin the credibility of their fiscal consolidation targets. Experience 
shows  that  expenditure  restraint  is  an  important  step  towards  achieving  and  maintaining 
fiscal  soundness,  notably  when  enshrined  in  binding  domestic  policy  rules.  Such  a 
commitment helps to strengthen confidence in the sustainability of public finances, reduces 
interest rate risk premia and improves the conditions for sound and sustainable growth. The 
implementation of credible policies is crucial in view of ongoing financial market pressures.  
Substantial  and  far-reaching  structural  reforms,  complementing  fiscal  adjustment,  should 
be  urgently  implemented  to  improve  the  prospects  for  higher  sustainable  growth  and 
employment.  Major  reforms  are  particularly  necessary  in  those  countries  that  have 
experienced a loss of competitiveness in the past or that are suffering from high fiscal and 
external  deficits.  Increased  product  market  competition  and  labour  market  flexibility  would 
further  support  the  necessary  adjustment  processes  in  the  economy.  All  these  structural 
reforms should be supported by the necessary improvements in the structure of the banking 
sector. Sound balance sheets, effective risk management and transparent, robust business 
models remain key to strengthening banks’ resilience to shocks and to ensuring adequate 
access  to  finance,  thereby  laying  the  foundations  for  sustainable  growth  and  financial 
stability.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
