Erkki Liikanen: Europe under stress – ways ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Atlantic  Council, 
Washington DC, 26 September 2011. 
 I have spent the last days at IMF meetings here in Washington. The growth forecasts for the 
United  States  have  been  revised  down.  The  same  was  done  to  Europe  mainly  due  to  the 
sovereign debt crisis. The US and Lehman were the center of the crisis in 2008, now it is 
more about Europe and sovereign debt. 
Europe must be seen in a global context. The present problems in Europe are nobody else’s 
fault, but Europe is dependent on what happens in the rest of the world. That was seen in 
2008–2009, and it is visible now. The global economic situation is today a matter of clearly 
more serious concern than it was a few months ago.  
One need not even refer to the published macroeconomic forecasts to see this. It is visible in 
the  confidence  indicators  of  businesses  and  households.  It  is  also  demonstrated  in  the 
financial markets, where stock market indices have plummeted and long term interest rates 
have decreased since last spring. Significantly, the decrease in yields can also be observed 
in  the  market  for  inflation-indexed  debt,  which  suggests  that  it  is  really  a  question  of 
weakening of growth prospects – rather than expectations of deflation, for example. 
But it is not the only the forecaster’s baseline that has changed. Also the downside risks to 
economic  performance  have  increased.  This  greater  uncertainty  can  be  seen  in  many 
places.  It  shows  up  in  the  gold  price  which  has  soared,  as  you  know;  and  much  more 
importantly, it shows up as flight to (perceived) quality in the financial markets. 
The flight to quality is a predictable consequence of current financial conditions: the fragility 
of some countries and banks, combined with the heightened uncertainty regarding the future. 
Investors react by trying to move funds from more indebted countries to “safe havens”. At the 
same time, banks are increasingly cautious and selective about lending to their peers – to 
the detriment to the operation of the interbank markets. Banks prefer dealing with the Central 
Banks instead. In short, liquidity preference has again started to dominate the markets. 
As  I  said,  Europe  in  general  and  the  euro  area  in  particular  has  become  the  centre  of 
attention  of  the  financial  markets.  This  is  not  so  because  of  the  average  condition  of  the 
European  economy:  indeed,  judging  by  several  objective  criteria,  Europe  is  not  worse  off 
economically than the other comparable economic areas.  
In  2011,  the  public  deficit  of  the  euro  area  should  be  around  4.5%  of  GDP,  while  in  the 
United  States  or  Japan  it  will  be  about  10%  of  GDP.  As  we  know,  the  accumulated 
government  debt  is  much  lower  in the  euro  area  than  in  Japan,  and  of  the  same  order  of 
magnitude as in the U.S. 
Moreover, the currency is solid. The euro is a credible currency which over the last 12 years 
has  kept  its  value  in  terms  of  price  stability  in  a  remarkable  way  in  comparison  with  its 
preceding national currencies in the previous decades. The stability of the currency itself is 
not disputed and there is no evidence of distrust in it, be it in the long-term yields on euro 
denominated AAA rated bonds, or in inflation expectation surveys, or in the exchange rate 
itself, which is stronger vis-a-vis the dollar now than when the single European currency was 
launched in 1999.  
But  of  course,  there  are  urgent  problems  in  the  euro  area  today.  But  they  are  not 
predominantly aggregate problems; rather, they are problems of divergence within the area, 
and structural deficits in several individual member countries. These came to the surface at 
the  time  of  eruption  of  the  global  crisis  in  2008,  when  the  yield  differentials  on  euro  area 
government bonds started to widen. The problems of divergence and deficits have revealed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fiscal correction,  
bank capitalization, and  
economic governance.  
serious weaknesses in the economic and fiscal governance of the euro area which are now 
in the process of being corrected.  
This summer has witnessed renewed problems as markets have worried about the effects of 
a  possible  new  global  economic  slowdown  on  Europe,  at  a  time  when  European  leaders 
were slow to demonstrate their determination to deal with the problems of debt, deficits and 
divergence.  
In order to restore credibility and to weather even less favorable global economic conditions, 
Europe must move forward on three main fronts at the same time. These are the fronts of 
1) 
2) 
3) 
The necessity of convincing action in these areas has been well recognized in principle and 
work is under way.  
For instance, in their meeting on July 21, this year, the heads of state or government of the 
euro area countries made a number of important  decisions which, when implemented, will 
take Europe a long way towards dealing with the present problems.  
Also, the EU finance ministers reached just over a week ago (in their meeting in Wroclaw, 
Poland)  an  agreement  on  strengthening  the  economic  governance  procedures  of  the  euro 
area. The European Parliament votes on the governance package – the so called six pack – 
this week and I expect it to be in force as of beginning of 2012. 
The political process in Europe is sometimes painfully slow. It is also very complicated and 
can be confusing to an outside observer. This is because of the very nature of our Union. EU 
is  an  entity  with  a  lot  of  jointly  legislated  and  mutually  binding  norms.  But  a  common 
executive  is  really  operative  in  certain  limited  areas  only,  such  as  trade,  competition  and 
agricultural  policies  –  and  in  monetary  policy,  in  the  form  of  the  ECB.  In  most  areas, 
however, EU does not operate by a common executive agency; it operates by common rules. 
In these areas, the competence of the EU executive – the commission – works through the 
regulation and surveillance of the national governments’ actions.  
The structure of several national executives, operating under Union treaties and directives, 
and the complicated process of making these norms, explains why EU works differently from 
the U.S., which has a unitary executive at the federal level, vested in the President. The way 
the EU is operates often stretches the patience of the financial markets, who would like to 
see  quick  and  clear-cut  decisions  instead  of  slow  negotiations  by  large  committees  and 
councils.  
A rule-based system of coordination works best if the rules are good, if they are followed and 
enforced, and if the world is stable. Under conditions of large and surprising shocks, like the 
recent  great  recession,  and  soft  enforcement  of  the  common  rules,  the  EU’s  economic 
governance has not worked effectively enough, and this is a major underlying reason for the 
present problems. 
 I return now to the three fronts on which advance is necessary to restore stability. The first of 
the  fronts,  fiscal  correction,  means  that  countries  having  a  fragile  fiscal  position  now  must 
correct it, as they have indeed committed to do. These countries fall into three categories. 
The  first  is  Greece,  which  is  actually  deemed  a  special  case  now.  The  new  EU/IMF 
adjustment program for Greece is crucial to foster sustainable economic growth and stabilize 
public finances. Strict and rigorous implementation of this program is absolutely necessary. 
Besides fiscal consolidation, the privatization measures and structural reforms agreed in the 
program are essential for revitalizing the Greek economy and to create growth over time. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  the  summit  of  July  21,  2011,  the  heads  of  state  and  government  made  a  number  of 
important decisions which pertain also to the Greek situation and its impact on the European 
financial markets. First of all, they agreed to support the new program for Greece. There was 
also a decision for enhanced flexibility in the use of the EFSF, including intervention in the 
secondary markets, if warranted by exceptional financial market circumstances and risks to 
financial stability.  
The  approach  to  private  sector  involvement  in  the  euro  area  was  also  clarified.  It  was 
recognized  that  Greece  is  in  an  exceptional  situation  and  that  for  that  reason  it  requires 
exceptional and unique solutions. A part of that is a voluntary bond exchange program for the 
private  investors.  At  the  same  time,  all  euro  area  member  countries  reaffirmed  their 
determination  to  honor  fully  their  own  individual  sovereign  signature.  The  ECB  has  been 
outspoken in this matter. It has made clear that it was advising that any contribution asked of 
the private sector should be voluntary, as is the case.  
Nevertheless, and despite all financial support, which is given in the form of loans, it is clear 
that the task of rebalancing the Greek economy must be carried out by Greece itself.  
Besides Greece, we have two other countries which have an adjustment program, i.e. Ireland 
and Portugal. These countries are implementing their programs which will restore the public 
finances  to  a  sustainable  path.  Especially  Portugal  needs  also  to  make  structural  reforms 
which  increase  the  growth  potential  of  the  country.  I  am  confident  that  the  programs  will 
proceed as agreed. One might note that in the case of Ireland at least, the confidence of the 
financial markets has recently been improving already. Portugal has taken a positive start. 
The  adjustment  programs  of  the  program  countries  in  Europe  are  jointly  monitored  by  the 
EU, IMF and the ECB, and financed by the temporary European Financial Stability vehicle, 
the EFSF. The EFSF is financed through the issuance of bonds guaranteed by the European 
states. Because of this reason, rigorous monitoring of the program countries is necessary. It 
is important that individual countries are responsible and also feel responsible for their own 
fiscal  policies.  It  is  also  important  that  the  guarantor  countries  see  that  the  programs  are 
implemented in a rigorous way. 
The  third  category  of  countries  is  constituted  by  two  larger  economies,  which  have  not 
needed a support program, but have been subject to market suspicions – that is Italy and 
Spain. Both of these countries had a serious budgetary consolidation already in their stability 
programs approved last spring 2011. Moreover, during the summer both countries enacted 
significant  additional  measures  which  I  think  exceeded  the  expectations  of  their  peers. 
Especially  Italy,  which  has  larger  accumulated  debt,  has  undertaken  bold  budgetary  cuts. 
Both  countries  have  speeded  up  their  budgetary  consolidation  and  are  implementing 
balanced budget rules to their constitutions.  
 Turning now to banking, we can see that the markets and banks themselves are not happy 
with the condition of the banking system, as shares have declined and interbank markets are 
not working as well as one would hope and expect.  
In  Europe,  the  systemic  liquidity  of  the  sector  is  supported  by  the  European  Central  Bank 
which  continues  to  provide  liquidity  on  a  full  allotment  basis,  against  a  broad  range  of 
collateral, both marketable and non-marketable. The ECB has committed itself to continuing 
this flexible method of liquidity provision as long as necessary. And the amount of collateral 
available in the market is large enough to allow even much greater creation of liquidity than 
at present, if demanded.  
I  think  that  the  main  problem  with  the  banking  system  is  that  a  further  recapitalization  of 
banks is already long overdue. This is the case throughout the world. Perhaps this task is 
especially  urgent  for  the  euro  area,  because  uncertainty  regarding  the  health  of  banks 
aggravates the negative effects of economic imbalances and divergence in the area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This should be the task primarily of the shareholders of the weaker banks, who should refrain 
from  taking  dividends  or  should  inject  more  capital  if  needed.  In  some  cases,  government 
investment in bank equity may also be necessary.  
Coming from Finland, I can understand very well the political problems involved in cleaning 
up  the  banking  system.  In  the  1990’s,  after  the  great  Finnish  banking  crisis,  the  Finnish 
government  had  to  support  the  asset  management  company  that  handled  the  banks’ 
problem assets, in amounts that at one point reached about 10 per cent of GDP. Most of this 
money  was  later  recovered,  but  in  the  meantime  taxpayers  were  furious.  The  public 
frustration with the costs of the banking crisis has not been forgotten in my country. 
Despite the short-term discomfort it entails, the resolution of banking problems is necessary 
for  us  to  move  forward  to  a  lasting  recovery.  On  the  one  hand,  the  recapitalization  of  the 
weaker  but  viable  banks  is  necessary  to  restore  confidence.  On  the  other  hand,  the  well-
managed closure of weakest banks is necessary, so that they do not distort the market for 
the viable banks. 
An important part of the decisions of July 21 by the euro area heads of state or government 
was that the use of funds raised by the European Financial Stability Facility was agreed to be 
made more flexible. This will make the EFSF a better tool in supporting the present tasks of 
crisis  management.  According  to  the  decisions,  loans  from  the  EFSF  can  be  used  to 
recapitalize banks – not only in the program countries, but in other countries as well.  
 The third front of advance for the EU is the improvement of fiscal and economic governance. 
While the fiscal correction front deals with the present imbalances, the governance front will 
mainly be directed towards the future, in order to reduce the likelihood of recurrence of deficit 
problems. Of course, credible institutions which would ensure future stability should reflect 
back on the present situation as well, improving credibility and confidence already now.  
When the monetary union was planned in Europe, there was much debate about the degree 
of economic convergence between countries that would be necessary for a monetary union. 
Some  people  thought  that  a  high  degree  of  economic  convergence  was  a  necessary 
precondition, whereas others argued that membership in a monetary union and the necessity 
to hold on to it would perforce bring about the necessary adjustments and convergence. 
Because  of  the  insistence  of  Germany  and  others,  emphasis  was  placed  on  economic 
convergence when the monetary union was established: reasonable entry criteria were set 
for membership in the union, and members’ fiscal behavior was regulated by the Stability and 
Growth Pact. 
Now we know that this emphasis on convergence did not carry enough force. In 2005, the 
pact was actually made more flexible than originally, despite the resistance of the ECB. That 
happened  when  some  big  countries  faced  the  prospect  of  being  subjected  to  the  EU’s 
“excessive  deficit  procedure.”  Then,  shaken  by  the  steep  recession  of  2008,  several 
countries  got  unexpectedly  to  the  danger  zone.  The  current  crisis  has  demonstrated  very 
clearly that an ambitious reform of the economic governance framework is in the interest of 
the European Union, its members, and the euro area in particular.  
Now,  we  need  even  tighter  economic  convergence,  and  we  need  better  economic 
governance within the EMU. We must strengthen economic governance mechanisms in the 
euro area to minimize the risk of additional crises in government finances in the future.  
The “Euro Plus” pact signed last spring was a step in the right direction. The signatories – all 
euro  area  countries  and  some  other  EU  countries  –  committed  themselves  to  several 
important  reforms,  such  as  to  implement  the  EU’s  budget  guidelines  to  their  national 
legislation. These nationally implemented norms could help “internalize” the fiscal discipline 
in each country and render the matter less of an issue of EU policing of the countries’ current 
fiscal  actions.  The  Euro  Plus  pact  also  broadened  the  scope  of  policy  coordination. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Previously, the stress had been on deficits and debt; now, the competiveness issues (such 
as relative labor costs) and financial stability were also included.  
As I already mentioned, the EU is just now adopting an important legislative package which 
will strengthen the stability and growth pact and the macroeconomic surveillance framework 
of the EU.  
This package includes, among other things, a directive on the budgetary frameworks of the 
member countries. This will be important for what is called the “European semester” – the 
new annual review of members’ budgets BEFORE their adoption nationally. The package will 
also make the sanctions enforcing the Stability and Growth Pact more automatic, by the so-
called reverse voting mechanism.  
Both the preventive and the corrective arms of the Stability and Growth Pact will be made 
stricter.  In  the  preventive  arm,  policy  coordination  will  extend  to  the  growth  rate  of  public 
expenditure of the member countries; in the corrective arm, the debt norm (60 per cent of the 
GDP) will be promoted to an equal position to the deficit norm (3 per cent).  
Also  macroeconomic  policy  coordination  is  strengthened  by  the  “six  pack”  legislative 
package. It includes regulation of macroeconomic imbalances which is aimed to prevent the 
accumulation of imbalances or loss of competiveness of any member of the euro area. The 
imbalances covered include current account deficits and surpluses, among other things. This 
policy coordination is underpinned by sanctions which are levied on a country which does not 
follow the recommendations of the EU council to address these excessive imbalances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
