José Manuel González-Páramo: Address at the opening ceremony of the 
Euro Exhibition 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Bulgarian National Bank, Sofia, 16 September 2011. 
 Governor Iskrov, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Sofia today at the Bulgarian National Bank for the 
opening of the Euro Exhibition, which is dedicated to Europe’s single currency, the euro. 
It  is  remarkable  that  in  a  few  months  we  will  be  celebrating  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the 
introduction of euro banknotes and coins. They came into circulation on 1 January 2002 and 
replaced  the  legacy  currencies  of  twelve  EU  Member  States  in  what  was  one  of  the  most 
ambitious  logistical  exercises  ever  undertaken  in  Europe.  Since  then,  the  euro  area  has 
grown to comprise 17 countries. Over 14 billion euro banknotes are currently in circulation 
and are used on a daily basis by more than 331 million inhabitants of the euro area. In fact, 
the euro banknotes and coins have become an important and integral part of the daily lives 
of  citizens  in  the  euro  area.  They  can  be  seen  as  the  most  tangible  symbol  of  European 
integration.  Moreover,  they  have  brought  many  advantages,  benefiting  not  only  euro  area 
citizens  but  also  the  citizens  of  the  other  EU  Member  States,  including  Bulgaria.  For 
example, Bulgarian citizens travelling within the euro area no longer need to change money 
when  crossing  from  one  euro  area  country  to  another.  Moreover,  in  particular  through 
remittances  sent  by  Bulgarians  living  in  the  euro  area,  the  euro  has  already  gained  a 
significant presence here in Bulgaria. Bulgarian enterprises can carry out transactions with 
business partners in all 17 euro area countries using just the euro.  
Bulgaria, like any other Member State without an “opt out” clause, is expected to adopt the 
euro at some point in the future. As you know, the road to euro adoption is well defined and 
the requirements are laid out in the Treaty and the Protocol on the convergence criteria. The 
decision to adopt the euro is a very fundamental one and should not be taken lightly. Very 
careful preparation is required to ensure that convergence is sustainable and participation in 
the euro area is successful.  
Appropriate economic policies are necessary not only before, but also after the adoption of 
the  euro.  The  challenges  that  some  euro  area  countries  are  currently  facing  illustrate  the 
importance of sustainable convergence very clearly.  
Achieving  an  environment  conducive  to  sustainable  convergence  in  Bulgaria  requires  the 
conduct  of  economic  policies  geared  towards  ensuring  overall  macroeconomic  stability, 
including  sustainable  price  stability.  Given  the  limited  room  for  manoeuvre  for  monetary 
policy under the currency board arrangement, it is imperative that other policy areas provide 
the  economy  with  the  wherewithal  to  cope  with  country-specific  shocks  and  to  avoid  the 
recurrence of macroeconomic imbalances. Let me emphasise in particular the role of fiscal 
policy, which is one of the most important macroeconomic management tools at the disposal 
of policy-makers.  
Since the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union and the European System of Central 
Banks  in  2007,  Bulgarian  citizens  have  already  become  more  familiar  with  the  euro 
banknotes and coins. The objective of the Euro Exhibition is to improve the general public’s 
awareness of the euro banknotes and coins and their security features, and explain how to 
distinguish a genuine euro banknote from a counterfeit.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Euro Exhibition gives visitors the chance to explore subjects ranging from the history of 
money to the production of banknotes. As you walk around the exhibition, you will no doubt 
recognise  the  images  of  bridges  that  feature  on  the  back  of  the  euro  banknotes.  They 
symbolise the communication between the people of Europe and between Europe and the 
rest  of  the  world.  The  bridges  also  represent  the  connection  between  the  past  and  the 
present, and symbolise a common European future. The diversity of Europe is reflected on 
the national sides of the euro coins, which depict national icons and symbols representing 
the heritage and culture of each euro area country.  
The exhibition also has plenty to interest the younger generation. In the kids’ corner, children 
can play educational computer games, learn more about the features of euro banknotes from 
interactive displays and follow the story of Anna and Alex as they catch counterfeiters. Many 
other interactive components of the Euro Exhibition will appeal to both children and adults 
alike. The best way to learn how to check the authenticity of a euro banknote is to explore 
the  security  features  showcases.  And  why  not  investigate  the  showcase  displaying  the 
different steps in banknote production or try to lift the weight of a gold bar?  
Sofia is the 11th city to play host to the Euro Exhibition. Previously the Euro Exhibition has 
travelled  to  Frankfurt,  Bratislava,  Barcelona,  Rome,  Berlin,  Luxembourg,  Warsaw,  Tallinn, 
Bucharest and Paris.  
Several activities are planned in 2012 to mark the tenth anniversary of the introduction of the 
euro banknotes and coins and I would encourage you to keep checking the “euro pages” of 
the ECB’s website for news on the initiatives that we plan to launch.  
Governor  Iskrov,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  sincerely  hope  that  you  enjoy  your  visit  to  the 
Euro Exhibition today here in Sofia. It is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the European Central 
Bank, to declare the exhibition open.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
