Paul Tucker: Discussion of Lord Turner’s lecture, “Reforming finance – 
are we being radical enough?” 
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Clare 
Distinguished Lecture in Economics, Cambridge, 18 February 2011. 
 Master, it is a real pleasure to be here this evening. And it is a real pleasure to kick off the 
discussion  of  Adair’s  paper.  We  spend  a  great  deal  of  time  together  –  constructive  and 
productive  time  –  at  international  fora,  and  this  evening  Adair  has  typically  provided  a 
splendidly thorough survey of responses to the financial crisis.  
Adair casts it as about “Radicalism”. I don’t think it’s necessary to frame the issues in that 
way.  In  his  monumental  survey  of  the  long-eighteenth  century  revolution  of  ideas  and 
practice,  Radical  Enlightenment,1  Jonathan  Israel  argues  that  the  “true”  force  of  the 
Enlightenment  was 
thinkers 
underemphasised  by  mainstream  historiography.  But  even  if  he  is  right,  the  so-called 
“mainstream Enlightenment” still, surely, turned the world upside down. One does not need 
to sign up to Whig views of history to believe that, by largely separating the world of enquiry 
from the world of faith, it set in train profound forces. 
But if I do not see a need for one of the organising rhetorical constructs of Adair’s lecture, I 
do most certainly think that we need to deliver fundamental change in the “rules of the game” 
for the financial system. Adair’s talk therefore provides an excellent opportunity to pause and 
review some of the ways in which policy and theory have been interacting so far. 
the  democratic  urge  of  a 
loosely  allied  group  of 
The literature on myopia and the crisis 
I want to begin with theory not policy, and the paper by Shleifer et al cited by Adair helps to 
provide an organising framework. 
This paper reflects the growing response of the economic profession to the crisis, and should 
hearten us all that theory is alive and well and productive. Unlike most papers written over 
the past three to four decades, Shleifer abandons rational expectations (RE) in favour of a 
world in which agents are seriously myopic about certain low probability, high impact risks. 
It is worth reminding ourselves of the RE paradigm, which has dominated macroeconomics 
and finance since the ‘70s. It posits a state of affairs in which agents know the world – know 
the  structure  of  the  model,  and  so  have  model-consistent  expectations.  Bad  things  can 
happen  –  but  only  in  virtue  of  exogenous  shocks.  And  depending  on  the  structure  of  the 
world, those bad states can be relatively small beer, as famously argued by Lucas on the 
relative  unimportance  of  business  cycles.  Disagreeing  with  that,  the  so-called  salt-water 
economists wanted to show that, upon the crystallisation of those exogenous shocks, really 
bad  things,  recessions  and  persistent  unemployment,  can  happen  due  to  flaws  –  or,  as 
economists like to say, frictions – in the make up of the world. But the frictions perform an 
amplifying  role  only;  the  initial  impetus  comes  from  an  exogenous  shock  over  which  the 
behaviour of agents exerts no influence, directly or indirectly. That is because agents – firms 
and households, as normal people call them – do not make any ex ante mistakes. 
Shleifer describes a different kind of world altogether. It is a set up in which the myopia of the 
agents  –  investors,  bankers,  intermediaries  –leads  them,  and  the  economy  more  widely, 
                                                 
1   A short summary of the first two volumes is in Jonathan Israel, Revolution of the Mind, Radical Enlightenment 
and the Intellectual Origins of Modern Democracy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
towards  trouble,  sometimes  disaster.  Because  they  are  effectively  blind  to  certain  lowish 
probability risks, they generate and invest too heavily in securities that carry precisely those 
risks.  The  effects  of  innovation  get  out  of  hand.  This  is  a  nice  complement  to  papers  by 
academics  and  policymakers  attributing  the  ballooning  of  ABS  issuance  in  the  West  to  a 
combination of (i) an ex ante excess of savings from the East in the hands of investors with a 
preference for low risk fixed-income assets, and (ii) a shortage of precisely those highly rated 
fixed-income  instruments.  The  effect,  on  that  view,  was  initially  to  drive  down  credit  risk 
premia relative to equity risk premia, and to spur the issue of synthetic securitisations to fill 
the  gap  in  supply.2  If  that  story  drives  expansion  of  ABS/CDO  issuance,  Shleifer’s  model 
helps motivate a lot of those securities being fundamentally mispriced.  
During  the  good  times,  everyone  feels  that  they  are  achieving  a  nice  balance  of  risk  and 
return.  They  are  getting,  they  think,  safety,  liquidity  and  return!  But  something  eventually 
happens to cause them to wake up, and to see the risks they have neglected. Investors can 
then react in a dramatic way. They stop buying, sell; prices collapse etc. But an exogenous 
shock  is  not  needed  to  generate  that  unravelling.  If  the  overpriced  securities  have  led  to 
credit  conditions  being  too  loose,  then  somebody  –  households,  firms,  sovereigns,  or 
everyone  –  will  have  accumulated  too  much  debt,  and  so  eventually  fundamentals  assert 
themselves: defaults rise, and realisation sets in. As a younger colleague said to me, “the 
model’s key features are all way outside what I was taught in the ‘90s”. But doesn’t it sound 
ever so slightly like the real world?  
For me, one of the strengths of Shleifer’s paper is that he cites good examples, not only from 
the  recent  crisis  but  earlier  ones  too.  A  key  past  case  is  the  boom  in  issuance  of 
Collateralised Mortgage Obligations (CMOs) in the run up to the 1994 mini-crisis, an episode 
that  I  tried –  too  timidly  –  to  highlight  in  2006.3  Of  many  examples  from  the  run  up  to  the 
recent bust , a great one is the late-cycle CPDOs – constant proportion debt obligations – 
which  were  rated  AAA,  paid  around  200bp  over  money  market  rates,  and  had  a  big 
exposure to tail risk.4 And on the great awakening, Shleifer himself gives the example of a 
realisation about ABCP, ABS and so on in mid-2007 after subprime delinquencies had risen 
and  faith  –  note,  faith  –  in  rating  agency  ratings  of  structured  finance  securities  had 
evaporated. This exactly chimes with the market intelligence that the Bank was picking up in 
August 2007. I well remember Stuart Gulliver, now CEO of HSBC, saying to me very early on 
something to the effect of “anything with “ABS” or “securitisation” in the label is now toxic”.  
Indeed, Shleifer’s story, and the broader one told by Adair this evening, fits with the thrust of 
the Bank of England’s strategy towards Market Intelligence, framed in around 2002/03. This 
amounted to saying that we needed to think about markets somewhat differently when we 
are doing monetary policy and financial stability. For monetary policy, in most circumstances 
a reasonable default assumption is that core markets are more or less efficient most of the 
time. So, while we absolutely have to be alert to distortions, we are not crazy to infer, from 
yield  curves,  expectations  about  the  path  of  policy  rates  or  of  inflation.  But  for  financial 
stability, which of course affects macroeconomic conditions, I have always encouraged the 
team to do a Gestalt flip to thinking of markets as inefficient, riddled with preferred habitats, 
imperfect  arbitrage,  regulatory  arbitrage,  herding,  and  inhabited  by  agents  with  less  than 
idealised rationality. That’s how during the early 2000s the team came to write about CDOs, 
ABCP, monolines and, eventually, vehicular finance etc. 
                                                 
2   Caballero  R  J  (2009),  “The  “Other”  Imbalances  and  the  Financial  Crisis”,  MIT  Department  of  Economics 
Working Paper No. 09–32. 
3   See  page  12  of  Tucker  P  M  W  (2006),  “Uncertainty,  the  Implementation  of  Monetary  Policy  and  the 
Management of Risk”, a speech to the Association of Corporate Treasurers. 
4   The  potential  risks  associated  with  CPDOs  (and  other  AAA-rated  products)  were  discussed  in  the  Bank  of 
England’s April 2007 Financial Stability Report. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Shleifer’s paper strikes me, therefore, as one example of exactly what the academic end of 
the  economics  profession  needs  to  do  in  order  to  speak  to  policymakers  framing  and 
implementing reform. It engages with what I have previously described as “risk illusion”, in 
motivating a macroprudential prudential approach to policy.5 
In other words, it carries policy implications. 
Policy 
Moreover, the policy implications of Shleifer’s paper are arguably rather different from those 
stemming  from  theories  that  attribute  the  crisis  solely  to  bankers  acting  rationally  in 
response to the private incentives created by remuneration packages and the problem of Too 
Big To Fail. In that sense, Shleifer’s model formalises the argument of Charles Goodhart and 
others  that  bankers  badly  misjudged  the  risks  rather  than  consciously  ran  the  system 
towards the edge of the cliff. 
One policy implication of myopia is that, as Shleifer himself says, we need to attend to risks 
beyond banking – in shadow banking etc. I spoke about that around this time last year.6 We 
need policies on firms and funds that perform similar economic functions to banking, such as 
money  funds;  as  Shleifer  says,  the  constant-net-asset-value  basis  of  most  money  funds 
encourages a belief that they are riskless, and yet in fact they are not insured and carry no 
capital. We also need policies on markets that deliver maturity transformation and leverage. 
This  crisis  happened  partly  because  the  authorities  did  not  keep  up  with  developments  in 
capital markets. I shall not revisit that in detail this evening, other than to say that the Bank is 
glad  that  its  new  Financial  Policy  Committee  will  have  a  responsibility  for  advising  HMG 
when  to  move  the  perimeter  of  microprudential  supervision  and  a  power  to  make 
Recommendations to the securities regulator on rules governing funds and markets where 
they are material to stability. Thankfully, all this is now also being worked on internationally in 
the Financial Stability Board. 
A second and obvious policy inference that one could draw from Shleifer’s paper, and one I 
want to spend a little more time on this evening, is that it is absolutely vital that (regulatory) 
capital requirements for banks more or less truly capture their risks. Two thoughts on that, of 
rather  different  kinds.  First,  it  was  very  obviously  a  false  step  when,  in  Basel  2,  the 
international-standard setters tried to follow the techniques and calibrations of private sector 
risk managers rather than engaging with the externalities that warrant State intervention in 
this area in the first place. Second, more particularly and more concretely, this underlines the 
vital importance of the current Basel work to review fundamentally the capital requirements 
for banks’ trading books. In short, Basel has recognised that the amount of capital a bank 
should hold against a liquid trading position often has good reason to be smaller than needed 
for a hold-to-maturity portfolio, ie where the bank can shed its exposure. But it failed utterly to 
recognise that since such books are marked-to-market (or  model) and  since the boundary 
conditions for solvency derive partly from accounting measures of asset values, it is vital that 
banks hold capital against the risk of violent swings in liquidity premia. Yet that is exactly 
what  torpedoed  a  fair  fraction  of  the  largest  banks  and  dealers  in  the  world  through  their 
(levered) holdings of leveraged loans and super senior tranches of CDOs. It was a risk about 
which  bank  management,  investors,  regulators  and  supervisors  were  all  myopic.  The  so-
called Fundamental Review of Trading Book Capital Requirements is, as Adair said, a very 
important opportunity to correct this. 
                                                 
5   See  the  Bank’s  paper:  “The  role  of  macroprudential  policy:  A  discussion  paper”,  November  2009  and 
Tucker P M  W  (2009e),  “The  debate  on  financial  system  resilience:  Macroprudential  instruments”  at  the 
Barclays Annual Lecture in London. 
6   Tucker  P  M  W  (2010),  “Shadow  Banking,  Financing  Markets  and  Financial  Stability”,  Speech  at  a  BCG 
Partners Seminar. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
What  that  amounts  to  in  practice  is  recognising  that  the  degree  of  resilience  of  market 
liquidity matters a lot. I have been arguing that a market’s liquidity is unlikely to be resilient if 
demand  is  dominantly  from  leveraged  investors  and  traders.  They  buy  when  prices  are 
rising, but stop buying or even sell when the price stops going up, leaving prices without a 
firm  underpinning  –  and  often  with  prices  perched  on  a  precipice.  That  element  of  recent 
events is missing from Shleifer’s set up, but in the real world it is precisely what we might 
expect if one joins up his story about innovation induced by myopia with Hyun Shin’s earlier 
paper7 about the association of leverage and asset-prices fluctuations. 
If securities are fundamentally mispriced because of blindness to a type of risk and, further, 
are  held  dominantly  by  leveraged  players,  the  adjustment  when  it  comes  will  be  all  the 
greater.  In  commentary  on  other  papers,  Shleifer  himself  has  argued  against  one  of  the 
fundamental drivers of the crisis being the liquidity exposures stemming from ABS and other 
securities being financed by short-term repos; what Gary Gorton and others have called the 
run on repo.8 But the spirit – if not the analytics – of his paper could extend to myopia about 
liquidity risk; it was neglected because agents forgot about it. Only recently the leader of a 
financial institution that emerged relatively unscathed from the crisis told me that they had 
been blind to the possibility of a really severe liquidity crunch; and that they had reacted by 
massively cutting their short-term funding in the worst days of the crisis. As a policymaker, 
for whom explanations can be complementary rather than seminar papers in competition, the 
myopia and run-on-repo se stories seem to me to join up rather well.  
What to do? As the Basel Supervisors Committee proceeds with the FRTB, I can imagine 
reluctance to opine on the liquidity of markets, but it was not beyond the wit of the official 
sector  to  observe  that  crucial  parts  of  the  ABS  market  were  utterly  dependent  on  levered 
money and so very unlikely to be liquid when the music stopped. This partly makes the case 
for reconnecting supervisors and markets specialists in central banks.  
This  is  all  part  of  getting  the  level  of  capital  in  the  banking  industry  closer  to  what  is 
warranted.  Adair  has  said  a  great  deal  about  that  this  evening.  But  before  coming  to  the 
associated international policy debates about the biggest and most complex firms, I want to 
go back to incentives. Because whatever the merits of the riskmyopia argument I have been 
reviewing,  we  absolutely  must  not  build  a  system  that  relies  on  dismissing  the  incentives 
argument. While I doubt that many bankers deliberately – that is to say, consciously – took 
outsized risks that crashed the system because they believed they would be bailed out, I do 
believe that their behaviour will have been profoundly affected by their cost of debt being too 
low  because  asset  managers  believed  they  would  not  lose  money.  Asset  managers  held 
beliefs about the policy world that fatally diluted their incentive, as creditors, to monitor and 
discipline banks (this is the Too Big To Fail problem).  
That  brings  me  to  the  policy  debate  on  resolution.  Those  of  us  promoting  enhanced 
resolution regimes, who include Adair by the way, do so for two reasons. First, no one can 
guarantee that losses will not exceed equity cushions in the future and when that happens if 
the losses do not fall on bondholders – via resolution or the much more disruptive liquidation 
– they will end up falling on taxpayers. And second, exposing bondholders to risk has the 
potential to harness market discipline – or, as I have put it, to bring capitalism back into the 
heart of capitalism. That weighs with me both as a matter of principle, and because minds 
have  been  concentrated  by  the  planned  transfer  to  the  Bank  of  responsibility  for  micro 
prudential supervision of banks. A system in which our bank supervisors were the next line of 
                                                 
7   Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2010),  “The  Changing  Nature  of  Financial  Intermediation  and  the 
Financial Crisis of 2007–09”, Annual Review of Economics 2: 603–18. 
8   Gorton G B and A Metrick (2009), “Securitized banking and the run on repo”, NBER Working Paper 15223. 
See also Shleifer’s comments on Gorton and Metrick “Regulating the Shadow Banking System” BPEA, Fall 
2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
defence after management would be badly designed. We need to set rules of the game that 
harness boards, shareholders, auditors and, in today’s context, crucially bondholders to the 
cause of preserving the safety and soundness of the firms they run, monitor and finance.  
Adair airs some questions about reliance on resolution. Namely, (i) the incidence of failure 
amongst  the  largest  and  most  complex  firms  is  so  rare  that,  over  time,  participants  in 
financial  markets  will  forget  it  can  happen;  and  (ii)  that  when  such  a  firm  does  fail,  the 
spillovers will be so great that the market will expect it to be bailed out, validating the myopia. 
Those arguments seriously underestimate the determination of policymakers in this area.  
Perhaps the first point to make is that Lehman was allowed to fail, even though no one can 
seriously have been in much doubt about the severity of the consequences. In a democracy, 
interventions are sometimes severely constrained. It would be myopic for market participants 
to set aside the probability of that happening again. In fact, I doubt markets will forget for a 
long time. And arguably one can see awareness of this risk in bank debt spreads today and 
in  the  movements  following  policy  consultations  in  Europe  and  the  US  on  “bailin”  and 
resolution reforms. But, secondly, the idea of not equipping ourselves with better tools for the 
“last chance saloon”, when all else had failed, would be a counsel of despair. Adair must be 
right, though, that we will need to build credibility for our commitment to resolve rather than 
bailout. That means building institutions to underpin that commitment. Idiosyncratic failures 
do occur. We can – and where appropriate should – prospectively apply the same resolution 
tools to the failure of medium-sized firms as we are developing for the largest global firms, 
demonstrating  our  willingness  to  use  them.  Living  wills  –  or,  as  they  are  now  called, 
Recovery and Resolution Plans – will help, provided they have teeth. Which means ensuring 
that  firms  are  organised  and  structured  to  permit  effective  resolution  of  different  kinds  of 
business line. And a prompt-intervention supervisory action regime can be designed to limit 
the  scope  for  regulatory  forbearance.  That  will  be  an  important  part  of  the  reforms  of 
microsupervision in the UK, as we prepare for the Prudential Regulatory Authority.  
Enhanced  resolution  regimes  are  aimed  at  putting  asset  managers  at  risk  through  their 
holdings of credit instruments, just as they accept risk as equity investors. That will affect the 
oxygen that bankers breathe. But we could underpin the positive incentive effects by paying 
part of the deferred element of the remuneration of bankers in risky debt securities as well as 
in equity; equity gives them upside as well as downside, whereas a fair chunk of their wealth 
being  a  debt  claim  on  their  bank  would  give  them  a  powerful  interest  in  its  medium-term 
soundness. My guess is that senior bank management team would not object to that.  
But  none  of  what  I  have  said  makes  a  case  for  placing  all  of  our  eggs  in  the  resolution 
basket. Switching metaphors, we need belt and braces. Which is why the G20 agreed that 
the  so-called  Global  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (G-SIFIs)  should  carry 
greater loss absorbing capacity (or GLAC) than implied by Basel III. 
First best would be equity. Indeed, Adair has argued this evening that ideally Basel 3 would 
have set a higher equity requirement. But that did not happen. In practice, we are going to 
have to be open-minded, but also principled, about quasi-equity instruments contributing to 
GLAC  for  SIFIs  (sorry  about  the  acronyms!).  Currently,  the  leading  candidate  is  so-called 
Contingent Capital bonds (CoCos), which convert from debt into equity in certain states of 
the world. It seems to me that to serve the purpose of GLAC for large and complex firms, 
such instruments would need to convert when a firm was still fundamentally sound, which is 
to say that they should have high capital triggers. For a large and complex firm, a low capital 
trigger  would  be  dangerous,  as  funders  and  counterparties  would  be  likely  to  flee  before 
reaching the point at which the firm would be recapitalised through the CoCos’ conversion. 
Moreover,  high-trigger  CoCos  would  presumably  get  converted  not  infrequently  which,  in 
terms of reducing myopia in capital markets, would have the merit of reminding holders and 
issuers about risks in banking.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
“Macroprudential” and the Financial Policy Committee 
Bringing this together, policies on trading-book capital requirements, loss-absorbing capacity, 
resolution and shadow banking can all contribute towards addressing the stability-threatening 
problems of myopia identified in the literature. And the higher effective capital requirements 
that this package can deliver might potentially affect incentives by exposing debtholders to 
risk;  and,  via  reducing  return  on  equity,  by  harnessing  the  energies  of  shareholders  in 
monitoring the terms of distributions to managers. In that sense, quite technical things might 
have significant effects over time on behaviour and the structure of the financial system.  
That assumes that lessons from this crisis endure. But, of course, the most pernicious forms 
of myopia surely come out of prolonged periods of apparent tranquillity in markets and the 
economy. That is when everyone gets suckered into believing the world is a safer place than 
it  is,  with  elegant  theories  and  eloquent  practical  stories  for  why  the  world  has  really 
changed.  Which  ultimately  tips  us  from  tranquillity  to  disaster.  One  of  this  university’s 
greatest twentieth century thinkers taught us that what counts as an argument – not just as a 
good  argument,  but  as  an  argument  at  all  –  is  not  always  firmly  grounded.  The  deepest 
problem during the years in which a grave crisis is brewed is that those who see the signs 
are marginalised or literally not heard. What on earth are we to do about that? 
Part  of  the  solution  must  lie  in  the  design  of  policy  institutions.  One  reform  would  ask  a 
dedicated  and  expert  group  to  identify  risks  to  stability  and  give  them  powers  to  address 
those risks that threaten the system or are leaving it vulnerable; and, vitally, to require them 
to stick at that task year in-year out, even when everyone else would otherwise be losing 
interest,  taking  stability  for  granted.  As  Adair  said  this  evening,  that  is  precisely  what  is 
going on in the UK through the creation of the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee. 
The first members were announced yesterday. This is a big reform. Rather undermining my 
strictures  to  Adair  on  his  use  of  “radicalism”,  I’ve  described  it  a  number  of  times  as 
revolutionary. 
The FPC’s success (or otherwise) will not depend solely on its own ability to identify risks. 
Rather we must ensure that the debate about stability – the flame if you like – never dies. For 
that reason, our accountability to the Treasury Select Committee can help greatly through the 
public debate and commentatory that our appearances will stimulate. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
