Jean-Claude Trichet: Building Europe, building institutions 
Speech by  Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on receiving 
the Karlspreis 2011, Aachen, 2 June 2011. 
 Lord Mayor, 
Presidents of the European Council, the European Commission, the European Parliament 
and the Eurogroup,  
Former recipients of the Karlspreis,  
President of the Deutsche Bundesrat,  
Excellencies, 
Ministers, 
Members of the European Parliament and national parliaments, 
Members of the ECB’s Governing Council,  
Members of the Karlspreis Foundation, 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is an immense honour to receive the Karlspreis today. 
I  find  it  difficult  to  put  into  words  how  deeply  humbled  I  am  to  join  the  most  impressive 
company of the prize recipients. To borrow the words of Sir Isaac Newton, I feel as if I am 
standing on the shoulders of giants. 
I express my most profound gratitude to the Karlspreis foundation for bestowing this honour. 
I know that this prize goes to my colleagues of the Executive Board who are present today 
and to all staff of the European monetary team: the European System of Central Banks. I am 
moved by the kind words of President Barroso and the faith the Karlspreis foundation have 
placed in us as true Europeans. 
 Each generation needs to affirm its commitment to Europe. 
For  the  generation  that  lived  through  the  Second  World  War,  Europe  was  essential  to 
prevent a return to the depression and the horrors of that war.  
For  the  generation  after,  Europe  was  the  cornerstone  of  building  prosperity  through 
economic freedom and open markets. 
For  the  current  generation,  these  achievements  are  taken  for  granted.  Citizens  have  new 
concerns.  
They  want  to  be  told  why  European  unity  is  more  important  than  ever  in  the  present 
globalised world  to  ensure  peace  and  security;  why  the  European  Union  is  vital  to  ensure 
and  promote  the  interests  of  the  European  nations;  why  the  European  economies  and 
societies are much more interdependent today than immediately after World War II; and how 
these interests and this interdependence should be best governed.  
In all domains this calls for continuing to strengthen Europe’s institutional framework. In the 
economic and financial fields it demands to reinforce in a decisive way the institutions of the 
economic and monetary union.  
By institutions, I do not mean technocrats making complex decisions remote from citizens. 
I  mean  the  rules  and  organisations  that  preserve  our  core  values  and  guide  our  actions 
towards the common good. 
Institutions that build trust between peoples and nations in Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Institutions that foster cooperation for mutual benefit. 
Institutions that manage our interdependence by preparing collective decisions. 
As Jean Monnet put it, “Nothing is possible without men and women, but nothing is lasting 
without institutions.” 
We  are  privileged  in  Europe  to  have  institutions  that  contribute  to  binding  together  our 
continent, that embody the values of the European project and carry it further. 
The European Commission, led by Mr. Barroso, is at the heart of this process. The European 
Council, led by Mr. Van Rompuy, gives it direction and momentum from the highest level. In 
the  domain  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  the  Eurogroup,  led  by  Mr.  Juncker,  drives 
forward its agenda and confronts its challenges. 
In keeping with the vision of the Karlspreis, I will focus my remarks today on how developing 
further  our  common  institutions  is  the  key  to  the  next  stage  of  European  economic  and 
financial integration. 
My main message is that the achievements of economic and monetary union (EMU) to date 
have  been  made  possible  by  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem,  the  strong  institutions  of 
monetary union – the M in EMU. In the same vein, confronting the challenges of the future 
requires strengthening the institutions of economic union – the E in EMU.  
Economic and Monetary Union 
EMU is the area where Europe has progressed furthest. 
It is a union where sovereign nations share a single market, a single economy and a single 
currency. Where they bind their actions through common laws and institutions. Where they 
remain unified and diverse at the same time. 
This unique arrangement fulfils the visions of centuries of great European thinkers. 
… of Erasmus in the 16th century, who spelled out the moral limitations of a strict concept of 
nationhood  
… of William Penn in the 17th century, who recognised that European nations could mutually 
benefit by creating common institutions 
…  of  Immanuel  Kant  in  the  18th  century,  who  understood  that  the  authority  of  such 
institutions had to rest on common laws 
…  of  Victor  Hugo  in  the  19th  century,  who  realised  that  democratic  participation  was 
necessary to provide these laws with legitimacy 
…  and  of  Robert  Schuman  in  the  20th  century,  who  saw  that  the  foundation  of  all  of  the 
above would be economic integration. 
It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  this  historical  perspective,  seeing  beyond  the  current 
challenges in the euro area. EMU is itself an unprecedented achievement in the history of 
sovereign nations – a goal to which generations of Europeans have aspired. 
EMU is a historical process designed to bring real economic benefits for Europe’s citizens. 
We should not overlook what has been achieved in this area. 
EMU  has  brought  growth.  Over  the  first  decade  of  the  euro,  GDP  growth  per  person  has 
been of the same order of magnitude as in the United States.  
EMU has fostered trade. Not only inside the Euro area (+50% increase in trade volumes over 
the first years of the euro), but even more so with the European Union as a whole and the 
rest of the world (+80% over the same period). EMU is not a closed shop. On the contrary, it 
is the most open of the large economies in the world.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
EMU has brought employment. Employment has increased by 14 million since the creation of 
the euro, compared with a rise of about 8 million in the United States. 
EMU has brought price stability. The average yearly inflation rate in the euro area during its 
first  12  years  was  1.97%.  That  is  fully  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability  at  the 
European Central Bank (ECB): an inflation rate below but close to 2% over the medium term.  
And EMU has brought monetary stability. The euro is a solid and credible currency, trusted 
by our fellow citizens, investors and savers.  
There is no “crisis of the euro”. 
The ECB and the euro 
In 2002, the Karlspreis Foundation awarded the prize to the euro. The Foundation stressed 
how  the  euro  was  the  logical  step  to  maximise  the  benefits  of  the  single  market  for 
sustainable growth and job creation.  
On the evidence accumulated in the first twelve and a half years, the ECB has delivered on 
this promise. 
The Treaty has mandated the ECB to keep safe the money of Europe’s citizens. And it has 
given the ECB the capability and the full independence to perform this task effectively. 
These  two  aspects  are  akin  to  Max  Weber’s  ethics  of  conviction  and  responsibility.  Our 
mandate gives us our conviction. Determined action reflects our responsibility. 
In the difficult circumstances afflicting all the advanced economies since the start of the crisis 
in 2007, the ECB Governing Council demonstrated both conviction and responsibility.  
We have shown conviction in steadfast commitment to price stability. Before and during the 
crisis,  all  our  decisions on  interest  rates  –  we  call  them  “standard  decisions”  –  have  been 
designed in order to give our fellow citizens price stability over the medium term.  
And, as I just said, over the first twelve years we have delivered average yearly inflation at 
the level of less than 2%: it is a better result than the previous national currencies over the 
last 50 years, including the Deutsche Mark. Here in Aachen, I can say, the promise “stark wie 
die Mark” has been fully respected.  
Since  the  crisis  we  also  had  to  cope  with  financial  turbulences,  abnormal  functioning  of 
markets and disruption of certain segments of markets.  
We  showed  our  responsibility  in  taking  monetary  policy  measures  –  we  call  them  “non 
standard” decisions, strictly separated from the “standard” decisions, and aimed at restoring 
a better transmission of our monetary policy in these abnormal market conditions.  
All these “non standard” measures – whether exceptional refinancing with full allotment and 
longer  duration,  or  the  interventions  in  private  or  public  securities  markets  –  have  been 
designed to be commensurate to the tensions observed on these markets and allow a better 
transmission of our interest rates decisions.  
In demonstrating both conviction and responsibility, the ECB has been, during the last four 
years, a reliable and solid anchor of stability to the service of our fellow citizens in the worst 
economic and financial circumstances since World War II.  
Had we not been able to present a solid anchor of stability and confidence, the recovery the 
euro  area  has  experienced  since May  2010  would  probably  have  been  very  different.  The 
increase in GDP of over 2.5% in the past 12 months would not have happened. The increase 
in employment by 350,000 jobs since then might not have been there. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  deciding  on  all  our  measures,  standard  and  non-standard,  we  have  the  needle  in  the 
compass on our primary objective: price stability for the 331 million fellow citizens of the euro 
area.  
I wish to underline that achievements of the last 12 years have only been possible thanks to 
the remarkable dedication and expertise of the ECB Executive Board and Governing Council, 
to whom Europe today, through the Karspreis, is expressing its gratitude. 
The  same  gratitude  goes  to  the  1,400  staff  members  at  the  ECB  in  Frankfurt.  They  come 
from  all  27  countries  of  the  EU.  They  are  a  shining  example  of  professionalism  and  team 
spirit, of what it means to work together for Europe. 
Current challenges for governance 
Just as the success of the euro as a currency is due to well-designed institutions, addressing 
EMU’s difficulties requires a major strengthening of the rules and organisations that govern 
fiscal and economic policies. 
Looking at the euro area today, we see clearly that countries that abide by the rules of the 
single currency can thrive and prosper. Sound policies and a healthy economy are strongly 
correlated. 
But we also see the opposite. Countries that have not lived up to the letter or the spirit of the 
rules  have  experienced  difficulties.  Via  contagion,  these  difficulties  have  affected  other 
countries in EMU. 
Strengthening the rules to prevent unsound policies is therefore an urgent priority. It is the 
means to allow all countries to reap the full benefits of the single currency. And it prohibits 
individual  countries  from  pursuing  policies  that  harm  themselves  and  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole.  
For this reason, I have called, in the name of the Governing Council, on the Commission, the 
Council  and  the  European  Parliament  to  be  very  ambitious  in  reinforcing  economic 
governance in the euro area. We have called for a “quantum leap” in governance now, to 
draw  all  the  immediate  lessons  from  the  first  years  of  Economic  union  and  from  the 
weaknesses revealed by the global crisis.  
I count particularly on the European Parliament to reinforce the draft secondary legislation 
that  is  presently  examined  in  the  “trialogue”  between  the  Parliament,  the  Commission  and 
the Council. 
Which possible changes of governance could be envisaged in the medium term? 
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, we face the challenge of supporting countries 
that experience financial difficulties. 
Arrangements  are  currently  in  place,  involving  financial  assistance  under  strict  conditions, 
fully in line with the IMF policy. I am aware that some observers have concerns about where 
this  leads.  The  line  between  regional  solidarity  and  individual  responsibility  could  become 
blurred if the conditionality is not rigorously complied with. 
In my view, it could be appropriate to foresee for the medium term two stages for countries in 
difficulty. This would naturally demand a change of the Treaty. 
As  a  first  stage,  it  is  justified  to  provide  financial  assistance  in  the  context  of  a  strong 
adjustment programme. It is appropriate to give countries an opportunity to put the situation 
right themselves and to restore stability. 
At  the  same  time,  such  assistance  is  in  the  interests  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  as  it 
prevents crises spreading in a way that could cause harm to other countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  is  of  paramount  importance  that  adjustment  occurs;  that  countries  –  governments  and 
opposition – unite behind the effort; and that contributing countries survey with great care the 
implementation of the programme. 
But if a country is still not delivering, I think all would agree that the second stage has to be 
different.  
Would it go too far if we envisaged, at this second stage, giving euro area authorities a much 
deeper and authoritative say in the formation of the country’s economic policies if these go 
harmfully astray? A direct influence, well over and above the reinforced surveillance that is 
presently envisaged?  
The  rationale  for  this  approach  would  be  to  find  a  balance  between  the  independence  of 
countries and the interdependence of their actions, especially in exceptional circumstances. 
We  can  see  before  our  eyes  that  membership  of  the  EU,  and  even  more  so  of  EMU, 
introduces a new understanding in the way sovereignty is exerted. Interdependence means 
that countries de facto do not have complete internal authority. They can experience crises 
caused entirely by the unsound economic policies of others. 
With a new concept of a second stage, we would change drastically the present governance 
based upon the dialectics of surveillance, recommendations and sanctions.  
In the present concept, all the decisions remain in the hands of the country concerned, even 
if the recommendations are not applied, and even if this attitude triggers major difficulties for 
other member countries.  
In the new concept, it would be not only possible, but in some cases compulsory, in a second 
stage for the European authorities – namely the Council on the basis of a proposal by the 
Commission,  in  liaison  with  the  ECB  –  to  take  themselves  decisions  applicable  in  the 
economy concerned.  
One way this could be imagined is for European authorities to have the right to veto some 
national  economic  policy  decisions.  The  remit  could  include  in  particular  major  fiscal 
spending items and elements essential for the country’s competitiveness.  
Which possible changes of governance in the historical long term?  
Looking much further ahead, we should wonder what will be the future political institutional 
framework of Europe.  
Immanuel Kant argued that, where countries are interdependent, institutions will continue to 
develop between them until a stable equilibrium is reached. In his words, “a state of affairs… 
that can maintain itself automatically.” 
And Jean Monnet in his memoirs 35 years ago wrote: “Nobody can say today what will be 
the  institutional  framework  of  Europe  tomorrow  because  the  future  changes,  which  will  be 
fostered by today’s changes, are unpredictable.”  
In a long term historical perspective, Europe – which has invented the concept and the word 
of democracy – is called to complete the design of what it already calls a “Union”.  
The future political institutional framework of the Europeans will not be the simple imitation of 
existing  models.  On  a  personal  basis,  as  a  European  citizen,  I  think  that,  like  at  the  very 
moment  of  the  birth  of  the  concept  of  democracy,  the  Europeans  will  not  be  imitators  but 
rather setting examples, with a Union that will be a confederation of sovereign states of an 
entirely new type. This naturally will call for a very important change of the Treaty and will 
have consequences in all the Union’s responsibilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In this Union of tomorrow, or of the day after tomorrow, would it be too bold, in the economic 
field, with a single market, a single currency and a single central bank, to envisage a ministry 
of finance of the Union?  
Not necessarily a ministry of finance that administers a large federal budget. But a ministry of 
finance that would exert direct responsibilities in at least three domains: first, the surveillance 
of  both  fiscal  policies  and  competitiveness  policies,  as  well  as  the  direct  responsibilities 
mentioned earlier as regards countries in a “second stage” inside the euro area; second, all 
the  typical  responsibilities  of  the  executive  branches  as  regards  the  union’s  integrated 
financial sector, so as to accompany the full integration of financial services; and third, the 
representation of the union confederation in international financial institutions.  
Which  institution  of  this  confederation  of  sovereign  states  of  a  new  type  will  exert  these 
responsibilities, will be decided by the people of Europe, as Jean Monnet suggested. I am 
sure  that  the  President  of  the  European  Council,  the  President  of  the  Commission,  the 
President of the Eurogroup and the German Minister of Finance – who are all present here – 
have their own sentiment on this question.  
Conclusion 
Let me come to a conclusion, and don’t be surprised that a central banker shares with you 
some thoughts on the subject of culture. It is often suggested that Jean Monnet said “if I had 
to do it again, I would start first through culture.” The cultural unity of Europe is at the root of 
the European endeavour, including economic and monetary union.  
Let me give you two complementary readings of Europe’s cultural unity.  
The first is the vision of Husserl in his famous Vienna lecture of May 1935. He sees the origin 
of the spiritual form of Europe in its philosophical roots. I am quoting: “One can see that it is 
the starting point of a new kind of community, one which extends beyond nations. It is now 
no longer a number of different nations living alongside each other and only influencing each 
other through commercial competition or power struggles, but it is: a new spirit – stemming 
from philosophy and the sciences based on it – a spirit of free criticism, providing norms for 
infinite tasks, and it dominates mankind creating new, infinite ideals”.  
The second is the vision of Paul Valéry. He stresses the spiritual character of Europe in his 
essay  “l’Européen”.  In  1924  he  wrote:  “Wherever  the  names  Caesar,  Gaius,  Trajan  and 
Virgil,  wherever  the  names  Moises  and  St.  Paul,  wherever  the  names  Aristotle,  Plato  and 
Euclid  have  a  significance  and  carry  weight,  that  is  where  Europe  is”.  Here  in  Aachen,  I 
would say wherever the name of Charlemagne carries weight, that is where Europe is. 
Particularly  in  these  times  of  global  challenges,  of  stress,  of  crisis,  such  a  return  to  the 
“spiritual form of Europe” is enlightening.  
Husserl concluded his lecture in a visionary way: “Europe’s existential crisis can end in only 
one of two ways: in its demise (…) lapsing into a hatred of the spirit and into barbarism; or in 
its rebirth from the spirit of philosophy, through a heroism of reason (…)”.  
I  think  that  [eventually]  a  confederation  of  sovereign  states  of  a  new  type,  with  new 
institutions to manage the interdependence of today and tomorrow, would be fully in line with 
such a heroism of reason. 
 The city of Aachen has a special significance for Europe as a whole and also for the peoples 
of France and Germany. 
Nearly 60 years later, I too have the honour of receiving the Karlspreis as President of the 
ECB, being also a “Frenchman on German soil”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As a French citizen on German soil, I do not forget the start of the European endeavour, with 
the  speech  of  Robert  Schuman.  This  endeavour  was  founded,  in  particular,  on  the  ties 
between our two countries, put to the service of all other nations and of Europe as a whole, 
the deepening integration of our economies and currencies, and ultimately the common bond 
of  the  euro.  It  has  been  a  great  privilege  that  the  path  of  my  career  has  allowed  me  to 
participate in this historical endeavour. 
In the almost eight years I have lived in Germany, I have developed a strong admiration for 
the country, its culture and its history.  
Germany  combines  local,  regional  and  national  identities  with  a  strong  European  identity, 
each mutually reinforcing. 
This is unity in diversity – a strong whole with equally strong parts.  
Europe is progressing along this path. But to go further, the European nations must continue 
to lead the way. It is vital that all nations engage fully in the European historical endeavour 
and look with confidence to the future. 
There are many grounds to be confident in our long-term future.  
Europe is in the vanguard of nations working peacefully together. 
We have replaced confrontation and conflict with cooperation and consensus.  
We have combined political freedom with economic freedom and social peace.  
We have proved that our single currency is stable and credible, preserving price stability over 
time.  
Let us carry this noble endeavour further by giving Europe now and for the longer term the 
institutions it deserves.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
