Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet 
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, Mansion House, 15 June 2011. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In  recent  years,  I  have set  the  Mansion  House audience  a numerical  examination.  After  a 
pleasant  dinner,  you  will  not  want  to  listen  to  more  numbers.  A  more  literary  style  is 
appropriate.  So  my  question  to  you  tonight  is:  which  aspect  of  financial  regulation  is  most 
deserving of the adjective “tragic”? The answer comes later. 
A  year  ago,  we  met  in  the  wake  of  a  major  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Greece  with  market 
nervousness about how far that might spread. Since then, this crisis of external indebtedness 
has consumed Ireland and now Portugal, as well as Greece. Current account imbalances in 
the euro area remain large, should concern us all, and will certainly affect us all.  
Inexorably,  the  world  economy  is  adjusting  from  an  unstable  disequilibrium  to  a  new 
equilibrium. Trade imbalances and the associated levels of borrowing proved unsustainable. 
In more biblical language, failure to tackle the imbalances during the seven years of plenty 
before  2007  threatens  seven  lean  years  thereafter  for  at  least  part  of  the  world  economy. 
After a deep-seated banking crisis, now transmuted into a sovereign debt crisis, the need to 
reduce  debt  as  the  world  adjusts  to  a  new  equilibrium  pattern  of  spending  and  trade  will 
mean only a gradual recovery in many advanced economies.  
Storms  from  the  world  economy  are  likely  to  stir  up  the  waters  through  which  the  UK 
economy  must pass as it too adjusts to a new equilibrium with lower  levels of debt and  a 
rebalancing from domestic to external demand. So, my Lord Mayor, there is no shortage of 
challenges at  home.  Consumer  price  inflation has  risen  to  4½%,  and further  large  rises  in 
utility prices are expected. Output has probably grown by only around 1% or so over the past 
year. Our banking system faces a need, over time, to build higher levels of capital and find 
new sources of domestic funding. And regulation must be reformed to respond to the lessons 
from the crisis.  
So  I  want  tonight  to  comment  briefly  on  three  themes:  monetary  policy;  macro-prudential 
policy,  and  the  work  of  the  new  Financial  Policy  Committee  at  the  Bank;  and  the  new 
approach  to  banking  regulation  that  will  follow  the  creation  of  the  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority.  
The challenge facing monetary policy is obvious – the combination of high consumer price 
inflation  and  weak  economic  growth.  Both  of  these  might  seem  surprising  given  the  large 
amount of spare capacity in the economy. But the rise in world energy and other commodity 
prices,  and  the  need  to  reduce  both  the  external  and  budget  deficits,  are  squeezing  real 
living standards, pushing up on consumer price inflation and slowing domestic consumption.  
The big picture is that the UK economy is going through a major rebalancing of demand and 
output, from private and public consumption to net exports and business investment, which 
will take several years to complete. A necessary precondition for that rebalancing was a fall 
in  the  real  exchange  rate.  Markets  anticipated  that  need.  The  nominal  effective  sterling 
exchange rate fell by around 25% between the start of the crisis in 2007 and the beginning of 
2009, since when it has been broadly stable. The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided 
to look through the first-round effects of this depreciation on the price level. We could have 
made a different judgement. We could have raised Bank Rate significantly so that inflation 
today would be closer to the target. But that would not have prevented the squeeze on living 
standards  arising  from  higher  oil  and  commodity  prices  and  the  measures  necessary  to 
reduce our twin deficits. And it would have meant a weaker recovery, or even further falls in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
output, despite our having experienced the worst downturn in output and spending since the 
Great Depression. To force nominal wages below their already depressed level would have 
meant much higher unemployment, a greater erosion of living standards, a marked degree of 
“undesirable volatility in output” (contrary to our remit), and a risk of inflation falling well below 
the target in the medium term.  
With  the  freedom  granted  from  having  our  own  currency,  the  mix  of  tight  fiscal  and  loose 
monetary policy is necessary for a rebalancing of the economy. Because of the measures 
taken to reduce the enormous fiscal deficit here at home, UK sovereign debt funding costs 
have actually fallen relative to those in Germany since the start of last year. Of course, there 
can always be differences of judgement about the overall stance of policy, but to change the 
broad policy mix would make little sense.  
Of  course,  at  some  point,  Bank  Rate  will  need  to  rise  to  more  normal  levels  in  order  to 
ensure that inflation returns to its 2% target. There has been, as you know, a lively debate 
among the members of the MPC as to when that point will come. The Committee is watching 
extremely  carefully  for  any  signs  of  a  pickup  in  domestically  generated  inflation  and  it  will 
take action as soon as it is appropriate to do so. So far, subdued rates of increase in average 
earnings, as well as remarkably – some might say disturbingly – low growth rates of broad 
money have provided strong signals that inflation will fall back in due course. Banks are still 
contracting  balance  sheets  and  reducing  leverage.  Spreads  between  Bank  Rate  and  the 
interest rates charged to many borrowers remain at unprecedentedly high levels, if indeed 
borrowers are able to access credit at all. When conditions in the banking sector return to 
something closer to normal, those spreads will contract and the rate at which that takes place 
will have an important influence on the speed at which Bank Rate will rise. 
Uncertainty inevitably surrounds both the speed of the rebalancing and the impact of today’s 
consumer  price  inflation  on  tomorrow’s  domestically  generated  inflation.  So  it  is  simply 
impossible to know now at what point monetary tightening will begin.  
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  Bank’s  new  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC).  Its  creation  is  a 
response  to  the  lesson  that  monetary  policy  cannot  target  stability  of  both  prices  and  the 
financial  system.  Before  2007,  the  massive  build-up  of  leverage  in  the  banking  system, 
accompanied by a rapid growth of broad money, led to an expansion of bank balance sheets 
and a rise in financial fragility, but not inflation. In most industrialised countries, central banks 
successfully set short-term interest rates to combine steady growth of  output with low and 
stable inflation. But this did not prevent the emergence of unsustainable patterns of demand 
and unstable financial systems. The FPC aims to deal with that problem by expanding the 
range of instruments available to the authorities.  
The FPC has been hard at work preparing for our first policy meeting tomorrow and our first 
report  will  be  published  on  24  June.  The  other  voting  members  of  the  Committee  –  Adair 
Turner,  Hector  Sants,  Michael Cohrs,  Don  Kohn,  Alastair  Clark,  and  my  Bank  colleagues 
Paul  Tucker,  Charlie  Bean,  Paul  Fisher,  and  Andrew  Haldane  –  make  a  formidable  group 
with  great  experience.  So  what  will  we  be  doing?  In  devising  new  macro-prudential  policy 
instruments, there is inevitably a degree of learning by doing. The FPC will be both doing and 
learning. In the wake of such a severe crisis, it is unlikely that excessive credit growth will be 
the  major  problem  over  the  next  few  years.  Indeed,  the  present  problem  is  the  
reverse – lending is weak. We shall next week make recommendations in areas where in our 
judgement risks to the resilience of the system are increasing.  
In future, when legislation has been enacted, a key part of the FPC’s role will be to issue 
recommendations  and  directions  to  the  new  regulatory  bodies,  the  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct Authority. The PRA will be part of the Bank, led 
by our new  Deputy  Governor, Hector Sants, and his Deputy, Andrew  Bailey. Its objectives 
and style will differ from those of the FSA. The primary objective of the PRA will be to secure 
the stability of the UK financial system through its supervision of individual firms. It will not be 
to protect individual institutions from failure. The new legislation will make clear that the aim 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of banking regulation will be to ensure that the adverse impact of a failure of a firm on the 
stability of the system as a whole is minimised. That is why resolution will be at the heart of 
the new regulatory regime – supervisors should act knowing that resolution powers can and 
will be deployed in the event of failure.  
But  adequate  resolution  procedures  are  not  an  alternative  to  ensuring  that  banks  have 
sufficient  loss-absorbing  capital;  rather  they  are  complements.  All  institutions,  especially 
so-called  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  must  have  much  higher  levels  of 
loss-absorbing capital than before the crisis. That should be in the form of common equity. A 
crucial  part  of  the  new  Basel  III  framework  is  the  recognition  that  only  common  equity  is 
ultimately  a  truly  loss-absorbing  layer  of  capital.  I  am,  therefore,  concerned  that  the 
European  Commission  will  propose  a  weakening  of  the  Basel  standards  in  that  area. 
Moreover, as the IMF made clear in its recent Article IV Report, it would be misguided for the 
EU  Capital  Requirements  Directive  to  prevent  member  countries  from  imposing  higher 
capital  requirements  to  protect  the  interests  of  domestic  taxpayers.  Nor  should  European 
legislation try to prevent the FPC from varying macro-prudential instruments, including capital 
ratios and risk weights, as appropriate to national circumstances. The Basel framework was 
agreed  globally  after  long  and  difficult  negotiations,  at  the  request  of  the  G20.  It  sets 
minimum  not  maximum  capital  requirements,  and  it  envisages  the  use  of  countercyclical 
capital buffers set by national regulators.  
Until we find a solution to the “too important to fail” problem, the size of our banking system 
will remain too large for the UK taxpayer credibly to support in future. London is a natural 
home for an international banking system, with its language, time zone and, most important 
of all, a large and successful critical mass of banking and supporting activity. But it cannot be 
allowed  to  benefit  from  an  unsustainable  dependence  on  the  UK  taxpayer.  To  allow  that 
would be unfair to millions of people, not here tonight, who are now bearing the costs of the 
financial crisis. It is precisely because we do want to be an international banking centre with 
assets a multiple of annual UK GDP that we have to find a solution to the “too important to 
fail” problem. A resilient banking system is in the collective interest of the financial services 
industry.  A  robust  solution  will  surely  involve  a  combination  of  limits  on  the  leverage  of 
individual  financial  institutions  (as  envisaged  in  the  Basel  III  agreement),  a  resolution 
framework for allowing individual institutions, no matter how large, to fail, and a change in the 
structure of banking. I await with interest the final Report from the Independent Commission 
on Banking.  
The  style  of  regulation  will  also  change  with  the  PRA.  Process  –  more  reporting,  more 
regulators, more committees – does not lead to a safer banking system. One of the reasons 
for putting the PRA inside a central bank is to integrate the work of the two institutions more 
closely.  In  particular,  the  market  intelligence  team  at  the  Bank  will  work  closely  with  the 
supervisory  body.  I  believe  that  we  can  operate  prudential  supervision  at  lower  cost  than 
hitherto by reducing the burden of routine data collection and focussing on the major risks to 
the  system.  It  is  vital  that  we  collect  and  process  data  only  where  the  supervisors  have  a 
need  to  know.  Targeted  and  focussed  regulation,  allowing  senior  supervisors  to  exercise 
their judgement, does not require ever-increasing resources. For example, we will reduce the 
number of people subject to the intensive regulatory interview process before appointment by 
limiting such interviews to the most senior people. And one of the benefits will, I hope, be to 
make entry into UK banking easier and so promote competition. 
Let me return to the question of which aspect of financial regulation is most deserving of the 
adjective  “tragic”.  Is  it  light  touch  regulation?  No  –  it  is  the  mistaken  belief  that  by 
compromising  on  unduly  low  capital  requirements  and  inadequate  limits  on  leverage, 
regulators can compensate by a detailed oversight of every aspect of a bank’s activities. It 
did not take complex reporting to see that the balance sheet of the banking system nearly 
trebled in five years, or that leverage ratios had reached levels of 50 or more. The obsession 
with detail was in fact a hindrance to seeing the big picture. And here the FPC has a crucial 
role to play. By drawing attention to system-wide developments, it can strengthen the hand of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  supervisor  in  dealing  with  a  particular  institution.  Requiring  prudential  changes  will  be 
easier for that supervisor with the public guidance and support of the FPC.  
The granting of new powers to the Bank of England leads naturally and properly to questions 
about how we should be held accountable. The same challenge arose when the Monetary 
Policy  Committee  was  set  up.  We  took  that  head  on  and  we  responded.  As  the  Treasury 
Committee  concluded  in  February,  “The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the  Bank  of 
England have repeatedly demonstrated their commitment to transparency. They have seen 
their engagement with the Treasury Committee as a means of securing accountability”. We 
will show equal commitment to accountability for the FPC and the PRA, and I look forward to 
discussing with the Treasury Committee how that might best be achieved. The Bank must be 
fully accountable to Parliament and the public.  
I know that some of you are concerned about the powers of the Governor. But with decisions 
taken by committees and enhanced accountability, those powers are not what they were. In 
the 1880s, the Metropolitan Railway wanted to extend the line to Amersham and Chesham. 
That meant acquiring land from the then Governor’s estate at Chorleywood. The Governor 
insisted that the company build a private station next to his home to expedite his travel to the 
City. I regret to say that the present Governor neither has the power to command a private 
railway station nor would he know where to put it if he did.  
My Lord Mayor, you will see that there are indeed many challenges for economic policy. We 
have  to  pass  through  turbulent  waters.  But  we  have  set  the  right  course.  There  is  an 
appropriate policy mix to rebalance the UK economy and reach a new equilibrium. With the 
Financial  Policy  Committee  there  is  a  new  body  responsible  for  monitoring  and,  more 
importantly, responding to risks to the financial system as a whole. And a new approach to 
prudential supervision will be implemented by the Prudential Regulation Authority. If we stick 
to this course, adjusting the tiller in response to changing conditions, I am confident that we 
shall return to both price and financial stability.  
Lord Mayor, all of us here tonight would like to pay tribute to your charitable work since you 
became Lord Mayor. Your personal involvement in the regeneration of Spitalfields, and the 
Lord Mayor’s Appeal in support of disaster relief and to help children and young people in 
need, are a demonstration of the charitable instincts of the City of London. We salute you for 
that  leadership,  and  I  am  sure  that  everyone  here  tonight  thanks  both  you  and  the  Lady 
Mayoress for the splendid hospitality which you have extended to us all this evening. 
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to 
“The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress”, Michael and Barbara Bear.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
