Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at  a  hearing  before  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 21 March 2011. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Honourable Members, 
As on a number of occasions before, our regular meeting takes place in extraordinary times. 
The  tragic  developments  in  Japan  with  the  deplorable  loss  of  human  lives,  but  also  their 
potential  global  economic  and  financial  implications  have  galvanised  the  international 
community into action.  
Here  in  Europe,  our  hearing  today  comes  at  a  time  between  two  meetings  at  the  level  of 
Heads of State or Government. And it comes at a time when the very important decisions on 
the  economic  governance  reform  in this  Parliament  are  coming  closer. Before  focusing  on 
the economic outlook and topics for today, let me therefore say a few words on the economic 
governance reform.  
Comme  vous  le  savez,  le  conseil  Ecofin  a  adopté  la  semaine  dernière  une  « approche 
générale »  sur  ce  dossier.  Cette  approche  contient  diverses  améliorations.  Pourtant, 
plusieurs  des  propositions  très  importantes  pour  renforcer  suffisamment  le  cadre  de 
gouvernance ne sont pas encore prises en compte. Ceci est nécessaire pour tirer toutes les 
leçons de la crise. Nos concitoyens européens, qui ont le souci de notre avenir à long terme, 
demandent aux autorités de faire tout ce qui est nécessaire pour empêcher une répétition 
des  développements  que  nous  avons  vécus  ces  dernières  années.  Ainsi,  selon  un 
«Eurobaromètre»  récent,  presque  80%  des  citoyens  dans  les  pays  de  la  zone  euro 
considèrent  qu’une  plus  grande  coordination  des  politiques  économiques  entre  les  Etats 
membres  –  c’est-à-dire  une  gouvernance  effective  et  efficace  –  serait  nécessaire  pour 
combattre la crise financière et économique.1 
Vor zehn Tagen haben die Mitgliedsstaaten eine Erklärung zur verstärkten Abstimmung der 
Wirtschaftspolitik im Eurogebiet gegeben. Diese Erklärung berührt inhaltlich viele Punkte der 
vorliegenden sechs Gesetzesvorschläge. Besser noch als diese Erklärung parallel stehen zu 
lassen,  wäre  es, 
in  das  gegenwärtige  Gesetzgebungsverfahren 
einzubringen.  Dies  würde  der  Absichtserklärung  ihre  volle  Glaubwürdigkeit  zukommen 
lassen.  
ihre  Kernpunkte 
Economic and monetary developments 
I.  
Let  me  turn  to  the  euro  area  economic  and  monetary  developments  since  our  previous 
meeting last November. I will concentrate on the analysis of the Governing Council on the 
occasion of its meeting of 3 March.  
Incoming data have confirmed our view that the underlying momentum of economic activity 
remains positive. Looking ahead, we expect the economy to further benefit from the ongoing 
                                                 
1   Eurobarometer  vol.  74  on  Economic  Governance  in  the  European  Union  (published  12  January  2011).  It 
shows  that  on  average  (unweighted)  close  to  80%  of  respondents  in  euro  countries  consider  “a  stronger 
coordination  of  economic  and  financial  policies  between  Member  States  to  be  effective  in  combating  the 
financial crisis.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
recovery  in  the  world  economy,  the  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  the 
measures adopted to improve the functioning of the financial system.  
As regards price developments, inflation in the euro area is on the rise. In February HICP 
inflation  stood  at  2.4%,  after  2.3%  in  January.  This  increase  largely  reflects  higher 
commodity prices. In particular, sharp increases in energy prices have led to upward price 
pressures in the earlier stages of the production process. It is crucial at this stage to avoid 
that the recent rise in inflation translates into broad-based second-round effects, for instance 
via  price-setting  or  higher  wages.  Such  effects  would  give  rise  to  broad-based  inflationary 
pressures over the medium term. 
In the view of the Governing Council, as expressed on 3 March, risks to the price outlook are 
on  the  upside.  Commodity  prices  could  increase  more  than  expected.  Also,  indirect  taxes 
and administered prices could turn out higher given the need for fiscal consolidation in the 
coming years. Finally, the ongoing recovery in activity could result in stronger than expected 
domestic price pressures. 
As regards our future monetary policy stance, I have nothing to add to what I said, on behalf 
of  the  Governing  Council,  on  the  occasion  of  our  last  monetary  policy  decision  meeting 
earlier this month. 
As regards liquidity-providing operations, the Governing Council decided to conduct them in 
the  second  quarter  of  2011  on  the  same  conditions  as  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011.  This 
means that we will continue to apply fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment in all our 
refinancing operations at least until mid-July.  
Interaction between banks and sovereign debt  
II.  
Let me now turn to the specific topics you have asked me to address and start with sovereign 
debt. I should like to emphasise once again that the right way to avoid the risk of sovereign 
debt crises in an economic and monetary union is through sound national macroeconomic 
policies and strengthened economic governance.  
At  the  same  time,  the governments  have  considered  that  a  permanent  crisis  management 
mechanism would be useful. From the side of the European Central Bank, the design of such 
a mechanism is essential for it to provide a positive contribution to financial stability in the 
euro area as a whole. I would like to highlight two aspects: first, the mechanism may in no 
way  weaken  the  incentives  for  sound  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  policies  pursued  in  all 
member  states.  It  must  in  particular  not  weaken  incentives  for  preemptive  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic adjustment by countries concerned, thereby avoiding moral hazard. Second, 
given that the euro area is characterised by an exceptionally high degree of economic and 
financial integration among countries, the mechanism should be able to employ a range of 
instruments  to  be  effective  in  stemming  against  contagion  in  situations  of  acute  market 
instability. If indispensable, supporting countries while still keeping some market access, may 
be an appropriate way and would imply a prudent use of funds. In this context, I continue to 
consider secondary market interventions as a helpful tool in this context.  
Regarding the institutional method to set up the ESM, the ECB, like the Parliament, supports 
the largest possible recourse to the Union method. It would welcome that, on the basis of the 
experience gained, the ESM could become a Union mechanism at the appropriate point in 
time. In the meantime, the ECB encourages that the assessment of circumstances leading to 
the  activation  of  the  ESM  and  the  conditions  on  financial  assistance  entail  an  appropriate 
involvement  of  Union  institutions,  thus  benefiting  from  their  expertise  and  their  Union-wide 
perspective. 
Turning to the issue of bank resolution, the presence of sound bank resolution mechanisms, 
limiting the costs associated to a bank failure in the case of a cross-border group, is likely to 
facilitate the negotiations to share the public costs incurred if and when required. Therefore, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
we support the overriding policy objective of the new EU framework for bank recovery and 
resolution proposed by the Commission.  
Although the implementation of the new resolution regime in the EU could already reduce the 
fiscal costs of bank failures, I believe that explicit arrangements should also be put in place to 
ensure that in the future the financial sector bears the burden of possible crises to come. As 
part  of  a  credible  resolution  framework,  bank  levies  (possibly  accumulated  in  resolution 
funds) could possibly be considered. 
However, a levy on banks should be seen as a complementary tool in the set of instruments 
aiming at increasing the loss absorbency of systematically important banks – notably capital 
and  liquidity  surcharges,  and  contingent  capital.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  is  currently 
exploring  several  options,  in  particular  on  contingent  convertible  capital  and  bail-in  debt 
instruments.  
To this end, I welcome the fact that the European Commission is considering bank levies and 
bail-in in its plans for the future EU crisis management framework. The ECB stands ready to 
further contribute to the challenging work that is still ahead of us in the development of this 
framework. 
I would like to take the opportunity of today’s meeting to address another topical issue: the 
finalisation  of  the  proposed  EU  Regulation  for  OTC  derivatives,  central  counterparties  and 
trade repositories. We would welcome if the draft report of your Committee on this significant 
legislative initiative took account of the important role that central banks play for ensuring the 
stability  and  efficiency  of  market  infrastructures.  Central  banks  have  proven  their  relevant 
role during the financial crisis and we would thus welcome that their contribution to financial 
stability be fully reflected in the new Regulation.  
This means that the central banks would be adequately involved in the new EU framework 
for  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  and  trade  repositories.  They  would  cooperate  with 
supervisors in the authorisation and the ongoing risk assessment of infrastructures, technical 
third  country  central 
standard-setting  and  decisions  regarding 
counterparties  and 
for  cooperation  and 
information-sharing  among  authorities,  the  Commission’s  proposal  of  colleges  provides,  in 
our  view,  a  set-up  that  is  preferable  to  bilateral  contacts  between  those  authorities  and 
ESMA.  
the  recognitions  of 
the  arrangements 
repositories.  Regarding 
Eurobonds 
III.  
Let me now say a few words on the other subject you suggested: so-called “Eurobonds”. The 
ECB is not in favour of introducing such “Eurobonds”, understood as guaranteed government 
bonds on a joint and several basis, in the present circumstances. We note that the aim is to 
support  the  development  of  euro  area  bond  markets,  as  well  as  at  providing  a  possible 
mechanism to alleviate or resolve the ongoing sovereign debt crisis.  
With  respect  to  supporting  the  euro  area  bond  market,  the  main  advantage  could  be  cost 
savings from reducing the liquidity premium in the bond markets. This could arise particularly 
if Eurobonds gained benchmark status, comparable for instance to US Treasury bonds. As 
regards the impact on sovereign debt developments, moving to Eurobonds would remove the 
financial  market  pressure  in  the  short  term  but,  if  not  replaced  by  new  mechanisms, 
fundamentally reduce incentives for sound fiscal policies.  
In  our  institutional  set-up,  fiscal  discipline  is  induced  via  existing  domestic  provisions;  the 
fundamental institutional framework of governance (the Treaty and the Stability and Growth 
Pact) and the assessment by savers and investors.  
Jointly guaranteed bonds would not permit savers and investors to assess fiscal policies of 
individual countries. As long as we do not have a political federation with a federal budget, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
this would create an incentive problem. It would impair the incentives for fiscal prudence at 
the domestic level.  
Consequently,  Eurobonds  would  be  the  natural  counterpart  if  national  fiscal  competences 
were clearly at the level of a union which would be a federation. In the present institutional 
framework  we  need  to  make  very  important  progress  in  the  collegial  governance  and 
surveillance of fiscal policies which remain national.  
Dear  Honourable  Members,  I  thank  you  for  your  attention  and  am  at  your  disposal  for 
questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
