Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Monetary union, regulation and supervision 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the 9th Annual European Financial Services Conference “Taking Stock of Reform: 
Fragmentation or Convergence?”, Brussels,10 February 2011. 
 I wish to thank Cécile Meys and Huw Pill for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the 
opinions contained herein. 
Introduction 
The  title  of  this  session  is  “Assessing  the  EU’s  re-regulation  effort”.  To  be  clear  from  the 
outset, we are striving not simply for re-regulation, but for better regulation. What constitutes 
“better”? In my remarks this morning, I will offer a central banker’s view of where we should 
be heading in this domain – and of what work still needs to be done.  
As  recent  events  have  shown,  the  financial  crisis  has  complicated  the  implementation  of 
monetary  policy,  in  particular  by  creating  instability  in  the  transmission  mechanism.  And, 
within  a  monetary  union,  differences  between  member  countries  –  either  created  by  the 
financial turmoil or exacerbated by it – have added to the uncertainty and complexity.  
During the crisis, the ECB has implemented a set of non-standard measures to address such 
concerns. We consider that these measures have been successful in ensuring that monetary 
policy  remains  effective.  Another  important  factor  throughout  the  crisis  has  been  the  firm 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations,  which  strengthened  our  stance  against  deflationary 
pressures in the worst part of the crisis. Such an anchoring is the result of all the decisions, 
each  one  of  them,  taken  during  the  first  decade  of  the  euro.  Overall,  we  believe  that  our 
ability to maintain price stability remains unimpaired.  
The  post-crisis  world  will  face  two  potentially  conflicting  challenges.  The  first  one  is  to 
achieve stronger financial integration as a factor of growth. In other words, we need more “E” 
in  EMU.  Deepening  financial  integration  is  a  key  aspect  of  the  economic  part  of  EMU. 
Deeper cross-border banking activities, especially at the retail level, are one way of achieving 
this objective. Enhancing and harmonising the regulatory and supervisory framework across 
Europe is a crucial step towards this goal. However, greater integration may imply greater 
risk  of  contagion,  as  financial  systems,  markets  and  institutions  become  more  intimately 
entwined.  Better  regulation  means  achieving  both  a  more  integrated  European  financial 
sector,  with  deeper  markets  and  more  diversified  institutions  as  well  as  a  more  robust 
financial system. Attaining this twofold objective would allow the benefits of integration to be 
reaped, while managing the associated spillover risks. 
More “E” in EMU 
The financial and economic crisis over the last three years has exposed the main supervisory 
and regulatory failures both at national and global levels. In Europe, it has also revealed how 
financial  integration  has  increased  the  likelihood,  scope  and  pace  of  contagion  across  the 
European financial sector.  
The institutional framework for managing the euro area economy and financial system has 
proved to be inadequate. To be more specific, the monetary part of EMU has worked well. 
Price stability – the primary objective of the single monetary policy – has been maintained, 
before, during and after the crisis. But the economic dimension has been insufficient. As I 
just said, we need more “E” in EMU, with a view to creating an economic area that is more 
closely, deeply and irreversibly integrated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The origins of the recent economic crisis lay largely in the financial sector. A more resilient 
financial  sector  is  key  to  building  a  euro  area  framework  that  will  be  more  robust  and 
effective in facing future shocks. Deepening and broadening financial integration in Europe is 
an essential – although neglected – component of the economic dimension of Economic and 
Monetary Union.  
Stronger integration will not only ensure a more efficient allocation of resources across the 
EU, but also enhance the shock-absorbing capacity of the financial system and the economy 
as  a  whole,  thanks  to  increased  opportunities  for  risk-sharing,  and  improved  market  and 
funding  liquidity.  Research  using  data  from  the  United  States  has  demonstrated  the 
important  role  played  by  financial  markets  and  capital  flows  in  absorbing  the  impact  of 
idiosyncratic regional shocks.1 The risk-sharing across regions resulting from an integrated 
financial  system  in  the  US  has  a  far  greater  smoothing  effect  on  regional  consumption 
patterns  than  that  achieved  via  explicit  fiscal  transfers  through  the  federal  government’s 
budget. This shows that it is an integrated financial sector, rather than the federal budget, 
which plays the most important role in ensuring that regional disturbances do not disrupt the 
functioning of the American economy as a whole. 
Research undertaken by ECB staff confirms that greater banking integration within the EU 
has  increased  consumption  risk-sharing.2  But  there  is  clearly  some  way  to  go  before  the 
level  of  integration  –  and  thus  the  extent  of  risk-sharing  –  seen  in  the  United  States  is 
achieved. 
These  results  have  important  implications  for  the  current  debate  on  further  European 
integration. There is a lot of talk about the need to move towards a more integrated fiscal 
union  and  debt  financing  in  the  euro  area,  as  a  means  to  enhance  stability.  A  more 
inancial  market  is  likely  to  be  a  more  efficient  way  to  enhance  euro  area 
integrated  f
resilience.  
Financial  integration  did  advance  rapidly  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  particularly  in 
wholesale  markets.  But  in  certain  segments,  markets  have  remained  fragmented  along 
national lines – not least retail banking. This is a politically sensitive sector, due to concerns 
about consumer protection and the financing of small businesses. But when retail banking 
markets are fragmented, governments are more likely to resort to “national solutions” in the 
face  of  a  financial  crisis  –  possibly  in  an  uncoordinated  fashion.  Experience  shows  a 
piecemeal approach can be very disruptive to financial stability and monetary transmission. 
For example, we have seen the externalities created by the Irish government’s decision to 
guarantee all Irish bank liabilities in the immediate aftermat
h of Lehman’s failure in 2008. We 
are still dealing with the consequences of those decisions. 
To  ensure  that  the  benefits  of  greater  financial  integration  more  than  outweigh  the  risks  – 
including that of a more concentrated banking system – the EU regulatory and supervisory 
a-wide 
framework  needs  to  be  enhanced  and  harmonised,  taking  the  necessary  are
perspective and thereby recognising and internalising the cross-border externalities.  
One objection to a more integrated banking system in Europe is the role of national budgets 
in  crisis  resolution.  As  long  as  budgets  remain  national  –  so  goes  the  argument  –  crisis 
resolution has to remain national, and so does supervision. The crisis has shown that bank 
resolution and restructuring are more complicated for cross-border institutions, given that any 
   
1  
2  
                                            
  
Asdrubali, P., B.E. Sørensen, and O. Yosha
Journal of Economics 111, pp. 1081–1110. 
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., S. Manganelli, E. Papaioannou and J-L. Peydró (2008). “Financial integration, macroeconomic volatility 
, F.P. Mongelli, G. Noblet and F. Smets (eds.) The euro 
and risk sharing – The role of the monetary union,” in B. Maćkowiak
at ten: Lessons and challenges, Frankfurt: European Central Bank. 
 (1996). “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963–90,” Quarterly 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fiscal costs have to be distributed across several host sovereigns. As Charles Goodhart has 
said, “…cross-border banks are international in life, but national in death”.3 
As I see it, enhanced financial integration in the euro area does not necessarily imply a need 
for greater fiscal union – if that is understood as a pooling of tax revenues, harmonisation of 
tax rates or issuance of a common bond. Instead, we must develop the capacity at the area-
wide level to address specific financial tensions that threaten to spill over to the area as a 
whole,  minimising  disruptions  to  market  integration  and  supporting  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy. 
The  recent  crisis  –  and,  in  particular,  developments  in  Ireland  –  have  demonstrated  that, 
despite the imperfect integration of the European financial system, very strong cross-border 
contagion  takes  place  within  the  financial  sector.  The  instruments  available  at  presen
t  to 
block this contagion are not efficient and have side-effects. In practice, much of the burden to 
contain contagion has fallen on central banks. This is neither desirable nor appropriate.  
In my view, the European authorities need to develop a capacity to conduct a “surgical strike” 
on  problematic  financial  institutions  or  market  segments  in  the  event  of  a  financial  crisis. 
Through  such  actions,  the  area-wide  externalities  created  by  specific  problems  can  be 
contained. In practice, this means ensuring that programmes such as the European Financial 
Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  or  the  European  Financial  Stabilisation  Mechanism  (EFSM)  –  and 
their  envisaged  permanent  successors  –  are  given  sufficient  financial  resources  and  the 
required flexibility by the Member States to act as necessary to support financial stability. To 
do  so,  these  bodies  may  also  need  to  be  able  to  support  the  recapitalisation  of  an 
ailing 
banking  system,  if  its  weakness  threatens  the  stability  of  the  area  as  a  whole.  All  this  of 
course comes with strict conditionality in the context of an overall EU/IMF programme.  
s,  in  which  funds  are 
This  has  been  the  case  in  both  the  Greek  and  Irish  programme
dedicated to the recapitalisation of the weak banks. A more systematic approach should be 
pursued, making it easier for countries to implement such a scheme. 
Developing an enhanced and harmonised regulatory and supervisory framework 
The  ECB  has  a  keen  interest  in  ensuring  that  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  structure,  at 
both national and EU level, provides all players with incentives to avoid excessive risk-taking 
that  could  lead  to  destabilising  the  financial  system.  In  addition,  consistent  rules  and 
convergent  sup
ervisory  practices  are  essential  to  the  creation  of  a  level  playing  field  and 
avoidance of competitive distortions, which would otherwise hinder financial integration within 
the euro area.  
The financial crisis has prompted a significant development of the regulatory and supervisory 
framework. Under the auspices of the G20, a remarkable amount of work has been done to 
mend the regulatory shortcomings revealed by the crisis at global and European level. A key 
element in strengthening the resilience of the financial system has been the adoption of the 
new Basel III framework. Concrete efforts have also been made to reinforce the supervisory 
framework,  with  greater  emphasis  placed  on  monitoring  and  assessing  macro-prudential 
risks. The powers and tools of micro-prudential supervisors have also been enhan
ced. Other 
important regulatory initiatives, notably work on systemically important financial institutions, 
shadow banking, crisis management and resolution frameworks, are under way.  
In  Europe  many  initiatives  have  been  or  are  being  taken  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework.  Amendments  to  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD)  have 
been made to correct the adverse incentives relating to securitisation and remuneration. A 
further review of the CRD is under way, aligning the European regulatory framework with the 
                                                 
3   Goodhart, C.A.E. (2009). “Procyclicality and financial regulation,” Banco de España, Estabilidad Financiera 16, p. 16. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Basel III framework, which is expected to improve the resilience and stability of the banking 
system by enhancing the quality and quantity of capital and introducing leverage and liquidity 
requirements. Other important initiatives have also been taken or are under way to improve 
and extend the scope of regulation. Examples include the regulation of hedge funds through 
the  adoption  of  the  Alternative  Investment  Fund  Managers  Directive  and  credit  rating 
agencies, and the upcoming review of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID). 
In  addition  to  the  ongoing  initiatives  to  reinforce  the  regulatory  framework,  the  supervisory 
framework  in  Europe  has  also  been  enhanced  through  the  establishment  of  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and the three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs). These 
authorities  should  help  to  strengthen  the  oversight  of  risks.  The  risk  warnings  and 
recommendations  to  be  issued  by  the  ESRB  should  become  a  powerful  tool  to  identify 
significant  risks  in  the  financial  system.  And  the  powers  of  the  thr
ee  ESAs  –  notably  their 
mediation  and  coordination  powers,  their  envisaged  role  in  emergency  situations  and,  in 
particular, their mandate to create an EU rule book through the issuance of binding technical 
standards  –  should  further  harmonise  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  within  the 
EU.  
Even though the framework has been substantially enhanced, challenges remain. Whether 
the framework will reach its full potential depends on many factors.  
First,  it  is  important  that  the  new  authorities  are  empowered  to  act  decisively  and  swiftly. 
Rapid decision-making as well as the independence of regulatory authorities is essential to 
safeguard  financial  stability.  In  this  context  let  me  mention  that  in  the  US  the  Financial 
Stability 
Oversight  Council  and  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  have  been 
granted more regulatory powers than their counterparts in the EU, although the effectiveness 
of those powers will ultimately depend on the way they are applied.  
Second, it is important that within our relatively complex institutional framework, the ESRB, 
the  three  European  Supervisory  Authorities  and  the  national  authorities  collaborate 
effectively. Information-sharing is key. It has been insufficient in the past. Will it change in the 
future?  
Third, the creation of an EU rule book is, of itself, not enough. Only when its implementation 
is harmonised can such a rule book facilitate cross-border activities, and thus contribute to a 
inancial system. The ESAs have an important role here to ensure that the 
more integrated f
rule book is implemented in a consistent way also through their coordination of the activity in 
colleges  of  supervisors.  In  addition,  the  ESAs,  crucially,  have  to  ensure  that  the  EU-wide 
stress  tests  are  conducted  in  a  uniform  way.  We  have  seen  from  experience  that  the 
credibility of the results of the EU-wide stress tests depends on whether they are conducted 
with  sufficient  rigour  in  all  the  countries.  Lack  of  rigour  in  one  country  can  undermine  the 
credibility of all.  
All these elements of the new European supervisory framework are expected to address the 
ch as the EU. However, in the euro area the very 
challenges related to an integrated area su
  the  interconnectedness  between  countries  and 
existence  of  the  single  currency  amplifies
financial  systems  and  thus  the  potential  for  contagion  in  stress  situations.  The  new  EU 
supervisory framework must therefore be capable of addressing this specificity of the euro 
area through tailored coordinated actions.  
Financial stability and monetary policy 
Within this changing institutional landscape, close collaboration is required between central 
bankers, regulators and supervisors, given the intimate connection between monetary policy 
and  financial  stability.  The  European  arrangements,  with  the  close  links  they  have 
established  between  the  ECB  and  the  ESRB,  recognise  this  need,  while  retaining  distinct 
mandates and maintaining a clear division of responsibility.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Recent  events  have  amply  demonstrated  how  financial  crises  influence  macroeconomic 
prospects,  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and  thus  the  appropriate  setting  of  the  monetary 
policy  stance.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  seen  how  monetary  policy  measures  –  of  both 
standard and non-standard varieties – can support the functioning and stability of f
inancial 
institutions and  markets.  After  all, central  banks  are  the ultimate  providers  of  liquidity,  and 
thus have a pivotal role to play in any financial turmoil or panic.  
The interactions between monetary policy and financial stability are complex. They need
 to 
be managed carefully, avoiding any confusion of mandates and responsibilities. In particular, 
we  need  to  avoid  moral  hazard.  Liquidity  support  provided  to  banks  that  face  funding 
difficulties cannot delay
Recent  experience  confirms  my  view  that  central  banks  must  be  closely  involved  in 
addressing  financial  tensions,  cooperating  closely  with  supervisory  bodies  in  supporting 
financial stability, even while recognising the primacy of their own price stability mandate. 
 the necessary fundamental restructuring of such institutions. 
Concluding remarks 
To  sum  up,  deeper  financial  integration  within  Europe  is  critical  in  making  the  economic 
dimension of Economic and Monetary Union function better. It will not only offer direct gains 
in terms of allocative efficiency, but also make monetary policy transmission more effective 
achievement of our primary objective of price stability, as 
and robust, thereby supporting the 
well  as  wider  macroeconomic  stability.  Greater  cross-border  banking  activity,  especially  at 
the retail level, has an important role to play in this regard. 
These conclusions are consistent with the main message of the Lamfalussy report, p
ublished 
as far back as 2001.4 This report argued that progress with financial integration in the EU 
should  be  regularly  reassessed  and,  if  necessary,  initiatives  taken  to  further  deepen  and 
accelerate the integration process. 
The  recent  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  the  European  financial  system  was  insufficiently 
deepen  integration  and  bolster  stability  are  required.  Looking 
robust.  Further  measures  to 
forward, we have to identify any remaining weaknesses and seek to address them. 
Until now, it has generally been argued that the main responsibility for financial supervision 
has to remain at national level. The consequences of failures in supervision ultimately fall on 
the  taxpayers  of  the  country  where  the  bank  resides.  To  align  incentives  and  ensure 
appropriate accountability, nationally defined tax bases imply nationally defined supervisory 
institutions. 
However, the crisis has demonstrated that the implications of supervisory failures extend well 
beyond  national  boundaries.  First,  cross-border  contagion  has  been  magnified  by 
tegration.  Second, 
externalities  and  spillovers  arising  from  greater  area-wide  financial  in
within  a  more  integrated  market,  greater  specialisation  may 
experience  has  shown  that, 
in  one  country  outgrow  the  capacity  of  national  taxpayers  to 
imply  that  financial  systems 
support them. 
The implications of this experience are profound. As I have argued, they point to the need for 
a much greater euro area and EU perspective in the supervisory and regulatory framework. 
While progress has been made in this domain, much remains to be done. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
 
4   Lamfalussy, A. et al. (2001). Final report of the Committee of wise men on the regulation of European securities markets, 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/docs/lamfalussy/wisemen/final-report-wise-men_en.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
