Halim Alamsyah: Some critical issues concerning the sustainability of 
Islamic finance development – Indonesia perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Halim  Alamsyah,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  presented  in  the 
opening keynote session of the 2nd Annual World Islamic Banking Conference: Asia Summit, 
Singapore, 8–9 June 2011. 
 Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim 
   H.  E.  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  Republic  of  Singapore  and 
Deputy Chairman, Monetary Authority of Singapore 
H.  E.  Mohd.  Rosli  Sabtu,  Managing  Director,  Monetary  Authority  of  Brunei 
Darussalam 
Tan Sri Zarinah Anwar, Chairman of Securities Commission Malaysia 
Distinguished  Speakers,  CEOs,  Islamic  bankers,  academics  and  practitioners, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Assalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakaatuh and very good morning 
It is an honor for me to deliver speech in this 2nd Annual World Islamic Banking Conference 
in Singapore, as a platform to discuss issues and efforts required to enhance cross-border 
connectivity of Islamic finance. As we have seen now, development of Islamic finance are 
growing very fast in the world, particularly in Asian countries such as Malaysia, Indonesia, 
Pakistan,  and  Brunei,  as  well  as  in  Middle  East  countries  such  as  United  Arab  Emirates 
(UAE), Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, and in European countries such as UK and Luxemburg. 
Hence, collaboration between countries in those regions would potentially very important to 
boost the expansion of Islamic finance in the world.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Islamic  finance  has  gained  a  significant  global  exposure  and  experienced  a  phenomenal 
growth  in  the  last  three  decades.  From  only  US$137  billion  of  the  total  assets  in  1996,  it 
expanded  to  reach  US$895  billion  in  2010.1  In  the  near  future  (2015),  the  amount  will  be 
expected to be US$5 trillion.2 With such a progressive development, certainly it needs further 
commitment  especially  among  countries  having  Islamic  finance  industries  to  maintain  and 
foster their sustainable growth.  
Countries in Asia, which I mentioned before, are keen to tap such promising industries and 
want  to  become  the  center  of  Islamic  finance  in  their  region.  Many  Islamic  financial 
institutions  have  been  established  by  both  foreign  and  local  players  and  expanded  their 
products  and  services  to  cover  Islamic  finance  growing  market.  As  such,  in  Malaysia,  the 
share  of  Islamic  finance  has  reached  22%  of  the  total  banking  industry;  Pakistan  plans  to 
capture share 12% market share of Islamic banking by 2012 and Indonesia targets 15%–20% 
market share of total banking industry in the next ten years.  
On the other hand, in the Middle East countries, especially Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries, the market share of Islamic finance has expanded to go beyond 15% headed by 
UAE,  Bahrain,  Saudi  Arabia  and  Kuwait.  Even,  some  of  the  local  Islamic  banks  have  had 
overseas branches such as Kuwait Financial House, Al Rajhi Banks, HSBC Amanah, etc. It 
                                                 
1  The Financial Express, Bangladesh (23 May 2011) 
2  Moody’s Investors Service (2010) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reveals  that  the  expansion  of  Islamic  banks  is  underway  and  right  now  countries  like 
Singapore, Hong Kong, China and Japan have prepared themselves to establish the Islamic 
finance industry. These are very interesting facts which could further enlarge the number of 
countries having Islamic finance industries.  
With greater economic interdependency and convergency together with more open financial 
system  and  capital  account  regimes  in  many  countries,  the  new  financial  system  (Islamic 
finance)  have  flourished  and  may  become  an  important  catalyst  for  growth  and  stability  in 
many countries. For example, Indonesia as a country with the biggest moslem population in 
the  world  has  only  started  its  Islamic  banking  industry  since  1992.  With  a  liberal  banking 
system regime and regulation, Islamic banking industry has grown very fast and right now it 
has eleven Islamic banks and 23 Islamic windows including Islamic foreign banks such as 
HSBC Amanah, Maybank Islamic, and CIMB Niaga Islamic. Although its share currently is 
still  trivial  (around  3%)  compared  with  the  conventional  banks,  the  industry  has  shown  its 
resiliency. Furthermore, our research has shown that it has also positively contributed to the 
expansion  of  Islamic  banking  and  financial  services  throughout  the  country,  and  enabling 
more multiplier for future Islamic financial development in the country.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Besides the growing trend of Islamic banks, another promising industry is the Islamic capital 
market, notable Sukuk market. It emerges in various countries in the Middle East and Asian 
countries.  The  recent  global  Sukuk  market  has  crossed  USD134  billion  in  issuances  and 
Malaysia  leads  this  market  with  65%  market  share  followed  by  Middle  East  countries  with 
26% market share and the rest of the world.  
However, the tenor of the world Sukuk market is dominated by short term Sukuk tenor which 
is 55%, while the long term tenor (for example more than 10 years tenor) is only 20%. The 
Sukuk market in Indonesia is also progressing, with a nominal amount of USD6.2 billion (as 
of May 2011) and annual growth of 9.3% (2010).  
In the near future, I strongly believe that Sukuk will grow significantly as it can be developed 
to  have  various  forms  of  contracts with  attractive  features  offering  competitive  returns  and 
liquidity. In addition, the existences of excess liquidity from surplus savings in Asia and oil 
revenues  countries  across  Middle  East  become  a  potential  demand  for  Sukuk.  This 
opportunity  can  be  used  by  the  government  or  private  companies  to  issue  Sukuk  as  an 
alternative  financing  source.  The  current  positive  trend  of  issuing  Sukuk  for  financing 
government’s infrastructure projects provides a good signal of support from the government 
that should be maintained.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Through  this  summit,  where  the  meeting  of  regulators,  practitioners,  academics,  potential 
investors  and  industry  experts  are  possible,  it  is  hoped  that  the  potential  of  the  Islamic 
banking and finance will be maximized to further improve the current swift development of 
the industry. In the future, it is expected that Asia will grow to be the next Islamic finance hub, 
in  addition  to  Middle  East.  Bridging  these  two  potential  markets  for  developing  Islamic 
financial  industry  will  also  contribute  to  the  increase  of  economic  growth  in  respective 
regions.  
Despite all those success stories and potential growth of Islamic finance, we believe that the 
road ahead remains challenging. I would like to point out four main issues that can be further 
discussed  in  this  summit.  Firstly,  concerning  the  Islamic  financial  products.  In  terms  of 
product  development,  Islamic  financial  institutions  should  develop  innovative  products  that 
can  bring  up  the  uniqueness  of  Sharia  components.  Instead  of  emulating  conventional 
products  or  adopting  Islamic  dressing  to  existing  products,  industry  should  move  towards 
creating  pure  or  genuine  Sharia  products  that  seek  to  bridge  the  financial  sector  with  real 
sector.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I believe the strength as well as the uniqueness of Islamic transactions lies within the profit-
loss  sharing  mechanism,  provision  of  underlying  assets  and  commitment  to  promote  real 
sector. However, in general, the record of Profit-Loss Sharing (PLS) transactions in Islamic 
banking industries across countries are still relatively low. I strongly believe that increasing 
portion  of  profit-loss  sharing  transactions,  such  as  mudharabah  and  musyarakah,  will  be 
beneficial for  both  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  side  of  the  economy  and  will  eliminate 
decoupling or detachment effect between two sectors, a situation that was behind the recent 
global financial crisis.  
Another issue related to product development is about product codification. At the moment, 
as  you  all  know,  there  are  different  acceptations  or  agreements  of  fatwas  concerning  the 
approval  of  certain  products.  In  other  word,  there  are  still  some  unresolved  issues  in  fiqh 
muammalah for certain sharia products. While such differences are well understood and in 
Islamic  tradition  are  well  accepted,  we  still  need  to  step  up  our  efforts  to  make  product 
codification  as  an  international  efforts  as  it  will  certainly  have  very  positive  benefits  in 
promoting and facilitating sharia product developments and innovations. Product codification 
provided by international institutions will reduce the gap and promote products harmonization 
among the countries.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Secondly, concerning the legal infrastructure and regulatory standard for Islamic finance. As 
mentioned above, product structured based on Islamic principles is, by nature, different from 
its conventional counterparts. Hence, it requires a dedicated legal framework confirming with 
Sharia principles. The existing law is not sufficient in solving disputes concerning the Sharia 
transactions. The availability of an appropriate legal infrastructure is particularly important for 
the  development  of  Islamic  financial  institutions,  especially  in  creating  a  more  conducive 
environment  for  sharia  transactions  to  grow  efficiently.  Perhaps,  legal framework  is  one  of 
the  most  important  challenges  in  developing  Islamic  finance  since  so  far  only  a  limited 
number  of  countries  have  issued  specific  laws  governing  Islamic  finance  and  dispute 
settlement, including cross border resolutions.  
In addition to the availability of legal framework, development of Islamic finance also needs 
global  regulations  and  standards.  The  existence  of  global  regulations  and  standards  is 
essential to promote cross-border transactions and foreign participations in the development 
of Islamic Finance in Asia and other regions. Currently, we already have several international 
institutions,  such  as  IFSB  and  AAOIFI  which  have  authority  to  issue  regulations  and 
standards.  The  role  of  those  institutions  should  be  enforced  and  improved.  Moreover,  it 
would  be  better  if  every  country  that  develops  Islamic  finance  voluntarily  adopt  those 
regulations and standards.  
For  instance,  Islamic  finance  regulator  in  each  country  is  encouraged  to  adopt  voluntarily 
risks management standard released by IFSB. Again, due to its uniqueness, we should not 
apply  the  same  approach  of  assessing  risks  in  Islamic  finance  in  a  similar  way  with 
conventional institution. For example, profit-loss sharing portfolio may expose the bank from 
the loss incurred by the third party. Hence, Islamic financial institutions should adopt suitable 
global  regulations  and  standards.  It  will  create  regulations  uniformity  that  will  spur 
harmonization and further integration of global Islamic finance.  
My third point will be about Islamic Financial Stability. If we, who are part of Islamic finance 
community,  work  together  in  developing  financial  products  which  truly  confirms  to  Sharia 
principles, complemented by appropriate legal framework, regulations and standards, Insya 
Allah, this creation of “genuine” Islamic financial system would be able to reduce systemic 
risks  and  continue  to  become  resilient  to  any  financial  shocks.  As  mentioned  earlier  that 
increasing  portion  of  profit-loss  sharing  transaction  will  reduce  the  potential  bubble  in  the 
economy and decoupling problem between financial sector and real sector.  
The fourth point is about “real rate of return” references. Besides beneficial in creating and 
maintaining  stability,  we  also  believe  that  profit-loss  sharing,  the  spirit  of  Islamic  finance, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
would  give  more  fair  return  to  all  parties  (funds  owner,  financial  institution,  and  borrower). 
The  return  distributed  to  all  parties  should  be  a  real  result  of  business  activities  in  the 
economy. However, at the moment, Islamic financial institutions seemingly tend to refer their 
rate of return to conventional rate of return (interest rates). Conceptually they should refer to 
the  real  rate  of  return  in  the  economy.  Unfortunately,  currently  there  is  no  valid  reference 
available  about  the  real  rate  of  return.  Therefore,  international  Islamic  institutions  and 
countries regulator need to collaborate to study about the real rate of return that will become 
a  reference  for  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  determining  return,  instead  of  referring  to 
conventional interest rates.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Beside  those  four  main  issues,  I  would  like  also  raise  two  additional  challenges  regarding 
liquidity and human resources. Most of us aware that currently Islamic financial markets have 
limited instruments and restricted access to short-term funding options in raising liquidity as 
compared to conventional markets. We should think of methods to enhance Islamic liquidity 
market based on contracts consistent with Sharia principles. A caveat for such initiative will 
be, to carefully identify and structure the instrument for the purpose of raising liquidity only 
and not for the tools for speculation.  
The emergence of global money market will reduce the reliant of Islamic financial institutions 
in mirroring the techniques regularly use by conventional banks that are still within the grey 
area and debatable in terms of its Sharia compliancy. Hence, Islamic finance can maintain its 
reputation  as  the  sector  linking  financial  intermediary  and  real  sector  and  slowly  close  the 
door to a heavy use of leverage that once led to Global Financial Crisis.  
Related to human resources issues, we understand that the fast growth of Islamic financial 
institutions so far isn’t followed by sufficient supply of human resources. In Indonesia context, 
the tremendous acceleration of Islamic finance industry has created human resources supply 
gap  of  more  than  30.000  people  recently.  I  believe  the  same  phenomenon  can  also  be 
observed in many countries. In order to fill the gap of human resources supply, establishing 
international efforts to tackle the issues and involving more formal and informal institutions 
teaching Islamic finance can be one possible solution. Moreover, the well-trained and well-
experienced  pool  of  talents  in  more  developed  Islamic  markets  should  open  for  learning 
exchange program facilitated by other countries with a strong international cooperation and 
engagement,  more  widespread  supply  of  well-versed  and  skilled  human  resources  will 
further foster the market growth given the rising demand for Islamic products and services.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me close my speech by highlighting that Asia has bright prospects in Islamic banking and 
finance  industry.  In  order  to  escalate  the  existing  growth  and  trajectory  to  a  next  level,  I 
sincerely hope that all parties, from the region and overseas to jointly explore new growth 
opportunities in Islamic banking and finance in this region.  
I wish you all to have an enriching and fruitful discussion and hope that we can contribute to 
the development and multiply the growth of the industry. May Allah Almighty bestow us the 
strength and patient to persevere in fulfilling our duty for a better future.  
Thank you for your kind attention,  
Wassalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakaatuh  
Dr. Halim Alamsyah 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
