Durmuş Yilmaz: In search of an appropriate policy mix for emerging 
economies – monetary policy in Turkey in the aftermath of the global 
financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Euromoney Central and Eastern European Forum, Vienna, 18 January 2010. 
 Dear Guests, 
During the global financial crisis, almost all countries focused on containing potential adverse 
effects  of  the  crisis  on  domestic  economy;  Turkey  was  not  an  exception.  Following  the 
intensification of the crisis, the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) delivered sizeable and front-
loaded cuts in policy rates, reaching 1025 basis points from November 2008 to November 
2009.  During  this  period  the  CBT  not  only  cut  policy  rates  rapidly,  but  also  pursued  a 
counter-cyclical  liquidity  policy  to  support  the  functioning  of  money  and  credit  markets, 
thereby strengthen the impact of the rate reductions on economic activity.  
These  efforts  were  successful  in  bringing  back  Turkey  on  a  strong  recovery  track.  The 
healthy  household  balance  sheets  and  solid  banking  system  allowed  a  rapid  rebound  in 
domestic demand. Starting from mid-2009, the Turkish economy has been facing a domestic 
demand  driven  rapid  recovery.  Meanwhile,  strengthening  capital  inflows  has  further 
exacerbated the divergence between the domestic and external demand, creating new policy 
challenges. Rapidly widening current account deficit coupled with short term capital inflows 
and exchange rate appreciation called for a different approach to monetary policy.  
In order to cope with this new situation, we have slightly modified our existing framework of 
inflation  targeting  by  explicitly  highlighting  the  increasing  role  of  financial  stability  in  our 
objective function. Accordingly, first we have announced the details of our exit strategy from 
crisis  measures  in  April  2010.  As  a  first  step,  we  have  normalized  the  liquidity  support 
facilities  and  brought  back  the  TRY  reserve  requirement  ratios  to  pre-crisis  levels  of 
6 percent.  Second,  we  started  to  highlight  the  macro  financial  risks  and  contingent  policy 
responses. For example, we have stated through our policy documents that, if divergence in 
growth  rates  between  domestic  and  external  demand  continues  in  the  forthcoming  period, 
and  if  this  pattern  of  growth  coexists  with  rapid  credit  expansion  and  deterioration  in  the 
current  account  balance,  it  would  be  necessary  to  utilize  other  policy  instruments  such  as 
reserve requirement ratios and liquidity management facilities more effectively.  
The  primary  objective  of  the  CBT  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability.  However,  the 
recent  crisis  has  taught  us  that  this  single  objective  may  not  be  enough  for  attaining 
macroeconomic and financial stability. In this respect, we reminded the public that financial 
stability  is  one  of  the  fundamental  duties  of  the  CBT  as  stipulated  in  our  Law,  and  we 
approach financial stability from a macroeconomic perspective.  
From an emerging market point of view, the concept of “macroprudential” measures may not 
be  the  same  as  it  is  perceived  in  advanced  economies.  It  is  important  to  note  that  each 
country  has  its  own  characteristics  and  every  country  has  to  design  the  policy  framework 
according to its own needs. From the Turkish perspective, financial stability risks under the 
current conditions are most evident as the rapidly increasing current account deficit fueled by 
short-term  capital  inflows.  The  divergence  between  domestic  and  foreign  demand  growth 
coupled with a rapid credit expansion is increasing the current account deficit, thereby raising 
financial stability concerns. Moreover, the recent developments and related policy decisions 
in  the  European  and  US  economies  have  been  exacerbating  these  risks,  necessitating  a 
different domestic policy mix than we have implemented in the past.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
What  do  we  mean  by  policy  mix?  When  the  external  and  internal  equilibrium  requires 
different interest rates, monetary policy has to use more than one instrument. In our case we 
utilized  two  more  instruments  to  limit  the  macro-financial  risks  associated  with  short  term 
capital inflows coupled with appreciating currency and rising current account deficit. Let me 
explain these extra tools in turn.  
In order to curb the domestic demand and widening current account deficit, our first aim was 
to control the rapid credit expansion. Therefore, we have made it clear that one of the goals 
of our current policy mix should be reducing the pace of credit growth. To this end, we stated 
that reserve requirement ratios should be used as an active monetary policy tool. Moreover, 
to use the required reserve ratios as one of the policy tools to mitigate the macroeconomic 
and  financial  risks  more  actively  in  the  future,  the  remuneration  of  Turkish  lira  required 
reserves is also terminated.  
We  have  been  very  open  with  the  public  regarding  these  measures.  We  stated  that  the 
measures  implemented  by  the  CBT  are  necessary  but  not  alone  sufficient  to  safeguard 
financial stability. We underscored the crucial role of coordination across all institutions. To 
this  end,  I  should  mention  that,  as  a  support  to  our  policies,  the  Banking  Regulation  and 
Supervision Agency (BRSA) has taken a set of measures to (such as restricting loan to value 
ratios  for  certain  segments  of  bank  credits,  increasing  the  minimum  payments  on  credit 
cards) in order to contain the credit supply. BRSA eliminated the ban designed to safeguard 
investor demand for government debt, and permitted Turkish Banks to sell TRY denominated 
securities starting from October 2010. Finally, the government also supported our efforts by 
saving most of the extra revenues acquired by the faster-than-expected pickup in economic 
activity.  In  addition,  government  raised  Resource  Usage  Support  Fund  (KKDF)  deductions 
on consumer loans to roll back measures taken during the global crisis.  
Another issue we considered while formulating current policy mix is lengthening the maturity 
of  capital  inflows.  This  is  important  for  improving  the  quality  of  the  capital  account  and 
avoiding exchange rate misalignments. We decided to adopt a policy mix to deal with this 
situation. We lowered the policy rate and widened the corridor between overnight borrowing 
and lending rates so as to allow fluctuations in the short-term interest rates, when needed. 
This policy so far has been quite effective. We observed a significant drop in the short term 
speculative  inflows.  In  addition,  In  addition,  we  differentiated  Turkish  lira  required  reserve 
ratios  according  to  the  maturity  structure  of  deposits  in  order  to  lengthen  the  maturity 
structure of liabilities and reduce the maturity mismatch.  
Of  course,  one  crucial  communication  issue  not  to  be  neglected  during  this  process  is 
convincing the public that these measures do not mean giving up on our primary mandate, 
which  is  price  stability.  Accordingly,  we  used  a  cautious  tone  for  the  inflation  outlook.  We 
have explicitly stated that, given the rapid pace of domestic demand and rising commodity 
prices, general price setting behavior should be closely monitored. In this respect we have 
forcefully signaled that the net impact of the macroprudential policy package implemented 
– and to be implemented – both by the CBT and other institutions should be on the tightening 
side.  
We anticipate the hikes in required reserve ratios to curb the credit growth through the cost 
and liquidity channels. Needless to say, there is a lot of uncertainty regarding the timing and 
the extent of the impact of our measures. In order to overcome the possible communication 
problems  associated  with  this  uncertainty,  we  have  announced  that  we  will  monitor  the 
effects of our decisions from both price stability and financial stability perspectives, and do 
not hesitate to implement additional measures if necessary.  
Although  it  looks  quite  complicated  at  first  sight,  the  framework  we  adopt  in  spirit  is  not 
significantly different from the conventional inflation targeting framework. The only difference 
is that, previously our policy instrument was the one week repo rate, but now our instrument 
is  a  “policy  mix”  –  which  consists  of  a  combination  of  short  term  interest  rates,  reserve 
requirement ratios and interest rate corridor. We seek to use these instruments in the right 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
combination  in  order  to  cope  with  both  inflation  and  macro-financial  risks.  The  monetary 
policy stance in this framework is not only determined by the path of policy rates, but as a 
mixture of all the policy instruments, as I just mentioned. Just like the conventional inflation 
targeting framework, the policy is forward looking and contingent on economic outlook. The 
course of the policy mix in the forthcoming period will depend on the factors affecting price 
stability and financial stability.  
In sum, we are going through a period in which central banks policies have to be creative in 
dealing  with  the  “new  normal”.  However,  it  is  also  important  to  consider  country  specific 
features in designing these strategies. In our part, we believe that a lower policy rate and a 
wider  interest  rate  corridor  combined  with  higher  required  reserve  ratios  may  serve  as  an 
effective policy mix in dealing with rapidly increasing macro imbalances driven by short term 
capital inflows.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
