Jean-Pierre Danthine: After the crisis – improving incentives in the 
financial sector 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank,  at  the  Founding  event  of  the  School  of  Finance,  University  of  St  Gallen,  St  Gallen, 
20 May 2011. 
 I would like to thank Gero Jung, Peter Kuster, Pierre Monnin, Angelo Ranaldo and Marlene Amstad for their help 
and comments. 
Introduction 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  for  the  inaugural  ceremony  of  the  new  School  of 
Finance  at  the  University  of  St.  Gallen.  Naturally,  finance  has  been  an  integral  part  of  the 
University for a long time, but I am sure that today’s ceremony represents both a new step 
forward and the realisation of a new objective. These are certainly warranted if we consider 
the need for improving financial decision-making made clear by the recent financial crisis. I 
will  take  this  opportunity  to  reflect  on  three  fundamental  questions  that  have  come  to  the 
forefront during this episode.  
The first issue I would like to address is the question of risk and risk-taking in banking. While 
there is evidence that the excessive risk-taking that led to the last financial crisis was at least 
partly attributable to knowledge or competence problems, another important element was the 
misalignment  of  the  incentives  of  the  various  stakeholders  of  financial  institutions.  This  is 
particularly apparent in the case of institutions that were deemed too big to fail. In order to 
illustrate  this  point,  I  will  look  at  the  incentives  with  regard  to  risk-taking  by  the  various 
stakeholders of a bank and try to gauge the likelihood that these incentives lead to decisions 
that would be optimal from society’s viewpoint.  
In my second section I will focus on the “too big to fail” (TBTF) problem. My goal here will be 
to discuss the variety of solutions that can be envisaged in order to restore proper incentives 
and  in  particular  assure  that  the  capital  necessary  for  maintaining  the  vital  functions  of 
financial institutions will in the future come from sources other than taxpayers. I  will argue 
that higher capital requirements, in part in the form of contingent convertible bonds (Cocos), 
together  with  appropriate  organisational  measures,  can  fulfil  the  objective  of  a  “partial” 
bankruptcy and lead to improved incentives for key bank stakeholders. In this speech I will 
adopt a relatively academic point of view, appropriate for today’s circumstances, which will 
lead  me  to  the  conclusion  that  sound  theoretical  principles  underlie  the  TBTF  package 
currently submitted to the Swiss Parliament.1  
Finally, I would like to address the question of the likely impact of current regulatory efforts 
on the cost of capital for banks and their expected return on equity. 
                                                 
1  The importance of this issue for the Swiss National Bank (SNB) is reflected in the number of times it has been 
addressed  by  members  of  the  SNB  Governing  Board.  For  a  more  detailed  and  focused  analysis  of  the 
proposed Swiss law, see the speech given by my colleague Thomas Jordan earlier this week. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Part I: Risk and risk-taking 
Progress in risk measurement: role in the crisis 
There is no doubt that significant progress in both the definition and measurement of risk has 
been made in the recent past. As an example,  the function of a risk manager was almost 
non-existent  some  20  years  ago.  However,  it  is  equally  hard  to  dispute  the  fact  that  this 
progress has been over-estimated. For instance it was regularly claimed in the early 2000s 
that the financial system had never been as resilient and robust as it was at the time. Clearly, 
developments  since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis  in  mid-2007  have  proved  the 
contrary, and we need to draw suitable lessons from that experience.  
Progress in the definition and measurement of risk may well have played a role in the recent 
financial  crisis.  A  reason  for  this  is  that  –  as  so  often  in  modern  finance  –  conceptual 
progress,  in  tandem  with  progress  in  the  methodology  of  risk  management,  has  led  to  a 
rather  blind  trust  in  models.  In  general,  a  trained  economist  learns  to  interpret  models  as 
abstract  approaches  to  reality,  with  these  models  serving  as  a  support  for  economic  and 
business reasoning. Models are not meant to be substitutes for complete, partially qualitative 
reasoning including, in particular, a discussion of the model’s assumptions and their degree 
of robustness. In some areas of finance, however, it appears that quantitative models have 
increasingly been viewed as the alpha and omega of business reasoning. They have often 
served as a substitute for an independent evaluation by business managers and decision-
makers  alike.  We  should  therefore  welcome  some  of  the  ideas  put  forward  in  the  new 
“Financial Modelers’ Hippocratic Oath”, such as “I will remember that I didn’t make the world, 
and it doesn’t satisfy my equations” (Wilmott, 2009).2  
Risk and luck 
Finance  and  banking  are  intimately  linked  with  the  notion  of  risk.  Risk  is  a  fascinating  but 
difficult  concept,  if  only  because  it  is  intimately  linked  with  the  concept  of  luck.  In  a  risky 
world,  heroes  are  more  likely  to  be  lucky  than  smart.  In  asset  management,  for  instance, 
Barras, Scaillet and Wermers (2010) find that around 8% of mutual funds display a significant 
positive alpha, but of them only about 0.5% deliver a positive alpha that is not driven by luck. 
One question that arises from this finding is whether the associated statistics would be very 
different  for  the  group  of  successful  bank  managers  or  successful  traders  in  financial 
markets.  Yet  remuneration  schemes  do  not  appear  to  take  this  identification  problem  into 
account. It can be hypothesised that bonus payments are often a reward for luck rather than 
compensation for actual skill or effort. This hypothesis represents a very significant challenge 
for an efficient financial system. It is a challenge for a new school of finance. We need to 
improve our ability to distinguish between skill and luck. Simultaneously we need to draw the 
adequate  conclusions  from  the  difficulties  that  will  always  exist  in  signal  extraction  on  this 
issue. 
Excessive risk-taking: lack of knowledge... 
Let me now turn to the question of financial risk-taking. Overall, there is no (expected) return 
and no growth without risk so we have to be careful to foster a sufficiently pro-risk society. 
But  risk  calculus  –  weighing  the  marginal  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  taking  more 
risk –  is  a  difficult  exercise.  It  is  difficult  because  it  entails  probabilities,  that  are  hard  to 
assess,  over  future  scenarios  which  are  themselves  often  hard  to  describe  fully  and 
accurately. And the difficulty increases by an additional step if there is an externality, that is, 
if  the  private  and  social  cost  and  benefit  of  additional  risk-taking  differ.  One  can  plausibly 
                                                 
2  Wilmott, P. (2009) “Financial Modelers’ Manifesto”, available at www.willmott.com, January 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
argue that the recent financial crisis was, to some extent, the result of excessive risk-taking. 
For  the  proponents  of  this  hypothesis,  the  ultimate  cause  is  in  question.  One  possibility  is 
that  this  excessive  risk-taking  was  the  result  of  wrong  incentives,  with  decision-makers 
wilfully taking more risk for themselves or their institutions than would have been privately or 
socially  desirable.  The  alternative  would  be  that  a  misperception  of  the  probabilities  and 
possible  consequences  of  the  decisions  was  the  prime  cause:  a  lack  of  knowledge  or 
competence. Since I will essentially concentrate on the first possibility, i.e. incentives, let me 
recall, by a way of contrast, a recent study by Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2011). These authors 
show  that  the  losses  of  the  banks  whose  managers’  incentives  were  most  closely  aligned 
with the long-term interests of the firm they managed were at least as large, in the last crisis, 
as  those  at  the  financial  institutions  where  governance  was  more  obviously  lacking.  This 
suggests that wrong incentives were not the only factor in the behaviour and decisions that 
led to the crisis. Knowledge and competence were also at play. 
... or a misalignment of incentives? 
Incentives are an important component in risk and risk-taking. If there is an important lesson 
in  economics  and  finance  that  has  not  been  invalidated  by  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  that 
incentives really do matter. The excessive risk-taking that was observed prior to the financial 
crisis is likely to have been – among other things – the result of the fact that key decision-
makers  were  not  provided  with  the  right  incentives  to  carefully  analyse  and  balance  the 
possible consequences of the risks they agreed to take. Let us take a bank as an example. 
The main relevant stakeholders are the depositors, the shareholders, the managers and the 
bondholders. What follows is a review of the situation of these stakeholders in relation to the 
desired risk profile of a typical bank.3 
  Depositors 
Deposit insurance ensures that it is not the business of depositors to worry about 
the  amount  of  risk  that  the  bank,  in  which  he  or  she  has  deposited  his  money, 
decides to take. A key lesson of the Great Depression was that deposit insurance is 
a  socially  justified  feature  of  the  banking  system.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that 
banks  are  institutions  vulnerable  to  bank  runs,  no  matter  how  well  they  are 
managed. The principle of deposit insurance is widely accepted and I will not further 
question  it.  Yet,  the  extent  of  deposit  insurance  and  the  form  of  its  financing  are 
important questions. Recent history has refocused our attention on these matters, 
but these are not the issues I would like to deal with today. 
Shareholders 
The  incentives  for  shareholders  differ  from  those  of  depositors.  At  first  sight 
shareholders, as ultimate owners of the bank, can be counted on to discipline risk-
taking by the institution they own. After all, they stand to lose their entire stake if the 
risks taken lead to bankruptcy. However, this is only true to a limited extent. Indeed, 
if we go beyond an initial, superficial consideration of the situation, we soon realise 
that shareholders cannot be expected to discipline risk-taking by a bank. There are 
a number of reasons for this. In addition to the fact that individual shareholders are 
often  small  and  scattered,  they  only  have  limited  ways  of  exerting  pressure  on 
management,  short  of  disposing  of  their  share.  Importantly,  the  reality  of  limited 
liability  seriously  biases  shareholders’  perspective  on  risk.  While  shareholders 
benefit from the upside of risk-taking, they are not symmetrically penalised on the 
                                                 
3  The  focus  here  is  placed  on  a  typical  banking  institution,  but  other  financial  institutions  might  be  similarly 
affected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  downside.  This  asymmetry  is  particularly  acute  in  the  case  of  highly  levered 
institutions.  For  these  institutions,  the  return  on  equity  in  good  times  is  high,  say 
above  20%.  The  trade-off  between  high  returns  if  the  risky  gamble  pays  off,  and 
zero, if it does not, is particularly lopsided. Both limited liability and the natural highly 
leveraged  nature  of  banking  thus  come  with  a  natural  propensity  for  socially 
excessive  risk-taking  on  the  part  of  banks’  owners.  In  this  sense,  shareholders 
cannot  be  relied  upon  to  impose  on  managers  the  socially  optimal  level  of  risk-
taking.4 
Managers 
What about the bank’s managers? Here theory tells us that, apart from reputation 
and  other  soft  considerations,  the behaviour  of  managers  will  crucially  depend  on 
the  link  between  their  remuneration  and  the  firm’s  performance.  What  is  at  issue 
here is less the level of managerial remuneration. More important is the relationship 
between  the  remuneration  and  the  medium  to  long-run  performance  of  the  bank. 
Clearly,  a  managerial  remuneration  scheme  which  depends  exclusively  on  the 
bank’s current performance places managers in a situation similar to limited-liability 
shareholders.  They  cash  in  on  lucky  gambles  but  bear  few  of  the  negative 
consequences  of  unlucky  ones.  Unless  we  are  willing  to  question  the  notion  of 
limited  liability  for  managers  (as  does  Kotlikoff,  2010,  for  example),  this  kind  of 
consideration provides the rationale for regulating managerial remuneration, and in 
particular for imposing long waiting periods before managers can cash in bonuses.5 
A  very  careful  design  of  managerial  payment  structure  is  needed  if  we  want  to 
ensure that the risk decisions of self-interested managers are in line with the long-
term interest of firm owners and society.6 
Bondholders 
Let me now turn to the issue of whether bondholders – the final stakeholder group – 
contribute to a balanced weighting of risk and return in a bank’s decisions. Under 
normal circumstances, discipline arises through the possibility and reality of default 
and eventually bankruptcy. Bondholders who are deprived of the upside potential of 
the risks taken by the bank and lose part (or all) of their stake in the event of default 
can be counted on to ensure that the negative consequences of the risky gambles 
taken by the bank are given proper weight. Indeed, the cost of debt increases with 
additional risk-taking, thus reminding managers and shareholders of the downside of 
the  risks  they  are  naturally  inclined  to  take.  In  reality,  this  is  precisely  where  the 
moral  hazard  issue  associated  with  the  implicit  guarantee  of  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
(TBTF)  status  becomes  relevant.  By  definition,  a  TBTF  financial  institution  can 
expect to be rescued from bankruptcy. As a consequence, the banks’ bondholders 
know they will not bear the cost of excessive risk-taking and therefore they need not 
                                                 
4  Though determining the precise level of socially optimal risk-taking is difficult to gauge for the economy as a 
whole, excessive risk-taking by an individual institution is easier to detect.  
In Switzerland, a FINMA circular on remuneration schemes lays down rules for the remuneration of employees 
of financial institutions. Cf., FINMA Circular 10/1, “Minimum standards for remuneration schemes of financial 
institutions”, October 2009. 
5 
6  Executive compensation schemes which could represent an additional mechanism for improving managerial 
compensation include schemes that align managerial compensation with the long-term objectives of the firm. 
Skills are better assessed in relative terms and on a risk-adjusted basis. Therefore, a compensation scheme 
that  rewards  better-than-average  corporate  results  and  refers  to  risk-adjusted  performance  measures  may 
reduce  risk-taking  and  reward  more  skills.  For  a  more  complete  discussion,  cf.  “The  Squam  Lake  Report: 
Fixing the Financial System”, Princeton University Press, May 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
take this cost into account when assessing the risk profile of the institution they lend 
to.7  
To sum up, the combination of deposit insurance, limited liability of shareholders, short-term 
contracts of managers and the TBTF implicit state guarantee provide strong support for the 
hypothesis that an excessive willingness to take risks may also have been a possible factor 
in the recent financial crisis. In the case of systemically relevant financial institutions, it is not 
clear  that  any  of  the  major  stakeholders  had  the  incentive  to  perform  a  balanced  risk 
calculus. As mentioned before, competence and knowledge may have been at stake. They 
can be improved through further investment in teaching and research in finance. This will be 
to no avail, however, if the incentive structure in systemically relevant financial institutions is 
not simultaneously corrected. 
Part II: Too big to fail 
TBTF: A problem of externalities 
I will now build on the previous analysis of risk and risk-taking and focus on the possibility of 
restoring  incentives  in  the  case  of  a  TBTF  institution.  By  definition,  TBTF  starts  with  an 
externality:  an  institution’s  failure  cannot  be  accepted  because  its  implications  for  other 
financial  institutions  and  for  the  real  economy  would  be  too  severe.  In  a  TBTF  situation, 
various stakeholders face misaligned incentives. The moral hazard issue already mentioned 
obviously  means  that  the  bondholders  face  the  wrong  incentives.  This  externality  has 
additional  implications  for  the  social  dimension  of  the  risk  decisions  of  managers  and 
shareholders.  This  is  because  the  private  cost  of  an  institution’s  failure  underestimates  its 
social  cost.  In  other  words,  the  externality  implies  that  the  appropriate  risk  calculus,  taken 
from  the  perspective  of  a  single  institution,  leads  to  excessive  risk-taking  from  the 
perspective of society. The institution’s failure may be the unfortunate consequence of risks 
that,  in  the  best  case,  were  justified  from  the  perspective  of  the  institution  itself.  But  it 
imposes  additional  costs  on  other 
institutions  and  market 
participants.  These  extra  costs  were  not  taken  into  account  even  if  the  decision-making 
process was privately optimal. 
In  what  follows,  let  me  discuss  the  appropriate  recipe  in  the  presence  of  an  externality. 
Economic theory mainly suggests two measures: either restoring the appropriate incentives 
via a Pigovian tax8 or applying direct quantity regulation. 
financial  and  economic 
Limiting the size of the bank 
One extreme solution to the TBTF problem falling within the second category of measures is 
to  adopt  the  following  precept:  if  an  institution  is  too  big  to  fail,  then  it  is  too  big  to  exist.9 
According to this view, the state should limit the size and scope of banks to levels where the 
TBTF  externality  does  not  materialise.  Renouncing  the  benefits  associated  with  scale  and 
scope is the price to pay for this radical solution.10 Potentially even more costly is the fact that 
all benefits associated with size and scope that might be discovered in the future are also 
forgone!  This  is  a  very  strong  encroachment  on  the  principles  prevailing  in  a  free  market 
                                                 
7  The argument outlined here is particularly relevant for holders of senior bonds. 
8  See Pigou, A. (1920), The Economics of Welfare, London: MacMillan. 
9  There are a variety of advocates of this view. Cf., for instance, King, M. (2009), speech at the Lord Mayor’s 
Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, June 2009. 
10  It is fair to acknowledge at this point that there is a lot of controversy and only weak evidence on the existence 
and size of returns to scale and scope in banking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
economy,  which  is  –  among  other  things  –  based  on  the  principle  that  firms  are  best 
positioned  to  select  their  business  plan  and  should  do  so  freely  within  the  appropriate 
incentive structure. 
Increasing capital requirements and imposing a capital surcharge 
The  “Pigovian”  approach  is  often  more  suitably  and  closely  aligned  to  the  principles  of  a 
dynamic market economy. In the problem at hand, the Pigovian approach may take the form 
of the imposition of higher capital requirements together with a capital surcharge, modulated 
to take account of the systemic risk of a financial institution. The benefits of increasing capital 
requirements are manifold. First, imposing more equity capital naturally makes an institution 
more  robust  and  able  to  withstand  adverse  scenarios.  This  reduces  the  probability  of 
bankruptcy, thus the severity of the externality. Second, a greater capital requirement also 
increases the stakes for shareholders as it decreases the degree of leverage of the financial 
institute. This somewhat alleviates (although it does not fully resolve) the asymmetry problem 
facing  limited  liability  shareholders  and  thus  improves  their  incentives  to  undertake  risk 
monitoring.  Third,  to  the  extent  that  equity  capital  is  more  expensive  than  debt,  a  capital 
surcharge works like a tax. It lets the firm decide on its optimal size but in so doing forces it 
to  integrate  the  fact  that  a  larger  size  imposes  an  extra  cost  to  society  and  is  thus  only 
warranted  if  the  additional  benefit  for  the  firm  justifies  the  additional  social  cost.  In  other 
words: be big if you are convinced of the benefits of size but cover the social cost of your 
decision!11  
Imposing organisational measures 
The level of the capital surcharge for systemically relevant institutions can, in the spirit of the 
Pigovian  approach,  be  decreased  if  the  size  of  the  TBTF  externality  is  further  reduced  by 
other means. This provides the rationale for imposing organisational measures with the goal 
of making partial bankruptcy possible.12 The aim of organisational measures is to encourage 
banks  to  isolate  the  divisions  that assume  essential  systemic  functions  from  those  that  do 
not,  so  that  the  functioning  ability  of  the  former  can  be  maintained  in  a  case  of  near-
bankruptcy, while the latter can be wound down. This would make it possible to dismantle a 
systemically relevant institution in such a way that only those parts of the institution that are 
vital to the economy need to be saved. Only a limited bailout is then necessary, and this can 
then  be  rendered  compatible  with  the  functioning  of  a  free  market  economy,  if  the  capital 
necessary for maintaining the vital functions does not come from the taxpayer.  
Cocos: better incentives for bondholders 
A  possible  way  to  keep  vital  parts  of  banks  functioning  during  crisis  situations  without 
involving the taxpayer is to have recourse to contingent convertible bonds or Cocos. These 
are  bonds  that  are  converted  into  equity  if  certain  thresholds  are  reached.  One  such 
threshold  may  be  a  capital  level  corresponding  to  a  de  facto  bankruptcy.  With  these 
“low-trigger”  Cocos,  the  necessary  capital  for  supporting  the  vital  functions  of  the  bank  is 
forthcoming precisely when it is most needed, in other words, when the institution would not 
otherwise be viable as a going concern. The conceptual attractiveness of Cocos is that, in 
addition  to  recapitalising  banks  when  the  standard  form  of  recapitalisation  is  unavailable, 
                                                 
11  Banks’ liquidity issues are not dealt with explicitly here. Clearly, weak bank liquidity profiles were at the core of 
the recent crisis. Liquidity measures represent a critical part of the Basel III regulatory framework. They are 
also  part  of  the  TBTF  proposal.  Another  relevant  issue  relates  to  the  maturity  mismatch  between  a  bank’s 
assets and liabilities. This is discussed in Hellwig (2008), among others. 
12  For suggestions on improving resolution options for systemically relevant financial institutions, cf. also “The 
Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System”, Princeton University Press, May 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
they  also  restore  creditors’  incentives  to  monitor  risk.  Cocos  can  therefore  be  viewed  as 
partial  substitutes  for  unusable  or  impractical  bankruptcy  procedures,  as  they  ensure  that 
one major class of stakeholders – which would otherwise be outside the risk calculus loop – 
is now interested in monitoring the bank’s risk attitude and contributing to containing the pro-
risk bias of the other stakeholders. 
The Swiss solution 
Resolving the TBTF issue is a first order of priority. It is of utmost importance for Switzerland, 
given  the  relative  size  of  the  two  big  banks  in  relation  to  economic  output.13  The  recent 
history of developments has helped us to understand that our two big banks are not only too 
big  to  fail,  but  that  circumstances  could  arise  under  which  they  would  be  too  big  to  be 
rescued  as  well.  The  solution  chosen  by  the  Swiss  authorities  to  address  this  important 
problem  is  fully  in  the  spirit  of  the  above  conceptual  discussion.  It  relies  on  higher  capital 
requirements  and  a  capital  surcharge  proportional  to  the  systemic  externality  with  a 
substantial part of the extra capital taking the form of Cocos. It also imposes organisational 
measures fulfilling the objective of allowing for a “partial” bankruptcy and thus reducing the 
size of the TBTF externality. 
Part III: The side effects of improved incentives 
Will higher capital restrict bank lending? 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  examination  of  some  of  the  potential  side-effects  of  the  measures 
described in the preceding section. A legitimate first question is whether improving incentives 
in the way we have described could have undesired indirect effects such as modifying the 
banks’ lending behaviour. An argument often heard is that higher equity requirements would 
force banks to set aside, or hold in reserve, funds that could otherwise be used for lending. 
Here the main observation is that extremely risky gambles should now be avoided as a result 
of  improved  incentives.  There  has  been  excessive  risk-taking  in  the  past;  there  should  be 
less  of  it  under  the  new  incentives.  Beyond  this  intended  effect,  which  concerns  only  the 
most risky activities, the form of financing used by an institution – in itself – should have no 
impact on the profit-maximising business model. That is, as far as activities and revenues are 
concerned,  imposing  extra  capital  does  not  change  the  perspective  of  the  decision-maker 
beyond  restoring  the  incentives  for  balanced  risk-taking.  The  exception  is  the  case  of 
marginally  profitable  activities,  and  here  only  to  the  extent  that  the  cost  of  financing  is 
increased (more on this later). Provided that activities are profitable, and bearing in mind that 
in banking the targeted return on equity is not only highly positive but incomparably higher 
than  in  other  sectors  of  the  economy,  the  cost  of  financing  should  not  be  the  main 
determinant of activity. Holding more capital does not impair banks’ ability to create value by 
lending,  provide  payment  services  or  satisfy  the  demand  for  investment  banking  activities. 
High leverage is not a pre-requisite for banks to perform their socially valuable functions.  
Will higher capital requirements increase the cost of financing? 
I  now  want  to  address  the  question  of  whether  higher  capital  requirements  per  se  will 
increase the cost of financing. A theoretical basis for answering this question can be found in 
the work of Modigliani and Miller.14 In a perfect, frictionless world, the value of a firm does not 
depend on whether it is financed by debt or equity. 
                                                 
13  The balance sheet of the two biggest Swiss banks adds up to a multiple of the size of domestic GDP. 
14  Modigliani,  F.  and  Miller,  M.  H.  (1958).  “The  Cost  of  Capital,  Corporate  Finance  and  the  Theory  of 
Investment”, American Economic Review, 48, 261–97. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Higher equity capital reduces leverage. Thus it reduces return on equity (ROE) when a bank 
makes a profit but it increases it when the bank makes a loss. In other words, if increased 
capital requirements lower the ROE in good times, they raise it in bad times, hence reducing 
shareholder risk. It follows that shareholders will demand a lower average ROE for a better 
capitalised bank, as this is the counterpart for the better protection they obtain in bad times. 
We can thus expect a decrease in ROE, but this only reflects the decreased risk premium 
associated with the decreased risk-taking. Similarly, the cost of debt decreases and this drop 
in  the  cost  of  funds  perfectly  offsets  the  effect  of  the  greater  use  of  the  more  expensive 
source  of  capital  in  the  firm’s  financing  structure.  The  essence  of  the  Modigliani-Miller 
theorem is that the cost of capital and thus the firm’s value are unaffected.  
Of course we do not live in a perfect world, and the Modigliani-Miller equivalence does not 
hold. Financing matters. The relevant literature typically puts forward a number of factors to 
justify the higher cost of equity financing: the fiscal advantage of debt, the cost associated 
with bankruptcy and the differential liquidity and issuing cost between debt and equity. These 
arguments  apply  to  pure  equity  financing,  not  in  the  case  of  Cocos.  As  debt  instruments, 
Cocos  offer  the  fiscal  advantage  of  other  debt  instruments.  As  hybrid  instruments,  they 
substitute for other hybrids that are already part of the financing structure of banks and that 
have proved relatively inexpensive for banks to issue. Finally, it is not clear that bankruptcy 
costs are relevant in the context of the TBTF problem where precisely those costs are never 
really  incurred.  For  all  these  reasons,  we  may  hypothesise  that  the  total  cost  of  bank 
financing will not materially increase as a result of higher capital requirements, in particular if 
the  latter  can  take  the  form  of  Cocos.  It  is  the  case,  however,  that  mitigating  the  implicit 
subsidy to TBTF institutions does correspond to a socially desirable increase in the cost of 
doing business for these institutions.  
Is maximising return on equity an appropriate objective? 
As mentioned in our discussion of the cost of capital, return on equity will be affected. A more 
highly  capitalised  bank  is  expected  to  have  a  lower  ROE  because  of  its  lower  risk  profile. 
However, this is socially desirable. The common emphasis on ROE should be handled with 
scepticism, as ROE is a measure that is not adjusted for the risk profile of the bank and thus 
can be easily manipulated by increasing leverage.  
Because ROE depends on the capital structure of a bank, this measure should not be used 
to compare two banks with different capital structures. If, however, two banks have the same 
capital structure, does it follow that targeting the highest ROE is the appropriate strategy? 
If a bank is operating efficiently, its return on equity will be positively correlated with the risk 
taken: on average, more risk means more reward and thus more profitability. However, as 
we have seen, there is such a thing as too much risk-taking from society’s perspective, in 
particular in the context of TBTF or systemically relevant institutions. That is, the amount of 
risk taken by a TBTF bank can diverge from the risk that society would like the bank to take. 
Targeting a very high return on equity is very likely to be inappropriate from a social point of 
view, as excessive risk-taking imposes an externality on the stability of the system.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude with a brief summary. Today I have first reviewed the incentives for risk-
taking by the various stakeholders of a bank. This review showed that, in particular in the 
case of a TBTF institution, no single stakeholder group is confronted with a natural incentive 
for  a  prudent  weighting  of  risks.  I  have  concluded  that  we  should  not  be  surprised  by  the 
assessment that the financial crisis could have its cause in excessive risk-taking by financial 
institutions. Pursuing the case of TBTF institutions we have considered a set of measures 
that  have  the  potential  to  correct  the  incentive  structure.  Higher  capital  requirements  in 
general, a capital surcharge for systemically relevant institutions, Cocos and organisational 
measures  designed  to  allow  for  “partial”  bankruptcies  naturally  belong  to  a  programme 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
aiming at improving financial incentives. It is worth noting that these are essential elements 
of the TBTF package currently submitted to the Swiss Parliament. Finally, I have discussed 
the impact of such measures on the incentive to lend, the cost of capital and the return on 
equity. The aim of these measures is, first, to improve the incentives for balanced risk-taking 
and, second, to mitigate the implicit subsidy granted to TBTF institutions. These are the first-
order  effects.  There  should  be  few  additional  side-effects  on  lending  practices  and  on  the 
cost of capital. Average return on equity is likely to decrease in proportion to the decline in 
the risks assumed by shareholders.  
References 
Admati, A. R., DeMarzo, P. M., Hellwig, M. F. and Pfleiderer, P. (2011) “Fallacies, irrelevant 
facts and myths in the discussion of capital regulation: why bank equity is not expensive”, 
Stanford GSB Research Paper No. 2063. 
Barras,  L.,  Scaillet,  O.  and  Wermers,  R.  (2010)  “False  Discoveries  in  Mutual  Fund 
Performance: Measuring Luck in Estimated Alphas”, Journal of Finance, 65(1), 179–216. 
Fahlenbrach, R. and Stulz, R. M. (2011) “Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis”, Journal 
of Financial Economics, 99(1), 11–26. 
Kotlikoff, L. J. (2010) “Jimmy Stewart is dead: ending the world’s ongoing financial plague 
with limited purpose banking”, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey. 
Hellwig,  M.  (2008)  “Systemic  Risk  in  the  Financial  Sector:  An  Analysis  of  the  Subprime-
Mortgage Financial Crisis”, Preprints of the Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective 
Goods, Bonn 2008/43. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
