Eric S Rosengren: A US perspective on strengthening financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Eric  S  Rosengren,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston, at the Financial Stability Institute High-Level Meeting on the New 
Framework to Strengthen Financial Stability and Regulatory Priorities, St Petersburg, Russia, 
24 May 2011. 
 Of  course,  the  views  I  express  today  are  my  own,  not  necessarily  those  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Board  of 
Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (the FOMC). 
Good morning. I would like to thank Josef Tosovsky and the Financial Stability Institute for 
inviting me to speak today on financial stability and on regulatory and supervisory priorities in 
the  United  States.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  Sergey  Ignatiev  and  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Russian Federation for hosting this very important event.1  
I  think  it is crucial  that we  continue  to  share  perspectives on  financial  stability  and  related 
issues.  Clearly  the  events  of  the  past  four  years  have  heightened  our  awareness  of  how 
interconnected  our  economies,  our  financial  institutions,  and  our  financial  markets  have 
become.  When  large  global  financial  intermediaries  become  troubled,  it  impacts  not  just 
home country borrowers and, potentially, taxpayers; but increasingly can also have collateral 
impacts on host countries and their financial markets. 
Much  has  been  learned  in  the  United  States  over  the  past  four  years  about  gaps  in  our 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  One  response  to  the  gaps  revealed  during  the 
financial  crisis  was  the  adoption  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer 
Protection Act. It ushered in significant changes and also required numerous studies to be 
undertaken, and new regulations to be considered and promulgated. Much of this work is still 
in process.  
Some of the most significant aspects of the Dodd-Frank legislation involve seeking greater 
clarity in the resolution procedures for complex financial holding companies that experience 
difficulties;  creating  a  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council;  establishing  a  Consumer 
Financial  Protection  Bureau  intended  to  address  gaps  in  consumer  protection;  and 
increasing regulatory powers over, and focus on, systemically important financial institutions. 
A  second  major  change  resulting  from  the  financial  crisis  has  been  a  reappraisal  of  the 
quantity and quality of capital needed to avoid a reoccurrence. This matter is clearly critical to 
the  Basel  III  discussions  taking  place  here  over  the  next  two  days;  but,  I  would  note,  has 
already been the focus of two supervisory exercises conducted in the United States.  
As I will describe in more detail in a moment, during a financial crisis investors focus on how 
much “core” or “pure” capital exists in an organization to absorb immediate and near-term 
losses.2  Some  of  the  broader  definitions  of  capital  include  elements  that  are  not  actually 
readily  available  to  absorb  losses.  Capital  meeting  the  broader  definitions  was  largely 
ignored by investors during the intense phases of the crisis, leading to significant financial 
runs  and  liquidity  problems  at  institutions  whose  capital,  using  the  broader  definitions, 
actually  satisfied  existing  regulatory  standards.  As  conditions  deteriorated,  market  focus 
                                                 
1  These  remarks  were  prepared  for  delivery  at  a  gathering  focused  on  “The  New  Framework  to  Strengthen 
Financial  Stability  and  Regulatory  Priorities”,  jointly  organized  by  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  and  the 
banking  supervisors  from  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  and  hosted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Russian 
Federation. 
2  Beyond concern over immediate losses, investors may also focus on the possibility of future losses and the 
capital readily available to offset them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
shifted  from  the  relative  strength  implied  by  regulatory  capital  ratios  to  the  vulnerabilities 
associated with deteriorating measures of “pure” capital. This led to greater uncertainty and 
ultimately to liquidity stresses. 
The experience in the United States during the crisis is instructive as we think about where 
we should focus our attention in terms of bank capital, as well as in terms of supervision. On 
the latter, I would note that stress testing has proved to be an important supervisory tool in 
the United States for judging the quality and quantity of capital. 
Before delving into the details, I’d like to give you a preview of my main points: 
 
First,  I  would  like  to  discuss  capital  and  the  financial  crisis,  and  will  suggest  that 
many U.S. financial institutions did not have the quality or quantity of capital needed 
to withstand the shocks we recently experienced. The focus in Basel III on improving 
the quantity and quality of capital at financial institutions – particularly systemically 
important financial institutions – is critically important.  
Second, I will suggest that we should be particularly focused on narrow definitions of 
capital, which are what investors focused on during the financial crisis.  
Third, I will suggest that stress tests are an important supervisory tool that should be 
used for prudential and macroprudential3 supervision as well as for management’s 
own capital planning efforts. The rapid recapitalization of many financial institutions 
in  the  United  States  greatly  benefitted  from  the  attention  during  supervisory 
exercises  (including  stress  tests)  on  the  quantity  and  quality  of  capital.  I  will  also 
discuss  the  evaluation  of  discretionary  capital  distributions  (such  as  increasing 
dividends, and stock buybacks).  
  Capital and the financial crisis 
I  think  it  is  instructive  to  look  at  the  capital  ratios  of  two  of  the  very  large  banking 
organizations that encountered problems and were acquired during the financial crisis.  
Wachovia was one of the four largest banking organizations in the United States, with total 
assets in 2008 exceeding $700 billion. As a result of large exposure to subprime mortgages, 
partially as a result of an acquisition of a large California thrift, investors became concerned 
about the solvency of Wachovia. A loss of confidence in Wachovia led depositors, funders, 
and  investors  –  those  on  the  liability  side  of  the  bank’s  balance  sheet  –  to  withdraw, 
pressuring  the  institution  to  sell  itself.  After  a  short  bidding  war  between  Wells  Fargo  and 
Citigroup, Wells Fargo prevailed and acquired Wachovia at the end of 2008. 
Washington  Mutual  or  “WaMu”  was  the  largest  savings  and  loan  holding  company  in  the 
United States, with assets over $300 billion. WaMu had grown rapidly, with a large exposure 
to  residential  real  estate  and  a  large  concentration  of  both  variable  rate  and  subprime 
mortgages. Large depositors became concerned about the solvency of WaMu in September 
2008  and  began  rapidly  withdrawing  funds.  The  institution  failed  later  that  month  (on 
September 25) and was acquired by JP Morgan Chase. 
 
                                                 
3  Given time constraints, my remarks do not delve into the role of stress tests in macroprudential supervision.  
In  my  view,  stress  tests  benefit  macroprudential  supervision  in  that  (a)  they  embed  an  explicit  link  to 
macroeconomic  scenarios  and  (b)  they  focus  on  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  to  provide 
intermediation services to the real economy rather than just on the solvency of individual institutions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 1 provides the capital ratios reported in the last financial filing for both Wachovia and 
Washington  Mutual.  The  most  narrow  definition  of  capital,4  tangible  common  equity,  is  a 
measure of capital widely used by investors (and increasingly so during the crisis) because it 
focuses  on  the  “core”  capital  readily  available  to  cushion  the  bank  against  losses.  The 
tangible capital measure – specifically the ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets 
– was a bit above 2 percent for Wachovia and about 3 percent for WaMu,5 providing only a 
small cushion against the losses accumulating from their subprime exposures.  
The  regulatory  capital  ratios  use  broader  definitions  of  capital,  relative  to  risk-weighted 
assets. To be considered  adequately capitalized, a bank needs to have at least 4 percent 
Tier  1  risk-based  capital  to  risk-weighted  assets,  and  at  least  8  percent  total  risk-based 
capital  to  risk-weighted  assets.  To  be  well  capitalized  a  bank  needs  to  have  at  least 
6 percent Tier 1 risk-based capital to risk-weighted assets and at least 10 percent total risk-
based  capital  to  risk-weighted  assets.6  Figure  1  shows  that  under  these  definitions  both 
banks  were  well  capitalized  in  their  final  quarter  –  despite  the  fact  that  more  narrow 
definitions of capital indicated only a very small capital buffer. 
Figure  2  plots  the  capital  ratios  for  the  period  leading  up  to  the  “run”  on  Wachovia.  The 
broader definitions of capital – Tier 1 and total risk-based capital – were actually rising in the 
period  when  holders  of  Wachovia’s  liabilities  were  becoming  concerned,  and  thus  the 
broader definitions of capital were not particularly informative. The more narrow definitions of 
capital  –  Tier  1  common  and  tangible  common  equity  –  were  both  declining  fairly 
substantially.  
In  retrospect,  the  quality  and  quantity  of  capital  was  not  sufficient  for  the  kind  of  financial 
shocks experienced in the United States in the crisis. Under the Basel III proposals there is 
much more attention being given to the quality and quantity of capital. My own view is that 
this  heightened  focus  is  appropriate,  and  that  the  particular  capital  that  truly  serves  as  a 
cushion against losses during periods of stress should be regulators’ primary focus. 
                                                       
4  Four  measures  of  capital  are  referenced  in  this  speech,  total  risk-based  capital,  Tier  1  risk-based  capital, 
Tier 1 common capital, and tangible common equity:  
Total  risk-based  capital  includes  core  capital  elements  (Tier  1  capital)  plus  supplementary  capital  elements 
(Tier 2 capital).  
Tier  1  risk-based  capital  is  defined  in  the  Capital  Adequacy  Guidelines  for  Bank  Holding  Companies: 
Risk-Based Measures (12 CFR part 225, Appendix A) as the sum of core capital elements less any amounts 
of  goodwill,  other  intangible  assets,  interest-only  strips  receivables,  deferred  tax  assets,  nonfinancial  equity 
investments,  and  other  items  that  are  required  to  be  deducted  in  accordance  with  section  II.B.  of  this 
appendix. Tier 1 capital must represent at least 50 percent of qualifying total capital.” The specific elements 
included in Tier 1 capital and their various limits, restrictions, and deductions are discussed in detail in 12 CFR 
part 225, Appendix A.   
Tier  2  capital  includes  supplementary  items  such  as  qualifying  subordinated  debt  and  a  portion  of  the 
allowance  for  loan  and  lease  losses.    See  12  CFR  part  225,  Appendix  A  for  a  full  discussion  of  the  items 
included in Tier 2 capital and the associated limits, restrictions and deductions.   
Tier 1 common capital as defined for the  Supervisory  Capital Assessment Program is the  portion  of Tier 1 
capital  that  is  common  equity,  or  Tier  1  capital  less  perpetual  preferred  stock,  minority  interests  and  trust 
preferred securities that qualified as Tier 1 capital.   
Tangible common equity is defined as total equity capital less perpetual preferred stock and related surplus 
(net of related treasury stock), goodwill and other intangible assets.   
Four capital ratios are also calculated. The denominator for three ratios – the Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio, 
the  total  risk-based  capital  ratio  and  the  Tier  1  common  capital  ratio  –  is  risk-weighted  assets.  The 
denominator for the tangible common equity ratio is tangible assets, defined as total assets less goodwill and 
other intangible assets. 
It had been under 2 percent. 
5 
6  These guidelines apply to the individual bank subsidiaries within a bank holding company. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure  3  highlights  that  since  the  worst  phase  of  the  crisis,  15  large  U.S.  banking 
organizations  that  have  reported  continuously  through  the  crisis  have  made  significant 
progress in improving both the quality and quantity of their capital. The most narrow capital 
definition on the chart – the ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets – has risen 
from  a  little  over  2  percent  to  almost  6  percent.  This  reflects  both  significant  raising  of 
external  capital  as  well  as  dramatic  declines  in  dividends  and  stock  buybacks  during  the 
crisis and the early period of recovery. Both of these dynamics have had a significant positive 
impact on the institutions’ ability to withstand potential future stresses. 
Figure 4 illustrates the amount and composition of capital – the numerators of the various 
capital ratios – at the 15 large banking organizations over a four-year period. You can see 
that there has been an appreciable amount of common equity raised by this group of large 
banks.  
The improvement in the quality and quantity of capital is quite striking. An important aspect of 
this recapitalization has been the supervisory use of stress tests to determine the adequacy 
of  capital,  and  also  in  evaluating  discretionary  capital  distributions  (such  as  increased 
dividend payouts). The supervisory use of the stress tests is relatively new. It is worth noting 
and  discussing  the  fact  that  it  is  not  just  capital  regulation,  but  also  supervision,  that  has 
been a driver of the recapitalization process. 
Stress tests and improving the quantity and quality of capital 
Now  I  would  like  to  delve  a  bit  deeper  into  the  role  that  stress  testing  has  played  in 
encouraging  more  rapid  recapitalization  of  U.S.  banks,  during  the  financial  crisis  and  the 
early  stages  of  the  economic  recovery.  The  U.S.  stress  test  exercise  was  conducted  from 
February to April of 2009 – a period of significant financial turmoil, when many private-sector 
analysts  and  academic  observers  had  raised  concerns  about  the  financial  condition  of  the 
U.S.  banking  industry.  The  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  (“SCAP”)  was 
designed  to  provide  a  rigorous  assessment  and,  in  doing  so,  to  ensure  that  banks  had 
sufficient  capital  to  sustain  additional  losses  and  still  continue  providing  critical  credit 
intermediation should economic conditions deteriorate further. 
The  SCAP  exercise  was  conducted  with  the  19  largest  U.S.  domiciled  bank  holding 
companies. Each bank holding company was provided a baseline economic scenario and a 
more  stressful  scenario.  The  scenarios  were  based  on  publicly  available  private  forecasts 
and provided the assumed path for real GDP, unemployment, and house prices over the next 
two  years.  Using  these  assumptions,  the  banks  were  asked  to  provide  detailed  portfolio 
information  so  that  projections  could  be  made  on  losses  in  a  variety  of  loan  and  security 
categories, potential trading losses for firms with large trading operations, pre-provision net 
revenue, and the allowance for loan losses – allowing for estimates of capital positions under 
each scenario. 
The stress tests were interactive, and were quite resource intensive for both the banks and 
the supervisors. The banks’ submissions were compared to a detailed portfolio analysis done 
by bank supervisors, and to statistical models intended to capture how key variables were 
likely to be affected by stressful conditions.  
While  individual  business-line  stress  tests  had  been  done  by  bank  supervisors,  a 
comprehensive stress test of all the largest banks at the same time using the same scenarios 
was  new.  While  conducting  the  tests  simultaneously  for  all  19  banks  was  challenging  and 
resource intensive, the exercise provided supervisors the ability to make comparisons across 
institutions using the same underlying assumptions, and allowed the same core supervisory 
staff to be involved in assessments across institutions. Where banks were outliers relative to 
peers, supervisors could ask for more detailed information to determine if these differences 
were  justified,  based  on  analysis  of  comparable  data.  In  addition,  the  stress  tests  were 
forward  looking,  so  that  the  evolution  of  performance  and  results  over  the  next  two  years 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
could be compared across institutions. This provided a rigorous, data-driven assessment. It 
also highlighted where institutions needed to do additional work relative to peers to improve 
their risk management practices. 
The banks were evaluated on whether, over the two-year period under stress assumptions, 
they were likely to be able to maintain a Tier 1 capital ratio of 6 percent and a Tier 1 common 
capital  ratio  of  4  percent.  It  is  worth  noting  that  for  most  banks  it  was  the  Tier  1  common 
capital ratio that was most binding, and was the capital definition that best reflected the ability 
to  absorb losses.  Of  the  19  banks,  nine  were sufficiently  capitalized  to  meet  the minimum 
capital ratios under stress conditions, while ten had a combined capital shortfall of $75 billion. 
The  banks  with  a  capital  shortfall  were  expected  to  provide  detailed  capital  plans  that 
included  raising  additional  capital  –  by  measures  such  as  restricting  payouts,  raising  new 
equity, selling assets, or utilizing capital available from the U.S. Treasury. Banks both with 
and  without  shortfalls  aggressively  sold  assets  and  raised  additional  capital,  resulting  in  a 
very significant recapitalization of the 19 banks over a relatively short period of time – as is 
apparent in the figures shown earlier. 
Stress testing and discretionary capital distributions 
Now  I  would  like  to  mention  the  role  of  other  stress  testing  in  decisions  to  pursue,  and 
approve,  the  resumption  of  discretionary  capital  distributions.  The  SCAP  was  designed  to 
estimate  how  banks  would  perform  under  stress  conditions.  However,  the  economic 
assumptions and the impact of those economic assumptions on financial institutions were by 
definition educated estimates of potential outcomes. By the end of 2010, many banks were 
noting  that  they  had  substantially  recapitalized  and  in  some  cases  were  now  well  above 
regulatory minimums – and thus would like to resume or increase stock buybacks or dividend 
payments. 
To  evaluate  the  requests  by  banks  to  increase  dividend  payments,  U.S.  bank  supervisors 
pursued  an  exercise  known  as  the  Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR), 
and  stress  testing  was  one  component  of  that  broader  exercise.  While  the  stress  testing 
element was only part of the CCAR review, it was an important input into evaluating banks’ 
capital planning. The assessment was conducted between November 2010 and March 2011. 
Once again the largest 19 U.S. domiciled bank holding companies were asked to participate, 
using  a  baseline  scenario,  their  own  stress  scenario,  and  a  supervisor-provided  stress 
scenario (a set of macroeconomic assumptions consistent with an economic downturn).  
A critical benchmark was whether banks could meet a 5 percent Tier 1 common capital ratio 
under stress conditions over the next two years, assuming they paid dividends or carried out 
the stock buybacks as they proposed. Additional capital measures were examined, including 
the ability to satisfy over time the new Basel III capital ratios and changes in capital required 
by the Dodd-Frank legislation. Bank holding companies were required to provide information 
on  their  capital  adequacy  processes  and  capital  distribution  policies,  and  supervisors 
assessed them. 
Conducting the analysis for all of these institutions simultaneously gave supervisors a good 
benchmark as to how the financial institutions were performing relative to a stress scenario. 
In addition to providing a method for evaluating capital assessments, the stress test that was 
one  component  of  the  broader  CCAR  provided  an  opportunity  to  determine  how  financial 
institutions had refined their ability to conduct stress tests and incorporated lessons learned 
from the SCAP. In that vein, these types of capital assessments are likely to be an important 
tool in understanding the capital planning process in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Concluding observations  
In conclusion I would note that the financial crisis highlighted that financial institutions did not 
have  the  quality  or  quantity  of  capital  they  needed.  In  particular,  the  broader  measures  of 
capital  were  largely  ignored  during  the  crisis  by  many  investors  as  they  worried  about  the 
“core”  capital  immediately  available  to  absorb  losses.  Thus  the  emphasis  in  Basel  III  on 
improving  the  quality  and  quantity  of  capital  is  an  important  regulatory  response  to  the 
financial crisis. Clearly we need to focus on the narrow definitions of capital – that which can 
readily absorb losses. 
The United  States has also improved its supervision framework based on lessons learned 
during the crisis. One of the major additions to the supervisory “toolkit” was the use of stress 
tests – in the SCAP and then as an important component of the broader CCAR exercise.  
The  supervisory  and  regulatory  responses  have  provided  strong  encouragement  for  U.S. 
financial institutions to improve their capital ratios, particularly those ratios most appropriate 
for absorbing losses during stressful economic periods. Through retention of earnings, asset 
sales, and new equity issuances, U.S. banks have substantially improved their capital ratios 
since the crisis period. 
The  severe  disruptions  and  economic  dislocations  that  occurred  during  the  financial  crisis  
– affecting not just institutions, but individuals throughout the national and global economy – 
highlight  the  critical  need  to  maintain  a  well-capitalized  and  resilient  financial  sector.  Bank 
regulation  and  bank  supervision  –  not  to  mention  management  practices  within  financial 
institutions  –  all  need  to  continue  to  evolve  to  ensure  that  during  periods  of  economic  or 
financial distress, organizations remain well capitalized so their role in credit intermediation is 
not disrupted.  
I  hope  the  analysis  and  observations  I  have  shared  today  can  assist  with  a  process  of 
learning, evolving, and improving that will prevent future disruptions. 
Thank you. 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
   8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
