Sir K Dwight Venner: Recent financial and economic developments in the 
Eastern Caribbean 
Presentation by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, on 
the ECCB 2010/11 Annual Report, St Kitts, 29 June 2011. 
 Good evening fellow citizens of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union. 
This  evening  I  am  pleased  to  present  the  report  on  the  performance  of  the  Eastern 
Caribbean Central Bank for the financial year 2010/2011. 
The purpose of this report is two-fold: 
1. 
First,  it  is  in-keeping  with  the  transparency  and  accountability  requirements  of  the 
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank Agreement Act 1983. 
Second, the operations of the ECCB have a direct impact on the lives of all citizens 
of  its  member  countries.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  public  is  provided  with 
information on the operations of the Bank and the challenges it faces as it continues 
to pursue its mandate of maintaining the stability of the Eastern Caribbean currency 
and the region’s banking system. 
2. 
The  size  and  nature  of  the  economies  of  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Currency  Union  (ECCU) 
render them particularly vulnerable to external shocks and natural disasters. This is the stark 
reality  that  the  ECCB  faces  as  it  seeks  to  strengthen  the  region’s  financial  structure  in 
response to the impact of the global economic and financial crisis. 
The external shocks which confronted the region over the past year have been manifested 
through  the  lingering  effects  of  the  global  economic  and  financial  meltdown.  The  global 
economy  has  been  recovering  from  the  recession  of  2008/2009,  but  at  a  slow  rate. 
Moreover, increases in oil ECCB Member and commodity prices, a significant weakening of 
the  recovery  process  or  a  second  round  recession  are  possible  downside  risks  given  the 
prevailing uncertainty in the international economy. 
In  the  United  States  of  America,  one  of  the  region’s  main  trading  partners,  stimulus 
interventions contributed to an estimated 2.8 per cent growth in GDP in 2010. However, the 
country continues to grapple with high unemployment and the economy continues to perform 
below capacity. This is particularly evident in the following areas: 
 
The very high level of sovereign debt and the stalemate between the major political 
parties on raising the legal debt ceiling and addressing the fiscal issues; 
The difficulties in the housing and real estate markets which are having a marked 
and negative impact on the pace of the recovery; 
The high level of unemployment which is now at approximately 9 per cent; and 
The  significant  impact  of  these  factors  on  consumer  spending  which  is  the  main 
driver of the American economy. 
  The European Union constitutes the largest single trading bloc in the international economy 
and has the second most important currency, the Euro. The Eurozone is being faced with 
very  difficult  financial  issues  as  the  peripheral  states  struggle  to  stave  off  default  on  their 
debts.  Issues  of  a  fiscal  and  banking  nature  are  having  a  major  impact  on  Europe  with 
repercussions on the global capital markets. We are monitoring the situation in Europe very 
carefully as there must be lessons to be learnt from another currency union, especially the 
largest one in the international system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Japan  is  the  third  largest  economy  in  the  world  and  the  recent  natural  disasters  and  the 
resulting nuclear meltdown have had effects beyond its borders. Major impacts have been 
felt on the international money and capital markets and on the supply chain of inputs into the 
important electronics and auto industries. In addition, insurance premiums are rising and this 
is particularly critical in the Caribbean area as we begin another hurricane season. 
The  political  upheavals  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  are  having  a  marked  impact 
through the rise in price of the most important internationally traded commodity, oil.  
The  emerging  markets  particularly  China,  the  world’s  second  largest  economy,  India  and 
Brazil, which have been driving growth in the global economy, are taking steps to restrain 
their  economies  due  to  a  significant  increase  in  inflation.  These  factors  make  for  great 
uncertainty  in  the  international  economic  system  and  the  possibility  of  a  lower  growth 
performance than projected. 
In the ECCU, economic activity declined by 1.8 per cent in 2010, a slower rate compared 
with  5.4  per  cent in  2009.  Weak  external  demand  and  a  reduction in  domestic  investment 
contributed  to  the  decline  which  resulted  in  the  continued  contraction  of  activity  in  the 
construction  and  transport  and  communications  sectors.  Construction,  which  is  one  of  the 
main  contributors  to  growth  in  the  ECCU,  contracted  by  21.8  per  cent  due  to  a  decline  in 
inflows of foreign direct investment. 
In October 2010, two of the ECCU member countries, Saint Lucia and St Vincent and the 
Grenadines, suffered severe damage to their economic infrastructure due to the passage of 
Hurricane Tomas. This has resulted in a further weakening of their economies. 
These  international  events  and  natural  disasters  have  brought  the  vulnerabilities  of  the 
region’s economies and financial structures into sharp focus. In response to these prevailing 
challenges and setbacks, the Bank, guided by its mandate, intensified its efforts to maintain 
financial and monetary stability and confidence in the ECCU financial system. 
ECCB’s performance 
The international financial downturn has impacted the Bank’s performance for the 2010/2011 
financial  year.  The  Bank  realised  a  net  income  of  $22.6m  a  decrease  of  $14.5m  over  the 
previous year’s income of $37.1m. This was due to the decrease in interest income on the 
Bank’s investments in a declining interest rate environment. 
As  at  31  March  2011,  the  Bank’s  total  assets  amounted  to  $2.8b  an  increase  of  $256.1m 
when compared to the previous year. This was mainly due to inflows of grants and loans to 
member governments from international institutions. 
Monetary stability 
At the end of the financial year, the foreign reserve backing of the currency was 95.53 per cent, 
well above the legal benchmark of 60.0 per cent and the operational benchmark of 80.0 per cent. 
The  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  measured  in  months  of  imports  was  above  the  IMF 
benchmark of 3 months. 
In  an  effort  to  ensure  that  its  risk  tolerance  level  was  preserved  in  uncertain  market 
conditions, the Bank rebalanced its customised benchmark to a two-year duration. The Bank 
also conducted a review of its reserve management custodian to ensure the continued safety 
of its foreign reserve assets. 
In  collaboration  with  De  La  Rue,  the  authorised  printers  of  the  EC  banknotes,  the  Bank 
hosted  an  Expert  Witness  Training  Course.  The  course  was  designed  to  provide  law 
enforcement officers in the ECCU with the skills to assist the Bank in its quest to reduce the 
circulation of counterfeit EC notes and to increase the prosecution of offenders. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Financial stability 
During the year, the Bank’s efforts to ensure the safety and soundness of the ECCU financial 
system  were  concentrated  on  enhancing  its  regulatory,  supervisory  and  monitoring 
frameworks. These initiatives included: 
 
The  drafting  of  enabling  legislation  for  the  credit  union  and  insurance  sectors  for 
passage by member governments; 
The  implementation  of  the  necessary  apparatus  for  information-sharing  and 
integrated supervision and regulation of the system; 
Development of a framework for the introduction of a repurchase facility to enhance 
liquidity support to commercial banks; 
Development of a liquidity monitoring and forecasting model; 
Working  with  the  commercial  banks  to  establish  the  ECCU  Automated  Clearing 
House (ACH); and 
Working with the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions in Canada to 
adopt an advanced model of financial regulation. 
    Throughout the year, the Bank accelerated its efforts to mitigate the fallout from the global 
economic  and  financial  crisis  by  restructuring  and  strengthening  the  financial  sector.  The 
Bank,  in  collaboration  with  member  governments  and  with  the  support  of  the  World  Bank, 
continued the efforts to establish the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) to restructure and 
recapitalise financial institutions and manage troubled assets. 
The Bank also provided support to the Ministerial Sub-Committees of the Monetary Council 
on  banking,  insurance, credit  unions  and  international  financial services  in  addressing  and 
implementing solutions to the challenges in these sectors. During the year, a Ministerial Sub-
Committee  on  Debt  was  appointed  to  facilitate  timely  decision  making  by  the  Council  in 
respect of issues related to debt, growth and development in ECCU member countries. 
The ECCB also played a pivotal role in the smooth transition of the Bank of Antigua Limited 
to the new entity, the Eastern Caribbean Amalgamated Bank Ltd (ECAB). 
The Bank hosted the 89th Meeting of the Committee on International Monetary Law of the 
International  Law  Association  in  November  2010.  It  was  the  first  time  that  the  ECCB  was 
hosting  this  high  level  meeting,  which  included  committee  members  from  the  European 
Central  Bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  central  banks  from  across  the 
globe. 
Monetary and capital market developments 
In the area of money and capital market development, the Bank continued the preparations 
for the operationalisation of the Eastern Caribbean Enterprise Fund Limited (ECEF) and the 
OECS Distribution and Transportation Company Limited (ODTC). 
The ECEF will provide capital, financial advisory services, technical assistance and general 
financial services to promote the growth of business ventures in the region, while the ODTC 
will serve as a third-party logistics company to facilitate trade across the OECS. 
Throughout  the  year,  the  Bank  continued  to  provide  technical  support  to  the  member 
governments  in  accessing  financing  on  the  Regional  Government  Securities  Market.  The 
average  weighted  interest  rate  on  91-day  Treasury  bills  declined  from  5.69  per  cent  to 
4.93 per cent. Hence, participating governments were able to lower their debt servicing costs 
on those instruments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
As  part  of  the  ECCB’s  mandate  to  facilitate  the  balanced  growth  and  development  of  its 
member states, the Bank piloted the Entrepreneurship Module of its Savings and Investment 
Course  in  St  Kitts  and  Nevis.  The  10-month  module  provided  the  participants  with  the 
rudiments  of  conceiving  a  business  idea,  creating  a  business  plan  and  setting-up  and 
managing  a  business  from  a  theoretical  and  practical  standpoint.  The  course  will  be 
launched in the other seven member countries during the year. 
Policy advice 
In  the  policy  sphere,  the  Bank  supported  the  work  of  the  Commissions  on  Tax  Revenue, 
Pensions and Public Expenditure, established by the Monetary Council to develop efficient 
revenue  and  expenditure  systems  throughout  the  ECCU.  In  addition,  the  Bank,  with  the 
support  of  the  Caribbean  Regional  Technical  Assistance  Centre  (CARTAC)  and  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  hosted  a  mini  boot  camp  for  technical  officers  from 
member governments to facilitate the development of fiscal targets and systems for reporting 
and monitoring the targets. 
The ability of ECCU member governments to assess, manage and service debt is critical to 
financial stability in the region and to achieving and sustaining their public sector debt target 
of 60.0 per cent of GDP by 2020. 
Throughout  the  year,  the  Debt  Management  Advisory  Services  Unit  (DMAS)  at  the  ECCB 
continued to work closely with the Debt Management Units in the member countries to build 
their debt management capabilities and to address the deficiencies in their debt management 
strategies. 
The Bank facilitated the establishment of a Task Force on Debt, Growth and Development to 
examine  the  prospects  for  economic  growth  in  the  ECCU  and  to  recommend  a  path  for 
stimulating and sustaining growth in the current high debt situation. 
The  Task  Force  is  a  collaborative  effort  involving  the  ECCB,  the  ECCU  member 
governments, the OECS Secretariat, the Caribbean Development Bank, the World Bank, the 
IMF and the International Financial Corporation (IFC). 
The Bank continued to play a critical role in implementing the various elements of the ECCU 
Eight  Point  Stabilization  and  Growth  Programme.  As  the  ECCU  prepares  for  the 
transformation phase of the restructuring of its economies, starting in 2013, the ECCU Eight 
Point Stabilisation and Growth Programme must be consolidated into a strategic action plan 
with clearly defined and measurable goals. 
This programme, together with the arrangements under the OECS Economic Union, provides 
the framework and guidelines for creating the necessary fiscal space and scope, reducing 
risk,  effectively  assessing  and  mitigating  challenges  and  building  resilience  to  external 
shocks in order to facilitate sustainable development. 
The way forward 
The year 2012 will be critical as the ECCU strives to consolidate its efforts to strengthen its 
economies  and  position  itself  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  from  the  anticipated 
global economic recovery. The policy priorities for the Bank would therefore be to: 
 
Strengthen  the  framework  for  the  early  identification  of  risk  and  resolution  of 
problems at weak financial institutions; 
Continue  to  explore  appropriate  monetary  policy  tools  and  the  enhancement  of 
market  intelligence  to  influence  money  and  credit  conditions  and  to  inform  policy 
development; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 4 
    Continue  to  work  with  member  governments  to  identify  and  remove  legal 
impediments to the establishment of a single financial space; 
Build  on  the  power  of  collective  action  by  assisting  member  governments  in  the 
articulation and adoption of a macroeconomic transformation programme for ECCU 
member countries consistent with the objectives of the OECS Economic Union and 
the ECCU Eight Point Stabilisation and Growth Programme; and 
Encourage member governments to modernise the public sector in order to enhance 
efficiency and provide the requisite technical and administrative capacity to achieve 
the region’s economic objectives. 
The challenge for the Bank in these difficult times is to continue to support the strong dollar 
policy  as  set  out  by  the  Monetary  Council  and  to  establish  the  environment  for  the  future 
growth and development of the region. 
Thank you and good night. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
