Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Die Zeit 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  
Die Zeit, Germany, conducted by Mr Mark Schieritz on 9 February 2011 and published on 
16 February 2011. 
 DIE  ZEIT:  Mr  Trichet,  you’ve  been  tirelessly  battling  this  euro  crisis  for  quite  some 
time now, and yet it’s still not over. 
Jean-Claude Trichet: There is no euro crisis. The currency has retained its value very well 
and is credible and remarkably stable – not just in one country, but in  the euro area as a 
whole.  Our  problem  is  that  the  fiscal  policies  of  some  member  countries  have  not  been 
sound and that some countries are also lacking in competitiveness. 
Zeit: What needs to happen? 
Trichet:  Here  in  Europe,  we  have  an  economic  and  monetary  union.  We  at  the  European 
Central  Bank  take  care  of  the  monetary  union;  it  is  up  to  politicians  to  very  significantly 
improve  the  functioning  of  the  economic  union.  The  member  countries  have  to  do  their 
homework. We’ve always demanded this, and there is no longer any excuse for sitting back 
and doing nothing. 
Zeit:  That’s  precisely  why  Angela  Merkel  has  proposed  her  “pact  for  greater 
competitiveness”.  
Trichet:  We  do  not  yet  know  what  exactly  this  pact  comprises.  If  its  aim  is  to  improve  the 
functioning  of  the  economic  union  through  greater  coordination  and  integration,  we  will 
support it. Ironically, however, we are already talking about this new pact, while the countries 
of the euro area are, at the same time, still discussing the reform of their Stability and Growth 
Pact and the other elements of economic governance. 
Zeit: … which, among other things, set upper limits for national budget deficits ... 
Trichet: And these reforms are, in our view, not ambitious enough. The proposals made by 
the European Commission went in the right direction, but were already not ambitious enough 
in our view. And the Member States – including Germany, France and other countries – have 
watered  them  down  further.  Our  message  is  clear:  we  have  to  go  as  far  as  possible  in 
reinforcing European economic governance, at all levels. We won’t give up on that. 
Zeit:  Calls  for  more  Europe  aren’t  going  down  that  well  with  the  public.  Is  Europe 
really ready for greater integration? 
Trichet: We have to tirelessly explain to people in the 17 countries of the euro area what the 
rationale for the historic process of establishing a highly integrated European Union is. All in 
all, that process has proceeded remarkably successfully for more than half a century now. 
Zeit: So, what is its rationale?  
Trichet: European integration is essential for ensuring the peace, stability and prosperity of 
the nations of Europe. All of the reasons we had to engage in this historic endeavour after 
the Second World War are still valid. The balance of power is shifting at the global level. New 
powers are on the rise in Asia, Latin America and Africa. We are experiencing a very rapidly 
changing new world with a lot of opportunities, challenges, risks and uncertainties. European 
unity is more important than ever. 
Zeit: What role does Germany play in that?  
Trichet: Germany played a decisive role in the establishment of the Treaty of Rome in 1958, 
the  Single  European  Act  in  1986  and,  in  particular,  Monetary  Union.  Germany  has  also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
succeeded  remarkably  well  in  regaining  its  competitiveness  over  the  last  ten  years.  Your 
country is now reaping the rewards of its patient efforts, and the euro area is benefiting from 
this. A strong German economy is good for Europe. 
Zeit:  In  Germany,  of  all  places,  Eurosceptic  voices  are  now  being  heard.  Are  the 
Germans even ready for Europe? 
Trichet: I travel a lot in Germany, and my impression is that while the initial reaction may be 
sceptical, deeper down everybody is aware of the importance of our historic project, aware of 
the importance of close cooperation and friendship between the nations of Europe. I believe 
people know that there is no other way of achieving peace, prosperity and stability. 
Zeit:  Even  Germans  are  feeling  anxious  –  they  have  the  impression  that  Monetary 
Union  is  no  longer  what  they  were  promised.  Rules  were  broken.  People  are 
apprehensive that the euro will become a soft currency.  
Trichet:  There  are  many  ways  of  seeing  things  in  a  democracy.  Concerns  like  these  were 
voiced even when I was involved in negotiating the Treaty of Maastricht with Theo Waigel, 
the Minister of Finance, Horst Köhler, Staatssekretär, and the other members of the German 
delegation.  But  the  facts  are  much  more  important.  For  instance,  it  was  unfortunately 
Germany and France which weakened the Stability and Growth Pact in 2004 and 2005. It’s 
also a fact that price stability is greater today than during the period of the Deutsche Mark. 
The average annual inflation rate in the euro area over the past 12 years has been 1.97%, 
and in Germany only 1.5%. The average annual inflation rate in Germany in the 1990s prior 
to the introduction of the euro was 2.2%. In the 1980s it was 2.8%, and in the 1970s it was 
even higher.  
Zeit: It has been like that in the past, but will it be like that in the future?  
Trichet:  It  has  been  like  that  in  the  past,  despite  the  fact  that  we  have  had  to  cope  with 
difficult challenges over the last 12 years, because the Governing Council of the ECB has 
taken  the  appropriate  decisions.  And  we  are  determined  to  always  take  the  necessary 
decisions.  But  on  top  of  that,  we  need  a  quantum  leap  in  terms  of  economic  governance: 
better  coordination  between  countries,  clear  rules  for  economic  policy  and  sanctions  for 
misbehaviour which are as automatic as possible. Some major changes must be made here. 
That’s the lesson of this crisis. Before it erupted, governments thought they could practise 
benign neglect. Now it is obvious that that is no longer the case. And we are telling them that. 
Zeit: What happens to democracy if more and more decisions are taken in Brussels? 
The EU does not have the legitimacy that a nation state has.  
Trichet: It is true that a functioning economic and monetary union presupposes that part of 
the sovereignty of the participating countries is exerted at the level of the union. It is obvious 
as regards monetary policy, which is a single policy decided by the Governing Council of the 
European Central Bank. But it is also true as regards fiscal policy. The Stability and Growth 
Pact,  with  its  sanctions,  constrains  budgetary  decisions  and  therefore  limits  national 
sovereignty  in  terms  of  fiscal  policy.  As  long  as  the  transfer  of  sovereignty  to  European 
institutions has been decided by our own democracies, it is fully legitimate.  
Zeit: And we’ll end up with a European super-state?  
Trichet: The people of Europe will decide where they want to go in terms of the political and 
institutional framework. They will decide whether or not to create a fully fledged federation, a 
United States of Europe. But we are a long way from that at the moment.  
Zeit: For you personally, that’s not fast enough, is it?  
Trichet: Speaking as a European citizen and not as President of the European Central Bank, 
I am convinced that we should go further than planned. But in any case, we should never 
forget  that  it  is  our  people  who  will  decide.  The  concept  of  modern  state  sovereignty  was 
devised in Europe. It goes back to the Peace of Westphalia, which reorganised the continent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
politically  after  the  Thirty  Years  War.  With  the  European  Union,  we  are  drawing  up  a  new 
concept:  together,  a  number  of  sovereign  states  have  decided  to  exert  part  of  their 
sovereignty at the level of the European Union. This is the current European response to a 
question which is not just European, but global, with the rapid integration of global finance 
and the global economy.  
Zeit:  The  scepticism  felt  by  many  people  also  has  to  do  with  their  fear  of  inflation, 
which recently has risen sharply. Are we now paying the price for the crisis policy? 
Trichet: The one has nothing to do with the other. We are observing a global increase in the 
prices  of  oil  and  commodities.  That’s  a  result  not  of  the  crisis,  but  of  the  current  rapid 
economic recovery in emerging markets.  
Zeit: So you will have to raise the interest rate?  
Trichet:  As  I  said  at  the  last  two  press  conferences  in  January  and  early  February,  all 
observers know that we will always take the decisions necessary to deliver price stability in 
the medium term. What is essential is to avoid what we call “second-round effects”: namely a 
situation  where  a  transitory  oil  shock  becomes  entrenched  in  other  prices,  particularly 
through a wage-price spiral.  
Zeit: In the 1970s such a spiral of increasing wages and higher prices led to inflation 
getting out of control. How will you stop history from repeating itself?  
Trichet:  A  central  bank  must  do  this  –  and  can,  if  it  is  credible  and  takes  the  appropriate 
decisions. The last 12 years have seen prices surge in commodity markets time and again. 
We have ensured price stability by taking the necessary decisions. 
Zeit:  Even  if  you  continue  to  do  so,  this  will  not  solve  the  problem  of  increasing 
commodity prices.  
Trichet: First, we, as central bankers, are responsible for avoiding second-round effects. But 
the  international  community  is  not  powerless  when  faced  with  such  global  phenomena. 
People  in  large  emerging  economies  are  changing  their  consumption  patterns,  which  is 
fuelling food prices. It is quite possible that this will continue for a while longer. However, at 
the same time, there are huge expanses of land in Africa which could be used for agricultural 
purposes. We need to provide the right incentives for African farmers in this respect. This is 
an  important  global  issue  which  should  be  taken  up  by  bodies  such  as  the  G20.  This 
particular problem is not impossible to solve in the medium and long run.  
Zeit: Returning to the issue of inflation. The problem is in fact that, during the crisis, 
the central banks – including the European Central Bank – flooded the economy with 
money. No one knows if you or your successor will be able to reabsorb this money in 
a timely fashion.  
Trichet:  First  of  all,  the  ECB  has  not  flooded  the  economy  with  money.  While  adopting  a 
range of non-standard measures, we have never lost sight of the fact that our mandate is to 
deliver price stability. For example, when we purchase government bonds in order to help 
restore  a  better  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  we  immediately  withdraw  this 
liquidity from the economy.  
Zeit: Those in the political arena have an interest in interest rates remaining low for as 
long as possible, though – if only on account of the massive government debt. This 
could become a problem for you.  
Trichet: We refused to reduce rates in 2004 against the advice of the German Chancellor, 
the  President  of  the  French  Republic  and  many  other  politicians.  We  increased  rates  in 
December 2005 with ten governments expressing their opposition at the time. We also raised 
them in 2008, even though we were criticised for doing so. We are independent and we know 
what our Treaty mandate is.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Zeit: Nevertheless, it is a difficult situation for you. Germany is booming and actually 
needs higher interest rates, while southern Europe is in crisis and would not be able 
to cope with this.  
Trichet: It is an unavoidable characteristic of very large economies that the speed of growth 
varies across the individual states or countries. This phenomenon also exists in the United 
States. We, at the European Central Bank, must concern ourselves with inflation in the euro 
area as a whole. This means that the individual countries must accept the monetary policy as 
a given and adjust their national policies accordingly. 
Zeit: Which means? 
Trichet:  When  a  country  experiences  a  boom,  it  needs  to  make  its  own  national  policies  
–  namely  fiscal  policies,  wage  policies,  structural  policies  and  prudential  supervisors’ 
autonomous  decisions  –  more  restrictive  in  order  to  avoid  the  economy  overheating  or 
speculation getting out of control. That goes for every country in the world, but all the more 
so for members of a monetary union.  
Zeit: So, German politicians should put the brakes on?  
Trichet: If that were to become necessary, they would definitely have the instruments to do 
what  was  needed.  But  let  us  remain  cautious:  although  Germany  has  made  up  a  lot  of 
ground, output has not yet returned to pre-crisis levels. The recovery has been remarkable, 
more  rapid  than  in  other  countries.  But  it  has  still  to  be  fully  confirmed.  It  is  too  early  to 
declare the crisis over.  
Zeit: Germany is becoming stronger, while other countries are becoming weaker. This 
threatens the balance in the euro area, don’t you think?  
Trichet: No, I don’t. Just as the balance wasn’t in danger when Germany itself was growing 
slowly in the first ten years of the euro. In large currency areas, we see economies oscillating 
around the average over the years. Sometimes they’re up, and sometimes they’re down. In 
any case, the current growth in Germany is good for Germany, good for the euro area and 
good for Europe as a whole. 
Zeit: Would it help the stability of the euro area if your successor were a German? 
Trichet: The appointment of the President of the ECB is in the hands of the Heads of State or 
Government.  
Zeit: What is your opinion of Axel Weber’s withdrawal in this context? 
Trichet: This is Axel’s personal decision, which I respect. Over the years I have had good 
collaboration with him on a wide range of issues. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
