Paul Fisher: Recent developments in the sterling monetary framework 
Speech given by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director, Markets, and Member of the Monetary 
Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Manchester  Economics  Seminar, 
Manchester, 30 March 2011. 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches. 
 I would like to thank Sarah Ashley, Roger Clews, Ronnie Driver, Tarkus Frost, Chris Salmon, Olaf Weeken, Iain 
de Weymarn and Richard Whisker for their help in preparing this paper. 
Introduction 
During  the  recent  financial  crisis  and  ensuing  recession,  the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy  has  been  the  subject  of  intense  debate.  Most  visibly,  that  debate  focused  on  the 
Bank’s use of large-scale asset purchases – otherwise known as “quantitative easing” (QE) – 
as  a  monetary  policy  tool.  But  other  aspects  of  the  mechanics  of  setting  policy  have  also 
been of great interest. In this paper, I want to focus on two issues which go to the heart of 
central banking: 
(i) 
The  first  concerns  how  the  Bank  should  seek  to  implement  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee’s (MPC) decisions on the official interest rate (known as Bank Rate), so 
as to best deliver a flat money market yield curve between one MPC decision and 
the next. 
The second is about how best to provide liquidity insurance to the banking system 
as  a  whole,  while  also  encouraging  banks  to  manage  their  day-to-day  liquidity 
needs, and subject to minimising the credit risk taken on the Bank’s balance sheet. 
(ii) 
Before  explaining  the  Bank’s  thinking  about  these  two  issues,  we  need  to  lay  out  some 
basics about the Bank’s objectives, and how it seeks to meet them using its balance sheet. 
The Bank of England’s objectives and its balance sheet 
The  Bank  has  two  core  purposes:  maintaining  monetary  stability  and  contributing  to  the 
stability  of  the  financial  system.  With  some  variations,  these  are  the  two  cornerstones  of 
policy for most central banks around the globe. Monetary policy is quite widely understood in 
a general sense – the Bank specifically defines it to mean price stability and confidence in 
the currency.1 Financial stability is less well understood generally but it entails detecting and 
reducing threats to the financial system as a whole, in order to make it more resilient.2 
One major reason why it is for the central bank to pursue both of these purposes is because 
it has a balance sheet that can be used both to implement monetary policy decisions and to 
carry  out  financial  operations  to  support  financial  stability.  A  simplified  time-series  of  the 
Bank’s balance sheet is shown in Charts 1 and 2 below.3 
                                                 
1   Bank of England, Annual Report 2010, page 1. 
2   See “A New Approach to Regulation”, HM Treasury consultation document Cm 8012. 
3   The Special Liquidity Scheme and Asset Purchase Facility are off-balance sheet, so are not included in the 
charts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Bank’s two main liabilities are banknotes in circulation (currently around £50billion) and 
the  reserve  balances  held  by  commercial  banks.4  You  can  think  of  these  balances  as  the 
commercial  banks’  current  accounts  with  the  Bank  of  England.  Together  with  banknotes, 
reserves  balances  are  the  most  liquid,  risk-free  asset  in  the  economy.  The  aggregate 
balance  on  reserves  accounts  stood  at  around  £36billion  before  the  start  of  the  asset 
purchase programme in March 2009 and the current total stands at around £140billion. 
The  asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet  mainly  comprises  the  Bank’s  lending  to  commercial 
banks (via both short and long-term OMOs) and latterly to the Asset Purchase Facility (APF). 
 The Sterling Monetary Framework: setting interest rates 
The  Bank’s  operations  are  designed  to  support  both  monetary  and  financial  stability 
objectives. Together they make up the Sterling Monetary Framework (SMF) which is outlined 
in  a  document  known  as  the  “Red  Book”5.  In  normal  times,  the  SMF  operates  a  system 
known as “reserves averaging”. Under that system, commercial banks are required to hold 
an  average  level  of  reserves  over  the  “maintenance  period”  running  between  one  MPC 
decision  and  the  next.  Until  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis,  similar  reserves  averaging 
mechanisms were employed at the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the 
Bank of Japan. But uniquely in the UK system, the target level of reserves for each bank is 
chosen  by  the  individual  firm.  If  they  hit  their  target  on  average  (and  subject  to  a  small 
tolerance range around that), they earn Bank Rate on their reserves balance. By contrast, 
any excess or deficiency incurs a significant charge and banks are thus incentivised to meet 
their chosen targets. 
                                                 
4   The  Bank’s  other  liabilities  include  various  deposits  (e.g.  from  other  central  banks)  and  debt  instruments 
issued in the Bank’s own name (e.g. to finance the Bank’s foreign currency reserves). Various Government-
related balances can also appear on either side of the balance sheet from time-to-time. 
5   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/money/publications/redbookdec10.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In order that it is possible for every bank to hit its individual target – and hence for the system 
to hit the implied collective target – the Bank calculates the aggregate demand for reserves 
across the commercial banks and then ensures that the aggregate amount of sterling in the 
system is exactly consistent with that collective target. It does that by offering, via short-term 
Open Market Operations (OMOs), exactly the right amount of sterling lending (against high 
quality liquid collateral).6 
Commercial banks can ensure they meet their individual reserves target by transacting with 
each other in the market. This should distribute the reserves around the system such that no 
bank  falls  short  or  exceeds  its  own  target.  Alternatively,  in  the  event  of  an  unexpected 
operational  disruption  or  exceptional  volatility  in  overnight  market  interest  rates,  SMF 
member banks can borrow from, or lend to the Bank of England via the Operational Standing 
Facilities  (OSFs).  The  rates  charged/paid  on  the  OSF  lending/deposit  facility  are  less 
attractive than Bank Rate, so as to discourage regular usage. But they are more attractive 
than  the  penalty  associated  with  missing  a  reserves  target  outright.  As  a  result,  the  OSF 
deposit and lending rates should impose a corridor around Bank Rate. By providing a floor 
and cap, this corridor should ensure that reserve account holders never need to transact in 
the market at a rate very different from Bank Rate. 
Chart 3 illustrates a stylised demand curve for reserves, and shows how the OSFs provide a 
corridor around Bank Rate. The demand curve is dictated by the scarcity value of reserves – 
if a bank is short reserves, it will bid in the money market to attract them. But it should not bid 
higher than the lending facility rate, which provides a cap on the market rate. As it gets closer 
to being within its tolerance range, a bank will be less willing to bid up to attract reserves. If a 
bank has excess reserves, it should be willing to lend in the interbank market at less than 
Bank Rate in order to shed them.  But it will not lend below the deposit facility rate, which 
provides an effective market rate floor. 
 Within the tolerance range around its reserves target, a bank has no incentive to pay more 
than  Bank  Rate  for  an  additional  unit  of  reserves,  or  to  charge  less  than  Bank  Rate  for 
lending an additional unit of reserves, and the demand curve is relatively flat. The length of 
the flat portion of the curve depends on the size of the tolerance range set by the Bank. If the 
tolerance range is very small, market interest rates will be relatively sensitive to variations in 
                                                 
6  
If the system as a whole already has excess reserves (relative to the commercial banks’ collective target), the 
Bank can drain reserves by issuing short-term Bank of England bills. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  supply  of  reserves.  That  is  because  small  variations  in  supply  could  potentially  move 
banks into using the deposit or lending facility. If the tolerance range is very wide then banks 
have  little  or  no  incentive  to  distribute  reserves  around  the  market  to  meet  their  targets 
precisely. 
Alternative frameworks for setting interest rates 
This system of reserves targets is just one of a number of systems that would be used to 
implement  the  policy  rate.  Indeed,  as  a  system  for  influencing  market  rates,  these 
arrangements  could  be  seen  as  overly  complicated.  Since  March  2009,  when  the  Bank 
embarked on its asset purchase program known as QE, we have been implementing Bank 
Rate  in  a  rather  simpler  fashion.  The  Bank’s  asset  purchases  were  financed  by  creating 
additional  central  bank  reserves.  As  a  consequence,  the  stock  of  reserves  increased  and 
exceeded the level the banks would have needed to hit the targets they would have chosen 
voluntarily. Because banks then had no control over the rate of expansion of reserves, the 
system  of  reserves  averaging  was  suspended.  Banks  were  instead  remunerated  at  Bank 
Rate  on  any  level  of  reserves.7  That  means  that  there  is  no  incentive  for  any  commercial 
bank to lend in the market at less than Bank Rate. As a result, the current system should set 
a “floor” on money market rates, at Bank Rate (Chart 4). Similar mechanisms are currently 
employed by the Federal Reserve in the US, and the Swedish Riksbank. 
In principle, banks could have continued to set monthly targets and – to the extent that the 
MPC’s asset purchases supplied reserves in excess of these targets – the Bank could have 
borrowed them back through OMOs. But the Bank judged it better not to borrow reserves in 
increasingly large quantities at the same time as the purchase programme grew. 
While  this  is  an  easy  and  effective  way  of  implementing  monetary  policy  at  the  moment, 
there are drawbacks to this “floor” system. For example, in order to ensure overnight rates 
settle  at  Bank  Rate,  the  Bank’s  supply  curve  needs  to  intersect  the  commercial  banks’ 
demand curve where it is infinitely elastic. That means that the Bank has to supply excess 
reserves to the system in aggregate, such that no firm has any incentive to pay more than 
                                                  
7   And the OSF Deposit Facility rate was set to zero. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Bank Rate for the marginal unit of reserves. In that world, banks’ incentives to trade with one 
another in the overnight markets are largely diminished. 
A  third  model  for  implementing  monetary  policy  is  the  “zero  corridor”  system.  In  this  case 
there would be no reserves targets and banks could both lend to and borrow from the Bank 
in  unlimited  amounts  at  Bank  Rate  every  day.  Although  short  term  market  interest  rates 
should always equal Bank Rate precisely, this system has several drawbacks. First, banks 
would never need to transact with each other; they simply transact with the central bank via 
the  OSFs:  there  would  be  little  or  no  commercial  overnight  interbank  money  market.  That 
would be unwelcome. For example, the information the Bank deduces from movements in 
overnight market interest rates would be lost. It might also disrupt functioning of longer-term 
money markets, given implicit links to the overnight market. Second, if the Bank can always 
be relied upon to meet daily liquidity needs, then commercial banks have less incentive to 
actively manage their liquidity. And the Bank would be unable to distinguish between banks 
using  the  OSFs  to  manage  their  day-to-day  liquidity  buffers,  and  those  facing  more 
fundamental shocks. Finally, by offering to borrow and lend overnight automatically, the Bank 
would relinquish day-to-day control over its balance sheet and the degree of risk associated 
with that.  
To summarise, there are different models for implementing the policy rate, each of which has 
its own merits and disadvantages. These reflect both monetary policy and financial stability 
considerations. A deeper exposition of the arguments can be found in Clews, Salmon and 
Weeken  (2010).8  The  Bank  has  carefully  considered  the  differing  systems  and  expects  to 
return  to  a  reserves  averaging  system  in  due  course.  Presumptively,  that  would  be  after 
increasing Bank Rate and before asset sales began – although the timing and sequencing 
will depend on the circumstances at the time. In the next section of this paper we explore 
more deeply some of the financial stability aspects of the Bank’s operations. 
The Sterling Monetary Framework: providing liquidity insurance 
Banks inherently engage in “maturity transformation” – borrowing on a short-term basis but 
lending on a long-term basis (eg taking deposits which can be withdrawn at short notice, and 
lending for mortgages). As a result, banks take liquidity risk – and even a well-run bank could 
suffer an unexpected shortage of liquidity. 
As part of their liquidity management, banks hold stocks of liquid assets that can be used to 
generate cash or make payments directly. Some assets are expected to retain their liquidity 
in all but the most extreme circumstances. But the liquidity of other assets is less assured, 
and  banks  can  suffer  problems  if  the  liquidity  of  their  assets  dries  up.  That  could  cause 
financial instability. The Bank of England can provide liquidity insurance to individual, credit-
worthy  institutions  and  to  the  banking  system  as  a  whole,  by  accepting  those  less  liquid 
assets as collateral, for a fee, in exchange for more liquid assets, including reserves.9 But 
such  liquidity  insurance  must  be  provided  in  a  way  that  takes  account  of  the  potential  for 
“moral hazard” – the incentive for individual banks to undertake riskier activities because of 
the  presence  of  a  central  bank  backstop.  The  Bank’s  operations  must  not  undermine  the 
incentives of private sector firms to manage their liquidity needs safely in the market, rather 
than turn to the Bank routinely. Moreover, although the Bank’s operations are collateralised, 
the value of the securities delivered to the Bank is always uncertain. We would never be able 
to protect ourselves perfectly against credit risk. 
                                                 
8   “The Bank’s money market framework”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2010 Q4. 
9   The Bank also stands ready to provide gilts via its permanent Discount Window Facility, introduced in October 
2008. This facility is available to provide bilateral liquidity support to solvent and viable institutions, against a 
wide pool of collateral. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
As  well  as  implementing  the  policy  rate,  the  SMF  is  also  used  to  provide  that  liquidity 
insurance. As we have already discussed, the first component of the insurance aspect of the 
framework is the reserves averaging mechanism itself, which permits banks, within reason 
and without penalty, to vary their reserves account balances day-to-day in the face of small 
and/or short-lived liquidity shocks – provided they hit their reserves target on average over 
the maintenance period. The second component is the OSFs which allow banks to cope with 
larger, expected (frictional) payments shocks day-by-day. A third component comes through 
longer-term OMOs to which we now turn. 
Longer-term Open Market Operations 
The most routine method for ensuring there is the correct amount of sterling in the system, 
consistent with reserves targets, is via short-term OMOs. Prior to the start of QE, the Bank 
carried  out  weekly  short-term  reverse  repo  operations  (STRs)  against  a  pool  of  “narrow” 
collateral comprising highly liquid sovereign or near-sovereign bonds from a small selection 
of countries. At that frequency, the scale of the operations could be judged fairly precisely so 
as to offset any autonomous factors which affected the net supply of sterling to the market. 
But  relying  solely  on  short  term  OMOs  could  have  meant  carrying  out  very  large  repo 
operations every week. 
To avoid that degree of churn, some longer term reverse repos (LTRs) were also used pre-
crisis  –  at  maturities  from  3  to  12  months.  Those  operations  could  be  backed  by  either 
narrow or “wider” collateral, which comprises high quality, but less liquid collateral, including 
private sector securities.10 The LTRs effectively reduced the quantity of lending needed via 
the routine weekly OMOs. 
But during the crisis, the demand for liquidity rose significantly, owing to the combination of a 
reduction  in  the  supply  of  longer-term  interbank  finance,  and  a  reduction  in  the  liquidity  of 
various asset-backed securities. The Bank responded by expanding the range of collateral it 
would accept in its operations in order to provide sufficient sterling liquidity to the UK banking 
system. As a result, the stock of LTRs rose from £15bn to £180bn by early 2009 (the blue 
area in Chart 2).11 
The Bank also widened the ranges around the commercial banks’ targets, so that they could 
hold  additional  reserves  (within  the  maintenance  period)  without  penalty.  The  Bank  was 
concerned  that  the  banks  would  collectively  not  increase  their  targets  enough  from  one 
maintenance  period  to  the  next.  Widening  the  ranges  around  these  targets,  permitting  a 
larger liquidity injection at the Bank’s discretion, also addressed that problem. 
The  temporary  expansion  of  LTR  lending  during  the  crisis  was  very  successful  in  its  main 
objective of providing liquidity to the banking system. But it also raised a number of important 
operational policy questions for the Bank: 
(i)  
(ii)  
It was very difficult to decide exactly how large these lending operations should be. 
It was also difficult to decide the appropriate spread to charge for lending against 
wider  relative  to  narrow  collateral,  to  mitigate  adverse  selection  and  the  moral 
hazard risk. A minimum 50 basis point spread was applied for wider collateral. 
Those long-term repos exposed the Bank and the commercial banks to significant 
interest rate risk. That is because commercial banks’ reserves balances were being 
remunerated  at  Bank  Rate  but  the  minimum  bid  rate  in  the  LTRs  was  the  fixed 
(iii)  
                                                 
10   The  narrow  and  wider  collateral  sets  were  redefined  in  February  2011.  The  changes  will  take  effect  from 
1 July 2011. See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/marketnotice110211.pdf for more details. 
11   For  more  information  about  changes  in  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  in  response  to  the  crisis,  see  Cross  and 
Fisher, “The Bank’s balance sheet during the crisis”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2010 Q1. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3-month  market  (OIS)  rate  at  the  time  of  the  operation  (plus  the  spread  for  wider 
collateral). So when Bank Rate was cut much more rapidly than was anticipated by 
the  market  during  Autumn  2008,  the  Bank  recorded  a  large,  unintentional  surplus 
(and the banks a corresponding loss).12 
In  order  to  try  to  resolve  these  issues,  the  Bank  enlisted the  help  of  Paul  Klemperer  from 
Nuffield  College,  Oxford,  an  expert  in  auction  theory,  to  help  re-design  its  long-term 
operations. The fruits of that labour were revealed in the summer of 2010, when the Bank 
replaced  the  extended  LTRs  with  its  new  permanent  Indexed  Long-Term  Repo  (ILTR) 
operations. 
In  the  ILTR  auctions,  counterparties  can  submit  bids  against  narrow  collateral,  wider 
collateral  or  both.  The  Bank  then  allocates  a  proportion  of  the  funds  on  offer  to  the  bids 
against wider collateral, where that proportion depends on the spreads offered. 
These new auctions solve the problems of the old LTRs. For example, expressing the bids 
as spreads to Bank Rate (with a minimum spread of zero) eliminates the interest rate risk 
arising from unexpected movements in the spread of market rates to Bank Rate. Moreover, 
the price of liquidity against wider collateral is determined within the auction – as the market 
becomes  more  stressed,  counterparties  are  willing  to  pay  more  to  borrow  against  wider 
collateral. So the Bank no longer has to make a judgment about the appropriate spread to 
charge counterparties. 
The most innovative aspect of ILTRs is that is that, as the degree of market stress increases 
(as the clearing spread on wider collateral rises relative to that on narrow collateral) the Bank 
automatically, within the auction, lends a greater proportion against wider collateral. And it 
gets  a  signal  about  the  need  to  expand  the  overall  size  or  frequency  of  the  operations  in 
future. As far as we know, the new format represents a global first for a public auction in any 
field. The rest of this paper goes through the new auction structure in more detail. 
The ILTR demand curve 
During  the  auction,  counterparties  submit  their  bids  for  reserves.13  Some  bid  against  the 
narrow collateral set, others against the wider set and some against both (using a so-called 
“paired bid”).14 One could think of bids against each collateral set as separate. The auctions 
are uniform price so that all counterparties pay the lowest accepted rate (on each collateral 
set) regardless of their bids.15 In theory, this should mean that there is no incentive for banks 
to try to “game” the auctions, nor is there a need to speculate on other bidders’ behaviour. 
Instead,  bids  should  reflect  the  true  demand  for  reserves  since,  if  their  bids  are  accepted, 
they will either pay the rate they bid, or a lower one. 
                                                 
12   See Bank of England, Annual Report, 2009. This issue doesn’t arise in the short-term OMOs, as the term of 
the repo runs from one MPC decision to the next, so the difference between the rate we received in the OMO 
and that which we pay on reserves is fixed. 
13   The Bank places no restriction on the number of bids submitted but places restrictions on the total value of 
bids  received  from  a  single  participant.  Participants  may  choose  to  submit  multiple  bids  against  either 
collateral set. 
14   A  paired  bid  consists  of  a  single  nominal  amount  and  two  spreads  at  which  the  counterparty  is  willing  to 
borrow  against  the  delivery  of  narrow  and  wider  collateral  respectively.  This  provides  participants  with  two 
opportunities to raise a specific quantity of funds whilst avoiding any risk of over allotment that might otherwise 
occur if two single bids for the same nominal amount were submitted. If both parts of a paired bid are above 
their respective clearing spreads, and therefore eligible to be accepted, the participant will be allotted against 
the bid which offers them better value (the bid with the highest spread relative to the clearing spread for that 
collateral type). 
15   As opposed to the old LTRs which were run on a discriminatory price basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The mechanics of the allocation mechanism are relatively complicated. In a normal auction 
there will be one price at which the auction will clear. But in the ILTRs there are two clearing 
prices, one for each of the two types of collateral. And there will be pairs of clearing rates 
which ensure that the total amount lent in the operation equals the amount on offer. These 
pairs of possible clearing rates can be derived from the bids, and the resulting “frontier” can 
be  converted  into  a  “demand  schedule”  mapping  the  difference  between  the  two  clearing 
rates  (known  as  the  stop-out  spread)  against  the  proportion  of  the  auction  that  would  be 
allocated to wider collateral (and hence by implication, narrow collateral) in each case.  
This  concept  is  best  understood  using  a  simple  example.  Consider  Table  1  below,  which 
shows  hypothetical  bids  from  six  counterparties.  Three  of  the  bids  are  against  the  narrow 
collateral set (N) and the remaining three are against the wider set (W). At the end of the 
auction, the bids within each set are ranked from those with the highest spread to those with 
the lowest spread, as shown. For simplicity of exposition, assume that there are no paired 
bids, and that the Bank has committed to supply £100mn in this operation.  
 The  most  systematic  way  to  construct  the  demand  curve  is  to  start  at  the  top  left  corner 
solution  where  all  the  funds  are  allocated  against  narrow  collateral  (bidders  4,  5  and  6  all 
have their bids filled). The clearing spread would be the lowest accepted bid on the narrow 
collateral:  10bps  and  that  would  dictate  the  uniform  price.16  Now  assume  that  99%  is 
allocated  to  narrow  (conveniently  1%  is  equal  to  £1mn  in  this  example),  and  1%  to  wider 
collateral.  The  clearing  spread  for  the  narrow  set  would  remain  10bps  (bidder  6,  as  the 
cheapest  narrow  bidder,  would  be  allotted  only  £9mn  against  his  bid  for  £10mn).  The 
clearing spread for wider collateral would be 19bps (£1mn would be allocated to bidder 1). 
That results in a stop-out spread (the difference between the clearing spreads for wider and 
narrow collateral) of 9bps.  
The stop out spread remains at 9bps until the point at which £10mn is allocated to the wider 
set. At that point, bidder 6 is no longer filled, and the clearing spread on the narrow set rises 
to 12bps. Bidder 1 receives £10mn out of the £30nm he has bid, and so the clearing spread 
remains at 19bps on wider. But the stop out spread is then 7bps (Chart 5). At the point where 
£31mn is allocated to wider, the clearing spread on narrow is still 12bps (bidder 6 is unfilled, 
and bidder 5 gets £9mn against a bid of £30mn), but the clearing spread on wider falls to 
                                                 
16   Strictly, the stop-out spread is not defined if the allocation is 100% to one type of collateral. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
17bps (bidder 1 is fully allocated and bidder 2 gets £1mn). The stop out spread falls to 5bps 
(Chart 5). Continuing this process, and tracing out the spectrum of stop out spreads and the 
associated  proportions  of  the  funds  allocated  to  wider  collateral,  results  in  the  auction 
demand curve.  
Note  that  the  resulting  demand  curve  will  be  downwards  sloping  (strictly,  in  steps),  as  the 
share  of  funds  allocated  against  wider  collateral  rises,  the  stop  out  spread  falls.  If  market 
conditions  deteriorate  such  that  the  value  attached  to  borrowing  against  wider  collateral 
relative to borrowing against narrow rises, this demand curve will shift higher. Because bids 
in the auctions should provide accurate information on individual banks’ demand for liquidity 
and  the  prices  they  are  willing  to  pay  for  it,  the  Bank  can  use  the  pattern  of  bids  in  each 
auction  to  assess  the  extent  of  stress  either  in  the  market  as  a  whole,  or  at  individual 
institutions. In turn, it can use that information to inform its decisions on the size and maturity 
of  future  operations,  or  to  engage  individual  institutions  in  a  dialogue  to  understand  their 
funding needs and plans.  
For  example,  consider  two  variants  on  our  example  laid  out  in  Table  1.  In  the  first,  an 
exogenous  shock  hits  the  market,  reducing  interbank  lending  volumes  and  impairing  the 
mechanism by which banks transfer liquidity amongst themselves. The result is that banks, 
individually,  bid  more  aggressively  for  funds  (Table  2  and  Chart  6  show  an  illustrative 
example). That pattern results in an upwards shift in the aggregate demand curve, leading to 
a rise in the share of funds allocated against wider collateral, and hence providing liquidity 
insurance to the banking system. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
In an alternative example, assume that an individual counterparty suffers a liquidity shock. 
That  counterparty  bids  more  aggressively  for  funds  –  something  that  is  immediately 
observable from the pattern of bids (Table 2 and Chart 6). 
These  examples  highlight  how  the  new  ILTRs  can  provide  an  “early  warning  indicator”  of 
stresses  in the  market, at  both  an  individual  and  aggregate  level.  That information can  be 
used  to  determine  the  size  of  and  frequency  of  subsequent  ILTRs  (hence  solving  one 
important problem with the old LTRs). 
The ILTR supply curve 
The  Bank’s  supply  curve  is  pinned  down  by  its  preferences  –  namely  to  provide  liquidity 
insurance to the banking system at a price that doesn’t undermine the incentive to prudently 
manage  liquidity.  The Bank  summarises  its  preferences  using  a  Relative  Supply  Schedule 
(RSS). The RSS dictates how the proportion of each auction allocated to the wider collateral 
set responds to changes in the bids submitted, and specifically the difference between the 
clearing spreads on the narrow and the wider collateral set (known as the stop out spread). 
Chart  7  below  shows  some  illustrative  examples  of  an  RSS.  A  larger  stop  out  spread 
increases  the  proportion  of  the  auction  allocated  to  the  wider  collateral  set,  so  the  Bank’s 
“supply schedule” is upward sloping. 
Consider  two  simple  examples.  With  a  perfectly  inelastic  RSS,  the  Bank  essentially  pins 
down the quantity of funds it would provide against wider collateral, regardless of the bids 
submitted.  With  a  perfectly  elastic  supply  curve,  the  bank  would,  once  a  certain  price 
threshold is exceeded, be prepared to allocate against all the wider collateral bids. 
These 
realistic 
two  examples  are  of  course  extremely  simplistic,  and  are  not 
parameterisations of the Bank’s actual RSS. In broad terms, the elasticity of the Bank’s RSS 
is pinned down by three broad considerations. First, the Bank sees merit in allocating some 
funds  regularly  against  wider  collateral,  to  ensure  counterparties  remain  familiar  with  the 
auction  structure  and  continue  to  participate.  Second,  the  Bank  should  not  undermine  the 
incentives to manage liquidity prudently. And third, the auctions should permit an increased 
allocation against wider collateral to the system in the face of adverse liquidity shocks and 
the associated heightened demand for liquidity. 
While  the  principles  underlying  the  Bank’s  RSS  are  clear,  the  precise  configuration  of  the 
RSS is not revealed to the market, so reducing the scope for firms to game the Bank, and 
encouraging them to bid according to need. The Bank’s supply curve should be continuous 
but  otherwise  need  not  be  linear.  In  particular  the  Bank  can  use  the  results  from  each 
operation to determine the degree of stress in the market and hence adjust the scale of the 
operations accordingly. 
Equilibrium 
The equilibrium point, which pins down the clearing spreads and the share of funds allocated 
to the two collateral sets, is determined by the intersection of the observed demand curve, 
and the Bank’s RSS. Chart 7 illustrates that using our hypothetical auction bids from Table 1 
above, and three hypothetical linear RSS schedules. In case of intersections such as those 
given by curves A and B, a unique equilibrium is well defined. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 In  the  case of  supply  curve  C,  there  is  no  intersection between  the  RSS  and  the  demand 
curve. We then face a decision about where to allocate. To date, we have chosen to allocate 
at the bid closest to the RSS, rather than allocating at the intersection of the RSS and the 
discontinuity  in  the  demand  schedule.  There  are  pros  and  cons  to  that  approach.  For 
example,  the  current  practice  lacks  transparency  in  that  counterparties  can  observe 
significant variance in the auction clearing spreads, and might take false signals about the 
RSS  as  a  result.  Set  against  that,  allocating  at  the  RSS  could  mean  providing  liquidity  to 
counterparties at a rate lower than any of the bids in the auction. 
Review to date 
Following their launch in June 2010, the Bank is reviewing how the ILTRs have functioned 
(Table 3 provides the key auction statistics to date). That work is still going on, but so far the 
operations have worked well. A few key points of interest are: 
 
Participation  levels  have  been  lower  than  in  the  extended-collateral  LTRs  at  the 
peak of the crisis, but broadly in line with the long-run/pre-crisis average. 
Although  the  sample  is  small,  the  6  month  auctions  appear  to  have  generated 
greater  demand  relative  to  the  amount  on  offer  (higher  cover)  than  the  3  month 
operations. Anecdote from counterparties suggests that reflects the attractiveness of 
securing longer-term liquidity and the relative scarcity of market sources of 6-month 
funding. 
The majority of bids, both by number and size, have been against narrow collateral. 
Clearing spreads against both narrow and wider collateral have been similar across 
operations of the same maturity (Chart 8). 6 month auctions for wider collateral have 
commanded a significant premium compared to the 3 month auctions. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
   The  January  and  February  auctions  were  uncovered  –  that  is,  the  amount  bid 
(against  either  collateral  set)  was  less  than  the  amount  on  offer.  There  are  two 
points to note about uncovered auctions. First, even if there is insufficient demand, 
the  auction  mechanism  functions.  Second,  irrespective  of  the  cover  ratio,  the 
allocation  depends  on  where  the  bids  are  relative  to  the  RSS.  So  while  an 
uncovered  auction  will  mean  that  the  Bank  allocates  less  than  it  had  offered,  a 
similar outcome could still occur if the auction was covered (but the bids were below 
the RSS). 
Concluding remarks 
During  the  past  five  years,  the  Bank  has  totally  re-shaped  its  operations.  Many  of  the 
changes  arose  as  a  direct  consequence  of  the  financial  crisis,  and  the  new  demands  for 
liquidity  insurance  that  it  engendered.  As  a  result,  the  Bank  has  now  installed  permanent 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
facilities to provide liquidity insurance, without compromising its ability to meet its monetary 
policy implementation objective.  
The  academic  profession  can  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the  field  of  central  bank 
operations. In this paper I have highlighted one example in particular where our thinking has 
benefitted  considerably  from  such  insights.  And  there  is  room  for  much  more  involvement 
going  forward:  although  the  Bank  has  rebuilt  all  of  its  sterling  operations  in  the  past  five 
years,  it  is  unlikely  to  have  reached  the  end  of  the  development  process.  As  experience 
grows with both reserves averaging and the new auctions, we will undoubtedly learn more 
and adjust the operations accordingly. I hope that the presentation of this paper will provoke 
interest and questions, that it will nurture further academic study of central bank operations 
and that it will encourage wider participation in developing the future agenda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
