Choongsoo Kim: The challenges of surveillance and coordination 
Speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  International 
Symposium of the Banque de France: Regulation in the Face of Global Imbalances, Paris, 
4 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I would like to express my gratitude to Governor Noyer for inviting me to this symposium. I 
also want to thank all the other Banque de France officials for preparing today’s symposium. 
As you will recall, last month G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors agreed on 
indicative guidelines to address global imbalances. 
The final indicative guideline should be approved at the coming April G20 meeting, and I am 
sure that France as the G20 Chair will successfully demonstrate its leadership in producing 
concerted and coordinated deliverables.  
Global imbalances, surveillance and policy coordination  
II. 
As  President  Sarkozy  mentioned  at  the  press  conference  in  January,  there  have  been 
125 banking  crises  during  the  past  40  years,  and  their  occurrence  has  picked  up 
extraordinary  speed  over  the  last  20  years.  This  clearly  underlines  how  global  imbalances 
are now building up ever faster. 
A  financial  crisis  is  no  longer  a  “tail  risk”  with  a  low  probability  of  occurrence.  It  should 
rather be regarded as a “normal risk” that can materialize at any time and at any place in 
new and diverse forms. 
A capacity to pick up promptly on the build-up of fresh imbalances calls for preemptive and 
proactive surveillance by central banks and supervisory authorities.  
What is more, closer attention must be paid to the mounting importance of crossborder and 
cross-institutional policy coordination in the process of resolving such imbalances. 
On October 8th 2008, the US, Canada, the UK, the ECB, Sweden, and Switzerland together 
decisively lowered their policy rates in a concerted move. The six of them demonstrated their 
resolve  to  overcome  the  crisis  through  such  international  coordination,  and  this  effectively 
tamed the raging turbulence of market sentiment and helped restore stability. 
This  experience  teaches  us  the  valuable  lesson  that  international  coordination  can  lessen 
market uncertainty in times of global crisis. 
International  coordination,  therefore,  is  undoubtedly  the  key  to  resolving  the  global 
imbalances.  Arguably  it  was  the  framework  of  international  policy  coordination  through  the 
G20  Summit  that  made  it  possible  to  overcome  the  global  financial  crisis  earlier  than 
anticipated and allowed the swift introduction of Basel III.  
On the other hand, there are a number of obstacles that stand in the way of the seamless 
conduct  of  surveillance  and  policy  coordination.  I  would  now  like  to  run  through  the 
challenges that particularly strike me. 
Challenges of surveillance and coordination 
III. 
Let me first point out the four factors that complicate the exercise of surveillance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
1. 
Blurred designation of accountability due to the complexity of financial 
instruments 
First of all, the recent financial crisis is set apart from previous crises in the sense that it is 
difficult to put your finger on the exact locus of responsibility for those specific elements that 
gave  rise  to  it.  This  very  fact  itself  represents  a  substantial  hurdle  for  surveillance.  For 
example, more than one thousand people were held criminally liable when many US savings 
and loans associations folded in the 1980’s. On the other hand, with the possible exception 
of  a  handful  of  cases  such  as  that  of  Bernie  Madoff,  no  criminal  prosecutions  were 
undertaken against the staff and management of financial institutions during the recent crisis.  
Today,  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  pinpoint  those  players  who  actually  give  rise  to  risk 
because the “originate and distribute” model passes on and spreads out heavy risks into a 
myriad of lesser risks. “CDOs (Collateralized Debt Obligations)”, frequently cited of the major 
causes of the sub-prime crisis, are a case in point.  
When CDOs go through “originate and distribute” process numerous times, the riskcreating 
entity cannot be clearly identified. For this reason, regulatory authorities were unable to fully 
comprehend  the  trade  mechanism  and  the  relevant  data  of  CDOs  when  Lehman  went 
bankrupt in September 2008. 
The  purpose  of  surveillance  is  “to  detect  problems  ahead  of  time  and  correct  faulty 
elements”. Nonetheless, if the structures and transactional processes of financial instruments 
are too complex as with CDOs, in  which it is too difficult to identify the problematic entity, 
surveillance becomes a path fraught with difficulties. 
Financial innovation incentives 
2. 
Secondly,  the  incentives  for  innovation  by  financial  market  players  themselves  turn  into 
barriers to effective surveillance. 
The  market  reacts  spontaneously  and  swiftly  to  new  regulations  by  innovating  techniques 
and  products  to  circumvent  them.  Innovation  on  the  part  of  market  participants  can  be 
expressed in other words as “the build-up of a new risk or imbalance that is not immediately 
apparent to the relevant authorities.”  
During the period of transition to Basel III, banks will attempt to minimize the burden imposed 
by  the  new  regulations.  This  change  in  the  regulatory  environment  will  create  new  side-
effects with the potential for triggering the eruption of new and unanticipated imbalances or 
risk build-ups. I see this very point as throwing up the greatest challenge for surveillance in 
the coming years.  
For  instance,  Global-SIFIs  that  are  subject  to  systemic  capital  surcharge  requirements  will 
attempt  to  pass  on  the additional cost  to  their counterparties.  These  counterparties  will,  in 
turn,  react  to  such  attempts.  If  unexpected  side-effects  or  imbalances  crop  up  during  this 
process, the need for additional regulatory measures will have to be discussed. In this case, 
G-SIFI  regulation  may  not  fulfill  its  original  objective  of  reducing  systemic  risk,  but  merely 
give  rise  to  the  implementation  of  additional  regulatory  requirements.  We  may  fall  into  a 
vicious circle in which the imposition of one regulation itself gives birth to another and so ad 
infinitum. 
Missed risk factors 
3. 
Thirdly, the difficulty of identifying newly emerging imbalances in a timely manner is another 
stumbling block on the road to effective surveillance. 
The  complex  network  interlinking  financial  institutions  is  effective  in  diversifying  the  risks 
during  a  business  expansion  phase.  In  a  critical  financial  situation,  however,  the  same 
network functions as channel of risk contagion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The aggregate risk of the financial system as a whole during a crisis is amplified and taken to 
a much higher dimension than the simple arithmetic sum of firm-specific risks. 
A lesson to be drawn from the global financial crisis is that regulatory authorities placed too 
much  emphasis  on  microprudential  surveillance,  and  as  a  result,  they  ignored  or  indeed 
turned a blind eye to the adverse effects of the accumulation of aggregate risk. 
It was only after the recent crisis that the authorities came to realize that network systemic 
risks expand as interconnectedness among banks intensifies. 
The addition in Basel III of macroprudential overlays – such as countercyclical capital buffers, 
forward-looking  provisioning,  and  systemic  surcharges  for  SIFIs  –  is  based  on  the 
repentance of the previous microprudential surveillance framework.  
It is downheartening to say it but we must admit the very strong possibility that we may still 
not pick up on newly emerging risks in a timely fashion. Regulators should bear this firmly in 
mind and be appropriately humble in their approach, never underestimating what they are up 
against. 
Distorted incentive structure 
4. 
Fourthly,  I  would  like  to  point  out  two  cases  where  incentive  distortion  challenges 
surveillance. 
If an attitude of forbearance prevails, it may well distort the outcome of surveillance. 
When low interest rates remain in place for a long time, the market tends to blindly expect 
that  those  bad  loan  assets  that  should  be  written  off  will  revert  to  normal  status.  In  turn, 
forbearance toward the redemption of these loans comes to prevail, in what is known as a 
game of “extend and pretend”. 
If this “evergreening practice” in the accounting treatment of delinquent loans as normal 
loans becomes common, there can be little confidence in the outcome of surveillance. 
Moreover, the symbiotic relationship between credit rating agencies and financial institutions, 
and conflict of interest problems within the agencies themselves represent another factor that 
threatens the credibility of surveillance outcomes.  
According to a report in the New York Times (June 3, 2010), certain credit rating agencies 
stand accused of distorting the rating outcomes in collusion with the issuer institutions being 
graded. 
This  distortion  of  ratings  can  largely  be  seen  as  essentially  a  structural  problem.  In  the 
current  structure  of  the  “issuer-pays  model”,  the  issuers  themselves  pay  the  rating  fees 
and rating agencies are able to provide consulting services to these issuers. In order to hide 
their assessment errors, credit rating agencies tend to persist in assigning high credit ratings 
even when an issuer faces a high probability of insolvency. Of course, surveillance outcomes 
using  such  less  than  adequate  ratings  undoubtedly  hamper  appropriate  policy  decision-
making. Recently, FSB has finalized proposals for reducing reliance on CRA ratings. I look 
forward to this plan being put in place in the near future. 
The obstacles to policy coordination can be classified into global and domestic dimensions. 
Global dimension 
1. 
As  the  interconnectedness  of  global  economies  has  intensified,  the  need  for  international 
policy coordination has grown to a great extent.  
If a national jurisdiction imposes capital controls in the absence of policy coordination with its 
neighboring  jurisdictions,  the  risks  may  spill  over  to  other  neighboring  countries  as 
opportunities for regulatory arbitrage open up.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We ought to take a closer look at the recent experience of those emerging market economies 
that,  after  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  in  September  2008,  put  in  place  a  “blanket 
deposit guarantee” and consequently transferred the risks to their peers and neighboring 
countries. 
In  addition,  emerging  economies’  excessive  accumulation  of  foreign  reserve  to  counter 
sudden surges in capital outflows will itself accentuate global imbalances. International policy 
coordination to resolve this problem is embodied in the global financial safety nets (GFSNs), 
which  took  on  detailed  form  at  the  Seoul  G  20  Summit.  In  this  context,  notable  advances 
were achieved last year in the improvement of the IMF Loan Facility. There remain, however, 
some aspects of it in need of further refinement. Therefore the French initiative set out this 
year in this area is greatly welcomed and I look forward to its successful realization.  
No jurisdiction is opposed to the idea of international coordination in principle, but when the 
interests of individual countries are in conflict, when the benefits from coordination are not 
obvious, or when there is no urgent call for it, then it is very hard to bring about international 
policy coordination in practice. That at any rate was Korea’s experience as the G 20 chair 
last year. 
It  seems  there  is  already  a  firm  consensus  among  the  G  20  member  countries  as  to  the 
overarching 
the 
synchronous  growth  of  the  world  economy.  This  being  the  case,  it  binds  us  all  to  put  into 
practice in all good faith what we may term the mutual trust built up through negotiation and 
agreement. 
imperative  of  policy  coordination 
framework 
the  G20 
through 
for 
Domestic dimension 
2. 
From a domestic perspective, the coordination problem lies in the institutional arrangements 
in relation to macroprudential policy. If the institutional setting for macroprudential policy is 
not  configured  properly,  its  coordination  with  monetary,  fiscal,  and  other  policies  may  well 
become problematic.  
As macroprudential policies are thrust into the spotlight, it is possible, misguidedly, to take 
the  view  that  it  is  feasible  to  deal  with  inflation  by  means  of  macroprudential  tools. 
Accordingly,  monetary  policy  is  increasingly  likely  to  be  adversely  affected  by  the 
overzealous  use  of  macroprudential  tools.  Hence,  it  is  critical  that  there  should  be  a  clear 
understanding that macroprudential policy does “not substitute” for monetary policy but 
rather “complements” it. 
The way forward 
IV. 
Lastly, I wish to draw attention to the following two issues that may shed some light on the 
trail that lies ahead. 
First,  potential  imbalances  in  the  future  may  arise  from  entirely  new  sources.  As  the 
boundaries between differing spheres are being dissolved in the process of globalization and 
increasing  interconnectedness,  social  political  and  geopolitical  risks  once  remote  may  well 
spill over more easily to the real economy and result in increased economic risk. 
One example springs readily to mind. The current events unfolding before us in the Middle 
East are upping the geopolitical risks and triggering such economic threats as an oil price 
shock and financial market turbulence. 
I would like to call this “global systemic risk” as opposed to “financial systemic risk.” 
Piling  Pelion  on  Ossa,  in  addition  to  international  financial  instability,  international  social 
instability represents an issue that must be dealt at an early date in order to avoid a new 
type of crisis. With this problem of social instability very much in mind, particular emphasis 
was given to the “development issue” in the talks at last November’s G20 meetings in Seoul. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  follows  on  from  this  that  discussions  are  required  within  the  G  20  framework  on 
surveillance and policy coordination with particular reference to “global systemic risk”. 
Next, the institutions with a mandate for global surveillance (such as the FSB and the IMF) 
can be readily identified. On the other hand, it is difficult to clearly delineate exactly those 
that are responsible for arbitrating conflicts between differing parties within the global policy 
coordination framework. To my mind, this underscores yet again the imperative for a further 
strengthening of the G20’s role in international policy coordination. 
Thank you for listening so attentively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
