Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Private sector involvement – from (good) theory to 
(bad) practice 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee, Berlin, 6 June 2011. 
 The  title  of  this  first  session  of  the  conference  is:  “Policy  responses  within  countries  and 
inside the eurozone since 2010: an appraisal”. The topic is very broad and I cannot cover it in 
such a short time span unless I am selective and focus on some specific issues.  
I would like to consider mainly what has not gone as expected and the disappointments. This 
enables me to avoid talking, once again, about the ECB’s actions over the last 18 months.  
There are at least three things that have gone wrong. The first is that governments of the 
countries  under  stress  waited  too  long  before  recognising  that  they  needed  financial 
assistance, and submitting their requests for support to the IMF and EU. This is true in all 
three  cases,  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal.  More  often  than  not  support  programmes  are 
delayed  and  within  well  integrated  economic  and  financial  regions  such  as  the  euro  area 
these delays exacerbate market turmoil and create contagion. There is thus an externality in 
leaving it entirely to the country in question to turn to the IMF and EU for financial assistance. 
However, experience has shown that when a country requests such assistance, the national 
authorities tend to blame European institutions, including the ECB, for having pushed them to 
do  so.  “Europe”  thus  becomes  a  scapegoat  and  this  may  fuel  strong  –  although  
unjustified  –  anti-European  sentiment  in  the  countries  concerned.  So  governments  have  a 
natural inclination not to request financial assistance at an early stage. 
The  second  thing  that  has  gone  wrong  has  been  the  implementation  of  the  Greek 
programme of reforms. Reform fatigue set in at an early stage and it probably went unnoticed 
for a while. Member States adopting IMF/EU programmes have to remain firmly committed to 
very specific measures, which need to be acted upon from the outset. Monitoring has to be 
strengthened. 
I will not elaborate on these two first issues but – being here in Berlin today – I would like to 
focus on the third issue which has not gone well, in my opinion, namely the whole discussion 
about private sector involvement. The point I would like to make is that having the private 
sector  actively  involved  in  preventing  and  resolving  sovereign  crises  is  a  good  idea. 
However, the practical implementation of this idea is fraught with complications and, if done 
unwisely, may actually be very damaging, and turn out to be more costly for taxpayers. The 
events of recent months seem to confirm my views. 
I  would  define  private  sector  involvement  (PSI),  for  the  purpose  of  this  discussion,  as 
intentional efforts and contributions, formal or informal, undertaken in a context of sovereign 
financial distress. This support ranges from softer forms, such as preventive talks, to harder 
forms, such as debt rescheduling, restructurings, reprofiling or even debt write-downs.1  2 In 
the  remainder  of  my  talk,  I  will  look  mainly  at  the  harder  forms  of  PSI,  often  called  debt 
restructurings. 
                                                 
1  See Enderlein, Müller, and Trebesch, 2006. 
2   Soft forms of private sector involvement include those that would not change the terms and conditions of the bonds or loans. 
Such  forms  may  include  voluntary  roll-over  agreements  and  preventive  talks  and  meetings.  By  contrast,  harder  forms  of 
private sector involvements imply changes to the terms and conditions of the bonds or loans. Under some forms, the private 
sector participants may face a net present value loss, in other cases they would not face such a loss. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  basic  rationale  behind  involving  private  creditors  when  a  debtor  is  in  distress  is 
straightforward and uncontroversial: creditors and investors should bear the consequences 
of their decisions as fully as possible and should not rely on taxpayers’ money to be bailed 
out.3 The underlying reason has long existed: a bailout by taxpayers today may encourage 
risky lending by private investors in the future. 
In  the  corporate  sector,  it  is  actually  commonplace  to  apply  such  principles.  Under 
bankruptcy laws or out-of-court settlement guidelines, such as the London Rules, the Jakarta 
Initiatives or the Hong Kong Guidelines, when a corporate is facing financing difficulties, the 
responsibility  is  passed  to  the  debtor  and  creditors  to  arrange  debt  settlements  among 
themselves. Indebted companies can reorganise and restructure their operations to return to 
profitability. In turn, creditors agree to reschedule loans or accept the conversion of debt into 
equity. 
While the basic principles of private creditor participation in resolving the debtor’s dilemma 
are  uncontroversial,  the  application  of  these  principles  to  sovereign  debt  is  much  more 
complex.  Debt  workouts  in  the  corporate  and  public  sectors  are  quite  different.  First, 
assessing the solvency of a country is different from that of a company. The former requires 
not only an analysis of the cash flow, the balance sheet and the assets and liabilities but also 
an  evaluation  of  the  political  will  to  implement  the  measures  needed  to  ensure  that  the 
country  remains  solvent.  The  capacity  to  service  debt  requires  both  a  willingness  and  an 
ability  to  implement  policies  that  will  generate  the  necessary  resources.  To  quote  the 
example of Greece: it has a gross debt of around €330 billion and marketable assets worth 
up to €300 billion, so the country is solvent to the extent that it is willing to sell off some of 
these assets. The same conclusion would be reached by looking at the measures required to 
achieve a balanced budget, which largely consist of reversing the decisions taken over the 
last ten years in respect of public sector wage rises, expenditure increases and the adoption 
of  standard  structural  reforms  which  would  bring  Greece  in  line  with  other  euro  area 
countries. Just to give an example, if, over the last 10 years, Greek public sector wages had 
gone up at the same pace as inflation, and public employment had not increased, in 2010 the 
Greek budget deficit to GDP ratio would have been around 4 percentage points lower and 
the debt to GDP ratio about 30% lower.4 
The  key  question  is  whether  the  Greek  government  and  the  Greek  people  are  willing  to 
implement these measures. The answer to this question largely depends on the alternative 
scenario, which is a default or restructuring of the public debt. A rational analysis comparing 
the economic, financial, social and political costs of implementing the needed adjustments, 
including privatisation, and the costs of a default/restructuring would conclude that the former 
costs  are  lower.  A  rational  decision-maker  would  thus  opt  for  the  adjustment  and,  on  that 
basis, Greece should be considered solvent and should be asked to service its debts.  
The  second  difference  between  debt  workouts  in  the  corporate  and  public  sectors  is  that, 
unlike  a  company,  a  sovereign  cannot  be  liquidated.  There  are  no  insolvency  laws  or 
bankruptcy forum to address sovereign solvency problems, and IMF attempts to do so during 
the last decade failed, for several reasons. What is clear is that in the case of an insolvent 
sovereign, further official finance can only be provided when that sovereign restructures its 
debts and, at the same time, undertakes serious and credible domestic fiscal adjustment and 
structural economic reforms.5 
                                                 
3  See US Treasury Secretary Rubin, 1998. 
4  The  results  of the  simulations  have  to  be  viewed  with  caution  since  they  are  sensitive  to  the  quality  of  the 
underlying data and the assumptions used in the exercise. 
5  See, for instance, Roubini, 2002. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  third  feature  that  generally  sets  sovereign  and  corporate  debt  workouts  apart  is  the 
externalities  they  may  generate.  A  debt  restructuring  of  a  sovereign  may  have  severe 
implications, both for the debtor’s and the creditor’s economies. 
Most of the experience in this area has involved less developed countries. In these cases 
private  sector  involvement  has  largely  been  a  concern  for  foreign  creditors.  Taxpayers  in 
creditor countries were affected, depending on the size of the exposure of their respective 
financial system and on whether the soundness of that system was jeopardised. Measures 
have  been  used  in  the  past  to  try  to  reduce  this  impact,  in  particular  through  regulatory 
forbearance. One example is the prudential measures which, during the 1980s, permitted US 
banks to book Brady bonds at their nominal value.  
Historical experience has also rejected the Panglossian view that there exists such a thing as 
an  orderly  debt  restructuring.  While  some  restructurings  have  indeed  been  successful  and 
can arguably be said to have occurred in an orderly fashion, they were often on a small scale 
and  executed  under  specific  circumstances.  The  most  striking  and  oft-quoted  case  is 
Uruguay.  However,  more  often  than  not,  restructurings  have  been  disorderly,  harmful  and 
fraught with difficulties. The average length of the negotiations is 2½ years6 and it can vary 
greatly. In some cases, negotiations have taken just a few months (for instance, Uruguay in 
2003, Pakistan in 1999, Chile in 1990 and Romania in 1983); in other cases they have taken 
many  years  (for  instance,  Vietnam  from  1982  until  1998,  Jordan  from  1989  to  1993,  Peru 
from 1983 to 1997 and Argentina more recently). Empirical evidence also shows that private 
investors are likely to penalise a country which has a history of restructuring and to demand 
higher risk premia.7 
When considering a euro area economy, the following points should be kept in mind. First, 
the  domestic  financial  market  would  be  severely  affected  by  a  default/restructuring  of  the 
public  debt.  Large  losses  would  have  to  be  accounted  for,  as  no  forbearance  would  be 
possible, and recapitalisation of the domestic banking system would require additional public 
money.  Second,  given  the  role  of  the  state  as  implicit  guarantor  of  many  financial  and 
economic transactions, the impact on the real wealth of the domestic population and on the 
economy would be substantial. Third, if the government is still running a primary deficit, it will 
not have the funds to pay for some of its key functions. Fourth, in the euro area the sovereign 
does  not  have  a  domestic  central  bank  that  will  finance  its  deficit.  Fifth,  after  a 
default/restructuring the banking system of the country would be unlikely to pass the stress 
test and have sufficient adequate collateral to access the ECB’s refinancing operations.  
What  are  the  implications  of  this  analysis?  Imposing  haircuts  on  private  investors  can 
seriously disrupt the financial and real economy of both the debtor and creditor countries. It 
ultimately damages the taxpayers of both the creditor and debtor country. This is particularly 
the  case  in  a  region  like  the  euro  area,  consisting  of  advanced  economies  with  highly 
integrated financial markets – an integration we have encouraged for years. This is why such 
restructuring should only be the last resort, i.e. when it is clear that the debtor country cannot 
repay its debts. 
Incidentally, this is the way the international community has functioned and cooperated since 
the  Bretton  Woods  agreement,  which  set  up  the  IMF.  Countries  are  never  encouraged  to 
default  or  restructure  their  debts  unless  they  are  in  a  desperate  situation  and  have  no 
alternative.  This  is  why  there  have  been  relatively  few  cases  of  debt  restructuring  and 
defaults, and they have affected poor and often undemocratic countries.  
Where is the problem? The problem emerges when debt restructuring is carried out not as 
the  last  resort  but  as  a  preventive  tool,  even  becoming  a  precondition  for  receiving  (or 
                                                 
6  See Trebesch, 2008. 
7  See, for instance, Reinhart et al. 2003 and Ozler, 1993. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
providing) financial assistance, a point mentioned in some official circles since mid-October 
2010. Debt restructuring would be a way to tackle not only dramatic cases of insolvency but 
also any difficulties countries face in accessing the financial markets.  
Why is it a problem? 
First, as I already mentioned, it would not be a way to prevent taxpayers from suffering the 
consequences of bad investment decisions. In our Monetary Union, given the integration of 
financial  markets  and  the  single  monetary  policy,  the  taxpayers  of  the  creditor  countries 
would  suffer  in  any  case.  According  to  the  Financial  Times,  for  instance,  a  default  on 
Greece’s debt would cost the German taxpayers alone “at least €40 billion”.8  
Second, this would be a way to punish patient investors, who are sticking to their investment 
and have not sold their bonds yet, and are confident that with the adjustment programme the 
country will get back on its feet. Restructuring would instead reward the investors who exited 
the market earlier or short-sold the sovereign bond, speculating that they would gain out of a 
restructuring.  
Third,  it  would  destabilise  the  euro  area  financial  markets  by  creating  incentives  for 
short-term speculative behaviour. Given that markets are forward-looking, they would try to 
anticipate any difficulty faced by a sovereign by short-selling their positions, thus triggering 
the crisis. This would discourage investment in the euro area because of its potential volatility 
and perverse market dynamics. 
Finally, such a measure would delay any return to the market by a sovereign, because no 
market participant would be willing to start reinvesting in the country for a long period if they 
know  that  this  kind  of  investment  might  at  some  stage  be  penalised.  This  would  thus 
discourage private sector involvement and oblige the official sector to increase its financial 
contribution. 
A  clear  example  is  the  fear  that  private  sector  involvement  would  be  sought  automatically 
under the European Stability Mechanism. Faced with such circumstances, investors would 
be sceptical about buying government bonds maturing after 2013. And the statement which 
is often made in this country that “there will be no restructuring before 2013” does little to 
reassure investors, as it implies that there might be one afterwards. 
The proof of what I have just mentioned can be found in the data. Just looking at the yield 
spreads  between  the  government  bonds  of  the  three  stressed  countries  and  those  of 
Germany, it can be seen that they were gradually coming down last autumn until the day of 
the Deauville agreement and then spiked up after the October European Council, in which it 
was  mentioned  that  preparatory  work  on  the  ESM  would  include  “the  role  of  the  private 
sector”. Renewed public comments about a possible “soft restructuring” or “reprofiling” of the 
Greek debt in April this year produced an immediate spike of the spreads on Greek bonds, 
with strong contagion effects to other euro area countries (see Chart 1). 
To sum up, private sector involvement, if pursued imprudently, i.e. automatically rather than 
as the last resort: 
 
 
does not help save taxpayers’ money; indeed, it may cost them more money; 
favours  short-term  speculation  over  long-term  investment,  which  is  certainly 
undesirable; 
discourages  and  even  delays  any  new  investments  in  a  country  implementing  an 
adjustment programme. 
                                                  
8  See FT, 24 April 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Given that such a system – of preventive PSI – does not exist elsewhere in any other parts of 
the world, the euro area would be seen by investors as handicapping itself and it would feel 
the  effects  of  discrimination.  The  euro  area,  in  terms  of  both  sovereign  and  private 
investments, would become less attractive. The financial system in particular would be highly 
exposed to sovereign restructuring.  
It would also put the euro area at odds with the rest of the international community. Given the 
damage  that  such  a  system  would  inflict  on  other  investors  and  countries,  the  other 
shareholders may be discouraged from supporting IMF programmes in the euro area.  
This is how a good idea can turn into bad practice. Continuing to pursue it suggests strong 
masochistic tendencies.  
How should the problem be solved? How can we prevent taxpayers of the good performers 
in the euro area from being asked to foot the bill for the excesses of the bad performers? 
EMU is based on two pillars. The first is price stability, ensured by an independent central 
bank. The second is sound public finances, promoted by the Stability and Growth Pact. This 
second pillar has not worked properly and needs to be repaired.  
Including  some  form  of  automatic  private  sector  involvement  does  not  repair  the  SGP.  It 
actually weakens it by delegating discipline to the financial markets, which we know are late 
and pro-cyclical. It makes debt restructuring easier and thus discourages fiscal discipline.  
The only way to protect taxpayers in “virtuous” countries is to avoid over-indebted countries 
from  easily  getting  away  with  not  repaying  their  debts;  the  payment  of  debts  should  be 
enforced,  through  sanctions  if  need  be.  When  countries  go  off  track  they  can  receive 
financial  assistance  only  in  exchange  for  strict  adjustment  programmes,  including  asset 
sales, which allow these countries to remain solvent. Respect for contracts is the one of the 
key principles underlying the market economy. It is also the basis of monetary union between 
sovereign countries.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
