Patrick Honohan: Risk – banks and government 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the International 
Centre for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 15 March 2011. 
 From the start of the global crisis, perhaps the most salient feature has been the jump in the 
appreciation of risk and in risk aversion. To be sure, in the previous years, the reverse was 
true: market appetite for risk was very high and risks were under-estimated. Indeed, I have 
long maintained that credulity in mechanical risk management models is likely to have been 
the  most  important  of  the  several  factors  that  were  at  the  root  of  the  imbalances  and 
excesses that occurred in the run-up to the crisis. Believing that their risk models – and the 
financial engineering built on these models – worked better than they did (and lured by the 
high rewards for assuming risk), market participants piled into trades that were much riskier 
than  they  believed.  The  revulsion  that  set  in  once  the  shortcomings  of  key  parts  of  the 
financial engineering edifice, and the associated failures of risk management, were revealed 
to its users also played a part in the speed with which the collapse occurred in the leading 
markets in September and October of 2008. Accordingly, some of the pricing changes that 
then  occurred  represented  a  normalisation,  in  that  risk  premia  for  many  classes  of  assets 
had been too low, but for a while there was an overshoot.  
Since then, normality has returned to many key markets. Indeed, some observers are fretting 
about the growing risk appetite that begins to be evidenced by some securities market prices 
in  recent  months.  But  for  other  asset  classes,  normalisation  has  not  occurred;  risk  premia 
have not narrowed. Indeed they have widened. One conspicuous example is the pricing of 
peripheral euro area Government debt, including the case of Ireland, which is best known to 
me and which, when the dust has settled, is likely to be the country case most studied by 
future generations of students of this crisis. 
I  could  dramatise  this  situation  by  listing  the  emerging  countries  which  have  the  same 
sovereign debt ratings and yield spreads as the European peripherals. But that is a rather 
painful  exercise  and  I  will  dodge  it  on  this  occasion.  By  the  way,  it  is  worth  recalling  that, 
before the crisis, spreads on euro sovereigns were rather insensitive to the ratings. Not so 
today.  
Market participants obviously want to protect themselves against the risk that they perceive, 
and the spreads are a consequence of this. But the spreads themselves feed back onto the 
condition of the issuers. Borrowing countries whose debt is trading at unaffordable spreads, 
because of perceived risk and market uncertainty, struggle to correct imbalances and hence 
can face a negative spiral of worsening creditworthiness. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  economic  and  financial  policy  in  countries  like  Ireland  is  heavily 
focused at present on reducing the uncertainty facing the prospects for the economy and for 
the public finances.  
While  the  Irish  problems  were  largely  home-grown,  Ireland  is  still  among  the  world’s  most 
globalised  economies,  and  the  solutions  are  therefore  being  worked  out  in  a  global 
environment with assistance not only from the rest of the Euro area and the European Union, 
but on a global scale from the International Monetary Fund. It is in the interests of all that the 
perception  of  risk  that  currently  swirls  around  Irish  assets  is  dissipated  with  better 
information, unquestioned adequacy of bank capital and a fiscal correction along as solid a 
national economic growth trajectory as can be achieved. Here too the heavy lifting will have 
to be done largely at home, but optimal engagement of partners remains a crucial element. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In this context, it is worth looking back a little at Ireland’s experience with globalisation. Until 
quite recently, most observers would have seen this experience as significantly positive; how 
is it today?  
Ireland’s increasing globalisation in the 1980s and 1990s both helped lift the economy from 
decades of under-performance and demonstrated its new ability to generate full employment 
and  compete  effectively  at  the  production  frontier.  The  intimate  engagement  with  the 
European  Union  since  membership  in  1973  had  helped  enrich  administrative  and  political 
capacity  as  well  as  resulting  in  a  vital  flow  of  development  funding  through  the  structural 
funds especially from the late-1980s to the end of the millennium.  
By then the wider forces of globalisation had begun to act as a kind of turbo-charger for the 
economy,  amplifying  the  competitive,  export-led  growth  period  and  the  subsequent 
residential  construction  and  property  price  boom.  This  process  helped  achieve  rapid 
convergence in living standards through the attainment of full employment, but it also fuelled 
an  overshoot  which  could  not  be  managed  down  given  the  debt  vulnerabilities  which  had 
accumulated and which proved unsustainable through the global crisis.  
International  convergence  of  economic  and  regulatory  policies  towards  liberalisation  and 
light-touch, unfortunately embraced also by Ireland, and ridiculously easy availability of credit 
(eventually  helped  by  the  removal  of  exchange  rate  risk  across  the  euro  area)  were  key 
factors  in  the  international  environment  that  masked  the  vulnerabilities  associated  with  the 
emergence of evident imbalances in the trend towards a construction monoculture: extreme 
house price inflation, a skewed revenue base for the Government accounts and a seemingly 
inexorable erosion of wage competitiveness.  
A  score-card  on  the  role  of  globalisation  in  the  Irish  downturn  shows  an  equally  mixed 
picture. Despite the fact that international trade was badly hit worldwide in the macro-shock 
of  late  2008,  Irish  exports  held  up  well  and  provided  a  stabilising  force  in  the  evolution  of 
aggregate demand both in that downturn and in the subsequent couple of years. The severe 
contraction in the numbers at work was somewhat mitigated by the continued availability of 
jobs  abroad,  both  for  recent  immigrants  who  wished  to  return  to  their  place  of  origin  and 
others who sadly resumed the historical pattern of seeking employment opportunities abroad 
when few were available at home.  
Crucially, the Eurosystem has also picked up the pieces on the downside: stepping-in to fund 
the liquidity deficit as the excessive bank borrowings from the global financial system drained 
out when markets lost confidence in the Irish Government’s capacity to both bring its regular 
deficit under control and pay for the mounting losses of the banking system. 
 As seen from the rest of the world, and in particular from the financial markets, the key risks 
now facing the Irish economy lie in its financial balance sheet. To oversimplify, Ireland faces 
two main problems in this respect. First, it has too much debt, public and private. Second, 
there is a market perception of significant tail risk to the debt, not least that part that relates 
to the banks. It is these two problems, which are obviously interlinked, and which have both 
been  growing  in  the  course  of  the  past  year,  that  have  led  to  the  market’s  reluctance  to 
provide continuing funding at reasonable rates of interest.  
By making an alternative line of funding available, the provision of financial support from EU 
partners  and  the  IMF  under  the  Programme  buys  time  for  Ireland  to  reduce  these  two 
problems. The financing package of the Programme does not itself reduce the risks. For one 
thing; it is not a bail-out, (which would entail a lowering of the net present value of the debt). 
Furthermore,  the  financing  provided  is  not  structured  to  itself  reduce  the  tail  risks  –  that 
would have been beyond the current scope of the funds from which the financial support has 
been sourced. 
If I am right in saying that the market’s reluctance to finance Ireland is down to the exposure 
to tail risks that they fear, then restoring Ireland’s access to market funding needs to address 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
those risks. There are three possible routes. First is to improve the quality and transparency 
of relevant information so that those parts of the perceived risk that are based on inadequate 
information  will  be  dispelled.  Second,  to  reduce  vulnerabilities  through  mitigants  –  notably 
reducing the leverage of banks, reducing the fiscal deficit and thus slowing the accumulation 
of  government  debt.  All  means  of  restarting  growth  of  output  and  employment  on  a 
sustainable basis fall into this category. That  would include sustaining the recovery, under 
way since 2007, in wage competitiveness in international markets, as well as strengthening 
other elements of international competitiveness. Most of the key components of the years of 
“Celtic Tiger” success are still in place: clearly none should be neglected or dismantled at this 
juncture.  
Since  we  are  in  an  academic  environment,  it  is  interesting  to  reflect  on  whether  financial 
engineering  at  an  intergovernmental  level  could,  in  due  course,  improve  on  the  current 
situation  by  reassigning  risks  in  a  way  that  is  beneficial  both  to  the  borrower  and  to  its 
creditors. This has indeed been suggested already for Ireland and other countries in similar 
circumstances by several authors. If the shortcomings of financial engineering were a main 
cause of the global crisis, yet contracts tailored with its elementary techniques still have the 
potential to transform the financial viability of stressed borrowers. After all, official creditors 
have now taken on the burden of holding the majority of Irish debt – at least so far as the 
State and the Irish-owned banks are concerned. Could there be financial instruments that are 
better  adapted  for  both  sides  of  the  transaction?  Among  the  suggestions  that  have  been 
made  here  are  GDP-linked  bonds, tail  risk insurance  and  even  bank  equity.  To  the  extent 
that it is the fear of anaemic economic growth challenging the capacity of Irish borrowers to 
service debt, then for example converting some of this official debt into a form whose return 
is explicitly linked to economic growth, could reduce the risk of borrower stress, while offering 
upside potential to those lenders. Alternatively, the provision – for a fee – of guarantees or 
insurance  to  banks  or their  lenders  by  official  funds  with the  capacity  to  absorb credit  risk 
could ensure or restore bank access to funding.  
Of  course  such  solutions  are  not  as  easily  taken  off  the  shelf  as  plain  vanilla  lending.  In 
particular any insurance contract is beset by moral hazard problems. While these could be 
addressed, unfortunately no pre-existing template exists for intergovernmental arrangements 
of this type, and most observers are sceptical that one could be put in place soon.  
If  so,  we  must  work  with  what  we  have,  and  that  is  the  policy  strategy  worked  out  for  the 
IMF-EU  Programme.  It  has  two  main  elements,  which  essentially  continue  and  deepen 
existing policies.  
First, there is phased deficit reduction projected to bring Government debt under control and 
declining by 2014. After the period of political uncertainty engendered by the run-up to the 
General Election, the new Government has reaffirmed the fiscal objectives of the Programme 
and specifically to the 2011 and 2012 budgetary numbers. This is key to reducing risk and 
restoring confidence, but I will say no more about it here.  
Second, accelerated resolution of the banking crisis for which we would have hoped to turn 
the corner already, but has proved to be on a scale which has challenged available policy 
tools. The banking strategy thus involves further recapitalisation and accelerated downsizing. 
The recapitalisation of the banks will take place following the completion of the 2011 stress 
tests  which,  in  line  with  the  Programme  commitments,  will  be  much  more  granular,  more 
explicitly transparent, and tougher, than those of 2010.  
Last year’s task was not just a question of assessing future losses under a speculative stress 
scenario; instead we were still trying to evaluate the losses already embedded in the existing 
portfolio resulting from the property price collapse that had already occurred, especially for 
development property.  
In normal times, a well-run bank with good loan appraisal procedures will be able to forecast 
its likely loan losses fairly accurately, especially if the likely macroeconomic prospects can be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
pinned-down.  But  when  it  becomes  clear  that  banks  have  made  substantial  underwriting 
errors across a wide range of their portfolio to the extent that began to become evident in late 
2008 and early 2009, the range of uncertainty balloons out. Standard valuation practices that 
work for properly underwritten loans in normal times are ineffective in such an environment in 
predicting the enormous systemic losses that can occur. Thus, over the past couple of years, 
a  point  estimate  –  a  single  number  –  has  been  more  misleading  than  helpful  in  terms  of 
understanding the range of loss possibilities.  
Usually  the  validity  of  stress  tests  is  revealed  only  over  a  period  of  time,  but  in  our  case, 
within months of publication, one of the underlying assumptions of the 2010 stress tests was 
unluckily undermined. We had to go public on them part-way through the big programme of 
loan  purchases  by  the  State  property  company  NAMA.  These  loan  purchases  crystallised 
those embedded bank losses immediately, but the prices at which the purchases would be 
made  were  calculated  in  a  very  elaborate  and  time-consuming  way  mandated  by 
Competition  Law.  The  stress-test’s  seemingly  aggressive  assumption  that  the  seemingly 
severe  haircuts  in  the  first  tranche  of  loan  purchases  would  read  through  to  the  lower 
tranches also proved to be wrong. With hindsight it would have been great to have built in 
more insulation by providing for even tougher haircuts; but at the time it would have seemed 
an arbitrary and hard to justify exercise of regulatory powers.  
This year, we are determined to present a stress test that will not only be more convincing to 
the  market,  by  providing  much  more  granular  detail,  but  also  be  better  insulated  against 
surprises by using aggressive stress assumptions and modelling.  
The  emphasis  is  clearly  on  determining  appropriate  capital  levels  to  meet  stresses.  The 
higher  capital  required  will  be  driven  by  this  rather  than  from  any  increase  in  expected 
losses: to be sure the somewhat weaker economic growth projections now available would 
imply some increase in expected losses, but it is the stress scenario that is the focus of the 
present exercise.  
We will seek to largely free the tests of any excessive expectations from Irish exceptionalism in 
loan-loss recoveries (over the years very few Irish residential mortgages have been foreclosed 
in downturns by comparison with the experience in the UK and US, for example: with the help 
of external consultants we are referencing experience in those countries – though not slavishly 
so  –  in  the  analysis  that  will  lead  us  to  choose  new  tougher  capital  levels  for  the  banks 
sufficient to convince the markets. And less reliance will be made on extrapolation from recent 
experience. 
 The  downsizing  of  the  banks  is  already  under  way.  Not  only  did  they  enter  the  crisis  with 
sizable businesses outside Ireland, including a long-standing presence in the UK, as well as 
more  recent  ventures  in  Poland  and  the  United  States,  among  others,  but  their  large 
property-backed  portfolios  of  lending  to  Irish  borrowers  was  heavily  financed  by  wholesale 
international borrowing most of which has now been repaid, and replaced, for the time being 
by central bank funding. By simply operating at a lower scale, the risk of the banks, and their 
capital requirements, are being reduced.  
The first and to date largest element of the downsizing was the sale during 2010 (at heavily 
discounted prices) of the development property-related loans to the purpose-created asset 
management company NAMA. The losses that crystallised in these loan sales – larger, as I 
have  mentioned,  than  expected  by  anyone  –  have  sometimes  been  blamed  by  critics  for 
destabilising  the  system,  though  I  am  sure  that  had  these  losses  not  been  transparently 
revealed, they would quite soon have been suspected by the market; losses on such a scale 
could not have been concealed for long, even if that had been desired.  
In the aftermath of that experience it is, perhaps, not surprising that the authorities are most 
reluctant to force the pace of downsizing to the point of incurring fire-sale losses. To be sure, 
further  sales  have  already  occurred,  most  notably  of  the  Polish  subsidiary  of  Allied  Irish 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Bank.  And  steady  progress  is  anticipated  on  the  rest  of  a  growing  class  of  what  are  now 
being  identified  as  non-core  banking  assets.  But  there  cannot  be  fire-sale  losses,  as  the 
sovereign – which would ultimately have to fund them – cannot afford them.  
As  soon  as  assets  can  be  sold  outright  (as  distinct  from  being  placed  in  a  “bad  bank” 
vehicle), then some of the banks’ excessive borrowings from the Central Bank – a legacy of 
the years of extravagant bank reliance on footloose foreign funding – can be reduced. 
Increasingly it seems evident that placing the continuing parts of the system on a firm footing 
can best be done through the involvement of new foreign owners who can bring capital, risk 
control  and  other  management  skills.  This  would  effectively  short-circuit  the  risk-reduction 
process  now  under  way.  With  their  due  diligence  complementing  the  tail-risk  reduction 
envisaged from PCAR2011, it is not unreasonable to suppose that such investors will see 
sufficient franchise value in the continuing banks to convince them that attractive investment 
opportunities exist. Provided they bring credible business plans, I look forward to welcoming 
new owners of Ireland’s downsized and cleaned-up banks. 
 Here I think it is worth acknowledging that the ECB and Eurosystem have stepped up to the 
mark  and  provided  ample  liquidity  to  the  Irish  banking  system  in  a  period  of  extraordinary 
liquidity pressure, thereby dramatically reducing risk. Of course the provision of such liquidity 
assistance  has  been  a  classic  and  impeccable  exercise  of  long-standing  central  banking 
doctrine,  but  it  has  been  on  a  scale  for  which  there  are  few  precedents  in  history.  To  an 
extent, the need for such liquidity is the mirror image of the scale on which the international 
market was previously tapped. Indeed, it has often been remarked that membership of the 
euro area facilitated bank access to foreign funds. But over-borrowing by European banking 
systems was not limited to the euro area. And euro membership has provided the safety net 
on the way down.  
The European Central Bank has risen to this challenge and the Eurosystem has extended 
credit to Irish banks on an unprecedented scale. Governed by a detailed legal framework, the 
lending has been carried out either through normal Eurosystem operations (to the extent that 
the banks concerned had collateral satisfying the specific requirements, both as to assured 
and rated quality, and as to marketability, defined by the ECB) or directly from the Central 
Bank of Ireland.  
The  direct  lending  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  of  course  carried  out  with  the  prior 
knowledge and approval of the ECB: the suggestion sometimes heard, that the ECB might 
be about to cut-off the Irish banks, is very wide of the mark.  
They hope, as we all do, for faster progress towards restoring the confidence of the market in 
Ireland and its banks; but that is a very different matter.  
All central bank lending to banks is collateralised, whether by other financial assets of the 
banks (with appropriate haircuts), or by Government guarantees. But inasmuch as almost all 
of the central bank lending has gone to repay bank liabilities that were already guaranteed, 
this process has not increased overall Government obligations. (It’s important not to double-
count  here).  Indeed,  the  quantum  of  Irish  Government  guaranteed  bank  liabilities  has 
diminished substantially over the past year. 
 The process of rolling back the excesses that have marred the great advances made by the 
Irish economy over the past two decades has heightened uncertainty. In order to underpin a 
vigorous economic recovery, risk must be reduced, not least by ensuring the conventional 
elements  of  fiscal  discipline  and  cost  competitiveness,  but  also  through  an  intensified 
process of clarifying and crystallising the position of the banks and reducing their exposure. 
The  EU-IMF  Programme  funding  provides  a  window  of  time  in  which  to  help  restore  the 
fundamentals and reduce the risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
