Caleb M Fundanga: Small-scale cross-border trade and payment 
services in southern Africa 
Official opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the  Bank of Zambia, at  a 
roundtable symposium on small-scale cross-border trade and payment services in southern 
Africa, Lusaka, 21 March 2011. 
 the 
region.  Furthermore,  by  strengthening  commercial 
Distinguished Invited Guests  
Let  me  begin  by  welcoming  you  to  this  Roundtable  Symposium  on  Small-Scale  Cross-
Border Trade and Payment Services in Southern Africa. May I also warmly welcome our 
colleagues from neighbouring countries who have come to join us in this important event. It is 
my  sincere  hope  that  you  shall  enjoy  your  stay  in  Zambia  and  that  you  shall  find  this 
roundtable symposium fruitful.  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  cross-border  trade  plays  an  important  role  in 
supporting livelihoods, especially those of border communities, thereby buttressing prosperity 
in 
ties,  promoting  cultural 
understanding, and deepening community relationships, cross-border trade helps to nurture 
harmonious relations amongst countries in the region.  
The  unique  feature  of  small-scale  cross-border  trade  lies  in  geographical  proximity  which 
minimises transportation costs, thereby allowing traders to take advantage of differences in 
the supply, demand, and prices of various goods and services available on either side of the 
border. It is worth noting that most cross-border trade activities are not reported in foreign 
trade statistics. However, surveys conducted on the subject show that cross-border trade is 
carried out by individuals or small traders and their families. The volumes traded are small 
both  in  value  and  quantity,  with  agricultural  products  and  consumer  goods  being  the  main 
traded goods. The traders’ mode of transport in conducting their business is on foot, using 
bicycles, taking a minibus or a taxi to and from the other side of the border.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, cross-border trade not only benefits traders’ lives through incomes 
but  also  strengthens  local  production,  and  fosters  service  provision.  It  also  benefits  the 
people involved in activities associated with trading. This entails that cross-border trade is a 
significant driver of employment and income generation for households that would otherwise 
have lived in poverty, especially in remote areas where employment is scarce. 
Furthermore, Ladies and Gentlemen, cross-border trade lowers import prices and widens 
the range of choice of goods available to consumers, as well as enables exporters to benefit 
from higher value-addition. Finally, cross border trade has a gender dimension with women 
being more actively involved.  
From the foregoing, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, it is very clear that small-scale 
cross-border trade plays a very vital role in our economies, particularly in generating income, 
creating employment and alleviating poverty. 
However, Ladies and Gentlemen, the small-scale cross-border trade faces a lot of barriers 
and  impediments,  including  lack  of  access  to  financial  and  payment  services  such  as 
currency  exchange  and  transmission  facilities.  Traders  from  both  sides  of  the  border  are 
forced  to  carry  cash  and  must  first  convert  funds  into  United  States  Dollars  from  their 
respective countries and then into the domestic currency of the country they are purchasing 
goods  or  services  from.  By  so  doing,  cross-border  traders  face  many  risks  including  theft, 
exchange losses and other conversion costs.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, although there have been some bilateral efforts towards formalising 
and  facilitating  small-scale  cross-border  trade  in  Southern  Africa,  these  have  not  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
informal 
enough.  For  instance,  Zimbabwe  signed  a  memorandum  of  understanding  with  Malawi  to 
facilitate 
trade,  especially  between  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises. 
Mozambique  and  Zambia  also  signed  a  memorandum  of  understanding  to  facilitate  the 
repatriation of currencies of the two countries that are accumulated by traders located along 
the  common  border  areas.  It  is  expected  that  this  memorandum  of  understanding  will  be 
expanded to include Malawi.  
The lack of financial and payment services has not only hindered small-scale cross border 
trade but also led to the establishment and entrenchment of parallel currency markets at the 
borders. Needless to say, these are associated with vices such as counterfeiting, facilitating 
illegal trade, as well as enhancing cross-border money laundering activities. Moreover, to us 
monetary authorities, illegal cross-border local currency circulation creates the potential for 
complicating the conduct of monetary policy, especially if a significant amount of a country’s 
domestic currency is being used outside its jurisdiction. The volumes of goods and services 
traded and amount of currency handled by individual traders may seem small. However, they 
are  collectively  significant  and  have  implications  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  For 
instance, the World Bank estimates small-scale border trade in Southern Africa to be around 
$17.6 billion. Other studies have estimated that small-scale cross-border trading accounts for 
about 42% of GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  for  this  reason  that  this  roundtable  symposium  has  been 
convened with the following objectives:  
1. 
2. 
To stimulate broader interest in the topic of small scale cross border trade;  
To initiate an inquiry into the design of a World Bank project aimed at fostering small 
scale trade and innovative cross-border payment services in Southern Africa; and  
To look at the opportunities for providing cross-border money transmission services 
that benefit both small-scale trade and remittance transfers.  
3. 
It is anticipated that this roundtable symposium shall come up with a refined design of the 
World Bank project to be launched later in 2011 focusing on five countries in Southern Africa, 
namely: Angola, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, and Zambia. A draft copy of the project 
design has been circulated to you all. The project will aim at enhancing trade through lower 
transaction  costs  for  trade  payments  and  improved  access  to  financial  services  for  small-
scale traders. The goal is to increase small value trade payments through formal channels 
and  transition  payments  away  from  cash  by  improving  competition  and  innovation  in  the 
market  for  trade  related  payment  services.  It  is  also  expected  that  the  forum  will  result  in 
attaining better alignment of project scope with stakeholder needs, and in particular buy-in 
from both private and public sector stakeholders in each country covered.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  roundtable  forum  brings  together  some  decision  and  policy 
makers, from both the private and public sectors of the countries covered by the project, to a 
single regional event representing government and central bank officials, trade and payment 
system  experts, 
international  development  community,  mobile  network  operators, 
international  money  operators,  payment  service  providers,  academics  and  researchers 
involved  in  the  topics  of  small-scale  cross-border  trade  and  payment  services.  I  am  very 
positive that the symposium shall achieve the stated objectives and wish to encourage you to 
actively and freely participate in the deliberations.  
With these few words, Ladies and Gentlemen, I declare this roundtable symposium open.  
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
