K C Chakrabarty: Talent acquisition and management 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
Seminar  on  Talent  Acquisition  and  Management  organized  by  the  IBPS,  Mumbai,  31  May 
2011. 
 The assistance provided by Shri Shailendra Trivedi in preparation of this address is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri M. Balachandran, Director, IBPS, Shri K. Ramakrishnan, CEO, IBA, members 
of Governing Board of the IBPS, faculty members of IBPS, my old friends and colleagues, 
Mr.  Saurabh  Tripathi  of  BCG  who  made  an  excellent  presentation,  distinguished  guests, 
ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  here  at  the  Seminar  on  Talent 
Acquisition and Management organized by the IBPS. The Seminar has very interesting 
objectives in that it attempts to review and evolve systems and tools for identification of talent 
for induction from outside and from within for recruitment, promotions and placements – in 
the context of changing needs of the banking industry. 
It is only apt for IBPS to be holding this Seminar. After all, the core job of IBPS is 
2. 
talent  acquisition  through  selection  of  competent  and  efficient  cadres  of  personnel,  their 
promotions and placement etc. The institute has made good progress in doing its job. It has 
moved from a total of 8 lakh registered candidates in 2001–02 to screening about 13 million 
candidates  in  2010–11.  The  progress  and  professionalism  is  indeed,  commendable  and  I 
take this opportunity to congratulate Shri Balachandran, the IBPS Governing Board and their 
entire team. 
3. 
Though  I  do  not  have  professional  HR  qualifications,  I  do  consider  myself  an  HR 
person  although  I  see  things  in  a  slightly  different  perspective.  I  believe  HR  cannot  be  a 
departmental  function; HR  cannot  be  an  individual  function.  Human  resource  development 
has to be a movement in any society if we have to upgrade the knowledge and skill level in a 
society, which is very much required in our country. 
4. 
Having  said  that,  let  me  return  to  the  theme  of  this  Seminar.  The  topic  assumes 
great  importance  considering  the  fact  that  the  Banks  in  India  today  are  faced  with  major 
challenges  on  the  talent  front.  Currently  our  Banks  employ  close  to  ten  lakh  people 
(9.44 lakh).  Of  these,  around  7.5  lakh  people  are  employed  by  the  Public  Sector  Banks. 
Mr. Balachandran  estimates  that  Banks  will  have  to  recruit  about  7.5  lakh  people  in  next 
5 years  and  that  there  will  be  a  situation  where  the  Banks  will  have  only  about 
40% experienced staff. The challenges, therefore, are manifold. Banks will have to plan for 
the following: 
 
 
A steady, carefully calibrated recruitment programme, 
As  rapid  technological  changes  transform  the  business  –  a  continuous  skill 
up-gradation exercise. 
A new generation of the workforce will be working along side an older generation as 
a  team.  Banking,  in  my  opinion  is  a  team  work  and  this new  situation  will  require 
cultural adjustments and therefore change management 
 The challenges are going to be similar for other institutions in the financial and non-financial 
sectors not only in India but across the globe and, yes, even for the regulators. That casts a 
tremendous responsibility on institutions like IBPS. Clearly, the costs of failure on this front 
would be very heavy. Having set the context, I will try to share with you my thoughts on talent 
acquisition and management. Let me begin with the definitions first. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Meaning of talent 
5. 
What  is  talent?  We  must  define  talent.  We  say  that  Lata  Mangeshkar  is  a  very 
talented singer or Sachin Tendulkar is a very talented player. No, I withdraw, they are like 
gods.  Let  me  choose  another  example.  It  is  common  to  say  that  Shreya  Ghoshal  is  a 
talented singer or Gautam Gambhir is a very talented player. Do we also say that I have got 
a talented driver, or the carpenter who did the interiors at my home is very talented. While we 
are certainly talking about talent in respect of Gautam Gambhir and Shreya Ghoshal, it is the 
skill of the driver and the carpenter that we usually refer to and not their talent. 
6. 
It is important to appreciate the difference between skill and talent. Skill is craft and 
technique. Skill can be taught, refined, honed and developed. Skill is simple to define. It is 
the term “Talent” that is difficult to define. We hear the term being thrown around in various 
contexts generally associated with some kind of performance – especially in creative fields 
like show business, and sports. In my opinion, it is very important to understand the nuances 
behind the term as that will enable us to identify talent around us and then manage it. 
7. 
The  Oxford  dictionary  defines  talent  as  “natural  aptitude  or  skill”,  the  Webster’s 
dictionary  defines  talent  as  “any  natural  ability  or  power”.  The  word  “natural”  is  common. 
Talent can therefore not be created, it can only be spotted. This is what differentiates talent 
from knowledge, skills or competency – all of which in some ways connect with things that 
are learned and not what a person naturally is. I am reminded of a story from Panchtantra: 
The scholars and the lion… 
Four men grew up together in a little village in India. Three of the men were scholars, but the 
fourth man never studied anything. In fact, he had never read a book in his life. He just got 
along as best as he could on his own common sense. But the four men had been friends as 
children, and they remained friends despite their differences. 
One day, the four friends were sitting under the tree talking of this and that when one of the 
scholars said, “Something has been bothering me. I have  spent all my life studying, and I 
know many things, but I know them only from books. I don’t know if my knowledge works, out 
in the world.” 
“You  know,”  said  another  of  the  scholars,  “the  same  thing  has  been  bothering  me!  But 
somehow,  this  little  village  doesn’t  seem  to  offer  the  scope  for  me  to  try  out  my  vast 
knowledge.” 
“Clearly,” said the third scholar, “we must travel out into the world and try out our knowledge 
there.”  The  other  scholars  agreed,  but  then  there  was  their  friend.  They  had  always  done 
everything  together,  share  and  share  alike,  but  suppose...suppose  they  found  some  lost 
treasure  by  using  their  knowledge?  Suppose  they  solved  a  problem  for  a  rajah  and  he 
rewarded  them  with  gold  and  jewels?  They  had  studied  late  into  the  night  to  prepare 
themselves for this work, and their friend had done nothing. He only had common sense, and 
which  rajah  would  be  impressed  with  that?  They  argued  this  back  and  forth,  as  they  so 
enjoyed doing, but finally they decided to do as they had always done, share and share alike. 
And so they started on their journey. They walked along for many days, and one day they 
saw some bones scattered by the path. One of the scholars said, “I can tell from my studies 
that these bones are the bones of a lion. Now it so happens that I have learnt how to arrange 
the bones as they would be in a living lion.” 
“Really?” said the second scholar, that is interesting—for it so happens that from my studies I 
know how to clothe the bones with flesh and blood and skin and fur.” 
“Indeed?” said the third scholar. “How curious. It so happens that I know the next step. Once 
the animal is formed, I know how to breathe life into it. Clearly, this is the place where we 
should try out our knowledge to see if it works in the world.” The others agreed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  fourth man,  the  one  who  wasn’t  a  scholar,  was  simply  struck  dumb  by  this  display  of 
learning and didn’t say anything at all. 
So the first scholar stepped forward and arranged the bones as they would be in a living lion. 
Then he stepped back, and the second scholar stepped forward and clothed the bones with 
flesh,  and  blood,  and  skin,  and  fur.  Then  he  stepped  back,  and  the  third  scholar  stepped 
forward, about to breathe life into the animal, when the fourth man said “Wait! That’s a lion! 
That’s a lion you are about to bring to life. It could eat us up! Stop! Think what you’re doing!” 
“We  know  what  we’re  doing,”  said  the  scholars.  “We  have  studied  this  all  our  lives.  Don’t 
worry. Just leave everything to us.” 
“Well, all right,” said their friend, “but...could you wait till I climb a tree?” “Certainly,” said the 
scholars,  and  they  waited  till  their  friend  had  climbed  a  convenient  tree.  Then  the  third 
scholar went back to the procedure of breathing life into the animal. And sure enough, the 
lion started breathing, opened its eyes, looked at the three scholars, sprang upon them, and 
ate them up. 
After the lion had gone away, the fourth man, the one who wasn’t a scholar, climbed down 
from the tree and made his way back to the village, taking with him no great treasure of gold 
and jewels, but only his own common sense. 
Talent, to me, is indeed like common sense – you have it, or you do not have it. 
What is talent management? 
Talent Management – is it the management of entertainers? There is an enormous 
8. 
array of literature and research on “Talent Management” – and a whole lot of companies and 
consultancies  minting  money  out  of  “Talent  Management”.  What  actually  is  Talent 
Management or Human Capital Management – the more fashionable phrase – implying the 
same thing? Talent Management describes the process through which employers of all kinds 
–  companies,  banks,  government,  non-government  organizations,  etc.,  –  anticipate  their 
human  capital  needs  and  set  about  meeting  them.  Getting  the  right  people  with  the  right 
skills  into  the  right  jobs,  a  common  definition  of  talent  management,  is  the  basic  people 
management challenge in organisations. While the focus of talent management tends to be 
on management and executive positions in most organisations, we do not necessarily need 
all talented people in an organisation. We need to spot the people with the right kind of talent 
to innovate, to lead, etc. For me, it, therefore, also includes on-boarding new workers, and 
developing and retaining current workers to meet current and future business objectives. 
Talent acquisition 
9. 
As  they  say,  it  takes  talent  to  spot  talent.  In  the  context  of  banking,  what  kind  of 
talent  are  we  looking  at?  People  here  would  have  heard  of  3-6-3  rule  of  banking.  The  
3-6-3 rule describes how bankers would give 3% interest on depositors’ accounts, lend the 
depositors money at 6% interest and then be off to playing golf at 3 p.m. This alludes to how 
a bank’s only form of business was lending out money at a higher rate than what it is paying 
out to its depositors. Did this require any talent? But this is not going to stay for long, for in 
these times of intense competition, only those who can acquire and nurture the right kind of 
talent are going to survive. This applies not only to banks within the country and outside, but 
to  all  the  organisations  across  the  globe,  as  globally,  shortage  is  not  just  of  talent  but  of 
manpower itself. Fortunately, in our country, we have no dearth of manpower. 
10. 
“Absurd  bonuses  for  excessive  risk  taking”  and  “an  explosion  of  exotic  socially 
useless product development” had been causes of the recent global crisis, FSA Chief Lord 
Turner has said. Post financial crisis, studies undertaken have showed that bank executives 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
are  more  likely  to  carry  out  potentially  unstable  takeovers  and  mergers  if  they  receive 
substantial bonuses for successful results. 
11. 
Do we, in banks, need highly aggressive, over ambitious people? When Financial 
Inclusion is a major national objective being partnered by banks, don’t we need people who 
would be closer to the ground realities on the Indian country side? If yes, then why should we 
be rushing to B-school campuses for recruitment? How many of the people recruited from 
such campuses will have empathy towards the poorest of the poor? I don’t say that none of 
them  will  fit  the  bill,  but  are  we  looking  for  the  right  traits  in  the  recruitment  tests  that  my 
friends at the IBPS conduct – I understand they are going to test around 65 lakh candidates 
in 2011–12. 
12. 
Professor Debashis Chatterjee, Director of IIM Kozhikode has an interesting take on 
the testing that we conduct for recruiting people. He says that these psychometric tools and 
classic tests are not useful because we can’t distinguish between problem-solving on paper 
and  problem-solving  in  the  field.  Talent,  as  he  puts  it,  is  transferable  from  one  context  to 
another but not from one person to another. 
13. 
While  the  Indian  banking  industry  faces  the  daunting  task of  recruiting  freshers  in 
droves,  I  would  earnestly  request  the  organisers  of  this  Seminar  to  have  a  serious 
introspection on the kind of talent that the Indian banking industry requires and spend some 
time  in  devising  ways  and  means  to  spot  the  right  kind  of talent.  Studies  at  Harvard  have 
shown that there may be no correlation between academic performance and performance in 
the field. I am sure that all of us would prefer to get it right from the start by assessing exactly 
what  we’re  after  in  terms  of  talent  and  ensuring  we  have  what  it  takes  to  judge  the 
candidates  who  want  to  join  us.  And,  believe  me,  in  the  banking  industry,  we  do  need  a 
variety of talent. Take someone whom some of us may call a congenital nagger. You might 
find,  surprisingly,  that  he  or  she  would  do  extremely  well  at  tele-marketing  or  selling 
insurance.  It’s  about  one  thing  being  negative  in  one  context,  yet  positive  in  another.  The 
stubbornness that Gandhiji displayed in class is also what helped him fight the British. But we 
seem to be lagging behind in this respect. For instance, despite all the emphasis on financial 
inclusion, I have not come across any study that indicates what kind of skills or talent the 
business  correspondents  should  have  though  we  are  going  to  need  may  be  more  than 
2,00,000  business  correspondents  and,  they  will  be  the  lynchpins  of  the  system  that  will 
make financial inclusion a success. I will be very happy if the IBPS does some work in this 
regard. 
The fight for talent 
14. 
After we have identified the kind of talent that we are going to require, we are faced 
with  a  fight  for  talent.  Before  that,  we  have  a  fight  for  manpower  itself.  We  are  living  in  a 
knowledge age and our workforce will predominantly comprise of knowledge workers. From 
the  time  when  people  were  just  expected  to  know  how  to  do  work  –  to  people  who  were 
expected  to  know  what  they  are  doing  –  we  have  now  come  to  an  age  when  to  be  a 
knowledge  worker  he  or  she  must  not  only  know  how  and  what  of  the  work  but  also  why 
he/she is doing that. In a knowledge age and in a knowledge society, it is not only the banks 
that  will  need  knowledge  workers  –  every  organisation  will  need  knowledge  workers  and, 
therefore, there is a fight for talent. 
How do we get to acquiring people with the right kind of talent? Unfortunately, it is 
15. 
the same limited talent pool that will be targetted by Banks, FIs, Insurance and Telecom and 
other industries which are on fast growth track and in need of talented manpower. While my 
friends in the Banking industry are busy developing “on-line” application forms and “on-line” 
tests, we need to probably question if we are even targetting the right kind of talent pool. I 
would like to have a study on how many people in remote villages, at the taluka / tehsil level, 
appear for the recruitment tests that are conducted. Because these might be the people who 
could drive our financial inclusion agenda. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Currently in the PSBs, talent acquisition at the base level is only a small part of the 
16. 
overall crunch. As per estimates, close to 1,00,000 employees of Public Sector Banks will be 
retiring by 2015. These are seasoned, experienced people of whom around 7% would be in 
Executive Grade. Replenishment at leadership positions is also a major requirement and in 
Public Sector Banks, we have EDs and CMDs even for one or two years. We need a larger 
pool of leaders to work as General Managers, Executive Directors and CMDs of Banks. Are 
there enough people within the PSB system with necessary talent and requisite experience 
to  fill  up  these  positions?  Did  we  spot  and  nurture  say,  a  pool  of  200  or  500  people  who 
would fill these positions? On the contrary, we keep hearing that experienced, senior people 
leave PSBs for greener pastures. While at lower levels, programmes can be developed for 
equipping the recruits with the right kind of skills, it would be challenging to get leaders. If 
there is freedom to leave the organisation at any level, and talented people do indeed leave, 
then the solution would be to acquire the talent back from the market place – go in for lateral 
induction/ recruitment at senior levels. If they do not do this, then obviously the PSBs or any 
such organisation will be at a distinct disadvantage. Banks may also have to consider direct 
induction at senior levels from unconventional talent pools. Spot the right talent and provide 
them with a challenging work environment that the PSBs can certainly provide. 
17. 
Another important aspect in the talent acquisition exercise would be to adapt to the 
new generation and strike a blend of fresh and experienced talent. Now, it would be difficult 
for us to get people who join us and stay their whole lives with us. This being the case, we 
will have to look at diverse range of arrangements for the work force that we need. There 
could be people working part time, people working as interns, people working on contract, 
etc. 
Talent management challenges 
18. 
For HR practitioners, the times are going to be very challenging. The work force will 
get complex and there will be a need to juggle a wide variety of people with varied needs and 
preferences, resulting in an array of relationships between the organisation and those who 
work  for  it.  I  am  an  avowed  fan  of  Peter  Drucker,  and  he  had  more  than  a  decade  ago, 
expressed  the  need  for  what  he  called  “non-traditional”  work  relations:  flexible  schedules, 
contract arrangements, and virtual teams etc. 
19. 
In  the  knowledge  age,  our  entire  management  theories  which  are  aimed  at  being 
more  productive  in  the  industrial  society  and  the  ethics  around  it  will  need  to  undergo  a 
360 degree  change.  When  we  talk  of  talent  management  today,  it  is  about  managing 
knowledge workers and there are some prerequisites for it: 
 
They cannot be treated as subordinates, but associates 
 
They cannot be managed, but led 
 
They will work flextime and flexi place but would need a “home base” 
 
Above all, they cannot be purchased or bribed, they have to be empowered. 
20. 
Then, the challenging task of “Talent Management” will have to be handed over to a 
central HR function – away from the line managers. The human resources function, would 
serve as the “home base” for the organisation’s workforce – attracting, tracking, developing 
and orchestrating this complex talent corps. Like staffing managers in professional service 
firms or talent agencies in the film industry, this new talent management function would help 
connect the right people with the next challenging job. Meanwhile, traditional line managers 
would  evolve  to  roles  more  similar  to  programme  managers  or  film  directors  –  setting 
direction  and  running  the  team  of  employees  who  have  been  assigned  to  the  task  or 
department at that moment in time 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  is  a  whole  industry  growing  around  “Talent 
21. 
Management”  today  –  most  of  it  technology  driven.  But  how  do  we  make  sense  of  the 
choices  available  today?  There  is  emergence  of  new  social  media-driven  solutions,  to 
acquisitions and additions of new functions by the big technology players, the landscape is 
constantly  changing.  These  so  called  “Talent  Management  Systems”  broadly  have  the 
following components: 
Recruitment 
(a) 
(b) 
On-boarding / Induction 
Training and Development 
(c) 
Performance Management 
(d) 
(e) 
Succession Planning 
Employee Retention Initiatives and finally; 
(f) 
(g) 
Employee Separation 
While I have no quarrels with the overall structure of the Talent Management process, I do 
not  think  that  there  can  be  a  one-size-fits-all  kind  of  an  approach.  There  will  certainly  be 
some  common  core  elements  of  strategy  but  it  is  important  that  an  organisation’s  talent 
management  strategy  is  tailored  to  suit  its  culture,  values,  goals,  size  and  geographic 
spread. The core elements could be: 
 
Consistent, documented and transparent talent assessment criteria, processes and 
definitions to identify top talent, high potentials and successors. 
Career and development discussions to ensure managers know their direct reports’ 
advancement and relocation desires.  
Talent review meetings that are designed to increase talent visibility and to calibrate 
succession plan and high-potential selection decisions. 
Follow-through  of  development  action  plans  as  identified  in  the  talent  review 
meetings  to  prepare  successors  and  high  potentials  for  career  movement  and 
advancement. 
22. 
Having listed the core elements of the talent management strategy, I want to add a 
new dimension. We often define high potential  employees as ones who have the talent to 
move above the level of their current position. Say two levels above their current position. 
Why don’t we slightly tweak this and include the candidate’s capacity to move across, say, 
two or three other functional areas as well? A true high-potential employee should also be 
willing to take on the risk and challenge associated with career movement in new positions 
outside  of  his  or  her  core  area.  Further,  as  Banks  have  a  large  geographic  reach,  high 
potentials  should  also  be  willing  to  relocate  to  other  geographic  or  international  regions  to 
build their global knowledge and expertise. 
23. 
Now, should we be working on identifying top performers alone? All of us are keen 
to identify top performers, but how many of us want to identify the weak performers? In any 
system it would not be possible for us to have only top performers. There will be average 
performers and weak performers as well. Why do we need to identify weak performers? Not 
because  they  should  be  sent  home  –  not  that  I  have  a  problem  if  you  want  to  send  them 
home. They need to be identified and worked upon – it is they who can really make a big 
difference.  For  example,  if  a  teacher  works  hard  on  a  student  scoring  95%  marks,  the 
maximum that can happen is an increase by a couple of percentages, whereas, if he works 
hard on a student getting say 35% marks, there is a possibility of him or her moving up by 
15–20% if not much more. 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
24. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
In the end, let me say that when dealing with talent: 
Create clear cut deliverables 
Create creative tension (a little pressure) 
Encourage  mobility  –  both  horizontal  and  vertical,  and  within  and  outside  the 
organisation and; 
Delayer the organisation 
(d) 
Also, as we are talking of talent management, let me add an element of work culture – we, all 
of us, somehow tend to ignore the role of culture in talent management. Let us develop a 
culture in which people who perform are celebrated as heroes. If you incentivise the heroes, 
also disincentivise those who do not perform. 
25. 
what Albert Einstein said about his talent: 
After having talked so much on talent, as an antithesis, I want to let you ponder over 
“I  know  quite  certainly  that  I  myself  have  no  special  talent;  curiosity, 
obsession  and  dogged  endurance,  combined  with  self-criticism,  have 
brought me to my ideas.” 
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope whatever you have learnt today will put you in good stead and 
you will put them to good use in your organisations. I wish the follow up of the action points 
of this Seminar a success and thank you. 
Select References : 
You Don’t Grow Talent, You Spot It – interview with Prof. Debashis Chatterjee, HR Matters 
Peter  Drucker’s  Prediction:  The  End  of  Line  Managers  as  We  Know  Them  –  Tammy 
Erickson, HBR Blogs. 
Debunking 10 Talent Management Myths – Doris Sims, SPHR, Talent Management 
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 