Javier Aríztegui: The financial crisis and the restructuring of the Spanish 
banking system 
Speech  by  Mr  Javier  Aríztegui,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  APIE  (the 
Spanish  Association  of  Economics  Journalists)  –  UIMP  (Menéndez  Pelayo  University) 
Course, Santander, 17 June 2011. 
 Let me begin by thanking the APIE (the Spanish Association of Economics Journalists) and 
the Menéndez Pelayo University for inviting me to deliver the closing address at this seminar, 
which has discussed matters of great interest for our economy and financial system. 
This is the third year I have come to Santander for this session, and the second year running 
that  I  will  be  briefly  reflecting  on  the  financial  crisis  and  the  restructuring  of  the  banking 
system. That I should be here again is no strange occurrence. Indeed, it was foreseen by the 
organisers  since  we  are  experiencing  the  deepest  and  most  extensive  crisis  in  recent 
decades, and we face a far-reaching restructuring and reform of savings banks.  
But my address today is from a different perspective than that of my last visit. 
In June 2010 the Royal Decree-Law that created the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of 
the Banking Sector (FROB by its acronym) had been in force for a year. One of its aims was 
to boost integration processes to create sounder and more efficient institutions. At that time 
the  main  negotiations  between  savings  banks  to  draw  up  the  new  map  of  the  sector  had 
already taken place, and the FROB had committed its first aid in this connection. But some of 
the  key  elements  to  entrench  the  reforms  and  restore  external  confidence  in  our  financial 
system were still pending.  
In fact, only a month later, in July 2010, the results of the stress tests of credit institutions, 
co-ordinated at the European level, were published; the Banco de España agreed to amend 
the regime governing accounting provisions; and the government approved a key reform on 
the  legal  regime  of  savings  banks.  Then,  in  February  2011,  the  Royal  Decree-Law  on  the 
reinforcement of the financial system was enacted, and its rules are currently being applied. 
This year we can roundly state that the restructuring of savings banks has moved into its final 
stage. Thereafter, we will have a smaller set of institutions (from 45 original savings banks 
there are now 18) and one that is more efficient and better capitalised, capable, along with 
the rest of our banking system, of providing the intermediation services our economy needs 
for the recovery to take root and to contribute to our citizens’ well-being.  
 The road is undoubtedly proving to be a long and complex one. Far behind us now is the 
summer  of  2007,  when  the  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis  broke,  spreading  its  risks  across 
agents and markets through securitisations and credit derivatives. That episode, which did 
not initially impact Spanish banks as they had no investments in those products, was actually 
the trigger for a chain of events and effects on the world economy and financial markets that 
would soon be felt in Spain.  
The  first  symptom  seen  was  the  deterioration  in  financing  and  liquidity  conditions.  The 
authorities  responded  to  this  with  support  measures,  such  as  the  programmes  for  the 
purchase of financial assets and the backing of debt issues, and the European Central Bank 
set in place its new and ample liquidity provision criteria. 
In  late  2008  the  Spanish  economy  went  into  recession.  The  decline  in  output  and  rising 
unemployment placed upward pressure on bank and savings-bank doubtful assets ratios and 
the subsequent need for loan loss provisions. This combined with the increase in financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
costs owing to growing dependence on wholesale funding and to sudden difficulties on these 
markets. Moreover, many institutions, highly concentrated in the real estate development and 
construction sector, were faced with the housing market grinding to a halt.  
What’s more, savings banks had a singular legal regime, associated with their legal status, 
that  entailed  clear  limits  on  their  ability  to  raise  top-quality  capital  and  to  set  in  place  the 
governance rules needed to retain the confidence of third-party investors as to their future.   
Given  this  outlook,  there  was  an  evident  need  to  restructure  the  sector  and  to  support  the 
process  with  an  instrument  that  would  help  strengthen  the  solvency  of  those  institutions  that 
decided to pursue plans to improve their efficiency by means of mergers or other integration 
operations. In July 2009 the FROB was duly created. And over the course of 2010 it granted – 
or committed itself to – aid amounting to €11.6 billion for eight integration processes (although 
one of these did not finally go ahead when the initial Banco Base project collapsed) and for the 
restructuring of a non-viable institution, CajaSur, and its integration into BBK. The other savings 
bank officially intervened due to its lack of viability, Caja Castilla-La Mancha, received aid from 
the Deposit Guarantee Fund, at a time when the FROB had not yet been created.  
The year 2010 also saw successive episodes in which the public debt of euro area countries 
whose finances looked weak was punished. In spring we witnessed the Greek crisis and, at 
the end of the year, the Irish crisis. Although Spain’s macroeconomic indicators were not in 
the  least  comparable  with  those  of  Greece  and  Ireland,  these  episodes  affected  Spanish 
public  debt  spreads,  owing  to  the  uncertainty  and  to  the  difficulty  ever-present  in  these 
situations  of  correctly  assessing  the  information  available.  Later,  into  2011,  the  country 
affected was Portugal, although at this stage of market tensions Spain was able to distance 
itself from the eye of the storm thanks to its resolute reforms policy. 
During 2010 the Banco de España also pursued a series of initiatives to help generate much-
needed confidence. Firstly, in July it took transparency to a new level with the publication of 
the results of the stress tests, both because of the high proportion of institutions analysed 
(representing 95% of the system, compared with the figure of 50% required in Europe) and 
the  degree  of  detail  of  the  information  provided.  Secondly,  it  reformed  the  provisioning 
system  that  same  month,  to  ensure  appropriate  balance-sheet  write-downs.  And  thirdly,  it 
urged institutions to provide the market with highly accurate information on their exposures to 
the  real  estate  development  and  construction  sector  and  on  their  financial  structure  and 
liquidity position.  
Likewise  in  July  2010,  Parliament  approved  the  savings  banks  reform,  included  in  Royal 
Decree-Law 11/2010. This paved the way for a new legal structure for savings banks, under 
which the pursuit of their banking activity may be through a bank, to which the bulk of assets 
and liabilities are transferred. This corporate model, conceived for adoption on a voluntary 
basis, although it has become obligatory for savings banks that receive further aid as I shall 
mention later, is imposing itself extensively on the sector owing to its advantages in terms of 
the  ability  to  tap  the  markets  for  capital,  to  promote  best  management  practices  and  to 
generate the necessary confidence on the part of customers and investors.  
As  initially  stated,  we  are  in  the  final  stage  of  the  savings  bank  restructuring  process, 
implementing the strategy envisaged in Royal Decree-Law 2/2011 approved by Parliament in 
February. Underpinning this legislation are three pillars. 
First, a very significant increase in solvency. All institutions shall comply with a core capital 
ratio, in which only top-quality instruments are eligible, of 8%, rising to 10% in the case of 
institutions  that  rely  on  wholesale  markets  for  at  least  20%  of  their  funding  and  none  of 
whose share capital or voting rights are placed with third parties.  
Second, FROB backing for those institutions that do not reach these new minimum capital 
levels by their own means.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third,  new  arrangements  for  the  instrumentation  of  FROB  aid,  which  now  ceases  to  be 
provided as preference shares, taking rather the form of subscription to shares in the bank 
resulting from the conversion of the savings banks concerned. 
 On 10 March 2011 the mechanisms envisaged in the new regulations were set in train with 
the publication by the Banco de España of the situation regarding institutions’ capital. Twelve 
banks (four commercial banks and eight savings banks) did not reach the figures required to 
comply with the ratio, needing an aggregate additional amount of €15.15 billion. Finally, the 
number  of  institutions  with  a  shortfall  rose  to  13  following  the  collapse  of  the  Banco  Base 
Institutional Protection Scheme (IPS).  
Under  the  new  regulations,  institutions  with  a  shortfall  submitted  their  strategy  and 
compliance  timetable  to  the  Banco  de  España,  which  were  approved  on  14  April.  The 
following day the FROB agreed to the strategies submitted, undertaking to provide the funds 
needed to those institutions which, as a priority option or alternative, had decided to resort to 
FROB aid to comply with the new ratio.  
The  four  banks  that  did  not  attain  the  required  minimum  opted,  in  the  case  of  the  two 
subsidiaries of foreign banks, to be capitalised by their parents, and the two Spanish banks, 
to issue instruments eligible as core capital. 
Depending on the strategy chosen, two groups can be distinguished among the nine savings 
banks indicated. 
The first, comprising four institutions, has opted for an IPO or raising private capital. 
The  second,  made  up  of  another  four  savings  banks,  has  opted  to  be  capitalised  by  the 
FROB. There is a fifth savings bank that has proposed FROB backing as an alternative to a 
possible  merger  with  another  institution.  In  all  these  instances,  the  Banco  de  España 
received the recapitalisation plans ahead of the scheduled deadline.  
The  situation  concerning  the  four  savings  banks  or  groups  of  savings  banks  that  have 
considered raising private capital is as follows. The four already have banks through which 
they are indirectly going to pursue their financial activity, and in three cases the transfer to 
the new bank of financial assets and liabilities has concluded following the approval of their 
respective  assemblies  and  their  mercantile  registration.  These  four  institutions  have 
submitted on a precautionary basis their recapitalisation plans to the FROB should they not 
be  able  to  obtain  private  capital,  although  this  is  a  possibility  they  consider  unlikely  in 
pursuing their strategies.  
Two of them, Bankia and Banca Cívica, are taking steps for a future market launch. If the 
plans  proposed  come  to  fruition,  in  less  than  30  days  these  institutions  will  be  listed,  the 
process envisaged under the new regulations will have concluded, and they will operate with 
capital higher than the minimum requirement set in the new legislation.  
Another two banks, Mare Nostrum and Effibank, are also negotiating placing their capital in 
private hands, and they intend to conclude the operation within the schedule set, placing the 
proportion necessary to obtain the level of own funds required to meet the new core capital 
ratio. In both cases, the avenue being explored, without ruling out other alternatives, is the 
direct placement of capital with wholesale investors.  
Turning now to the other four savings banks, all of them have submitted their recapitalisation 
plans, a pre-requisite for applying for aid.  
The  plans  are  in  two  parts:  a  business  plan,  with  projections  for  profitability,  leverage, 
liquidity  and  efficiency  (among  other  variables);  and  a  series  of  specific  commitments 
regarding corporate governance and cost-cutting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
These plans will be – and indeed are already – subject to scrutiny by various parties: by the 
Banco de España, which must give final approval; by the FROB and its external advisers, 
who may demand inclusion of commitments on top of those proposed, considering these as 
an essential input in the process of setting the price to be paid for the shares in which the 
FROB invests; and by the European Commission, as the aid provided must be compatible 
with  the  European  criteria  on  “State  aid”  and  budget  deficits.  All  three  institutions  are 
currently analysing the plans received.  
The  savings  banks,  for their  part,  are  taking  the  necessary  steps  remaining  to  adjust  their 
structure to the new requirements. In some cases they have already created the new bank to 
which they will transfer their banking activity, and in others the necessary procedures are at 
different  stages  of  completion.  Subsequently,  in  July,  their  assemblies  will  adopt  the 
resolutions segregating their assets and liabilities and definitively transferring their financial 
business to the new bank.  
A key aspect will be the setting of the price at which the FROB will participate in the capital of 
the  new  banks.  As  an  initial  step,  the  leading  audit  firms  hired  in  this  connection  are 
performing both financial due diligence (to confirm the reliability of the institution’s financial 
statements) and business plan due diligence (the reasonableness of the plan). Both provide 
relevant  information  for  the  economic  valuation  of  the  new  bank.  This  work  is  conducted 
using methodological and procedural approaches devised and published by the FROB late 
last May, following advice from a panel of experts in order to include best market practices. 
Under these approaches, financial due diligence must pay particular attention to loans and 
receivables,  real  estate  assets  and  the  investment  portfolio,  along  with  potential  one-off 
transactions  envisaged,  and  to  potential  areas  of  risk  from  a  legal,  tax  and  labour-related 
perspective.  Business  plan  due  diligence  will 
reasonableness  of 
macroeconomic  assumptions,  growth,  revenue,  doubtful  assets  ratios  and  provisioning, 
costs, synergies and disposals.  
Based  on  the  institution’s  financial  statements,  on  the  business  plan  and  on  the  due 
diligences, three independent experts – all acknowledged authorities in their field – hired by 
the  FROB  will  deliver  their  opinion  on  the  institution’s  market  value  and  the  percentage  of 
capital  to  which  the  new  investment  is  equivalent.  To  ensure  the  quality  of  the  result,  the 
FROB  will  use  the  conclusions  of  three  experts,  although  it  will  not  take  into  account 
valuations that deviate by more than 15% from the resulting mean value.  
Determining  the  economic  value  of  the  institution  is  thus  being  done  with  the  utmost  care 
since,  as  the  FROB  indicated  in  its  methodological  note,  this  is  of  paramount  importance 
from three standpoints: from that of Community competition rules, to ensure that public aid is 
granted on an arm’s length basis; from that of the proper use of public funds, so that they are 
disbursed  in  accordance  with  rigorously  set  subscription  prices;  and  from  that  of  the 
institution itself and of the “interested parties”, because the market value will also determine 
the FROB’s actual stake and, consequently, that of the former stakeholders in the resulting 
capital and in the institution’s governing bodies.  
On conclusion of this process, before 30 September 2011, the FROB will have taken a stake 
in the capital of these institutions and will vote on the decisions of their boards of directors on 
a scale proportionate to the economic valuation.  
Thereafter, the FROB will participate directly in their management with the mission to monitor 
fulfilment of their business plans. It shall remain in the institutions only temporarily, and never 
any  longer  than  the  maximum  term  of  five  years  in  which  the  shares  it  holds  must  be 
disposed of to third parties through a competitive procedure.  
focus  on 
the 
In  sum,  we  are  at  the  last  stage  of  savings  bank  restructuring.  The  aim  is  that  by 
30 September  the  various  steps  outstanding  should  have  been  completed.  This  is  the 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
timeframe  set  by  the  Royal  Decree-Law  on  the  reinforcement  of  the  financial  system, 
although an exceptional three-month extension for operational reasons and a further three 
months in the event of an IPO would be possible.  
In recent years our banking system has made a very intense balance-sheet write-down drive 
(equivalent  to  9%  of  GDP  in  the  three  years  from  2008  to  2010),  it  has  evidenced 
unprecedented  transparency  in  respect  of  its  most  problematic  exposures,  and  it  has 
recapitalised  drawing  on  private  funds  and  also  with  relatively  limited  public  aid  when 
compared with other countries. In turn, Spanish legislation has risen to the challenges posed 
by  the  crisis  with  a  raft  of  measures.  These  include  most  notably,  due  to  their  intended 
durability,  the  establishment  of  new  solvency  requirements,  the  modernisation  of  the  legal 
regime governing savings banks and the creation of more flexible and efficient banking crisis-
resolution instruments.  
We trust we will move into autumn with all our homework completed. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
