William C Dudley: Economic overview – Queens and the region 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the Queens Chamber of Commerce and Queens Economic 
Development Corporation, Flushing, New York City, 11 March 2011. 
 in 
the  competition.  The 
Good morning. I am pleased to come to Flushing’s Main Street to speak to the leaders of 
your  vibrant  business  community.  I  thank  the  Queens  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  the 
Queens  Economic  Development  Corporation  for  their  help  in  organizing  today’s  breakfast 
and  for  reaching  out  to  the  people  in  this  room  and  those  we  will  meet  later  today  –  the 
business, community and academic leadership of Queens.  
You  may  have  noticed  videos  playing  as  you  walked  into  the  room.  These  videos  are  the 
winners of a Federal Reserve Bank of New York contest to promote financial literacy among 
young  adults.  This  year,  students  from  LaGuardia  Community  College  took  both  first  and 
second-place 
top  winning  video  ran  as  a  public  service 
announcement at several movie theaters in New York City. All three videos are available on 
the  New  York  Fed’s  website  and  on  YouTube.1  This  is  an  impressive  achievement  and  I 
applaud the students and LaGuardia Community College. 
Although some people may refer to Queens as an “outer borough,” I am quite aware that the 
center of population of New York City is in Maspeth, Queens. Of course, Queens is special 
not just for its central location, but also for its extraordinary diversity. Queens continues to 
serve as a land of opportunity for immigrants from all over the world. Roughly 46 percent of 
Queens’ population is foreign born – more than four times the national average and higher 
than any other county in the country with the exception of Miami-Dade. Sizable communities 
of immigrants from countries ranging from Columbia to Korea, Ecuador to Egypt, Greece to 
Guyana, and Italy to India have made Queens their home. 
This morning I will talk to you about national and regional economic conditions. As always, 
what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
Introduction to the New York Fed 
By way of introduction, let me start with a synopsis of what the New York Fed is, what we do 
and what makes my job so interesting. 
The New York Fed is part of the Federal Reserve System, America’s central bank, and was 
created  by  Congress  in  1913.  With  this  act,  Congress  delegated  to  the  Fed  System  its 
constitutional authority to manage the supply of money in the nation’s economy. Congress 
designed  the  central  bank  to  be  decentralized,  representative  of  all  regions  of  the  country 
and independent of the political process. 
The  Fed  System  is  comprised  of  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.  –  a  federal 
agency currently led by Chairman Ben Bernanke – plus 12 regional Reserve Banks that span 
the  country.  For  example,  the  district  overseen  by  the  New  York  Fed  includes  all  of  New 
                                                 
1   See top winning videos of the New York Fed’s Financial Awareness Video Competition on YouTube: 
 
  Debt Comedy Jam 
  Credit Card Arrest 
Think Twice Before You Swipe 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
York, the 12 northern counties of New Jersey; Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
Each Reserve Bank is distinct, with its own charter and a board of directors drawn from its 
district, but overseen by the Board of Governors. The law that created the Federal Reserve 
made  the  central  bank  independent  so  that  policymakers  could  make  decisions  about 
monetary  policy  in  the  national  interest,  somewhat  insulated  from  political  pressure. 
However, the Fed is accountable to Congress. 
Congress  has  set  an  explicit  objective  for  monetary  policy:  To  pursue  the  highest  level  of 
employment  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  objective  is  often  referred  to  as  our  “dual 
mandate,” because it combines two goals: high employment, and low and stable inflation. In 
order to promote these objectives, we also pay close attention to financial stability, because 
without financial stability, it is very hard to achieve our goals for jobs and inflation. 
The FOMC consists of the Board of Governors plus the presidents of each of the 12 district 
Banks,  and  it  meets  in  Washington,  D.C.,  eight  times  per  year  to  deliberate  and  vote  on 
monetary  policy.  As  the  current  New  York  Fed  president,  I  am  vice  chairman  at  these 
meetings  and  have  a  permanent  vote.  At  these  meetings,  the  committee  members  and  I 
each present our current outlook for the economy. For these assessments, we augment input 
from  our  research  departments  with  critical  information  about  local  economic  conditions 
supplied by our boards of directors, regional advisory councils and conversations with local 
stakeholders. My visit to Queens today is a part of these regional activities. 
One thing that makes my job even more interesting is that New York has some roles unique 
within  the  Fed.  For  example,  the  New  York  Fed  is  the  Reserve  Bank  charged  with 
implementing  monetary  policy.  At  the  direction  of  the  FOMC,  we  buy  and  sell  Treasury 
securities. We are also the eyes and ears of the Fed on Wall Street, and we supervise many 
of  the  largest  financial  institutions  in  the  country.  We  operate  Fedwire®  –  the  conduit  for 
large  money  transfers  between  banks.  And,  we  provide  banking  services  to  the  U.S. 
Treasury, and central banks and governments from around the world. 
Finally,  I  must  mention  that  the  New  York  Fed’s  district  could  be  the  most  diverse  in  the 
System: ranging from the urban density of New York City to the forested sparseness of the 
northern Adirondacks, to the Caribbean islands of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. All in 
all, there is a lot to keep my colleagues and me quite busy – even in normal times. 
U.S. economic outlook 
Now, what is the outlook for economic activity, employment and inflation? In particular, what 
are the areas of vulnerability that we should be most concerned about? 
I  am  pleased  to  say  that  the  economic  outlook  has  improved  considerably  in  the  past  six 
months. Despite this, we are still very far away from achieving our dual mandate of maximum 
sustainable employment and price stability. Faster progress toward these objectives would 
be very welcome. 
On  the  activity  side,  a  wide  range  of  indicators  show  a  broadening  and  strengthening  of 
demand by households and production by firms. For example, on the demand side, families 
boosted their real consumption at a 4.1 percent annual rate during the fourth quarter. This 
compares  with  only  a  2.2  percent  annual  rate  during  the  first  three  quarters  of  2010.  Not 
surprisingly, businesses’ orders and production are following suit. And this revival in activity, 
in turn, has been accompanied by improving consumer and business confidence. 
These  contributed  to  a  2.8  percent  growth  rate  in  our  most  comprehensive  measure  of 
national output (real gross domestic product or GDP) in the fourth quarter of 2010. I actually 
suspect  that  this  number  may  understate  the  economy’s  forward  momentum.  That  is 
because real GDP growth in the quarter was held back by a sharp slowing in the pace of 
inventory  accumulation.  In  my  view,  the  revival  in  demand,  production  and  confidence 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
strongly  suggests  that  we  may  be  much  closer  to  establishing  a  virtuous  circle  that  will 
support  stronger  growth.  What  I  have  in  mind  is  a  cycle  in  which  rising  household  and 
business  demand  generate  more  rapid  income  and  employment  growth,  which  in  turn 
bolsters confidence and leads to further increases in spending. The only major missing piece 
of  the  puzzle  is  the  absence  of  strong  payroll  job  growth.  We  will  need  to  see  sustained 
strong employment growth in order to be certain that this virtuous circle has become firmly 
established. 
With respect to the labor market, last Friday’s report helps resolve some conflicting signals. 
On  one  hand,  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  sharply  over  the  past  three  months, 
dropping  to  8.9  percent  from  9.8  percent  two  months  earlier.  On  the  other  hand,  payroll 
employment gains had been very modest and were not consistent with a sustained drop in 
the unemployment rate. 
Last Friday we learned that the economy added 192,000 jobs in February, and estimates of 
previous job growth were adjusted upward modestly. Particularly encouraging is the growth 
of manufacturing jobs. Over the past year we  have added factory jobs at the fastest pace 
since the 1990s. This makes me more confident that job growth in January was temporarily 
depressed  by  unusually  bad  winter  weather.  Other  labor  market  indicators,  such  as  initial 
claims  for  unemployment  insurance  benefits  and  the  employment  components  of  both 
manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing  business  surveys  have  also  shown  improvement 
recently. 
Although there is still uncertainty over the timing and speed of the labor market recovery, I do 
expect  that  job  growth  will  increase  considerably  more  rapidly  in  the  coming  months.  We 
should  welcome  this.  A  substantial  pickup  is  sorely  needed.  Even  if  we  were  to  generate 
growth of 300,000 jobs per month, we would still likely have considerable slack in the labor 
market at the end of 2012. 
So,  why  is  the  economy  finally  showing  more  signs  of  life?  In  my  view,  the  improvement 
reflects three developments. 
First,  household  and  financial  institution  balance  sheets  continue  to  improve.  On  the 
household  side,  the  2008–09  rise  in  the  saving  rate  appears  to  have  stabilized  in  the  5 
percent to 6 percent range. Meanwhile, the amount of money they need to service their debt 
(for mortgages, cars, credit cards, etc.) has fallen sharply to levels that prevailed during the 
mid-1990s.  Debt  service  has  been  pushed  lower  by  a  combination  of  debt  repayment, 
refinancing  at 
institutions  have 
strengthened their balance sheets by retaining earnings and by issuing equity. As a result, 
some measures of bank credit are beginning to expand again. 
Second,  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  have  provided  support  to  the  recovery.  On  the 
monetary  policy  side,  we  at  the  Fed  have  maintained  unusually  low  levels  of  short-term 
interest rates and engaged in large-scale asset purchases. These measures have fostered a 
sharp  improvement  in  financial  market  conditions.  On  the  fiscal  side  (that  is,  government 
spending and taxes), the economy has been supported by the shift in policy to help support 
growth. In particular, the temporary reduction in payroll taxes could have a particularly strong 
impact on growth during the first part of the year. 
Third, growth abroad – especially among emerging market economies – has been strong and 
this has led to an increase in the demand for U.S.-made goods and services. Over the four 
quarters of 2010. real exports rose 9.2 percent. After a disappointing performance earlier in 
the year, U.S. net exports surged in the fourth quarter. 
The firming in economic activity, in short, is due both to natural healing and past and present 
policy support. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  emphasize  that  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  have  been 
expecting the economy to strengthen. We provided additional monetary policy stimulus via 
the  asset  purchase  program  to  help  ensure  that  the  recovery  regained  momentum.  A 
interest  rates  and  debt  write-offs.  Financial 
lower 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
stronger recovery with more rapid progress toward our dual mandate objectives is what we 
have been seeking. This is welcome and not a reason to reverse course. 
Yet, we must not be overly optimistic about the growth outlook. The coast is not completely 
clear – the healing process in the aftermath of the crisis takes time and there are still several 
areas of vulnerability and weakness. In particular, housing activity remains unusually weak 
and home prices have begun to soften again in many parts of the country. State and local 
government finances remain under stress, and this is likely to lead to further spending cuts, 
tax increases, or job losses in this sector that will offset at least a part of the federal fiscal 
stimulus. And we cannot rule out the possibility of further shocks from abroad. For example, 
higher oil prices cut into household purchasing power, and the situation in the Middle East 
and Africa remains uncertain and dynamic. Also, we cannot ignore the risks stemming from 
the longer-term fiscal challenges that we face in the United States. 
But  in  the  near-term,  the  most  immediate  domestic  problems  may  recede  rather  than 
become  more  prevalent.  On  the  housing  side,  stronger  job  growth  should  lead  to  more 
household  formation.  For  example,  more  young  people  will  be  able  to  move  out  of  their 
parents’  homes  when  they  get  jobs.  This  trend  should  provide  more  support  to  housing 
demand.  And  anxieties  about  the  large  overhang  of  unsold  homes  represented  by  the 
foreclosure pipeline may overstate the magnitude of the excess supply of housing. Families 
that have lost their homes through foreclosures are likely to seek new homes as their income 
permits, even though many may re-enter the housing market as renters rather than buyers. 
On the state and local side, a rising economy should boost sales and income tax revenue, 
and help narrow near-term fiscal shortfalls. 
We also need to remain watchful for signs that low interest rates could foster a buildup of 
financial excesses or bubbles that might pose a medium-term risk to both full employment 
and price stability. Fortunately, current risk spreads on U.S. financial assets are not unduly 
compressed. This suggests that people are still being relatively cautious about taking on a lot 
of financial asset risk. 
On the inflation side of the ledger, there are some signs that core inflation is now stabilizing 
after falling for several years. At the Fed, we track core inflation (which excludes the volatile 
food and energy prices) because experience and research tell us that core inflation provides 
the best measure of whether overall inflationary pressures are building up or subsiding. Core 
inflation has proven quite reliable in predicting future total, or “headline” inflation rates. At the 
moment,  both  headline  and  core  inflation  remain  below  levels  consistent  with  our  dual 
mandate objectives – which most members of the FOMC consider to be 2 percent or a bit 
less on the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) measure. 
Recent  evidence  shows  that  the  large  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  has  contributed  to 
declining inflation over the past couple of years. I expect this slack to continue to dampen 
price  pressures  in  the  near  term.  Inflation  expectations  are  well-anchored  today  and  we 
intend  to  keep  it  that  way.  A  sustained  rise  in  medium-term  inflation  expectations  would 
represent a threat to our price stability mandate and would not be tolerated. 
Nevertheless,  we  always  need  to  be  careful  about  inflation  –  even  in  an  environment  of 
ample spare capacity. Let me focus on one issue, commodity prices, for a moment. Surely 
some of the businesses in the audience have faced the challenge of sharply rising oil, food or 
metal prices in recent months. For example, the spot GSCI – a broad measure of commodity 
prices  –  has  risen  more  than  35  percent  over  the  past  year.  This  was  in  train  before  the 
upheavals in the Middle East and Africa raised market concerns about potential disruption to 
oil  supplies,  pushing  energy  prices  –  though  not  other  commodity  prices  –  still  higher. 
Commodity price pressures are pushing measures of headline inflation above measures of 
core  inflation,  which,  as  I  mentioned,  exclude  food  and  energy  prices.  You  may  have 
concerns that the rise in commodity prices will turn out to be persistent and, if so, how this 
might impact the inflation outlook. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
From  a  policymaking  standpoint,  there  are  important  factors  that  suggest  that  it  would  be 
unwise for the Federal Reserve to over-react to recent commodity price pressures by raising 
interest rates soon. Why? First, despite the general uptrend, some of the recent commodity 
price pressures are likely to be temporary – due to poor weather or geopolitical uncertainties. 
This is certainly what is anticipated by market participants. 
Second,  even  if  commodity  price  pressures  were  to  prove  persistent,  they  have  a  smaller 
impact  in  the  United  States  than  they  do  in  many  other  countries.  Relative  to  most  other 
major  economies,  the  U.S.  inflation  rate  is  lower,  the  amount  of  slack  much  greater  and 
commodities represent a relatively small share of our consumption basket. This small share 
helps to explain why the “pass-through” of commodity prices into core measures of inflation 
has been very low in the United States for several decades. 
Third,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  success  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  has  also  been 
important  in  limiting  pass-through.  Since  1984,  for  example,  when  the  Federal  Reserve 
began  to  achieve  success  in  driving  down  and  then  subsequently  anchoring  long-term 
inflation expectations, there has been very little evidence of commodity price pass-through 
into core inflation. In contrast, prior to 1984, when inflation expectations were much less well-
anchored,  pass-through  did  occur  and,  at  times,  played  an  important  role  in  pushing 
underlying inflation higher. 
Thus, while rising commodity prices may be giving some of you a bad headache, they are 
not likely to lead to a sustained rise in inflation to levels inconsistent with our dual mandate. 
We will have to ensure, however, that these pressures do not cause inflation expectations to 
become unanchored. If that were to occur, that would be a troublesome development that 
would complicate the pursuit of our dual mandate of high employment and low and stable 
inflation Because we have an Federal Open Market Committee meeting next Tuesday, I will 
not comment today on the implications of the economic outlook for monetary policy.  
Outlook for the region and Queens 
Now, let me turn briefly to the situation here in the city and in Queens, in particular. While the 
national economic outlook improved considerably during the latter part of 2010 and into early 
this year, growth in New York City’s economy appears to have slowed a bit. 
The  regional  economists  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  have  developed  a 
composite economic index for New York City. It incorporates measures such as employment, 
unemployment and income, and can serve as a barometer of the state of the local economy. 
Based  on  this  measure,  the  city’s  economic  activity,  which  had  declined  fairly  sharply 
throughout much of 2008 and all of 2009, rebounded at an encouraging pace in the first half 
of  2010.  Growth  slowed  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  but  recently  released  employment 
data  point  to  some  pickup  in  the  city’s  economy  in  early  2011  and  suggest  that  the  local 
economic recovery remains on track. 
Over the past year, employment in the city has expanded fairly strongly in a number of key 
industries, including finance, professional and business services, education and health, and 
tourism,  including  air  transportation.  Job  losses  in  construction  and  government,  however, 
continue to weigh down growth. Meanwhile, New York City’s unemployment rate has edged 
down  steadily  over  the  past  year,  though  it  remains  unacceptably  high  at  8.9  percent. 
Unfortunately, as in the rest of the nation, much of the recent drop in the unemployment rate 
has come from people withdrawing from the labor force so that they are no longer counted as 
unemployed. Some of the unemployed have been able to find jobs, but not in large numbers 
thus far. 
Where  do  Queens’  residents  find  employment?  While  many  of  them  commute  to  work  in 
other boroughs (primarily Manhattan), Queens has a formidable industrial base of its own. As 
the home to the city’s two major airports, the volume of air traffic coming through Queens 
ranks  third  highest  among  U.S.  counties.  Not  surprisingly,  then,  transportation  is  Queens’ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
largest industrial specialty; it accounts for 12 percent of total employment – four times the 
national average. Air transportation alone accounts for 6 percent of Queens’ jobs, or 15 times 
the nationwide share. But, of course, Queens has a diverse economy, with jobs in industries 
ranging  from  medical  care  to  construction,  not  to  mention  printing  and  a  number  of  other 
manufacturing industries that benefit from being in a large population center. 
During  the  recent  recession,  Queens’  dynamic  economy  was  hard  hit,  yet  it  proved  more 
resilient  than  Manhattan’s  and  much  of  the  nation’s.  From  peak  to  trough,  employment 
declined  by  roughly  3  percent  in  Queens,  far  less  than  the  roughly  7  percent  plunge 
nationally and the 4.5 percent loss in New York City as a whole. Although borough-specific 
economic data are not quite as current as city-wide data, we at the New York Fed see clear 
indications that employment in Queens stopped declining in the first half of 2010. We hope 
that upcoming reports will show a sustained upturn. With prospects for the national economy 
improving  in  early  2011,  the  outlook  for  Queens’  diverse  and  vibrant  economy  –  and  New 
York City’s as a whole – seems to be brightening as well. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, the national economy experienced a pick-up in activity during the last quarter of 
2010 that shows signs of continuing in 2011. Although the city’s economy saw some loss of 
momentum,  I  would  not  be  overly  discouraged.  After  all,  soft  patches  are  not  uncommon 
during  economic  recoveries.  Both  nationally  and  regionally,  unemployment  remains 
stubbornly high, but many indicators suggest that conditions are in place for stronger growth 
in the coming months. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
