Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana, 
29 June 2011. 
 Today,  on  29  June  2011,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  an  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  financial  developments  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to leave the key interest rate 
unchanged at 5.25%. The Supervisory Council holds that the actual monetary conditions are 
appropriate  for  meeting  the  inflation  target  and  for  continuing  to  stimulate  the  economic 
activity. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and main issues discussed 
at today’s meeting of the Supervisory Council.  
*** 
Annual inflation pointed to 4.2% in May, remaining close to preceding months levels. Under 
higher  foreign  prices  pressure,  the  prices  of  “processed  foods”  and  “non-food  consumer 
goods”,  including  oil,  were  the  main  contributors  to  inflation  rates.  In  the  meantime,  the 
seasonal effect of increased domestic supply of fruits and vegetables is reflected in a lower 
contribution of the “unprocessed food” to inflation. The rise of some administered prices and 
the  effect  of  higher  excise  tax  rates  for  some  goods  continued  to  provide  a  constant,  but 
positive, contribution to annual inflation.  
Inflation’s performance over the recent months was consequent to the balance of two main 
factors’ opposite actions. On the upward trend, high primary commodity and raw materials 
prices  in  world  markets  were  transmitted  to  the  domestic  inflation  in  the  form  of  higher 
imported inflation. In the short run, this phenomenon also contributed to core inflation, which 
was up compared with last year. High net inflation rate of non-tradable goods showed that a 
part of higher commodity prices materialised in second round effects in inflation.  
Latest  developments  in  inflation  affected  also  the  economic  agents’  inflation  expectation, 
which, however, remain within the target band of the Bank of Albania.  
On  the  downward  trend,  domestic  economy  developments  continued  to  provide  an 
environment  with  contained  inflationary  pressures.  Our  assessments  on  economic  activity 
suggest positive growth rates for the first quarter, although below the potential. Under these 
circumstances,  the  Albanian  economy  continued  to  be  characterised  by  spare  productivity 
capacities – labour and capital – and negative output gap, continuing to exercise downward 
pressures on inflation. Similarly, the monetary development analysis confirmed the presence 
of contained monetary pressures on the domestic economy.  
Following,  I  would 
developments and their expected performance.  
Albania’s economic activity, during the first months of the year, took place in the context of a 
growing  global  economy,  amid  increasing  inflation  pressures  and  added  uncertainty  in 
financial markets.  
Global  economic  activity  continued  to  grow  during  the  first  half  of  2011,  led  by  rapid 
expansion  of  demand  in  emerging  economies.  On  the  other  hand,  high  demand  and 
geopolitical tensions were reflected in higher raw materials and primary commodity prices, 
thus  increasing  inflationary  pressures  at  global  level.  Developments  in  financial  markets 
reflected the concern over the fiscal position stability in euro area peripheral countries, hence 
that  determined 
the  economic 
to  address 
inflation 
factors 
like 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
rising risk premiums on a wide scale. On a balance, risks on future performance of global 
economy  were  expanded,  while  space  for  a  response  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies 
narrowed.  
Against  this  setting  of  international  economic  developments,  the  Albanian  economy  is 
assessed to have grown over the first months of 2011. Foreign demand contributed positively 
to  the  aggregate  demand,  but,  as  expected,  Albanian  exports  contribution  to  economic 
growth was lower than in 2010. Moreover, the public sector demand supported the economic 
activity growth. On the other hand, consumption and private investments performance was 
considered as slow.  
Indirect  indicators  of  these  domestic  demand  components  signal  their  weak  performance, 
despite  improved  financing  conditions  and  a  more  appropriate  climate  for  private  sector 
development. Uncertainties for the future, as stated in the low consumer confidence, dictated 
a  conservative  behaviour  of  individuals  towards  consumption  and  a  higher  preference 
towards  saving.  Given  the  under-utilised  output  capacities,  the  business  need  for  new 
investment was low.  
The  positive  momentum  of  global  economy  continued  to  boost  our  exports,  although  to  a 
lesser  degree  compared  to  last  year.  In  April,  exports’  annual  growth  was  10.8%  while 
imports expanded further, reaching an annual growth of 16.7% in this month. These foreign 
trade  developments  materialised  in  deepened  trade  deficit  during  this  period,  resulting  in 
19.5%  year-on-year.  Overall,  balance  of  payments  developments  confirm  the  frailty  of 
Albanian economy’s external position.  
Current account deficit, estimated at 11.8% of the GDP in the first quarter, remains high. The 
Bank  of  Albania  has  constantly  underlined  the  need  for  taking  measures  to  reduce  it  and 
ensuring sustainable funding sources by attracting capital inflows, in the form of foreign direct 
investments.  
Balance  of  payment  developments  were  reflected  in  a  relatively  stable  exchange  rate. 
Under 
the  domestic  currency 
demonstrated  stability,  slightly  depreciating  in  effective  and  nominal  terms  in  May.  Future 
exchange rate performance will be conditioned significantly by external economy balances 
and individuals’ preferences for their financial asset portfolio structure.  
Public sector expenditures were an important stimulus of economic activity during the first 
months  of  the  year.  In  January–May,  these  expenditures  were  up  by  10.3%  year-on-year, 
while  decelerated 
low  demand.  These 
developments were reflected in the budget deficit of about 1.7 times higher compared to a 
year earlier. Expenditure growth slowed down during the second quarter.  
This  behaviour  is  expected  to  continue  for  the  rest  of  the  year,  conditioned  by  the 
commitment to respect the 2011 deficit and public debt target. This fiscal policy approach is 
expected to be formalised in the July budget revision, which should take into consideration 
the public debt’s long-term stability.  
indicator  analysis  confirms 
Against 
controlled  inflationary  pressures  originating  from  the  domestic  economy.  Money  supply 
annual  growth  was  12.2%  in  April,  staying  close  to  its  historic  trend.  Monetary  expansion 
reflected  the  accumulation  of  liquidity  in  the  banking  system,  revealing  the  households’ 
preferential behaviour towards saving. Our assessments point out that monetary expansion 
is  compliant  with  the  private  sector’s  demand  for  real  money,  thus  indicating  controlled 
monetary-related inflationary pressures.  
The contained behaviour of the private sector about spending and investing is reflected also 
in a low demand for bank lending.  
Annual growth rates of lending to the private sector ranged 10%–12% in the four first months 
of the year, on average, only 2 percentage points higher than a year earlier. The business 
the  conditions  of  a  balancing  demand  and  supply, 
the  above-mentioned  developments,  monetary 
the  private  sector’s 
income  reflected 
fiscal 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
demand to cover liquidity needs was their main driver for loans, while lending to households 
increased by low rates.  
Developments  in  financial  markets  speak  of  low  risk  premiums  and  liquidity.  Short-term 
interest rates in the inter-bank market stayed close to the key interest rate and demonstrated 
contained  volatility.  In  the  primary  market,  government  securities  yield  surged  in  the  last 
three months, in response to a higher demand of the public sector for funding. Nevertheless, 
their  curb  remains  lower  in  comparison  with  a  year  earlier,  pointing  to  more  favourable 
financial conditions in the economy.  
Looking ahead, assessments and projections of the Bank of Albania suggest continuation of 
positive growth in the upcoming period. In a longer-term horizon, under diminishing external 
impulses  to  the  aggregate  demand  and  a  more  contained  fiscal  behaviour,  growth  rates 
acceleration will be conditioned by the resurgence of the private sector.  
In this regard, the Bank of Albania deems that the economic climate provides the conditions 
and space for even higher consumption and private investment growth.  
Despite  positive  growth  rates,  the  Albanian  economy  is  expected  to  remain  and  operate 
below its potential, with the demand conditioning the continuation of the negative output gap 
and contained inflationary pressures. On the other hand, inflation performance will continue 
to  be  under  foreign  prices  pressure  for  the  upcoming  period  as  well.  In  the  absence  of 
unexpected developments, the effect of shock from foreign prices is expected to fade away 
while the effect of administered prices increase is expected to be neutralised during the third 
quarter of the year. Therefore, inflation is foreseen to return within the Bank of Albania target 
band by the year-end. Although risks about this base scenario are added as a consequence 
of uncertainties of the global economy, they remain balanced.  
 Drawing on the information above, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania deemed 
that inflationary pressures are, in the short term, high, but with a downward trajectory; in the 
medium term they remain controlled.  
In the absence of unexpected shocks, inflation is expected to be within the target band of the 
Bank of Albania along the time horizon of monetary policy action. Inflationary expectations of 
economic  agents  continue  to  be  within  the  target  range,  which  is  essential  under  the 
conditions of the simultaneous presence of the negative output gap and high foreign prices. 
The Bank of Albania is fully committed for anchored inflationary expectations in compliance 
with  its  inflation  target  and  stands  ready  to  accomplish  its  mandate,  by  preventing 
materialisation of constant pressures on inflation.  
Following  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  concluded  that  the  monetary  conditions 
remain appropriate for meeting the medium-term inflation target and decided to leave the key 
interest rate unchanged at 5.25%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
