Duvvuri Subbarao: Monetary policy dilemmas – some Reserve Bank of 
India perspectives 
Comments  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Stern 
School of Business, New York University, 26 September 2011. 
 1.  
I value this opportunity of speaking at the Stern School to an academic community 
interested in central bank issues. Over the last decade, the profile of central banks has gone 
up. First, we had the Great Moderation – a period of extraordinary benign macroeconomic 
environment  globally,  characterized  by  steady  growth  in  advanced  economies  and 
accelerated growth in emerging economies, and low and stable inflation all around. Central 
banks took credit for this, believed they had discovered the Holy Grail and declared victory. 
2.  
That sense of triumph was dented by the crisis as central banks came to be blamed 
for policies and actions that got the world into the crisis. Even so, central banks battled the 
crisis  from  the  frontlines  and  regained  some  of  the  lost  reputation  by  acting  quickly, 
decisively, and where required in concert, to stabilize the global economy which was hurtling 
towards collapse. Over the last few months, fears of a double-dip recession have resurfaced, 
and  governments  in  advanced  countries  are  locked  in  a  policy  logjam  over  the  balance 
between  short-term  fiscal  stimulus  and  long  term  fiscal  consolidation.  This  has  willy-nilly 
pushed  central  banks  to  the  fore  once  again  as  monetary  stimulus  is  having  to  bear  the 
burden  of  being  the  first,  and  in  some  cases,  possibly  the  only  line  of  defence  against 
recession. 
3.  
The  crisis  has  been  an  intellectual  challenge  in  many  ways.  It  has  tested  the 
armoury of instruments available to central banks and the limits of their policy force. It has 
also reopened questions that we thought had been answered and renewed debates that we 
thought  had  been  settled.  My  own  experience  has  been  that  real  world  problems  are  too 
complex to fit template solution of text books. I want to use this opportunity that you have 
provided  me  to  communicate  to  you  some  of  the  complexities  and  dilemmas  in  real  world 
policy making, and I will do so from the perspective of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
What is the appropriate monetary policy response to complex growth-inflation 
dynamics? 
4.  
India  recovered  from  the  crisis  sooner  than  even  other  emerging  economies,  but 
inflation  too  caught  up  with  us  sooner  than  elsewhere.  Inflation,  as  measured  by  the 
wholesale price index (WPI), which actually went into negative territory for a brief period in 
mid-2009,  started  rising  in  late  2009,  and  it  has  remained  around  9–10  per  cent  since 
January  2010  reflecting  both  supply  and  demand  pressures.  Supply  pressures  stemmed 
from elevated domestic food prices and rising global prices of oil and other commodities. The 
source of demand pressures was an economy with low per capita income which recovered 
sharply  from  the  crisis.  The  supply  pressures  and  demand  pressures  collided  triggering  a 
wider inflationary process. 
5. 
In  response  to  the  inflationary  pressures,  the  Reserve  Bank  began  to  reverse  its 
accommodative monetary policy as early as October 2009. We have been criticized for our 
anti-inflationary stance, ironically from two different directions. 
From  one  side,  we  have  been  criticized  for  being  hawkish  on  inflation.  The  argument  has 
been  that  our  inflation  is  driven  largely  by  supply  shocks,  particularly,  since  mid-2010,  by 
high oil and other commodity prices, and that monetary policy should not respond to such 
inflation. We will only end up hurting growth. The criticism from the other side has been that 
the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  soft  on  inflation,  the  baby  step  approach  we  followed  –  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
increasing policy interest rates by 25 bp each time – was not deterrent enough, and that the 
persistence  of  inflation  is  a  result  of  our  delayed  response.  Both  these  critiques  cannot 
obviously  be  right  at  the  same  time.  Let  me  offer  a  response  to  them  and  in  the  process 
explain the rationale for our anti-inflationary stance. 
Monetary policy too hawkish 
6.  
My response to the doves is as follows. Admittedly, monetary policy is best suited to 
contain inflationary pressures stemming from the aggregate demand side. In that case, the 
policy prescription is clear. If inflation is high, tighten monetary policy; and if inflation is low, 
loosen monetary policy. Monetary policy options in the face of supply shocks are less straight 
forward.  Whether  monetary  policy  is  effective  in  dealing  with  supply  shocks  is  therefore  a 
matter of both academic debate and policy contention. 
7.  
The  conventional  wisdom  is  that  if  inflation  expectations  are  well  anchored, 
monetary policy need not react to supply shocks. This premise is based on two assumptions; 
first that the supply shocks are purely temporary, and second that supply shocks are the only 
ones driving inflation. These assumptions do not always hold. In the real world, oftentimes 
supply shocks lead to a permanent trend upward shift in prices. Also, sometimes, demand 
pressures combine with supply shocks to stoke inflationary pressures. 
A  good  illustration  of  the  first  assumption  –  mean  reverting  supply  shocks  –  not 
8.  
holding  comes  from  the  world  prices  of  oil  which  have  trended  up  on a  long  period  basis. 
International  crude  oil  prices  recorded  an  annual  average  increase  of  around  17  per  cent 
during the 2000s as against only a modest increase of 2 per cent during the 1990s and a 
decline of 3 per cent during the 1980s. This obviously is the outcome of structural changes in 
supply  and  demand  for  oil.  Monetary  policy  has  to  recognize  these  underlying  trends  and 
respond to them. If it looks upon these trends as pure transient supply shocks and ignores 
them, it runs the risk of destabilizing inflation expectations. 
9. 
And now about the second assumption – of supply shocks not usually acting alone 
to stoke inflation. The shifting drivers of inflation in India over the past year and a half offer a 
good  illustration.  The  increase  in  global  commodity  prices  coincided  with  rapidly  rising 
demand at home. GDP grew at 8.5 per cent last year (2010/11), faster than the trend growth 
rate  which  is  now  estimated  to  be  of  the  order  of  8  per  cent.  In  an  environment  of  rapid 
growth  and  high  capacity  utilization,  corporates  regained  pricing  power  and  were  able  to 
pass  through  the  increase  in  input  prices  to  higher  output  prices  thus  fuelling  generalized 
inflationary pressures.  
10.  
Similar dynamics were at play on the food front. Rising incomes, especially in rural 
areas, have resulted in a shift in dietary habits away from cereals and toward protein-based 
foods.  This  is  a  structural  change  and  monetary  policy  will  be  misled  if  it  treats  this  as  a 
one-off  supply  shock.  Given  the  high  share  of  food  in  the  various  consumer  price  indices 
(46%–70%), persistent supply pressures on the food front can fuel inflation expectations; and 
in  the  face of  growing  demand  pressures,  rising  inflation  expectations can  trigger a  wage-
price spiral. Recent reports that real wages of rural labour have gone up markedly suggest 
that such a wage-price spiral may already be under way. 
11.  
To  summarize,  the  inflation  that  we  have  experienced  over  the  last  nearly  twenty 
months is a result of a combination of supply shocks that had a trend impact on prices as 
well  as  demand  pressures.  Given  the  nature  of  the  inflation  drivers  and  their  combined 
impact,  clearly  there  is  a  significant  role  for  monetary  policy  in  combating  inflation.  Our 
monetary policy stance is guided by this understanding, and is aimed at restraining demand 
and anchoring inflation expectations. The argument of our critics that monetary policy has no 
role because inflation is a result of imported commodity prices would have been valid if the 
increase  in  commodity  prices  was  a  pure  and  transient  supply  shock  or  if  there  were  no 
demand pressures. That clearly was not the case in India. 
2 
 Monetary tightening hurts growth 
12. 
Another argument made in this line of criticism is that monetary policy tightening is 
hurting growth. I believe a much more nuanced evaluation of our policy stance is necessary. 
Evidence from empirical research suggests that the relationship between growth and inflation 
is non-linear. At low inflation and stable inflation expectations, there is a trade-off between 
growth  and  inflation.  But  above  a  certain  threshold  level  of  inflation,  this  relationship 
reverses, the trade-off disappears, and high inflation actually starts taking a toll on growth. 
Estimates  by  the  Reserve  Bank  using  different  methodologies  put  the  threshold  level  of 
inflation in the range of 4%–6%. With WPI inflation ruling above 9 per cent, we are way past 
the threshold. At this high level, inflation is unambiguously inimical to growth; it saps investor 
confidence  and  erodes  medium  term  growth  prospects.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  monetary 
tightening is accordingly geared towards safeguarding medium term growth even if it means 
some sacrifice in near term growth. 
Monetary policy behind the curve 
13.  
Now let me turn to the criticism from the opposite side – that the Reserve Bank was 
slow in closing the monetary spigots, that our “baby step” approach was inadequate to tame 
the inflationary pressures, and that we are having to tighten aggressively lately to make up 
for lost time. 
14.  
This criticism fails to appreciate the context – the nature of domestic inflation and 
global uncertainty – in which we were operating. The calibration of our monetary tightening 
was guided by the changing drivers of inflation over the course of fiscal year 2010/11. Early 
on  in  the  year,  inflation  pressures  had  their  origin  in  food  prices,  and  accordingly  our 
monetary  policy  response  was  aimed  at  containing  the  spillover  risk  to  non-food  inflation. 
Note that policy rates had gone down to historically low levels during the crisis, and an abrupt 
adjustment would have disrupted the market. Our judgement, therefore, was that tightening 
should be done gradually, in small steps, so as to allow time for the banks and the private 
sector to adjust to a higher interest rate environment.  
15.  
The inflation scenario changed starting August 2010 when global commodity prices 
surged  higher  than  anticipated.  Global  oil  prices  came  under  further  pressure  starting 
January 2011 because of political developments in the Middle East and North-Africa. Also, 
as I had indicated earlier, because of the narrowing of the output gap, producers were able to 
pass on higher input prices to higher output prices leading to inflationary pressures getting 
generalized  as  evidenced  by  the  increase  in  non-food  manufactured  product  inflation  from 
5.3 per cent per cent in August 2010 to 8.5 per cent in March 2011. We responded to these 
changes in underlying drivers of inflation by tightening more aggressively starting May 2011.  
16.  
The second factor relevant in the “behind the curve” debate is that we also had to 
contend with an uncertain global recovery. Even as there was some talk of spring shoots in 
April 2010, the optimism did not last; soon thereafter, the Greek sovereign debt crisis and 
unemployment  concerns  in  the  US  revived  concerns  about  the  pace  and  shape  of  global 
recovery. These uncertainties increased both in nature and size as time passed with the euro 
area  sovereign  debt  problem  not  only  spreading  but  proving  to  be  intractable,  the  US 
recovery  stalling  and  the  Japanese  economy  assaulted  by  an  unprecedented  natural 
disaster.  Our  “baby  step”  approach  during  2010  was  accordingly  a  delicate  balancing  act 
between  supporting  recovery  at  home  amidst  growing  global  uncertainty  and  containing 
inflation pressures. 
17.  
If  the  above  factors  are  reckoned  with,  the  “behind-the-curve”  argument  loses 
potency. Starting in March 2010, we have so far raised policy interest rates (the repo rate) by 
350 bp. The effective tightening has been even more, 500 bp, as the operational policy rate 
shifted from reverse repo rate (absorption mode) to repo rate (infusion mode). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In offering a response to the criticism of our monetary policy stance from both sides, 
18.  
my endeavour has been to communicate to you that every monetary policy action involves 
complex judgement. The supply shocks we confront in the real world are different from pure 
text  book  versions;  oftentimes  they  coincide  with  rising  demand  pressures.  We  have  to 
balance growth-inflation concerns. On top of that, monetary policy actions need to be forward 
looking even in the face of external uncertainty. This in essence is the dilemma of monetary 
policy decisions. 
How do you justify liquidity injection in the midst of a tightening cycle? 
19.  
The  conventional  tools  of  monetary  policy  are  controls  over  the  volume  of  money 
(liquidity)  and  the  price  of  money  (policy  interest  rate).  Typically  an  expansionary  stance 
would  involve  easing  both  the  rate  and  volume,  and  conversely,  a  contractionary  stance 
would involve tightening both of them. Occasionally, there arise situations when the price and 
volume  instruments  are  deployed  in  opposite  directions  –  for  example,  injecting  liquidity 
amidst  a  rate  tightening  cycle  –  that  call  for  both  cautious  judgement  and  extra  effort  at 
communication.  
20.  
In understanding the motive force for liquidity adjustment by a central bank, it must 
be noted that a growing economy requires the central bank to inject primary liquidity to meet 
the  requirement  for  currency  and  credit.  This  injection  can  come  about  only  through  an 
expansion  of  the  reserve  (base)  money.  In  the  first  instance,  liquidity  injection  happens 
through  overnight  borrowing  by  banks  under  the  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF).  If  the 
liquidity shortage is of a durable nature, the central bank needs to meet that need through 
outright open market operations (OMOs) by buying government securities. 
21.  
As we progressed with monetary tightening through 2010, the LAF window shifted 
from a surplus (absorption) mode to a deficit (injection) mode. This was consistent with our 
anti-inflationary  stance  since  a  deficit 
improve  monetary 
transmission. We had also indicated clearly that it would be the endeavour of the Reserve 
Bank to maintain the absorption or injection through the LAF window at about ± 1 per cent of 
the net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) of banks. However, towards the second half of 
2010,  systemic  liquidity  tightened  further  pushing  the  injection  through  the  LAF  window 
beyond  1  per  cent  of  NDTL.  This  was  owing  to  a  combination  of  structural  and  one-off 
factors. Recognizing that the deficit in systemic liquidity was of a durable nature, the Reserve 
Bank conducted outright OMOs to inject liquidity of a durable nature. 
22.  
This liquidity injection through OMOs happened at a time when we were tightening 
policy  rates  to  combat  inflation.  These  were  seemingly  contrarian  actions,  and  many 
observers may have seen them as being conflicting and incoherent. We realized that there 
was a communication challenge here – to explain to the market that we remained committed 
to bringing inflation down, that our action in injecting liquidity was not inconsistent with our 
anti-inflation stance, that we continued to hold that liquidity should be in a deficit mode in a 
monetary  tightening  cycle,  but  that  we  were  injecting  liquidity  only  to  ease  the  “excessive 
deficit” in order to ensure that flow of credit for productive purposes was not choked. 
23.  
Informed market participants did of course understand the rationale for our actions. 
But  we  recognized  the  importance  of  communicating  the  rationale  to  the  larger  public.  If 
people got confused policy signals and believed thereby that the central bank’s commitment 
to inflation control was not credible, inflation expectations would get unhinged and that would 
erode  the  effectiveness  of  our  anti-inflation  strategy.  We,  therefore,  went  the  extra  mile  to 
communicate the rationale at a non-technical level. 
liquidity  situation  would 
4 
 Forward guidance: how transparent can/should a central bank be? 
24.  
Received  wisdom  today  is  that  successful  monetary  policy  is  not  just  a  matter  of 
effective calibration of overnight interest rates, but also of shaping market expectations of the 
way  in  which  interest  rates,  inflation  and  income  are  likely  to  evolve  on  the  way  forward. 
Among  the  important  instruments  used  by  central  banks  for  this  purpose  is  the  “forward 
guidance” they give in their monetary policy statements. 
25.  
The practice of giving forward guidance varies across central banks. By far the most 
explicit has been the Bank of Canada which, given the uncertainty during the crisis, gave a 
definite timeframe until which it would keep overnight rate at the “current” level, subject of 
course to the outlook for inflation. The ECB has traditionally been less explicit on the ground 
that policy commitment is not possible in an uncertain macro environment. The US Fed has a 
more credible record of using forward guidance to shape and manage expectations. For over 
two  years  since  the  crisis,  the  Fed  had  guided  the  markets  by  saying  that  “economic 
conditions  are  likely  to  warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  for  the  federal  funds  rate  for  an 
extended  period”.  In  its  most  recent  statement  of  August  9,  2011,  the  Fed  quantified 
“extended period” as “at least up to mid-2013”, thereby giving a more definitive time frame for 
market participants to plan. The Fed evidently expects that by reducing uncertainty, at least 
in one dimension (time dimension), the forward guidance will help stimulate demand. 
26. 
Giving  forward  guidance  is  not  always  necessarily  a  positive  sum  game.  Central 
banks face several dilemmas. The  first is how exactly is the conditionality surrounding the 
guidance to be worded. It cannot be so vague as to lose all content value; on the other hand, 
it cannot be so precise that the central bank becomes a prisoner of its words and loses any 
flexibility  to  deviate  from  the  guidance  should  the  underlying  circumstances  change.  A 
second,  and  related,  dilemma  is  how  to  ensure  that  the  market  correctly  appreciates  the 
conditionality and does not interpret the guidance as an irrevocable commitment. 
27.  
Starting  early  2010,  in  keeping  with  the  best  practice,  the  Reserve  Bank  too  has 
begun  giving  forward  guidance.  And  as  expected,  we  too  have  confronted  the  classic 
communication dilemma. Let me illustrate. In the First Quarter Review of July 2011, we said: 
“Going forward, the monetary policy stance will depend on the evolving inflation 
trajectory,  which  in  turn,  will  be  determined  by  trends  in  domestic  growth  and 
global  commodity  prices.  A  change  in  stance  will  be  motivated  by  signs  of  a 
sustainable downturn in inflation.” 
Simultaneously, we also noted that the stance of monetary policy will be to “manage 
28. 
the risk of growth falling significantly below trend”. 
29.  
Reading the two statements together, some analysts have criticized the guidance for 
its lack of precision; more specifically, there were questions like, “what is the trend growth 
rate” and “how much deviation from trend would the RBI tolerate”. This was valid criticism 
and these questions were relevant. With our trend growth rate, post-crisis, estimated at 8 per 
cent,  the  balance  of  policy  stance  would  shift  if  growth  fell  consistently  and  substantially 
below that rate. But a shift in stance will also be a function of the behaviour of the external 
and internal drivers of inflation. What we said in response to the criticism therefore was that 
defining precisely “what significantly below trend” ex-ante was difficult, and that the ambiguity 
in the guidance was deliberate because it was unavoidable.  
30. 
Central to this whole issue of forward guidance is that a central bank is handicapped 
by external uncertainty over which it has no control. The crisis has brought this dilemma into 
sharp  focus.  On  the  one  hand,  central  banks  want  to  use  the  instrumentality  of  forward 
guidance to manage expectations, and even outcomes; on the other hand, they cannot be 
precise  enough  because  of  external  uncertainty.  How  to  communicate  monetary  policy  so 
that the benefit-cost balance is positive is yet another dilemma for central banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Should monetary policy respond to asset prices? 
31.  
Among the many questions thrown up by the crisis is one about the role of central 
banks in dealing with asset price bubbles. The broadly accepted theology before the crisis – 
although  not  the  only  view  –  was  the  Greenspan  orthodoxy  which  can  be  summarized  as 
follows.  First,  asset  price  bubbles  are  hard  to  identify  in  real  time,  and  the  fundamental 
factors that drive asset prices are not directly observable. A central bank should not therefore 
second guess the market. Second, monetary policy is too blunt an instrument to counteract 
asset price booms. And third, central banks can “clean up the mess” after the bubble bursts. 
The surmise therefore was that the cost-benefit calculus of a more activist monetary stance 
of “leaning against the wind” was clearly negative. In other words, it is not the job of central 
bankers to remove the punch bowl no matter that the party is getting wild. 
The crisis has dented the credibility of the Greenspan orthodoxy. The emerging view 
32.  
post-crisis is that central banks cannot remain indifferent to asset price bubbles. However, it 
has thrown up a debate over what should be the role of the central bank and how that role 
might affect its other responsibilities, and indeed its autonomy. The debate is still fluid and 
there are no conclusive answers. Nevertheless, it has helped in crystallizing some views to 
guide the way forward. Let me discuss some of them. 
33.  
As much as the pre-crisis orthodoxy about not deploying monetary policy in aid of 
asset price management has now lost its potency, reservations persist about its efficacy. The 
essence of the argument is that the typical monetary policy action of raising policy interest 
rate in small steps of 25–50 basis points will not help contain the surge in asset prices. On 
the other hand, monetary policy action aggressive enough to deter asset price build up will 
take a heavy toll on the real economy. A consensus is building around the view that the most 
appropriate  way  of  addressing  asset  prices  is  through  macroprudential  instruments,  either 
independently  or  in  conjunction  with  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  macroprudential  instruments 
are at the heart of the Basel 3 package which was agreed upon last year.  
34.  
Macroprudential  policies  are  neat  in  concept  but  throw  up  a  host  of  problems  in 
operation. The tools of macroprudential policy such as capital norms, countercyclical buffers 
and  risk  weights  fall  within  the  domain  of  regulation.  But  there  also  has  to  be  consistency 
between  the  monetary  stance  and  macroprudential  policy.  Does  this  then  mean  that  the 
central  bank  should  also  have  responsibility  for  bank  regulation?  If  on  the  other  hand,  the 
responsibilities  are  distributed  across  different  agencies,  what  should  be  the  platform  and 
protocol for coordination? What should be the role of the government? 
Indeed,  the  post-crisis  trend  has  been  to  entrust  macroprudential  supervision  to 
35.  
central  banks,  and  where  central  banks  already  have  this  responsibility,  to  define  it  more 
explicitly.  While  there  could  be  some  synergies  in  that,  there  are  also  questions  about 
potential conflicts of interest such as when, for example, the macroeconomic situation may 
require  a  tight  monetary  policy,  but  the  central  bank  may  demur  because  such  tightening 
may  raise  concerns  about  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  Some  people  argue  though 
that  potential  conflicts  between  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  are  being 
exaggerated. In entrusting responsibility for macroprudential supervision, and more broadly 
for financial stability, to central banks, there are concerns also about how this responsibility, 
might  impact  the  prized  autonomy  of  central  banks.  This  apprehension  arises  because 
macroprudential  decisions  entail  a  greater  element  of  subjective  judgement  than  do 
monetary policy decisions, and if that be the case, it opens up scope for interference from the 
outside. 
36.  
My  attempt  as  above  has  been  only  to  give  you  a  flavour  of  the  many  complex 
questions thrown up by this issue of central bank responsibility for asset price management, 
indeed  more  broadly  for  financial  stability.  The  scope  of  this  lecture  does  not  permit  a 
detailed  assessment  of  the  debate.  But  let  me  give  you  the  Reserve  Bank  perspective  on 
this. 
6 
 The  Reserve  Bank  has  traditionally  had  a  much  broader  mandate,  including 
37.  
responsibility for some development functions, than is typical of advanced economy central 
banks.  Our  experience  in  regard  to  simultaneously  managing  both  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy has been positive, indeed synergistic. Asset price trends are one of 
the  many  variables  we  take  into  account  in  monetary  policy  calibration.  We  have  used 
conventional monetary policy instruments such as policy interest rates if demand pressures 
are across board. On the other hand, if demand pressures are confined to specific sectors, 
we have found it more efficient to use macroprudential instruments such as risk weights and 
provisioning  norms  so  as  to  put  sand  in  the  wheels  of  credit  flowing  to  those  sectors.  We 
have  also  used  macroprudential  instruments  symmetrically  –  tightening  in  times  of  excess 
demand  as,  for  example,  in  the  years  before  the  crisis,  and  easing  in  times  of  slackening 
demand, for example, as part of the crisis response. 
38.  
Even  as  macroprudential  policies  have  become  the  talk  of  the  town  post-crisis, 
deploying  them  requires  careful  judgement.  In  order  to  make  a  judgement,  a  central  bank 
has to ascertain if the asset price build up is driven by “excessive leverage” and if the price 
build up is across board or confined to specific sectors. By far the most important thing to 
remember  in  deploying  macroprudential  policies  is  that,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  all 
conservative policies look safe. But excessive conservatism in order to be prepared to ride 
out a potential crisis could thwart financial innovation and progress. It is this balance between 
preventing instability and promoting innovation that central banks have to learn to manage. 
And  this  is  especially  important  in  an  emerging  market  economy  like  India  where  the 
responsibility of the central bank for market development, though not explicit, is nonetheless 
quite important. 
How should monetary policy manage the interface with fiscal policy? 
39.  
The seventy odd years since the Great Depression saw a famous rivalry between 
fiscal  and  monetary  policies  for  influence.  For  much  of  this  period,  almost  across  the 
developed  world,  Keynesian  theology  ruled,  fiscal  policy  dominated  and  monetary  policy 
remained subservient to that. The stagflation of the 1970s, the influential monetarist views of 
Friedman et al and the apparent success of supply side policies to tame inflation prompted a 
shift  in  thinking  away  from  full  bodied  Keynesianism.  Also  important  were  the  theoretical 
analysis of discretion vs. rules in setting monetary policy. Together, the theoretical advances 
and empirical evidence allowed monetary policy to wean itself away from fiscal dominance 
and central banks started asserting their autonomy. 
40.  
Even as the advantages of having an apolitical monetary authority as an effective 
counterpoise  to  politically  driven  fiscal  policies  were  becoming  evident,  democratic 
compulsions made fiscal discipline increasingly difficult. To get around this, starting 1990s, 
several  countries  voluntarily  enacted  fiscal  responsibility  laws.  The  laws  imposed  limits  on 
fiscal deficits/public debt on the one hand and prohibited primary financing of the fiscal deficit 
by  the  central  bank  on  the  other.  This  institutional  framework  allowed  operational 
independence  to  the  central  bank  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy  within  a  rule-based 
regime and was successful in keeping inflation low. 
41.  
The rule based fiscal regimes unravelled during the crisis as both governments and 
central  banks  implemented  expansionary  policies  in  close  coordination.  While  such 
coordination  during  the  crisis  was  not  questioned  except  by  extreme  purists,  now  in  the 
recovery  period,  several  fundamental  concerns  are  resurfacing.  At  the  heart  of  these 
concerns is whether monetary policy is once again becoming hostage to fiscal compulsions? 
The specifics of the debate vary but the basic issues are similar. In the US, the debate is 
over the trade-off between short-term fiscal stimulus and long-term fiscal consolidation. In the 
euro area, the question is about the shared benefits of a monetary union without the shared 
responsibilities of a fiscal union. The questions all around are: Are central banks being forced 
beyond  their  comfort  zone  to  maintain  expansionary  monetary  stances  to  compensate  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
fiscal  laxity?  Aren’t  the  so  called  unconventional  monetary  actions  thinly  veiled  fiscal 
measures?  Aren’t  central  banks,  in  the  process,  compromising  their  basic  commitment  to 
price  stability?  Are  central  banks  becoming  vulnerable  to  political  pressures?  Is  their 
autonomy  at  risk?  The  answers  to  these  questions  will  be  shaped  by  how  the  current  big 
issues are settled. 
42.  
As  in  many  economies,  in  India  too,  monetary  policy  was  dominated  by  fiscal 
considerations during the 1970s and the 1980s. Large and growing fiscal deficits ended up 
being financed by the Reserve Bank. This led to more than desired growth in base money 
and money supply which ultimately reflected in high inflation. Like other economies, we too 
put  in  place  a  fiscal  responsibility  legislation  –  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management  (FRBM)  Act,  2003  –  with  ceilings  on  deficit  and  debt  ratios  and  provisions 
prohibiting  primary  financing  of  government  debt  by  the  central  bank.  These  provisions 
facilitated fiscal consolidation during 2003–08 and afforded the Reserve Bank the necessary 
flexibility to implement monetary policy aimed at low and stable inflation. 
43.  
Like elsewhere in the world, both monetary and fiscal policies were eased in India 
too  in  response  to  the  crisis.  In  particular,  this  meant  interrupting  the  fiscal  consolidation 
process  enjoined  by  the  FRBM  Act.  As  India  emerged  from  the  crisis,  the  Government 
adopted  a  revised  road  map  for  fiscal  consolidation  as  recommended  by  the  Thirteenth 
Finance  Commission.  Nevertheless,  meeting  the  road  map  targets  is  going  to  be  a 
formidable  challenge.  The  quantum  of  non-discretionary  expenditure  (salaries,  pensions, 
interest payments) is large and this cannot be adjusted easily, at any rate in the short-term. 
By far the largest component of discretionary expenditure is on subsidies – on food, fertilizer 
and petroleum products. In reducing these subsidies, there is inevitably a tension between 
democratic  compulsions  and  economic  virtue.  Even  as  the  Government  pursues  a 
quantitative  target,  it  also  has  to  be  mindful  of  the  quality  of  fiscal  adjustment  –  that  is  to 
prune unproductive expenditure and increase productive expenditure which is necessary for 
raising the potential output of the economy. 
44.  
As I said, the Reserve Bank has been battling inflation for the last twenty months. 
Monetary tightening, as is well known, works by restraining demand. In as much as the fiscal 
stance is supportive of demand, the monetary stance has had to be more aggressive than 
otherwise. For monetary policy to be more supportive of growth, it will be necessary for fiscal 
consolidation to take root more firmly.  
45.  
The dilemma for monetary policy in India is thus somewhat different from that of the 
advanced  economies.  The  dilemma  for  advanced  economy  central  banks  is  whether 
monetary  policy  is  having  to  be  kept  more  accommodative  than  necessary  to  offset  fiscal 
contraction.  In  contrast,  the  dilemma  for  the  Reserve  Bank  is  whether  monetary  policy  is 
having to be tightened that much more because of fiscal demand. 
Conclusion 
46.  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  have  tried  to  present  to  you  some  of  the  dilemmas  we 
confront in monetary policy management. All central banks confront these, with differences in 
the extent and timing. I have tried to give you the Reserve Bank perspective on these. The 
message  I  tried  to  convey  is  that  there  are  no  template  answers  to  real  life  policy  issues. 
Analysis is important, but judgement is crucial. I believe a two way communication between 
central practitioners and central bank scholars will help in sharpening both our analysis and 
judgement. 
8 
 