Njuguna Ndung’u: Strengthening regulatory frameworks in the finance 
industry – a key enabler for private sector development 
Keynote speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
1st Annual Africa Banking and Finance Conference, Nairobi, 21 February 2011. 
 Distinguished Speakers, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It gives me great pleasure to be here today at this inaugural African Banking and Finance 
Conference.  This  is  an  appropriate  forum  for  the  financial  sector  in  Africa  to  reflect  on 
pertinent  developments  affecting  the  sector  globally  and  share  experiences.  But  more 
importantly dwell on solutions to structural constraints that hinder its’ development.  
To start with, let me extend my profound appreciation to the organisers for putting together 
this forum, and to all participants for the honour of your presence. I take this opportunity to 
welcome all those visiting Kenya for this Conference, and wish you all a delightful stay during 
and after the conference.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  My  task  this  morning  is  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on 
strengthening regulatory frameworks in the financial sector as a key enabler to private sector 
development. The Financial Sector supports the development of the country through: 
 
 
 
The traditional regulatory environment delivered the appropriate structures for the financial 
sector. But it was tried during the global financial crisis.  
The global financial crisis brought out some very important lessons. We should not think of 
more regulation but better regulation. What does better regulation entail?  
 
Resource mobilization and their allocation.  
Collating savings from savers and delivering them to investors.  
The intermediation process.  
identify  weaknesses  and  emerging 
A  regulatory  regime 
vulnerabilities.  
A regulatory regime capable of analyzing risks and so adequately pricing risks.  
A  regulatory  regime  that  provides  appropriate  incentives  (penalties)  to  induce 
prudent behavior in the market place.  
A regulatory regime that encourages innovations and strong institutions to develop. 
Where the regulator has the role to develop the market in the African countries we 
live in.  
that  can  readily 
  The  efficiency  through  which  these  roles  are  performed  depends  very  much  on  the  sector 
and the regulatory technology in place.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The theme of this forum “Achieving Innovative Solutions Relevant 
for Africa’s Banking & Finance Industry – Key Issues” is timely and weighty because it is only 
through  innovative  solutions  that  African  economies  can  move  to  the  next  level  of 
development frontiers. It is therefore my expectation that the diversity of the participants in 
this forum will enable you to identify the various relevant innovations in the financial sector 
that are consistent with the African Landscape and to drive development in the sector.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Allow  me  now  to  briefly  share  with  you  Kenya’s  experience  on 
innovations  in  the  banking  sector.  In  pursuit  of  the  financial  sector’s  vision  in  the  Kenya’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
development  blueprint,  Vision  2030,  CBK  and  the  players  have  embraced  a  partnership 
approach.  Consequently,  several  initiatives  have  been  undertaken  over  the  last  4  years 
aimed  at  the  three  envisaged  goals  of  stability,  efficiency  and  financial  inclusion.  These 
initiatives include:-  
 
Rollout of mobile phone financial services – Approval for banks to leverage on 
mobile  phone  technology  to  present  convenience  and  lower  costs  for  their 
customers  without  compromising  quality  of  service.  Through  mobile  banking, 
customers  are  now  able  to  perform  their  transactions  “anytime  anywhere”.  Mobile 
money transfer has evolved from the initial concept of transferring money from one 
individual to another to include other functions such as payment of utility bills, loans, 
salaries and for deposits mobilization.  
Introduction of agent banking mechanism in May 2010 where banks are allowed 
to  engage  third  parties  to  provide  certain  banking  services.  The  aim  is  increased 
outreach  of  banks  to  the  vast  under-banked  and  unbanked  Kenyan  populace  by 
introducing  “banking  beyond  branches”.  It  also  enables  banks  to  leverage  on 
additional  cost  effective  distribution  channels  to  offer  financial  services.  Agency 
banking takes banking to the people unlike previously when people had to go to the 
banks.  
Licensing of credit reference bureaus to collect, collate, analyse and disseminate 
credit  information  among  credit  providers.  Credit  information  sharing  provides  an 
opportunity for individuals and businesses to rely on their credit history (information 
capital)  as  an  alternative  form  of  collateral  to  the  traditional  physical  collateral,  to 
secure credit facilities from banks. Individuals will also be able to use their positive 
credit history to negotiate for better terms and conditions from their banks. On the 
other hand, banks will benefit from the mechanism since it will address the problem 
of  information  asymmetry  and  by  extension  the  problem  of  non-performing  loans 
which has in the past threatened the stability of the banking sector. The traditional 
challenges of the moral hazard and adverse selections can hinder financial sector 
growth.  
Licensing  of  deposit  taking  microfinance  institutions  (DTMs),  whose  focus  is 
the lower end of the market, which is concentrated in the rural and periurban areas. 
The Microfinance Act, 2006, which empowers CBK to licence and supervise DTMs, 
was  operationalised  in  2008.  Formalizing  the  operations  of  DTMs  is  expected  to 
bring more people, especially those previously unbanked or under banked, into the 
realm of the formal financial sector not only through their lending activities but also 
savings mobilization.  
Lowering the cost of doing business: Several modalities including establishment 
of  three  currency  centers  in  towns outside  the key  Kenyan  cities  to  lower  cash  in 
transit costs for banks. CBK is also actively pursuing modalities of reducing the cost 
of  establishing  branch  networks  for  Deposit  Taking  Microfinance  Institutions,  in 
addition to agency mechanism.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: As a result of CBK’s adoption of a new approach to regulating the 
financial  sector  through  dialogue  with  the  players  and  acting  as  a  development  agent,  the 
Kenyan financial sector has experienced a structural transformation. This transformation is 
evidenced by the following achievements: 
 
 
Exponential growth of bank branches from 740 in 2007 to 1,063 as at end of 2010.  
Increase in the number of deposit accounts from 4.7 million in 2007 to 12.8 million 
as at end of 2010.  
Increase in the number of loan accounts from 1.2 million in 2007 to 1.8 million as at 
2010.  
     2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    Licensing  of  five  deposit  taking  microfinance  institutions  with  41  branches  as  at 
31st December 2010, which had opened 1.01 million deposit accounts with deposits 
worth Kshs. 7.90 billion(USD 99m).  
Increase in the automated teller machines from 1,012 in 2007 to 1,940 as at 31st 
December 2010.  
Banks contracting 8,809 agents by December 2010.  
Mobile  money  transfers  increased  their  total  transactions  to  Kshs.  2.3  bn  or 
USD 29 m per day. Well over 15 million Kenyans have subscribed to mobile money 
transfers since their roll out in 2007. This is expected to increase especially with the 
confidence  to  be  generated  by  the  draft  E-Money  Regulations  recently  issued  by 
CBK.  
Mobile phone financial services have generated micro-savings accounts (MKESHO) 
to the tune of over 700,000 accounts with Kshs. 678m in deposits.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  structural  transformation  of  Kenya’s  financial  sector  has  not 
been achieved on a silver platter. There has always been the task of surmounting prevalent 
challenges. Key among these is the need to balance the goals of financial efficiency, stability 
and  integrity  on  one  side  with  financial  inclusion  on  the  other.  The  pursuit  of  these  goals 
requires delicate balancing given their importance. However, as already alluded, balancing of 
these  goals  is  made  easier  when  regulators  embrace  their  new  role  of  being  a  market 
developer  in  addition  to  their  traditional  regulatory  role.  A  developing  financial  sector 
increases efficiency and the regulator ensures stability.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  The  structural  transformation  experienced  thus  far  is  just  but  the 
beginning. CBK and other players have earmarked several other reforms which are expected 
to take the development of the financial sector to new frontiers. CBK has embraced financial 
education  as  a  critical  component  of  its  financial  inclusion  strategy.  When  consumers  are 
financially  literate,  they  are  able  to  make  informed  financial  decisions.  In  this  regard,  CBK 
and  all  the  other  financial  sector  regulators  are  members  of  the  Financial  Education  and 
Consumer  Protection  Partnership  (FEP),  a  private–public  partnership,  spearheaded  by  the 
Financial Sector Deepening Trust Kenya with an aim of developing a National Strategy for 
Financial Education in Kenya.  
On the same token, Ladies and Gentlemen, as efforts progress towards a more developed 
financial sector, there is need to ensure existence of adequate disclosure of information by 
providers  of  financial  services,  efficient  dispute  resolution  mechanisms,  comparability  of 
offers and data protection. As financial regulators embrace innovations in their jurisdictions, 
there is need to ensure that the innovations have adequate consumer protection safeguards. 
Kenya’s new constitution promulgated in August 2010 entrenches consumer protection in the 
Bill  of  Rights  and  mandates  Parliament  to  enact  consumer  protection  legislation.  But  in 
addition the constitution allows for strong institutions and protects them. Strong institutions 
define appropriate incentives and the rules of the game to encourage prudent behavior. This 
is  good  for  the  financial  market  to  allow  defined  entry  and  orderly  exit  from  this  important 
market.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  As  I  conclude,  let  me  reiterate  that  innovative  solutions  for 
strengthened regulatory framework for a financial sector lie with the players. The regulators, 
the regulated and market participants should think outside the box. They exist for each other 
and  it  is  only  through  their  acceptance  to  promote,  advise  and  partner  that  a  smarter 
regulatory framework is put in place that enables the private sector to prosper.  
With  these  remarks,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  take  this  opportunity  to  wish  you  fruitful 
deliberations  while  I  look  forward  to  receiving  the  forum’s  report  in  due  course  for  us  to 
consider the relevant innovative solutions tailored to our circumstances.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
