Brian Wynter: Rekindle the passion 
Remarks  by  Mr  Brian  Wynter,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  the  Blast  Off  2011 
seminar  “Rekindle  the  passion”,  hosted  by  the  Jamaica  Association  of  Insurance  and 
Financial Advisors (JAIFA), Kingston, 11 January 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to join you in your “Blast Off” and for giving me an opportunity to 
share with you my view of the economic outlook for 2011. 
Had I been offered this opportunity last year, I would have sketched a picture of an economy 
that  was  struggling  to  come  to  terms  with  the  impact  of  a  global  recession.  Output  and 
employment were declining and were expected to fall further. Even as incomes were falling, 
inflation was being driven by new tax measures as the Government tried desperately to keep 
up with the heavy burden of debt payments. The only bright spot that I would have relied on 
to motivate you would have been the potential benefits of a radical debt initiative that was still 
in the design stage and the likelihood of strong international support if Jamaica could commit 
to a new path of fiscal and debt sustainability. 
I’m glad to be able to join you at the start of 2011 because this time the outlook is different. I 
hope that you will fully understand what I mean in a few minutes. 
As advisors all, you would know that a large part of the value that you bring to your clients 
consists  of  an  informed  view  of  the  kind  of  changes  that  we  can  expect  in  our  economic 
environment  –  what  will  happen  to  inflation,  incomes,  the  exchange  rate,  interest  rates, 
taxation  and  so  on.  All  financial  plans  depend  on  these  inputs.  In  designing  or  choosing 
financial products for your clients, you seek to protect them from some of the risks to which 
they are exposed and, where applicable, you find a way for them to share in the proceeds of 
activities that are profitable and expanding. 
I  claim,  as  a  kind  of  financial  advisor  myself,  that  inflation  is  the  single  most  important 
variable affecting your future, the value of your products, the perceived value of your services 
and  your  own  financial  plans.  Inflation  is  the  continuous,  inexorable  and  sometimes  rapid 
increase in the prices of the things we need to enjoy a decent life or even merely to survive 
day by day. It eats away at our savings and makes nonsense of long-term financial plans. 
And it has a direct link to those other variables that planners contend with such as growth, 
interest rates and the exchange rate. 
I  don’t  have  to  tell  you  this.  This  is  the  shared  experience  of  everybody  in  modern  day 
Jamaica.  No  doubt  you  hear  it  from  your  clients  every  day.  Let  me  put  it  another  way:  a 
policy with a face value of $100,000 purchased by a young graduate 40 years ago is worth 
considerably less than 1,000 of those same dollars at his retirement. In actual fact, the value 
of 100,000 of today’s dollars in terms of 1971 dollars is $177.22. 
So, where is the other $99,000 or so of purchasing power? Where has it gone? 
On  the  face  of  it,  nowhere.  The  underwriter  will  still  faithfully  pay  over  the  face  amount  or 
cash surrender value which could still be nominally $100,000. But the expectation that this 
lump sum could have bought a house or provided an adequate source of investment income 
well into retirement is worse than a broken promise. Time and inflation changed the price of 
everything except his savings. 
As it turned out, from the day the policy or contract was signed, the value of the Jamaica 
Dollar  has  been  steadily  falling.  A  dollar  buys  less  each  day.  Sometimes  the  impetus  has 
come  from  some  unexpected  shortage  of  goods  which  causes  the  supplier  to  hike  prices. 
The  ability  to  sustain  demand  at  these  higher  prices  has  been  helped  by  the  bargaining 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
power of workers who claim higher wages and salaries to compensate for the increased cost 
of living. Property owners charge higher rent, owners of capital charge higher interest and 
demand higher profits and earners of foreign exchange hold out for higher exchange rates. 
The Government too plays a role. It borrows more to pay higher wages and distribute more 
financial support and if, instead, the Government were to resort to borrowing from the Central 
Bank,  it  would  be  simply  printing  more  money  to  fund  its  activities  thus  adding  fuel  to  the 
inflation fire. At the end of the day, those without the ability to adjust their incomes to match 
inflation  –  such  as  pensioners,  workers  on  fixed  income  and  those  with  little  income  or 
property  –  become  progressively  poorer  and  their  savings  worth  less  and  less.  Thus  a 
princely $100,000 policy in 1971 eventually becomes little more than a funeral grant today. 
When will this erosion of value stop? It will not stop entirely. Everywhere in the world prices 
change  as  the  relative  value  of  goods  and  services  change  and  as  basic  exhaustible 
resources  become  scarcer.  But,  as  happens  in  the  developed  world  and  increasingly  in 
emerging market economies, it is possible to conduct our affairs so that inflation is hardly a 
factor in our long-term plans. The formula is simple enough although very challenging to put 
into practice. 
First, we need to stabilise public finances. We need to stop the process that demands that 
we keep borrowing just to keep servicing past borrowing. We need to leave people with as 
much money in their pockets as possible and cease paying more employees than necessary 
to produce fewer and fewer goods and services. That process has begun in the public sector 
and  an  encouraging  degree  of  progress  was  made  in  2010.  The  Jamaica  Voluntary  Debt 
Exchange  (JDX)  provided  a  jump  start  by  reducing  annual  debt  serving  costs  by  over 
$40 billion and has relieved cash flow requirements by extending the maturity of Government 
securities. The grace period that this has provided is allowing time for the implementation of 
a  series  of  reforms  –  from  divestment,  expenditure  management  and  tax  administration  to 
overall  resizing  of  government  –  that  will  see  the  Government’s  borrowing  requirement 
eliminated in three years. It is a strong commitment to stakeholders, local and foreign, who 
are  monitoring  progress  carefully.  The 
financial  discipline 
represented by these reforms is a key component of a stable low-inflation environment. 
Second,  the  Central  Bank  has  a  key  role  to  play.  Many  low-inflation  countries  have 
modified their governance arrangements such that the Central Bank takes “independent”, 
or non – political, responsibility for achieving the inflation target that the country sees as 
desirable. The Bank is then left to make the necessary periodic adjustments to its monetary 
policies  so  as  to  achieve  this  objective  and  reports  to  the  country  through  Parliament  at 
regular intervals. It has worked well elsewhere and is being advocated by strong voices in 
the local private sector. We at the Bank endorse this direction and have already begun to 
rearrange our internal operations to meet this new expectation. By March 2011, we expect 
the 12-month inflation rate to fall to about 8 per cent, well within the target range announced 
for the fiscal year. We at the Bank of Jamaica will do what is required of us to see that rate 
fall further and remain at a stable single-digit rate for the foreseeable future. 
But much depends on what the public views as an acceptable rate of inflation. Jamaica has 
experienced an average annual rate of inflation of about 15% over the past 50 years. Our 
main trading partner, the USA, has averaged about 4% over the same period. We need, as 
consumers, parents, financial planners and advisors to make our voices heard and help to 
forge a consensus on how much inflation is too much and oblige our public administrators to 
operate within our expectations. If some find an easy inflation hedge at the expense of those 
on fixed contracts, we all lose in the end because the injustice of it will become intolerable to 
those at the losing end of events. 
The burden of fostering a low inflation environment rests not only on the Government. As you 
blast off into your own spheres of endeavour – as you ramp up your productivity and do more 
in a day using less fuel and less paper – you help to keep costs from continuously rising. 
Productivity improvements are the single most effective way to grow income while keeping 
fiscal  consolidation  and 
2 
 prices stable. It thus becomes a business objective, a managerial guidepost and a personal 
resolution. At the end of the day, your actions, your voices and your advice will be invaluable 
inputs into the mix that keeps Government and central bankers true to their promise and you 
true to your clients. 
Plan for success this year and rest assured that we will do our part to maintain the integrity of 
those plans. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
