Glenn Stevens: The state of things 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business  in  Europe,  United  Kingdom  Robert  Walters  Boardroom  Series,  Australialive 
Business Lunch, London, 9 March 2011. 
 Quite a lot has happened since I last had the opportunity to address a London audience in 
January 2008. Later that year, a sequence of financial events saw the global financial system 
teeter on the brink, followed very quickly by a very sharp global economic slowdown in the 
closing months of 2008 and the early part of 2009. 
For the global economy, a recovery in activity commenced shortly thereafter. It has turned 
out, contrary to widely held expectations two years ago, to be quite a robust one overall. Real 
GDP for the world is estimated by the IMF to have grown by 5 per cent in 2010, well above 
the  medium-term  trend  of  a  touch  under  4  per  cent.  As  of  the  most  recent  published 
forecasts, the IMF expects the world economy to grow by almost 4½ per cent this year – still 
above trend. 
But the pattern of the growth has been rather uneven. Here in this part of the world, recovery 
is proving to be difficult and protracted. Yet in the Asian region, the recovery has been quite 
rapid and concerns have been expressed about excesses. 
There is more than just cyclical dynamics at work in these trends. Important structural forces 
are  in  operation,  and  they  have  significant  implications.  These  are  worthy  of  careful 
consideration, even though we cannot do them full justice today. 
The North Atlantic region 
The  group  of  countries  that  could  be  labelled  as  being  in  the  North  Atlantic  region 
(North America,  the  United  Kingdom  and  continental  Europe)  are  in  the  early  phase  of 
recovery  from  a  deep  downturn.  For  several  of  them,  the  downturn  was  the  worst  for 
decades. In other cases the downturns were serious, though not more so than those of the 
mid 1970s or the early 1980s. But what has been unusual is less the depth of the downturn 
than the slowness of the recovery. 
For most major countries, in most cycles in the second half of the 20th century, the pace of a 
recovery tended to be related to the depth of the preceding recession: generally, the deeper 
the recession, the sharper the upturn that followed. This episode has been different, in that a 
serious recession has been followed by a fairly shallow upswing so far. In the case of the 
United States, the level of real GDP has reached its pre-crisis peak, but it took three years to 
do  so.  In  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  major  continental  economies,  levels  of  real  GDP 
remain well below their peaks of three or so years ago. In some other cases in Europe the 
declines are larger and, in fact, are continuing. In all these cases the level of output remains 
well below what policy-makers would regard as their respective economies’ “potential” level. 
A corollary of that is the rate of unemployment in most cases remains unusually high after a 
year or more of recovery. 
This  slowness  of  initial  recovery  is  of  course  related  to  the  nature  of  the  downturn,  which 
differed from most of the post-war business cycles in that it was characterised by serious and 
widespread financial distress. History shows that recoveries from downturns associated with 
banking crises and collapsed asset booms are, more often than not, drawn-out affairs. Really 
we need look no further than Japan’s experience over the past two decades to see this, but 
in fact it is well established by a great deal of research. Moreover, while banking systems are 
in  the  process  of  regaining  health,  that  process  is  not  yet  complete.  Nor  is  it  clear  that 
households are yet finished the process of reducing their leverage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   North Atlantic 
Canada 
United States 
Euro area 
Germany 
France 
Spain 
Ireland 
United Kingdom 
Asia Pacific 
China* 
India* 
East Asia** 
South Korea 
Australia 
New Zealand 
Japan 
Output and Unemployment  
Real GDP 
Percentage change from 
pre-crisis peak 
Unemployment rate 
Percentage point change 
from pre-crisis trough 
  1.2 
0.0 
−2.9 
−1.4 
−1.6 
−4.3 
−12.8 
−4.6 
23.2 
20.9 
8.0 
6.2 
4.4 
−1.8 
−4.1 
1.9 
4.5 
2.7 
−0.6 
2.0 
12.5 
9.3 
2.7 
  0.5 
0.6 
1.1 
3.4 
1.3 
* Quarterly GDP did not contract during the global downturn; percentage change in GDP is from the quarter 
preceding  a  marked  slowing  in  output  growth  **  Excluding  China  and  Japan;  GDP  aggregated  at  market 
exchange rates; unemployment rate also excludes Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand 
Sources: ABS; CEIC; RBA; Thomson Reuters  
 
There are now some other factors that may impede the recovery. One of them is the delicate 
state of government budgets, which leaves many of these countries feeling they have little 
choice but to pursue policies of fiscal contraction. In a proximate sense, this problem is due 
to the financial crisis. The direct costs of assisting banking systems were the smaller part of 
the effect – the main impact on budgets has simply been the cumulative loss of revenue and 
the general impost on spending that comes with a protracted period of economic weakness. 
Ideally,  government  budgets  should  move  temporarily  into  a  position  of  deficit  when  the 
private  economy  suffers  an  adverse  shock.  The  budget  should  play  the  role  of  a  “shock 
absorber”. 
But that ideal assumes that the government’s own accounts are in a strong enough position 
to play such a role without raising questions of the state’s own solvency. The problem is that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in a number of countries, large burdens of spending, significant debt burdens, underfunded 
pension systems and unfavourable demographics have been on a collision course for a long 
time. What the crisis has done is to bring on the adjustment sooner. 
In  the  euro  area  the  intersection  of  banking  and  fiscal  issues  –  including  through  the 
exposures of banks to sovereign debt – heightens the difficulty. Although the single monetary 
policy  framework  is  highly  developed,  single  frameworks  for  other  areas  of  financial  policy 
have been less highly developed. This is gradually being addressed, though of course it is a 
complex issue. At its heart, the debate is essentially over the incidence across the taxpayers 
of Europe of the various costs of fixing banking problems.   
The Asia-Pacific region 
The contrast between the story for the North Atlantic countries and that for Asia could, in all 
frankness, hardly be more pronounced. Most of the countries in the Asian region have had a 
“v-shaped” recovery. Of course this has been led by China and India, where levels of GDP 
actually did not fall at all and where very robust growth rates have been maintained since the 
second quarter of 2009. Real GDP in both cases is now 20 per cent or more above pre-crisis 
levels. A range of other countries have also had a pretty strong rebound. 
Japan is an exception. The long aftermath of the “bubble economy” period, together with a 
declining population and generally low rates of return on capital, have made Japan a much 
less significant source of dynamism for the region and the world than it was for the couple of 
decades up to 1990. In truth, though, the global economy has become used to this. 
How is it that the Asian story has been so different to that of the North Atlantic?  
The first important factor was that Asia did not have a banking crisis. In fact, most countries 
in the world didn’t have one. The extraordinary events of September and October 2008 put 
immense pressure on markets, and banks everywhere inevitably felt the effect of that. But 
most  banks  in  Asia  and  Latin  America  over  the  past  few  years  have  generally  not  seen 
unusually  bad  losses  on  loans,  nor  had  they  been  very  much  involved  in  the  holdings  of 
securities that did such damage to some of the world’s largest banks. Similarly, the majority 
of governments have not ended up needing to re-capitalise banks in these regions. 
The second factor was that various countries in the Asian region had ample scope for fiscal 
stimulus, and were prepared to use it. The Chinese stimulus measures were just about the 
largest anywhere. The manner in which these were implemented may have led, in the view 
of some people, to other problems. But there is little doubt such measures were effective in 
boosting demand at the critical moment. 
The fact that there was scope to use fiscal policy this way reflects a long period of impressive 
fiscal discipline among most countries in the region. This is reinforced by Asian habits of thrift 
among the population and the generally better growth dynamics for these countries, which of 
course makes fiscal management inherently easier. 
There is another factor at work too, whose implications have been powerful but increasingly 
are being seen as not quite so benign. That is that monetary policy in Asia has been quite 
accommodative. Compared with the North Atlantic countries, this monetary accommodation 
has  been  much  more  effective  as  a  stimulus,  again  because  of  the  better  state  of  banks 
through  which  much  of  its  effect  is  transmitted.  The  issue  more  recently  has  been  that 
accommodative  conditions  have  started  to  look  out  of  place  given  the  robust  growth  in 
output,  rising  asset  values  and  increasing  goods  and  services  price  inflation.  A  number  of 
countries,  including  key  ones  such as  India  and  China,  have  been  responding  to  this  with 
tightening. Some of the Latin American countries have done likewise. 
The  matter  is  complicated  for  those  countries  by  the  very  low  interest  rates  in  the  major 
countries  –  implemented,  understandably,  for  their  own  domestic  reasons  –  and  concerns 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
over the extent of capital inflow and potential exchange rate appreciation. This is one of the 
key issues for the year ahead.  
Shifts in the global economy 
These are all important manifestations of the fact that different regions are at different points 
in  their  recoveries  from  the  crisis.  It  isn’t,  however,  only  a  cyclical  matter.  This  contrast 
between the economic performances of the key emerging countries and those of the older 
industrial economies in the past few years is seeing a marked acceleration in the shift in the 
world economy’s centre of gravity towards the east (or west, if viewing from North America). 
Since the beginning of 2008, Asia (excluding Japan) has accounted for about 70 per cent of 
the  growth  in  global  GDP  (measured  on  a  purchasing  power  parity  basis).  It  has  also 
accounted  for  about  70 per  cent  of  the  growth  in  global  demand  over  that  period.  This 
compares with a figure of about 30 per cent over the period 2000–2007.  
It has often been said that more domestic demand is needed in Asia to help “rebalance” the 
global economy. There may have been a structural sense in which Asian saving rates were 
“too  high”  and  saving  in  some  other  countries  too  low.  But  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  more 
demand growth in Asia is desirable at present. After all, global GDP growth has been strong, 
and  prices  for  most  commodities  have  been  rising.  Just  at  the  moment,  from  a  global 
perspective, what we need is not so much faster domestic demand growth in Asia, but a way 
of supplying more of Asia’s demand for goods and services from the parts of the world where 
excess supply remains – mainly the North Atlantic countries. Of course exchange rates are 
relevant here. 
Moreover, there is a secular increase in living standards occurring in Asia and changes in 
consumption patterns are accompanying that. Energy intensity is rising quickly with income. 
The  steel  intensity  of  production  is  already  high  in  China  but,  with  China  seeking  strong 
overall  growth  for  many  years  yet,  steel  consumption  could  well  continue  to  increase  at  a 
rapid pace. In India, steel intensity has a long way to rise yet. In many developing countries, 
higher living standards are also prompting changes to diets. The already clear trend towards 
higher  protein  consumption  in  emerging  countries  such  as  China  potentially  has  major 
implications for demand (and prices) for livestock and grain feed globally. 
So it is not really surprising that rapid economic growth in Asia is placing upward pressure on 
prices  for  foodstuffs,  energy  and  minerals.  There  may  be  speculative  demand  adding  to 
these pressures at the margin. But speculators can’t hold up prices over the long run. These 
big changes, which appear to be rather long-running, surely are mainly a result of powerful, 
and rather durable, fundamental forces. 
What is new is that this pressure on prices is not coming from the advanced world (except 
perhaps in the case of demand for grain to be converted into ethanol). It is not the story that 
would  have  been  told,  until  only  a  few  years  ago,  of  the  industrial  cycle  of  the  OECD 
countries picking up and adding to demand for resources and energy. The action is, for the 
most part, occurring outside that group. Prices are under upward pressure because of rising 
demand,1 but it is the demand coming from a couple of billion people in Asia seeking, and in 
many cases rapidly converging on, the way of life that the advanced countries have enjoyed 
for decades. 
These price rises, not to mention those occurring most recently as a result of pressure on oil 
supplies, are quite unhelpful for the advanced countries, particularly those whose recoveries 
have  been  hesitant  to  date.  They  will  also  be  unwelcome  for  very  poor  countries  whose 
populations  spend  much  of  their  meagre  incomes  on  food.  For  practical  purposes  they 
                                                 
1   Food prices, as well as oil, are also being affected by supply disturbances at present. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
amount to a supply shock for the advanced countries – someone else’s demand has pushed 
up  the  price  at  which  markets  are  prepared  to  supply  energy,  agricultural  and  resource 
commodities.  That  will  make  it  harder  to  engender  a  strong  recovery  in  the  advanced 
countries.  Moreover,  were  demand  in  the  advanced  countries  to  grow  faster,  as  is 
presumably the intent of current economic policies in those countries, the price pressures will 
grow more intense, unless substantial new capacity comes on stream and/or growth in the 
emerging world moderates somewhat. 
As it happens, new capacity is being planned in many resource commodities. In Australia, 
where iron ore shipments are running a little over a million tonnes a day, projected capacity 
expansion will likely take that to about 2 million tonnes within four or five years. Significant 
capacity  expansion  is  also  planned  in  other  areas.  These  and  similar  expansions  in  other 
countries will presumably help to contain pressure on prices for many resources over time.  
In the case of foodstuffs, much of the growth in supply over the medium term will need to 
come  from  productivity  gains  or  greater  farming  intensity.  The  experts  seem  to  think  that 
such productivity gains are possible but not given. In fact the rates of productivity growth will 
need to be higher than those actually observed in recent years to generate sufficient output.2 
One thing is for certain: the rise of Asia is changing the shape of the world economy and the 
set  of  relative  prices  that  goes  with  it.  It  seems  to  be  doing  so  more  quickly  than  was 
generally assumed. 
Australia 
Australia sits in an interesting position here. Like our Asian neighbours we were affected by 
the events of late 2008. But the downturn was fairly brief. We were in a position to apply a 
liberal  dose  of  stimulus  to  the  economy,  which  was  done  in  a  timely  fashion.  The  banks 
remained  in  good  shape.  Hence  recovery  began  in  the  first  half  of  2009.  A  strong  Asian 
recovery has also helped Australia.  
As in other developed countries, our consumers feel the effects of higher commodity prices 
as a reduction in real income. But since Australia is also a producer, the big rise in demand 
for energy, resources and food is expansionary for the economy. In fact, with our terms of 
trade at by far their highest level, on a five-year average basis, in more than a century, these 
events are very expansionary indeed. A very large increase in investment in the resources 
sector is under way and has a good deal further to run yet. 
Just recently, we have been experiencing growth close to trend, relatively low unemployment 
–  about  5  per  cent  –  and  moderate  inflation,  about  2¼  per  cent  in  underlying  terms.  In 
comparison with the experience of the past generation, that is a pretty good combination. 
Looking  ahead,  our  job  is  to  try  to  manage  the  terms  of  trade  and  investment  booms. 
Historically, Australia has often not managed periods of prosperity conferred on us by global 
trends terribly well. On this occasion, we have to do better. We have to take the opportunity 
to capitalise effectively on some very powerful trends in the global economy to which we are, 
almost uniquely, positively exposed. 
A  few  things  are  working  in  our  favour.  One  is  that  the  exchange  rate  is  playing  a  role  of 
helping  the  economy  to  adjust  to  the  change  in  the  terms  of  trade  in  a  way  that  it  was 
prevented  from  doing  on  numerous  previous  occasions.  Another  is  that,  at  least  so  far, 
households are behaving with a degree of caution, insofar as spending and borrowing are 
                                                 
2   See, for example, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) discussion paper “How to Feed the World 
in  2050”,  which  was  prepared  for  a  high-level  expert  forum  of  the  same  name  held  in  Rome  on 
12–13  October  2009.  The  document,  and  other  background 
is  available  at: 
<http://www.fao.org/wsfs/forum2050/wsfs-background-documents/issues-briefs/en/>. 
information, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
concerned, that we have not seen for a long time. Having taken on quite a degree of debt 
over the preceding 15 years or so, households have thought better of taking on too much 
more. They are saving more than at any time for 20 years or more. So are households in 
many other countries, of course, but our good fortune is to be making that adjustment against 
a backdrop of rising income.  
We  are  now  engaged  in  a  national  discussion  about  how  to  stretch  the  benefits  of  the 
resources boom over a long period, and how to manage the risks that it will bring. These are 
complex matters that involve a wide range of policy areas – macroeconomic, microeconomic, 
taxation, industrial and so on. But if that discussion can be conducted in a mature fashion, 
and followed up with sensible policies, then we have a good chance of leaving to the next 
generation a wealthier, more secure and more stable Australian economy.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
