Thomas M Hoenig: Back to the business of banking  
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at 
the  29th  Annual  Monetary  and  Trade  Conference,  Global  Interdependence  Center  and 
Drexel University LeBow College of Business, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 24 May 2011. 
 Introduction  
Today’s  meeting  and  sessions  are  about  financial  reform,  and  I  congratulate  the 
organizers  of  this  conference  for  keeping  this  important  topic  in  the  mainstream  of 
discussion. Much remains to be done around reform if we are to ensure a more stable 
financial system. Topics today will focus on housing, the Dodd-Frank Act, government-
sponsored enterprises  (GSEs),  the  safety  net  and  other  reform efforts  that  necessarily 
follow the recent financial crisis that has so devastated our national economy.  
Understandably, major financial interests are lobbying to change and mitigate the impact 
of Dodd-Frank or influence the reform efforts that will affect the GSEs. One reform effort, 
for example, that is especially difficult for some interests to accept is the Volcker Rule. 
This rule will restrict banking organizations from engaging in proprietary trading activities 
and involvement with hedge and private equity funds. It will affect the largest institutions 
most  directly,  confining  their  risk  profile  and  limiting  the  advantages  of  leverage  that 
currently drive behavior among these firms. How it is implemented will influence not only 
the behavior of these firms in the future but the discussion of other reform efforts yet to 
be undertaken.  
I strongly support the Volcker Rule and suggest it should be implemented with resolve 
and should be strengthened in its reach and impact. Over the next few minutes, I want to 
outline  my  reasons  for  this  position.  Supporting  my  remarks  this  morning  is  a  more 
extensive white paper prepared with colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City. This paper is posted on our Bank’s website, www.KansasCityFed.org. 
A brief history  
A fundamental characteristic of the United States is that its citizens have an enormous 
suspicion and distrust of concentrated power – political or financial. For nearly 200 years, 
state  and  federal  laws  placed  limits  on  bank  activities  and  resource  concentration, 
resulting  in  a  relatively  open U.S.  banking  system  that has  served  the  country well.  In 
fact, some of the largest institutions in this country started small: The Bank of New York, 
for  example,  was  founded,  in  part,  by  Alexander  Hamilton,  and  the  Mellon  Bank  was 
founded  by  a  farm  boy  who  built  his  own  financial  empire.  Thousands  of  banks,  from 
small community banks to large global players, have operated in this country for most of 
our 200 years.  
Banking  in  the  United  States  thrived  under  the  principles  of  competition  and 
accountability – as opposed to having a few mega-institutions with the power to allocate 
a majority of financial resources and decide who wins and who loses. Rather, success 
followed a structure in which thousands of banks operated; competed; and, in the end, 
helped build the greatest middle class the world has known.  
In  1913,  when  the  Federal  Reserve  was  brought  into  existence,  21,000  commercial 
banks operated across the country. At that time, the five largest banks controlled assets 
that we estimate were the equivalent of about 2.6 percent of our gross domestic product 
(GDP). As late as 1980, the United States had 14,000 commercial banks, and the five 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
largest controlled, in assets, the equivalent of about 14 percent of GDP. Our nation had a 
lightly concentrated and highly competitive commercial banking and financial system. We 
saw the ascendancy of the United States as the greatest economic system in the world. 
And  we  saw  our  country  change  from  an  agrarian-based  economy  to  a  successful 
agriculture and industrial complex. 
Today  the  United  States  has  far  fewer  banks  and  a  highly  concentrated  financial 
industry. We have fewer than 7,000 banks operating across the country. The five largest 
institutions  control  assets  that  are  equivalent  to  almost  60  percent  of  GDP,  and  the 
largest 20 institutions control assets that are the equivalent of 86 percent of GDP. The 
remaining nearly 7,000 banks control assets the equivalent of only 14 percent of GDP. 
More noteworthy perhaps is the fact that it was several of the 20 largest institutions that 
nearly brought down the U.S. economy during this most recent global crisis.  
We did not get to such a circumstance by accident or a Darwinian “survival of the fittest“ 
process. We got there through policies that reflected good intentions along the way, but 
ultimately resulted in bad outcomes. Following earlier crises, such as the 1907 Panic and 
the Great Depression, we understandably wanted a more resilient system that protected 
small depositors. So, we first created the Federal Reserve and then the FDIC to provide 
a safety net of central bank liquidity for solvent banks and limited deposit insurance.  
During  the  past  30  years,  however,  we  have  expanded  the  use  of  the  safety  net  far 
beyond its original intent. During the crisis of the 1980s and early ‘90s, the government 
confirmed  that  some  institutions  were  too  systemically  important  to  fail  –  the  largest 
institutions could put money anywhere, and its creditors would not be held accountable 
for  the  risk  taken.  More  striking  perhaps  in  the  late  1990s,  despite  recent  experience, 
Congress repealed the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated activities protected through 
the safety net from a host of other more-highly risk-oriented and opaque activities.  
As risks intensified and new crises emerged, this safety net was continually expanded to 
where  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  FDIC  and  the  Treasury  were  empowered  to  allocate 
enormous resources to ensure systemically important institutions didn’t bring down the 
economy. This process inevitably led to the picking of winners and losers – not through 
competition  and  performance,  but  through  bureaucracy.  The  result  is  increased 
concentration and, as just proven, less financial stability.  
Also,  as  conditions  allowed  and  incentives  encouraged,  complexity  within  the  financial 
industry  expanded  exponentially  and  so  did  industry  risks.  First,  the  expansion  of  the 
safety net enabled and encouraged banks to increase their return on equity by lowering 
capital  levels  and  increasing  leverage.  Second,  with  the  elimination  of  Glass-Steagall, 
the largest institutions with the greatest ability to leverage their balance sheets increased 
their risk profile by getting into trading, market making and hedge fund activities, adding 
ever greater complexity to their balance sheets. Third, perception was reality, as certain 
complex  institutions  were  bailed  out  and  therefore  were  in  fact  the  safest  places  for 
money to go despite the risk. The market’s ability to discipline was mitigated, and these 
institutions became so complex that supervision could not control their risk.  
The conclusion of this experience is that the United States must reform its banking and 
financial structure if we hope to have a competitive; accountable; and, in the long run, 
less volatile system. There are good reasons to expand the Volcker Rule and to narrow 
the  scope  of  activities  for  institutions  operating  under  the  public  safety  net.  The 
consequence of expanding the safety net to an ever-increasing range of activities is to 
invite  a  repeat  of  our  most  recent  crisis.  Yes,  with  separation  of  activities,  risks  will 
remain in the financial system, but unlike the past decade, this risk will be priced more 
correctly and failure can be resolved more equitably. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Proposal to reduce costs and risks to the safety net and financial system  
Let me turn briefly to the reforms that I judge necessary if we hope to more successfully 
manage  the  risks  and  costs  to  the  safety  net  and  financial  system.  First,  banking 
organizations that have access to the safety net should be restricted to the core activities 
of  making  loans  and  taking  deposits  and  to  other  activities  that  do  not  significantly 
impede  the  market,  bank  management  and  bank  supervisors  in  assessing,  monitoring 
and  controlling  bank  risk-taking.  However,  these  actions  alone  would  provide  limited 
benefits if the newly restricted activities migrate to shadow banks without that sector also 
being  reformed.  Thus,  we  also  will  need  to  affect  behavior  within  the  shadow  banking 
system through reforms of money market funds and the repo market.  
Restricting activities of banking organizations  
The financial activities of commercial, investment and shadow banks can be categorized 
into the following six groups1:  
 
 
Commercial banking: deposit-taking and lending to individuals and businesses.  
Investment  banking:  underwriting  securities  (stocks  and  bonds)  and  advisory 
services.  
Asset  and  wealth  management  services:  managing  assets  for  individuals  and 
institutions.  
Intermediation as dealers and market makers: securities, repo and over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivatives.  
Brokerage  services:  retail,  professional 
brokerage). 
Proprietary  trading:  trading  for  own  account,  internal  hedge  funds,  private  equity 
funds, and holding unhedged securities and derivatives.  
investors  and  hedge 
funds  (prime 
    Based  on  the  criterion  that  permissible  activities  should  not  significantly  impede  the 
market, bank management and the supervisory authorities in assessing, monitoring and 
controlling bank risk-taking, banking organizations should be allowed to conduct only the 
following  activities:  commercial  banking,  underwriting  securities  and  advisory  services, 
and  asset  and  wealth  management  services.  Underwriting,  advisory,  and  asset  and 
wealth management services are mostly fee-based services that do not put much of a 
firm’s capital at risk. In addition, asset and wealth management services are similar to 
the trust services that have always been allowable for banks.  
In  contrast,  the  other  three  categories  of  activities  –  dealing  and  market  making, 
brokerage, and proprietary trading – extend the safety net and yet do not have much in 
common with core banking services. Within the protection of the safety net, they create 
risks that are difficult to assess, monitor or control. Thus, banking organizations would 
not  be  allowed  to  do  trading,  either  proprietary  or  for  customers,  or  make  markets 
because such activity requires the ability to do trading. In addition, allowing customer but 
not  proprietary  trading  would  make  it  easy  to  game  the  system  by  “concealing” 
proprietary trading as part of the inventory necessary to conduct customer trading. Also, 
prime brokerage services not only require the ability to conduct trading activities, but also 
                                                 
1  This categorization of financial activities is from Matthew Richardson, Roy Smith and Ingo Walter in Chapter 7 
of Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance, edited by Viral V. 
Acharya,  Thomas  F.  Cooley,  Matthew  Richardson,  Ingo  Walter,  New  York  University  Stern  School  of 
Business, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
essentially  allow  companies  to  finance  their  activities  with  highly  unstable  uninsured 
“deposits.” This combination of factors, as we have recently witnessed, leads to unstable 
markets and government bailouts.  
The  proposed  activity  restrictions  will  enable  and  require  bank  management  to  focus 
their  activities  on  the  traditional  banking  business  and  manage  their  exposure  to  risks 
inherent in these activities. Banking is based on a long-term customer relationship where 
the  interests  of  the  bank  and  customer  are  more  aligned.  Both  the  bank  and  loan 
customers benefit if borrowers do well and are able to pay off their loans. In contrast, as 
shown only too clearly with this recent crisis, trading is an adversarial zero-sum game 
– the trader’s gains are the losses of the counterparty, who is oftentimes the customer. 
Also,  for  those  firms  with  access  to  the  safety  net  and  large  amounts  of  credit,  the 
advantage in the game goes to them. Thus, restricting these activities removes a conflict 
of interest between a bank and its customers, which encourages a more stable financial 
environment.  
In  addition,  the  inherent  riskiness  of  securities  trading,  dealing  and  market-making 
attracts,  and  in  fact  requires,  people  who  are  predisposed  to  taking  short-term  risks 
rather  than  lenders  with  a  long-term  outlook.  The  combination  of  securities  and 
commercial  banking  activities  in  a  single  organization  provides  opportunities  for  the 
senior management and boards of directors to be increasingly influenced by individuals 
with a short-term perspective. As a result, the increased propensity of these corporate 
leaders to take high risks for short-term gain leads to more of a short-term-returns culture 
throughout the organization.  
Historically,  bank  investments  were  restricted  to  loans  and  investments  in  investment-
grade securities. As demonstrated in the financial crisis, the complexity of many asset-
backed  securities  made  it  very  difficult  to  determine  their  credit  quality.  As  a  result, 
“complicated”  multilayer  structured  securities  should  be 
treated  as  other  
non-investment-grade assets are, and commercial banks should be limited or prohibited 
from holding them.  
Critics of restricting activities have raised concerns that it would cause problems for U.S. 
banks because they would face a competitive disadvantage relative to universal banks 
that are allowed to conduct the full range of activities. They say it would drive U.S. banks 
and jobs to other countries. If this were accurate, it would be an unfortunate outcome, 
certainly. However, this conclusion should be considered carefully before it is accepted. 
First,  we  have  200  years  of  banking  success  in  this  country  that  tends  to  refute  that 
assertion. Second, it seems improbable that any other country should be willing or able 
to  expand  its  safety  net  to  new  large  and  complex  banking  organizations.  Third,  and 
finally,  the  U.S.  authorities  should  consider  carefully  whether  it  is  wise  to  insure  and 
therefore protect creditors of foreign organizations that operate in this country outside of 
the U.S.’s prudential standards.  
Reforming the shadow banking system  
Critics of restricting the activities of banking organizations also argue that it could worsen 
the risk of financial instability by pushing even more activities to the unregulated shadow 
banking system. I agree that focusing solely on the regulated banking industry would not 
solve  the  problem  and  might  in  fact  expand  the  shadow  banking  sector  that  was  an 
integral part of the financial crisis.  
However, much of the instability in the shadow banking system stemmed from its use of 
short-term  funding  for  longer-term  investment.  This  source  of  systemic  risk  can  be 
significantly reduced by making two changes to the money market.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The first change addresses potential disruptions coming from money market funding of 
shadow banks – money market mutual funds and other investments that are allowed to 
maintain  a  fixed  net  asset  value  of  $1  should  be  required  to  have  floating  net  asset 
values. Shadow banks’ reliance on this source of short-term funding and the associated 
threat of disruptive runs would be greatly reduced by eliminating the fixed $1 net asset 
value and requiring share values to float with their market values. 
The second recommendation addresses potential disruptions stemming from the short-
term repurchase agreement, or repo, financing of shadow banks. Under bankruptcy law, 
repo lenders receive special treatment as compared to other secured lenders because 
they are allowed to take possession of the underlying collateral if the borrower defaults. 
In other words, repo lenders are not subject to the automatic stay that all other creditors 
are subject to when default occurs. The bankruptcy law also specifies the eligible assets 
for the automatic stay exemption.  
One of the changes in the 2005 bankruptcy reform law was to make mortgage-related 
assets used in repo transactions exempt from the automatic stay. Prior to 2005, only very 
safe securities were exempt from this stay. The change meant that all of the complicated 
and  often  risky  mortgage  securities  could  be  used  as  repo  collateral  just  when  the 
securities were growing rapidly and just prior to the bursting of the housing price bubble. 
One  of  the  sources  of  instability  during  the  crisis  was  repo  runs,  particularly  on  repo 
borrowers  using  subprime  mortgage-related  assets  as  collateral.  Essentially,  these 
borrowers funded long-term assets of relatively low quality with very short-term liabilities.  
Therefore, to improve the stability of the shadow banking market, the bankruptcy law for 
repo collateral should be rolled back to the pre-2005 rules and eliminate the automatic 
stay exemption for mortgage-related repo collateral. This would discourage such activity 
and  tend  to  reduce  the  potential  instability  that  is  associated  with  repo  runs.  Term 
wholesale  funding  would  continue  to  be  provided  by  institutional  investors  such  as 
mutual funds, pension funds and life insurance companies.  
Overall, these changes to the rules for money market funds and repo instruments would 
increase the stability of the shadow banking system because term lending would be less 
dependent on “demandable “ funding and more reliant on term funding, and the pricing of 
risk would reflect the actual risk incurred.  
Conclusion  
The  proposal  I  am  placing  before  you  today  will  not  take  all  risks  out  of  the  financial 
system.  Reasonable  risk  is,  in  fact,  part  of  the  financial  system  and  essential  to  our 
economic  success.  However,  the  proposal  will  improve  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system  by  clarifying  where  risks  reside;  improving  the  pricing  of  risk;  and,  thus, 
enhancing the allocation of resources within our economic system. It also will promote a 
more competitive financial system, as it levels the playing field for all financial institutions. 
And  finally,  it  will  raise  the  bar  of accountability  for  actions  taken and,  to  an  important 
degree, reduce the likelihood of future bailouts funded by the American taxpayers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
