Ewart Williams: Restoring competitiveness and growth in the Caribbean 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  4the  Biennial  International  Business,  Banking  and  Finance  Conference, 
University of the West Indies, St Augustine, 22–24 June 2011. 
 Salutations:  
Let me first of all thank the sponsors for their kind invitation to deliver the feature address at 
this  4th  Biennial  International  Business,  Banking  and  Finance  Conference.  The  organizers 
need  to  be  commended  for  bringing  together  such  an  excellent  group  of  academics  and 
practitioners  from  the  region  and  further  afield  to  exchange  views  with  us  on  –  many 
hot-button economic issues. This forum is particularly timely since our Caribbean economies 
find  themselves  at  a  critical  inflection-point,  with  the  legacy  of  the  international  financial 
crisis not yet behind us and with our region facing a global environment, which in many ways 
is markedly different from what obtained at the beginning of the last decade.  
A few days ago in its mid-year World Economic Outlook assessment, the IMF warned that 
the  global  economy  had  run  into  a  speed-bump  arising  from  greater  than  anticipated 
weakness in US economy and renewed financial volatility arising from concerns about the 
depth of fiscal challenges in the euro area periphery – particularly, the Greek debt problem. 
The IMF report noted that although emerging market economies in Asia and Latin America 
continue  to  experience  robust  growth,  they  are  now  facing  the  risk  of  over-heating  with 
inflation  increasing  at  a  faster  rate  than  could  be  explained  by  rising  commodity  and  food 
prices.  
Our Caribbean economies are still digging themselves out of the global crisis of 2008 and 
unfortunately the recovery of the region is lagging behind that of other developing countries. 
This  most  recent  slide  is,  however,  part  of  a  longer-term  trend  in  which  countries  in  the 
region have not been keeping pace with growth rates in emerging markets around the world.  
According to the World Bank statistics, in 1980, the Caribbean’s average per capita income 
was  twice  as  high  as  the  average  for  developing  countries;  today  it  is  only  a  third  higher. 
Countries in the region have been growing at an average rate of 2 per cent per year while 
small island states have been growing at an average rate of 3.6 per cent per year, roughly 
the average for the world economy. 
As we seek to reverse this trend and address the challenge of long-term viability, the region 
faces  the  reality  that  it  has  lost  some  comparative  advantage  at  a  time  when  the  global 
economy has become less friendly. The following examples are worth noting:  
(i) 
First, the traditional preferences for bananas and sugar are now practically at an end 
and the region still finds itself unable to compete with lower-cost producers;  
Second, foreign aid flows to the region (with the exception of Haiti) have all be dried 
up;  
Third, while Caribbean tourism continues to be a viable brand, the region is facing 
stiffer  competition  from  Asian  destinations  and  will  experience  even  greater 
competitive pressure when Cuba is fully opened up (as it could in the not too distant 
future); and  
Fourth, the prospect of continued high unemployment in the US and the UK for the 
next  2  –  3  years  will  have  implications  for  workers’  remittances  which  are  very 
important to some Caribbean economies.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To add to these exogenous factors, most countries in the region already have unsustainably 
high  debt  burdens,  which  limit  the  extent  to  which  government  spending  could  lead  the 
recovery.  
One could argue that Trinidad and Tobago represents an exception from this theme, given 
our energy resources, our stronger public finances and our much lower public debt burden 
which  gives  us  more  room  to  manoeuvre.  We  should  be  careful  however  of  pushing  that 
argument  too  far  since  (i)  our  proven  energy  reserves  are  fast  dwindling  (though  some 
experts think that prospects for new discoveries are high); and (ii) our fiscal space is being 
steadily reduced, the more the private sector activity remains subdued and government steps 
in to lead the recovery. While public sector indebtedness is still at a comfortable level, it too 
is increasing rapidly to meet the high cost of the CLF/CLICO bailout.  
Let  me  put  our  (Trinidad  and  Tobago’s)  challenge  in  another  context  which  further 
underscores the problem. In the period 2002–2006, real GDP increased at an annual rate of 
close to 10 per cent based on an annual growth of 16.7 per cent in the energy sector and 
5.6 per cent per year in the non-energy sector. Energy sector growth was based on higher oil 
production  and  on  the  expansion  of  the  downstream  production  capacity  –  particularly 
Atlantic  LNG  Trains  2,  3  and  the  M5000  Methanol  plant.  The  current  prospects  are  for  a 
continued  decline  in  oil  production  (until  there  are  new  finds)  and  except  for  planned 
Melamine plant (the AUM), no significant increase in downstream capacity is envisaged over 
the next few years, this would imply that energy sector growth would revert to lower, more 
sustainable levels leaving the non-energy sector to carry more of the medium-term growth 
burden.  This  makes  a  credible  diversification  strategy  not  merely  a  policy  option  but  an 
urgent necessity. 
The bottom line is that the entire region needs to embark on a new private-sector-led growth 
strategy to ensure medium-term economic viability.  
Clearly, each country in the Caribbean faces its unique challenges in terms of its capacity to 
spur private sector investment. For example, the pre-conditions for attracting investment in 
the extractive industries in Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana and Suriname are different from the 
steps that are needed to promote investment in the on-shore sectors. And these are different 
from what is needed to promote tourism investment in Barbados or in the OECS. There are 
however some common challenges and some common approaches which are worthy 
of consideration by all the countries in the region.  
One challenge faced by the entire region is the need to reverse the decline in productivity 
and competitiveness which has occurred in recent years. The most egregious example of our 
competitive  disadvantage  is  the  banana  industry,  where  the  yields  of  our  major  producers 
– St. Lucia, Jamaica or Dominica - range between 20 – 25 per cent of the most efficient Latin 
American producers. But there are numerous other examples. For example the 2011 “Doing 
Business  Report”  (published  by  the  World  Bank  and  IFC)  ranks  183  countries  in  terms  of 
their  business  facilitation  environment.  Among  all  countries,  Jamaica  and  Trinidad  and 
Tobago – the two largest CARICOM  members – were ranked 81st and 97th, respectively. 
Suriname  was  ranked  161st.  For  the  sub-category  “registering  property”;  eleven  of  the 
thirteen countries had a ranking greater than 105 for the sub-category “closing a business” 
and five of our CARICOM countries tied for the lowest ranking in the world.  
The Global Competitive Index for 2010–2011 shows Barbados ranked at 43rd and the rest of 
the Caribbean ranked between 84th (Trinidad and Tobago) and 110th among 139 countries.  
One  explanation  for  our  lack  of  competitive  edge  is  the  fact  that  the  Caribbean  is  lagging 
behind  in  terms  of  access  to  information  technology  and  affordability.  In  2008,  it  was 
estimated that broadband penetration in the region was below 8 per cent compared with over 
30 per cent in OECD countries. World Bank data also indicate that the cost of broadband 
services in the region is close to three times the price in the US and seven times the price in 
the UK. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Technology  played  an  important  role  in  the  take-off  of  Singapore,  Cyprus,  Mauritius  and 
other  successful  small  economies  by  making  business  and  government  services  more 
efficient. A concentrated focus on technological development will greatly facilitate business 
competitiveness in the region.  
In addition to business facilitation, regional governments could contribute to the resurgence 
of  the  private  sector  through  disciplined  management  of  the  public  finances.  And  this  has 
many aspects. Obviously, one important aspect is avoiding sizeable fiscal deficits so as 
not to crowd out the private sector and to contain public debt burdens.  
Good public sector management also implies allocating sufficient resources to infrastructural 
development, education and health – areas that are critical for private sector development. In 
many  cases,  a  business-friendly  government  expenditure  policy  could  imply  difficult 
socio-political trade-offs involving expenditures on subsidies and transfers. As I noted earlier, 
several countries in the region already have excessive debt burdens which sometimes force 
expenditure adjustments to fall disproportionately on critical public investment.  
In our university councils, we are at pains to underscore the importance of UWI as a regional 
university. Regionalism is even more important in our economic sphere and deeper regional 
integration is absolutely critical for our economic survival.  
In delivering the William Demas Memorial Lecture last month, the Managing Director of the 
World Bank put her finger on this delicate issue as follows:  
“From  my  experience  in  Africa,  (she  said),  I  appreciate  very  well  the 
sensitivities  around  deeper  integration.  At  first  glance,  it  might  well  seem 
that whatever one country wins, another loses. Free movement of people, 
for  instance  has  created  concerns  in  all  regions  that  are  seeking  deeper 
integration. But regional integration is the only viable way to create scale for 
your economies.”  
We  absolutely  need  to  move  beyond  pious  statements  and  seriously  pursue  what  C.  Y 
“Open  Regionalism”,  based  on  an  outward-looking 
Thomas  calls  a  model  of 
market-oriented  framework  in  which  the  private  sector  is  expected  to  take  the  lead.  In 
addition  to  the  liberalization  of  trade  in  goods  and  services,  this  model  involves  the  free 
movement  of  labour  and  capital,  a  regional  strategic  sectoral  plan,  the  adoption  of  a 
harmonized investment code and the development of a regional capital market.  
Greater integration along these lines could be a critical input in improving competitiveness. 
For example:  
 
labour  mobility  within  the  region  has  the  potential  to  improve  skill  and  wage 
arbitrage;  
co-ordinated investment promotion could make the region more attractive for foreign 
investment  and  reduce  the  fiscal  cost  attached  to  expensive  and  sometimes 
wasteful tax concessions;  
regional  planning  could 
opportunities, through clusters of economic activities; and  
the integration model also presents opportunities for joint marketing in extra-regional 
markets, joint research and development, and joint purchasing arrangements.  
the  exploitation  of  production 
   integration 
facilitate 
If the focus of our regional development strategy is the private sector, the sector would need 
to undergo a cultural re-orientation. Foreign direct investment to the region has been on a 
steady decline over the past several years. While policy changes may help to reverse this 
decline, countries should also think about diversifying their targets for investment promotion, 
with the BRICs registering the fastest growth in the global economy they must be potential 
sources of foreign direct investment. So also must be Brazil.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Some people feel though that our domestic private sector needs to be more aggressive, to 
get  beyond  their  comfort  zone,  and  to  be  more  prepared  to  take  risks.  This  is  of  utmost 
importance since the country is depending on our entrepreneurs to expand, create jobs and 
contribute to the general welfare.  
In  this  context,  there  is  a  case  for  targeted  partnerships  between  the  private  sector  and 
government to enhance international competitiveness, to identify and promote opportunities 
for greater economic diversification and to develop new export markets. These partnerships 
should  also  incorporate  tertiary  educational  institutions  that  must  be  at  the  center  of  our 
efforts to promote research and development.  
Unfortunately, I have spent my entire time outlining the many challenges that the Caribbean 
economies  face  in  their  quest  for  sustainable  growth  over  the  medium-term.  But  these 
challenges are not destiny and difficulties can become opportunities for change. Our region 
is  at  a  cross-road  of  opportunity  where  the  right  combination  of  leadership,  vision  and 
commitment  is  needed  to  overcome  a  plethora  of  challenges.  I  am  convinced  that  closer 
regional  integration  must  be  part  of  the  solution  and  then  we  would  need  partnerships 
between  the  public  and  private  sectors  and  other  stakeholders  including  labour  and  our 
tertiary education. We need all hands on deck. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
