Caleb M Fundanga: The history and experiences of the financial sector 
and regulatory framework in Zambia 
Address  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Co-operative 
Bank Capitalisation Consultative Forum “The history and experiences of the financial sector 
and regulatory framework in Zambia”, Lusaka, 3 March 2011. 
   The  Honourable  Minister  of  Agriculture  and  Co-operatives,  Hon  Eustarkio 
Kazonga, M.P;  
The  Board  Chairman  of  the  Co-operative  Bank  Zambia  Limited,  Mr  Mulilo 
Kabesha;  
Members of the Diplomatic Corps;  
Distinguished Invited Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
 
 
 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  and  privilege  to  speak  to  you  at  this  very  important  Consultative 
Forum. I have been requested to speak briefly on the history and some of the experiences of 
the financial sector in Zambia.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you are aware, considerable developments have been recorded 
in  the  Zambia  economy  in  general  and  the  financial  sector  in  particular,  following  the 
liberalization  of  the  economy  in  the  early  1990’s.  These  developments  include  the 
proliferation of banks and non-bank financial institutions, which have necessitated the review 
of supervisory policies as well as the legal and regulatory frameworks in order re-align them 
to the liberalised environment.  
A  significant  development  relating  to  the  Zambian  financial  sector  was  the  decision  to 
relocate  the  function  of  the  Registrar  of  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  to  the  Bank  of 
Zambia from the Ministry of Finance and National Planning where it was previously located. 
This decision was taken in an effort to enhance regulatory oversight of banks and financial 
institutions starting from the licensing stage. Currently, all applicants have to be evaluated in 
line  with  relevant  provisions  of  the  Banking  and  Financial  Services  Act  (BFSA)  and 
international  best  practice  such  as  the  Basel  Core  Principles  on  Effective  Banking 
Supervision. The intention is to ensure that only applicants who meet these stringent criteria 
enter the financial system in Zambia. This is crucial for fostering confidence and stability in 
the financial system.  
Mr  Chairman,  you  may  be  aware  that  in  the  early  stages  of  the  reforms,  a  number  of 
commercial banks faced serious problems and were subsequently liquidated. The closures 
were in part a consequence of the reforms. The reforms also highlighted some weaknesses 
in corporate governance arrangements at most failed banks.  
However,  following  improvements  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks,  no  bank 
closure  has  been  recorded  since  2002  and  the  banking  sector  has  recorded  significant 
growth.  The  growth  in  the  sector  can  also  be  attributed  to  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies  aimed  at  achieving  sustainable  macroeconomic  stability.  This  has  been 
accomplished under a stable political environment and liberalised market conditions.  
Furthermore,  in  2002,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank  undertook  a 
comprehensive  assessment  of  the  Zambian  financial  sector  through  the  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Program (FSAP). In response to the weaknesses noted in the FSAP, Cabinet 
approved the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) covering the period 2004 – 2009. 
Apart from addressing the weaknesses identified in the FSAP, the FSDP sought to further 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
strengthen the Zambian financial sector as well as to guide efforts for realizing the vision of a 
stable, sound and market based financial system that would support the efficient mobilisation 
and allocation of financial resources necessary for economic diversification and sustainable 
growth.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  in  conjunction  with  the  Government  has  been 
undertaken  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  under  the  FSDP,  which  is  now  in  the  second 
phase.  
Through the FSDP, the Bank of Zambia promoting competition among banks. Competition in 
the banking sector while desirable can have both negative and positive effects. In this regard, 
competition can be viewed in terms of being a public good which can significantly contribute 
towards access to better quality and cheaper financial services. The challenge, therefore, is 
to  ensure  that  supervisory  effort  is  adequately  able  to  change  and  effectively  respond  to 
innovations and events in the financial system. It is expected that this would consequently 
promote  confidence  in  the  financial  system  which  is  necessary  for  insulating  the  economy 
from adverse internal and external shocks.  
The Bank of Zambia has attempted to develop supervisory and regulatory approaches which 
answer  to  these  challenges.  For  instance,  Bank  of  Zambia  has  adopted  a  risk-based 
approach to supervision. This approach entails closer interaction with banks and allows early 
identification of risk as well as close monitoring of the nature and direction of risks as they 
emerge.  This  paradigm  shift  in  supervisory  approaches  requires  a  permissive  legal  and 
regulatory framework.  
Chairperson,  currently,  the  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  in  Zambia  comprise  of  the 
Banking and Financial Services Act, Chapter 387 of the Laws of Zambia; the Bank of Zambia 
Act,  Chapter  360  of  the  Laws  of  Zambia;  the  Prohibition  and  Prevention  of  Money 
Laundering  Act;  the  Bank  of  Zambia  Anti-Money  Laundering  Directives;  and  the  Bank  of 
Zambia Corporate Governance Guidelines. In addition, the Bank of Zambia also issued Risk 
Management Guidelines to provide minimum standards to be observed by commercial banks 
in the area of risk management. The Bank has continued to revise these frameworks on an 
on-going basis to ensure that they  address current challenges in the sector. However, the 
major  challenge  in  this  regard  remains  the  extent  and  speed  at  which  changes  to  these 
regulatory frameworks can be made in order to improve policy responsiveness.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of Zambia has always strived to strike a balance between 
having a robust supervisory and regulatory framework and the need to promote investments 
in the sector. The entry of new players in the market is testimony of the confident that Bank’s 
supervisory oversight of the sector has instilled in both the general and investing public. We 
remain  committed  to  executing  our  mandate  and  in  ensuring  that  the  financial  system  is 
properly  regulated  in  order  for  economic  agents  to  undertake  their  activities  in  a  safe  and 
sound environment.  
Distinguished guests, we note that financial intermediation is still very low in our economy 
and  as  such  a  lot  of  work  still  remains  in  this  area.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  encourages  and 
supports market initiatives aimed at the financially excluded in order to achieve the objective 
on  financial  inclusion.  It  is  therefore  my  view  that  promoting  the  initiative  of  reviving  the 
operations of a Co-operative bank is important. As you are all aware, in a co-operative bank, 
shareholders and customers are the same group of people whose dominant purpose is to 
provide customer value by offering tailored-made products and services cost-effectively and 
close to home.  
Through  their  membership  structures,  Co-operatives  are  known  to  have  a  firm  foothold  in 
local  communities  and  a  sound  knowledge  of  people’s  overall  financial  situation.  This 
enables  accurate  decision  making  and  risk  control  which  in  turn,  fosters  regional 
development  and  social  cohesion.  Co-operative  banks  are  also  known  for  pioneering 
sustainable  development  and  corporate  social 
through  continuous 
engagement  to  fight  unemployment  and  eradicate  social  exclusion.  In  fact,  if  properly 
managed, Co-operative banks can make the financial system more competitive. This can be 
responsibility, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
done through proper organization, meaningful investment in technology and proper pricing of 
products.  
Lastly, let me remind all of us here that like any player seeking entry in the market, the co-
operative bank which we wish to revive will be bound by the same legal, fiscal and prudential 
regulations  as  other  players.  It  is  therefore  important  for  those  who  will  be  entrusted  to 
manage the affairs of the institution to prudently provide leadership that seeks to promote the 
well being of all stakeholders. As such the aspect of good corporate governance practices in 
the banking and financial services sector cannot be over-emphasized.  
I thank you all for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
