Rundheersing Bheenick: Innovative financial services for the public in 
Mauritius 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the launching 
ceremony of CIM Visa Card by CIM Finance Ltd, Port Louis, 23 March 2011. 
 Let me begin by thanking CIM Finance Ltd for their invitation to be the guest of honour at the 
launching ceremony of the CIM Visa card. Outright I can say that you have moved today a 
step further in the financial sector by introducing your second credit card. You took your first 
step in 1996 when you started offering leasing services. In 2005, you became the first and 
to-date  the  only  non-bank  financial  institution  to  issue  a  credit  card  with  the  MasterCard 
accreditation in Sub-Saharan Africa. Today your company has assets of around 4.4 billion 
rupees,  including  your  HP  and  factoring  business,  and  you  describe  yourself  as  a  leading 
provider of consumer credit in Mauritius. Your company has come a long way indeed! 
You  demonstrate  your  desire  to  continue  to  expand  your  financial  products.  The  impetus 
does involve globalization. The Visa Card will enable your customers to gain access to the 
Visa global payments network, which reportedly operates in more than 200 countries. The 
launching of the Visa Card is in line with economic openness, an objective pursued by the 
Bank. May I therefore congratulate the Management and staff of CIM Finance Ltd for their 
commitment to enhance the quality, depth and outreach of the services that they provide? 
I understand that you will soon be launching the PayMobile, a mobile payment system. May I 
digress a little to comment on this new product which falls into what I would call a grey area? 
Let  me  share  with  you  some  of  my  thoughts  on  the  matter.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  not 
empowered, according to our interpretation of the law, to authorise mobile money transfers. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  law  requires  us  to  manage  the  national  clearing,  payment  and 
settlement  system,  in  collaboration  with  other  relevant  supervisory  and  regulatory  bodies, 
and if the PayMobile is a mode of payment, then it would come under our purview. These 
issues  raise  many  questions,  namely  that  of  “e-money”  regulation,  consumer  protection, 
stability of the financial system, and competition and interoperability.  
E-money  has  in  some  countries  moved  from  a  payment  product  to  a  full  transactional 
banking product that could be used in other ways, such as a savings account. In Mauritius, 
where our mobile penetration rate is 99 per cent for a population of nearly 1.3 million (and 
around  375,000  fixed  telephone  lines),  this  means  of  payment  seems  very  convenient  for 
low-value  transactions.  If  the  service  runs  in  the  low-value  segment,  it  would  not  have 
systemic  impact.  But  the  matter  needs  to  be  discussed  further  with  all  parties  concerned 
 – CIM Finance, the telephone service provider, the carrier or gateway, and other regulators, 
namely  the  Financial  Services  Commission  and  the  Information  and  Communication 
Technologies  Authority  (ICTA).  There  should  be  some  coordination  between  financial  and 
telecoms  regulators.  In  fact  I  have  already  had  meetings  with  the  ICTA  in  this  respect. 
Regardless of what the law says, I don’t believe that it was the intent of the legislator that a 
payment product would go unregulated. Please do not get me wrong – we are not against 
this new product! But we need to be prudent and alive to any possible danger and ensure 
that there are not any pitfalls ahead.  
To come back to CIM VISA card – the Bank of Mauritius fully backs such developments and 
pledges the necessary support to all financial institutions which roll-out new products for the 
benefit of their clients. But as the regulator, we are fully aware that along with such initiatives 
comes a wide range of inherent risks. These risks should be carefully evaluated and credible 
mitigation  measures  must  be  put  in  place  to  ensure  the  safety  of  depositors’  funds  and 
preserve the soundness of the financial system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
My first advice to you is that you should conduct a proper screening of your clients to ensure 
that your credit card advances do not turn into bad loans. You should ensure that you have in 
place procedures to chase the bad clients and a good fraud investigation framework. Your 
recent  participation  in  the  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  will  certainly  contribute  to  a 
better  assessment  of  the  creditworthiness  of  your  prospective  borrowers  and  reduce  your 
non-performing  loan  ratio.  Therefore,  prudence  in  credit  risk  management  should  be  your 
priority. 
Growth in the use of credit cards has been, to say the least, spectacular. Between 2000 and 
2010, credit card advances increased by more than 175 per cent. The credit card has grown 
to become a ubiquitous financial product used by households. There are presently more than 
one million credit cards in circulation for total advances amounting to 1.6 billion rupees – the 
biggest  chunk,  1.5  billion  rupees,  represent  personal  and  professional  sectors  –  which 
means that there has been a notable change in consumer behavior.  
Consumers use credit cards for two purposes: (i) as a substitute for cash and cheques, and 
(ii) as  a  source  of  revolving  credit.  Therefore  my  concern  is  whether  the  consumer  fully 
understands  the  costs  and  implications  of  using  credit  cards  and  whether  credit  cards  are 
encouraging  over-indebtedness,  particularly  for  those  least  able  to  pay?  In  the  US,  for 
example,  many  households  have  thus  been  caught  in  the  so-called  “plastic  trap”  
– consumers do not seem to be able to repay their balance, especially those who opt to pay 
only the minimum repayment amount by the due date of each month. In Mauritius, credit card 
advances currently represent around 3 per cent of total household credit. Concurrently, credit 
to  the  household  sector  by  banks  has  been  growing  at  a  faster  pace  than  nominal  GDP 
(although  the  credit  was  mainly  for  property  acquisition,  generally  viewed  as  a  low  risk 
investment.) As a regulator we need to remain vigilant and keep an eye on the delinquency 
rate of credit cards. And so should you for the health of your loan portfolio.  
My second concern which of course is more in the nature of an inducement, not a concern, 
for you is that card business is very good business. Financial institutions that are in the card 
business know that they make very good money from card-related fees. Since credit cards 
are  unsecured  in  nature,  interest  rates  on  credit  cards  are  very  high  –  around  2  per  cent 
monthly.  There  are  also  fees  for  late  payments,  fees  for  cash  withdrawal,  and  other 
penalties,  on  top  of  the  hidden  “swipe  fees”  that  banks  and  credit  card  companies  collect 
each time a customer pays with his credit card. Unfortunately, most of the time, such costs 
are  passed  on  to  the  customer.  And  I  can  tell  you,  time  and  again  we  receive  complaints 
from the public that credit card fees are prohibitive. In the US there is what I call the Battle of 
the Swipe Fees raging on. The Senate passed an amendment directing the Federal Reserve 
to reduce “swipe fees” (on debit cards) and to limit them to the “reasonable and proportional” 
cost  of  each  transaction.  You  can  imagine  the  intense  lobbying  from  banks  to  push  for 
changes, or outright repeal of such a legal requirement, arguing that they are being deprived 
of a significant source of revenue and that they would be forced to trim down on some of 
their services to recoup the loss. On the other hand, you have merchants arguing that the 
fees levied by banks are too high and that without those fees, they could offer products at 
reduced price to customers. The battle over the swipe fees is in full swing – each party hotly 
defending his position. My concern as a regulator here is that financial institutions should of 
course be able to cover their costs but, at the same time, the customer should get a fair deal. 
This  leads  me  to  my  second  advice  to  you:  Make  sure  that  information  on  credit  terms  is 
available to your customers, and equally important, that they fully understand them – this will 
enable  them  to  use  their  cards  wisely.  We  can  draw  our  inspiration  from  US  Credit  Card 
Accountability Act of 2009. The law protects consumer rights and abolishes the “predatory” 
lending  practices  I  referred  to  earlier.  One  of  the  requirements  is  that  monthly  credit  card 
statements  should  include  information  on  how  much  that  credit  is  actually  costing  the 
consumer. The statement now indicates the amount of time it will take for the client to pay off 
his balance if he only makes the minimum payments. It also indicates how much he needs to 
pay each month to get rid of that balance in three years. Such requirements go a long way 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
towards  a  better  management  of  credit  card  debt  in  a  country  which  has  about  54 million 
households with credit card debt – each carrying over 3,000 dollars. If these requirements 
are good for post-crisis US, they surely have some interest for us. 
Our Banking Act (2004) makes it mandatory on financial institutions to disclose information 
on  credit  terms,  while  not  being  as  specific  as  the  more  recent  US  law.  I  would  urge 
customers to pay attention to those terms to avoid paying interest which could instead have 
gone in a savings product.  
Financial  institutions  do  not  spare  any  effort  to  promote  the  use  of  cards  –  they  offer 
exclusive discounts in restaurants and shops, insurance covers, gift vouchers; frequent card 
users can even win cars. We are becoming a consumerist society – which brings me to my 
third concern: The savings culture is losing ground. Over a ten-year span, we note that the 
savings rate nearly halved, declining from 26.3 per cent in 2000 to 14.4 per cent in 2010. 
Concurrently final household consumption has risen from 60.3 per cent in 2000 to 74.8 cent 
in 2010. We are witnessing a radical societal change since the last decade. A new economic 
model is taking shape – lenders are manufacturing more credit facilities, and consumers are 
borrowing more in order to keep spending. We in Mauritius need to be cautious about this 
drastic transformation – we should not fall into the trap of a credit culture but find ways to go 
back to our savings traditions. 
Many analysts relate the low savings rate to the fall in the Key Repo Rate – an argument that 
I do not fully endorse. In simple economic terms, savings is income minus consumption. So 
as our standard of living rises, our needs increase, consumption rises, and our disposable 
income  gets  squeezed.  This  is  why  we  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  have  always  resisted 
pressures from certain sectors to take monetary policy decisions in their favour – our major 
concern has always been the interest of the wider economy. 
Turning  to  the  state  of  our  financial  sector,  the  last  IMF  Article  IV  Mission  made  positive 
comments  on  the  supervision  and  regulation  of  the  banking  sector  by  the  Bank.  The 
regulatory and supervisory framework greatly contributed to the resilience of the sector. We 
will  therefore  continue  to  strengthen  our  supervisory  framework,  and  our  supervisors  will 
continue to remind and badger institutions to hold firm to sound risk management principles. 
Another issue is competition in the banking sector. We believe that the best way to enhance 
competition  in  the  banking  sector  is  to  make  it  more  transparent  and  as  competitive  as 
possible  so  that  consumers  can  make  more  informed  decisions  in  their  choice  of  financial 
products. The issue of transparency is very important for the Bank. Transparency enhances 
competition and competition is good because it promotes economic efficiency and ultimately 
growth. It maximizes welfare by ensuring that the greatest quantity of credit is supplied at the 
lowest price. After almost two years of hard work and consultation with banks, our framework 
for assessing the financial strength of banks, the CAMEL Rating has been refined and will be 
made  public  at  the  beginning  of  next  month.  For  those  who  may  not  know  it,  the  CAMEL 
rating  framework  is  made  up  of  five  components  –  Capital,  Asset  quality,  Management, 
Earnings and Liquidity – in respect of which each financial institution is assessed. We are 
working on devising a similar framework for non-bank deposit taking institutions (NBDTIs) to 
provide the public with vital information on the financial standing of NBDTIs.  
One  final  point  I  would  like  to  raise  is  that  the  Banking  Act  stipulates  that  NBDTIs  with  a 
strong capital base be encouraged to graduate to full-fledged banks and go for a full banking 
licence. In June 2010, I had the pleasure of issuing a banking licence to our first NBDTI to 
convert  into  a  bank  –  I  would  certainly  like  to  see  CIM  Finance  Ltd  move  in  the  same 
direction. 
I  therefore  congratulate  your  board,  your  management  and  staff  for  taking  another  step  in 
widening  the  scope  of  your  operations.  I  certainly  welcome  all  initiatives  that  will  deliver 
innovative financial services to the public.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I  wish  you  every  success  in  your  future  plans  and  I  have  now  the  immense  pleasure  of 
launching the CIM Visa Card.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
