Andrew G Haldane: Haircuts 
Remarks  by  Mr  Andrew  G  Haldane,  Executive  Director,  Financial  Stability,  of  the  Bank  of 
England and member of the Financial Policy Committee, summarising a forthcoming paper in the 
Journal of Monetary Economics “Complexity, Concentration and Contagion”, 1 August 2011. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Financial Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Marnoch Aston, Benjamin Nelson, Sujit Kapadia, Vasileios Madouros, Priya Kothari and Andrew Mason for 
comments and contributions. 
During the summer months, I have my hair cut slightly shorter than during the winter months. 
This helps keep my head a little cooler in the summer heat and my ears a little warmer in the 
winter cold. Anyone who has seen them will know this is a smart strategy for my ears, to say 
nothing of my head. This strategy is explicitly counter-cyclical. When the temperature goes 
up, my hair-length comes down and vice-versa. I am not alone. National statistics show that 
expenditure on haircuts increases as temperatures rise.  
The  financial  system  also  makes  choices  about  haircuts.  The  haircuts  in  question  are  the 
amount  of  collateral  a  borrower  places  with  the  lender  over  and  above  the  face  value  of 
borrowing. But collateral haircuts tend to behave rather differently to personal haircuts. They 
fall when the financial temperature is increasing and rise when the chill sets in. This strategy 
is  explicitly  pro-cyclical.  It  will  tend  to  result  in  financial  markets  being  hot-headed  in  the 
summer and frozen-eared in the winter. 
Table 1 demonstrates this pattern. It compares haircuts on a range of financial instruments 
used  to  back  borrowing  –  so-called  securities  financing.  They  are  shown  on  two  dates, 
before  (June  2007)  and  after  (June  2009)  the  financial  crisis.  Haircuts  rose  by  up  to 
90 percentage  points  in  the  space of  these  two  years,  as  the  scorching  pre-crisis summer 
gave way to a frozen crisis winter. In other words, haircuts exhibited a rather dramatic pro-
cyclicality over the course of the crisis. 
Table 1: 
Typical haircut on term securities financing transactions (per cent) 
 June 20071 
June 20091 
Medium-term G7 government 
bonds 
Medium-term US agencies 
AAA-rated prime MBS 
Asset-backed securities 
AAA-rated structured products 
AAA- and AA-rated investment 
grade bonds 
High-yield bonds 
G7 countries equity 
0 
1 
4 
10 
10 
1 
8 
10 
Source: Committee on the Global Financial System (2010). 
1  Prime counterparty. 
1 
2 
10 
25 
100 
8 
15 
15 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This haircut cycle played an important causal role in the crisis. Secured financing became an 
increasingly  important  source  of  credit  in  both  bank  and  non-bank  markets  over  the  past 
decade. In the US, the repo market financed roughly half of the growth in investment banks’ 
balance sheets between 2002 and 2007. In the UK, the securitisation market trebled in size 
over  the  same  period.  Those  were  the  heady  days  of  summer.  Since  then  the  US  repo 
market has shrunk by 40%, while the UK securitisation market remains frozen. 
Pro-cyclicality in the haircuts applied to secured financing transactions in turn amplified the 
cycle  in  credit.  Thin  haircuts  made  it  cheaper  for  banks  to  mobilise  collateral  to  finance 
borrowing  when  the  credit  cycle  was  in  the  upswing,  adding  momentum  to  the  upward 
pendulum of asset prices and credit. And fat haircuts immobilised collateral when the credit 
cycle reversed, exaggerating the downward pendulum swing. 
A  further  factor  amplifying  these  swings  came  from  the  fact  that  much  of  the  secured 
financing took place within the financial sector. In the run-up to crisis, banks and near-banks 
entered  into  secured  financing  transactions  with  one  another,  inflating  both  counterparties’ 
balance sheet. In the UK, fully two-thirds of the trebling in balance sheets between 2002 and 
2007 can be explained by expanding claims on other parts of the financial system.  
These  cross-system  dependencies  in  financing  have  “externality-like”  effects.  During  a 
generalised boom, individual banks lend freely to one another and all of the moving parts of 
the  financial  system  are  lubricated.  The  system  co-ordinates  itself  on  a  high  liquidity 
equilibrium. Liquidity has positive spillover effects or externalities; liquidity is a public good. 
And with rising asset prices and liquidity and falling haircuts, the credit multiplier is high and 
self-reinforcing.  
But  that  cycle  can  just  as  quickly  reverse.  In  a  situation  of  stress,  individual  banks  hoard 
rather than lend liquidity. The system then co-ordinates itself on a low liquidity equilibrium. 
Liquidity  then  has  negative  spillovers,  imposing  negative  externalities;  illiquidity  is  a  public 
bad.  And  with  asset  prices  and  liquidity  falling  and  haircuts  rising,  the  credit  multiplier 
becomes self-reinforcing downwards.  
Given  these  pro-cyclicalities,  there  have  been  recent  proposals  by  both  policymakers  and 
academics  to  regulate  collateral  requirements.1  This  is  one  possible  arm  of  so-called 
macroprudential  policy.  Within  the  UK,  haircuts  on  secured  financing  or  OTC  derivative 
transactions have been identified as one possible tool for executing macroprudential policy.2 
The  UK’s  new  interim  Financial  Policy  Committee,  housed  in  the  Bank  of  England,  will 
provide advice to government on possible macroprudential tools over the next year or so.  
The debate on haircuts as a policy tool is live internationally too. In a recent speech in Atlanta, 
US  Treasury  Secretary  Tim  Geithner  proposed  the  introduction  of  international  minimum 
standards  for  margins  on  derivatives  transactions.3  This  would  be  akin  to  the  international 
minimum  standards  for  capital  adequacy  introduced  through  the  Basel  agreements.  Since 
1934, the US authorities have had regulatory powers to impose minimum margin requirements 
on lending against equity and some other assets – so-called Regulation T. But these policies 
have not been used actively, with minimum margins unchanged since 1974. 
To  date,  analysis  of  the  macroprudential  role  of  haircuts  has  been  largely  descriptive.  A 
recent paper, co-authored with Prasanna Gai and Sujit Kapadia, attempts to fill that gap.4 We 
                                                 
1  For  example,  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2010),  “The  role  of  margin  requirements  and  haircuts  in 
procyclicality”, CGFS Publications No. 36, Geanakoplos, J (2010), “Solving the present crisis and managing the leverage 
cycle”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Economic  Policy  Review,  August,  16  (1)  and  Kashyap,  A  K,  Berner,  R  and 
Goodhart, C, “The Macroprudential Toolkit”, forthcoming in the IMF Economic Review.  
http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/consult_newfinancial_regulation170211.pdf. 
http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/tg1202.aspx. 
“Complexity, Concentration and Contagion”, which is forthcoming in the Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol 58 (5). 
2 
3 
4 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
develop a model of a banking network, inter-connected through unsecured interbank lending 
and secured funding markets. This financial web exhibits classical tipping point properties. It 
is even-tempered most of the time. Indeed, having a tight-knit circle of financial friends helps 
keep the financial system strong and stable. Risks are diffused across the system. A problem 
shared is a problem halved. The system is in a high-liquidity equilibrium. 
But,  on  occasion,  the  system  can  be  pushed  beyond  its  tipping  point.  Connectivity  then 
generates contagion. A problem shared is a problem multiplied. The best of financial friends 
become  the  worst  of  enemies.  In  the  model,  one  of  the  key  channels  for  contagion  is  the 
secured financing market as banks hoard rather than lend liquidity when haircuts rise. The 
liquidity feast then turns to famine as secured and unsecured financing markets dry up. The 
system  switches  to  a  low-liquidity  equilibrium.  These  liquidity  droughts  were  perhaps  the 
defining feature of the financial crisis during 2007 and 2008. 
In  the  model,  the  likelihood  of  such  systemic  liquidity  crises  depends  critically  on  two  key 
structural characteristics of the financial system – the two c’s: concentration and complexity. 
The  greater  the  concentration  within  the  financial  system,  the  greater  the  potential  for 
systemic collapse as larger banks spread a disproportionate amount of financial pain around 
a densely networked financial system. A greater degree of system complexity has a similar 
effect,  creating  more  channels  for  contagion  and  heightening  banks’  incentives  to  hoard 
liquidity when the weather worsens. The two c’s are very much features of today’s financial 
system. On the face of it, that bodes ill for future systemic crises.  
So what role might policy play in avoiding those crises? The model provides a test-bed to 
consider  a  range  of  policy  options,  including  for  haircuts  policy.  An  illustrative  policy 
experiment, based on a simulation of the model in which haircuts spike sharply, is shown in 
Chart  1.  Up  the  vertical  axis  is  a  measure  of  the  probability  of  a  systemic  liquidity  crisis. 
Along the horizontal axis is the initial size of the haircut on secured financing transactions.  
The  three  lines  trace  three  policy  options.  Consider  first  the  “baseline”  path  without  policy 
intervention.  Provided  haircuts  remain  high  come  rain  or  shine  –  in  the  example,  above 
around 20% – the probability of a liquidity crisis remains very low. But if haircuts are lowered 
even modestly, resilience is eroded. In the example, lowering haircuts from 20% to 5% raises 
the crisis probability by an order of magnitude, from less than 0.1 to almost 1. In other words, 
a  hands-off  haircuts  policy  runs  a  significant  risk  of  systemic  collapse  if  haircuts  are  pro-
cyclically trimmed during the upswing. 
To  prevent  this,  policy  makers  could  seek  to  control  haircuts  directly.  In  the  example, 
significantly  greater  resilience  could  be  achieved  by  imposing  a  haircut  limit  of  20%. 
Alternatively,  policy  makers  could  seek  to  lean  against  the  pro-cyclical  tendencies  of  the 
financial  system  as  systemic  risk  increases.  The  other  two  lines  in  Chart  1  show  different 
sets  of  activist  policy  intervention.  Both  require banks  to  build  up  larger  liquid  asset  buffer 
stocks  in  the  event  of  haircuts  being  trimmed.  This  lessens  the  need  for  banks  to  hoard 
liquidity, so reducing system-wide liquidity stress.  
The  two  policies  differ  in  how  aggressively  they  respond  to  such  excesses  –  “weak”  and 
“tough”. Either way, the effects are striking. Even the weak policy shrinks the probability of 
collapse by more than half, whatever the initial level of haircuts. And under the tough policy, 
the financial system is effectively inoculated against haircut-induced pro-cyclicality. 
It may be over-optimistic to think policy could eliminate the adverse effects of haircut-induced 
pro-cyclicality.  For  example,  we  have  little  theoretical  understanding  of  how  haircut-based 
policies  might  affect  banks’  behaviour.  And  we  have  little  empirical  case  law  on  the 
implementation  of  these  policies.  For  example,  haircuts  policy  might  be  circumvented  by 
banks substituting towards unsecured finance. So any quantitative calibration of the effects 
of a haircut-based policy rule is necessarily tentative. Nonetheless, the model simulations are 
suggestive – and, at least qualitatively, encouraging. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Aggregate haircuts and probability of a systemic liquidity crisis 
Chart 1: 
s
i
s
i
r
c
 
y
t
i
d
i
u
q
i
l
 
c
i
m
e
t
s
y
s
 
a
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
25
20
Baseline
Weak
15
Initial aggregate haircut (h) 
10
Baseline
'Weak' haircut-dependent liquidity requirement
'Tough' haircut-dependent liquidity requirement
Source: Gai, Haldane and Kapadia (2011). 
Tough
5
0
 This financial network set-up can be used to assess a number of other topical policy issues. 
These include: 
 
Central clearing: Central clearing of financial transactions tackles the complexity of, 
and concentration within, the financial system at source. The dense knitting of the 
financial  web  is  unravelled  and  replaced  with  a  simple  hub-and-spokes  topology. 
This will tend to reduce the liquidity hoarding incentives of investors, so making for 
more  resilient  funding  markets  in  the  event  problems  strike.  Provided  the  central 
clearing  house  is  beyond  reproach,  this  topology  also  reduces  the  contagious 
consequences  of  individual  bank  stress:  liquidity  cascades  are  headed-off  at  the 
clearing house. The proviso is important, though. Robustness of the central clearing 
basket becomes more important as more eggs are placed in it. This calls for a sea-
change improvement in risk management practices among the clearing houses, as 
more financial transactions come to be centrally cleared to meet G20 commitments. 
Otherwise the too-important-to-fail problem simply re-emerges in a different guise. 
Liquidity  policy:  One  implication  of  the  model  is  the  importance  of  banks 
maintaining  buffers  of  the  highest-quality  liquid  assets.  These  have  a  doubly 
beneficial  effect.  First,  they  reduce  banks’  need  to  hoard  liquidity  in  situations  of 
stress. Second, high-quality assets reduce the amplitude of the haircut cycle in the 
first place, as Table 1 demonstrates. The first reduces the impact of a liquidity event, 
the second its probability. The upshot is a fall in the chances of a systemic liquidity 
crisis. The new Basel III liquidity regulation uses a strict definition of what counts as 
liquid assets. The model underlines the importance of sticking to that definition. The 
model  suggests  that  financial  system  robustness  would  be  further  enhanced  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 4 
 targeting liquidity requirements on the most connected banks in the system, as this 
would lean against the destabilising effects of system-wide concentration. 
Hot  heads  make  for  bad  decisions,  frozen  ears  for  uncomfortable  ones.  Financial  markets 
have  felt  the  effects  of  this  change  in  the  weather  more  dramatically  than  most.  Suitably 
designed, macroprudential  policy can  help  moderate  those  swings  in  temperature,  thereby 
improving the health of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
