Shyamala Gopinath: Approach to capital account management – shifting 
contours 
Keynote address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  Annual  Conference  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers’  Association  of  India  (FEDAI), 
Thimpu, 18 February 2011. 
 Thank you for inviting me to this forum once again and that too in these sublime environs. 
Only in such sublimity could the deeply spiritual concept of “Gross National Happiness” have 
been  crystallised  into  a  national  policy  mission.  The  theory  of  Gross  National  Happiness 
(GNH) established by His Majesty the King of Bhutan in 1972, defines Bhutan’s development 
objective as improvement in the happiness and satisfaction of the people rather than growth 
of  Gross  National  Product  (GNP).  Included  in  GNH  is  a  “middle  path”  approach  in  which 
spiritual and material pursuits are balanced. I can only hope that after a deep, long standing 
relationship with Bhutan over the last several years, we are able to incorporate at least the 
spirit of this approach in our economic policies. 
I have been a inaugural speaker at the FEDAI conferences during past few years, in person 
or  in  absentia  and  it  is  always  a  challenge  to  select  an  appropriate  topic  in  line  with  the 
overall  theme  of  the  conference.  I  felt  really  relieved  that  the  theme  for  this  Conference 
attempts to capture a broader canvas, revolving around long-run growth cycles. I hope the 
deliberations enable us to focus more closely on the relationship between the cart and the 
horse so that foreign exchange flows do support growth. 
There  are  several  ways  in  which  capital  flows  and  growth  are  related.  First,  growth 
expectations drive capital flows. In turn, capital flows accelerate growth. If capital flows are 
well  absorbed  by  the  real  economy  and  do  not  generate  macro-economic  or  financial 
instabilities, they stay. Such capital flows augment growth over the long-run and may help 
income  levels  in  developing  economies  converge  towards  the  income  levels  in  advanced 
economies. Second, capital is likely to be attracted towards countries with high productivity 
growth and higher marginal productivity of capital. However, in practice this is found to be not 
necessarily true. Third, what is generally missed is the fact that it is not just the net capital 
flows that drive growth, but also the gross capital flows contribute to growth. Gross capital 
flows  contribute  immensely  to  diffusion  of  technology  and  international  knowledge  flows. 
Fourth  growth  augmentation  can  also  take  place  because  capital  flows  enforce  macro-
economic discipline and force firms to improve governance. However, the impact of capital 
flows  on  growth  ultimately  depends  on  their  being  stable  and  less  volatile.  Durable  capital 
flows bring durable growth, while non-durable and volatile capital flows not only bring about 
non-durable growth but also large output losses in cases of currency or banking crisis. This 
however does not make a case for capital controls as in a globalised world capital account 
liberalisation is seen as a plus-sum game. 
According to IMF’s World Economic Outlook (October 2010), private financial flows to EMEs 
are projected to increase to USD 339.6 billion in 2010 as compared to US 234.8 billion in 
2009 accounted for mainly by equity flows. Growth in bank lending, after the rebound since 
the  crisis  lows,  is  expected  to  slow  down.  Going  further,  however,  the  improved  growth 
scenario in developed markets (DM) and the rising concerns regarding inflation in the EMs 
has created uncertainty in regard to the quantum of flows to EMEs. Global imbalances, which 
have been the driver of capital flows over the past several years, are expected to continue. 
Given  the  inherent  uncertainties,  most  of  the  capital  recipient  EMEs  are  going  to  find  it 
challenging to respond dynamically. If the tide of global flows changes, it may not be easy to 
change  policy  gears  swiftly  though  magnitude  of  impact  would  depend  on  the  specific 
macroeconomic  situation,  particularly  the  current  account  position.  Over  a  longer  horizon, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
therefore, it makes sense to have a broad framework for capital account management from a 
macroprudential perspective. 
It is this post-crisis shift in regard to the approach to capital account that I intend to talk about 
today.  Beyond  the  immediate  impact  of  capital  flows  on  exchange  rate  dynamics,  the 
procyclicality of such flows and implications for financial stability are being clearly recognised. 
In this context, the underlining theme that I want to bring out is that irrespective of the stage 
of liberalisation of capital account, there seems to be an imperative need for a framework for 
capital account management which gives the policymakers sufficient space and instruments 
to be able to modulate policy to the different characteristics of capital flows. Not having such 
a framework only enhances the disruptive impact of sudden capital control measures when 
they are announced. 
Shift in the approach to capital account management 
The recent crisis has clearly been a turning point in the world view on capital controls. The 
issue  of  regulation  of  capital  flows  has  slowly  but  steadily  moved  to  the  centrestage  from 
earlier being confined to the periphery of the mainstream policy discourse. The hesitancy of 
policymakers  at  the  helm  in  discussing  this  openly  earlier  has  given  way  to  a  welcome 
openness. 
Even  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions  have  revisited  their  earlier  approach  on  the  issue  of 
management of capital flows. There was a time in the nineties that, backed by the intellectual 
force  of  the  “Washington  Consensus”,  the  IMF  at  one  point  was  considering  including 
liberalization  of  international  capital  movements  as  a  central  purpose  of  the  Fund.  The 
subsequent crisis in East Asia in 1997, however, halted such moves of the IMF. 
It  seems  to  have  come  full  circle  now.  The  experience  of  many  EMEs  during  the  crisis 
underlined  the  financial  stability  implications  of  volatile  capital  flows.  At  the  G-20  Seoul 
Summit  in  Nov  2010,  the  Leaders  agreed  “to  work  on  financial  stability  issues  that  are  of 
particular interest to emerging market and developing economies and called on the FSB, IMF 
and  World  Bank  to  develop  and  report  before  the  next  Summit.  These  issues  include  the 
management  of 
institutions  corporations  and 
households...........”  
A recent policy note prepared by the IMF Staff1 puts the issue of cross-border capital flows in 
perspective. It recognises the destabilising impact of capital floods and droughts particularly 
on  emerging  economies,  noting  that  volatile  capital  flows  played  a  key  role  in  the  recent 
crisis, both in increasing vulnerabilities and in transmitting shocks across borders. Recently a 
group  of  more  than  250  economists  have  written  an  open  letter  to  the  US  Government, 
explaining  the  benign  influences  of  capital  controls  and  stressing  the  need  for  the  US  to 
dilute  the  capital  control  covenants  in  the  U.S.  trade  and  investment  treaties.  Increasingly 
many EMEs are beginning to impose capital controls and regulations, both of the traditional 
kind  such  as  reserve  requirements,  URR  and  restrictions  on  investment  in  debt  including 
minimum  investment  period  but  also  more  innovative  ones  such  as  prudential  measures, 
administrative  measures,  tax  measures  and  quantitative  limits,  particularly  targeting  the 
derivative positions held by banks. Indeed, many of these derivatives were initially invented 
to avoid precisely regulations on capital inflows or other types of financial activity. 
The key elements of this shift have been the following:  
 
Ex-ante management of capital flows is now accepted as a legitimate instrument of 
macroeconomic policy and financial stability. Though exchange rate appreciation is 
still  considered  the  preferred  ex-post  policy  option  in  dealing  with  inflows, 
foreign  exchange 
risks  by 
financial 
                                                 
1   “The Fund’s role regarding cross-border capital flows”, IMF, November, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
      intervention is now justified if there is major veering away of the currency from its 
fundamental value.  
The  limitations  of  individual  country-specific  measures  are  being  articulated.  The 
IMF  policy  note  seeks  to  address  the  issue  through  development  of  rules  of  the 
game  for  global  capital  flows  and  in  fostering  multilateral,  non-discriminatory, 
approaches that look to the interest of both the originators and recipients of capital. 
Is such a framework possible? I am not sure but till then countries impacted by this 
would need to continue to find their answers.  
It  is  increasingly  being  recognised  that  it  is  gross  flows  that  determine  risk 
exposures  and  are  therefore  important  for  financial  stability.  Netting  of  cross-
temporal flows does not capture the real impact of gross capital flows on exchange 
rate as well as asset price impacts.  
Capital  control  measures  are  being  designed  more  innovatively  for  effectiveness. 
Derivative  transactions  are  increasingly  being  specifically  targeted  and  many 
countries  are  resorting  to  enhanced  supervision  and  data  reporting  to  monitor  the 
build up of currency positions in the books of banks.  
The issue of capital flows is getting factored in the macroprudential framework being 
envisaged  for  financial  institutions  globally.  Procyclicality  of  capital  flows  and  of 
wholesale  market  funding  can  engender  vulnerabilities.  Prudential  measures  to 
address asset market volatility such as risk weights, provisioning, LTV ratios, margin 
requirements and the build up of foreign currency liabilities in the financial system 
are  also  considered  as  legitimate  instruments  to  respond  to  destabilising  capital 
flows.  
There  is  greater  recognition  of  the  insurance  needs  of  countries.  While  it  was 
commonly  argued  before  the  crisis  that  many  Asian  countries  were  incurring 
avoidable costs in accumulating large foreign currency reserves, it has been widely 
noted that countries with large reserves fared relatively well during the crisis. Forex 
reserves  have  provided  self-insurance  during  the  global  liquidity  crisis.  Those 
countries  that  built  up  precautionary  reserve  holding  were  able  to  avoid  large 
depreciation in the “Panic of 2008” (Obstfeld, Shambaug, and Taylor, 2009).  
The  argument  for  compositional  irrelevance  of  capital  flows  stands  questioned.  A 
recent IMF paper2 has concluded that the appreciation effect of private flows differs 
by  type  of  flow.  Portfolio  investments,  which  are  more  volatile,  have  the  highest 
appreciation  effect,  followed  by  FDI  and  bank  loans.  Since  these  flows  are 
potentially  related  to  an  increase  in  productive  capacity,  the  real  appreciation 
associated with FDI and bank loans is barely one-seventh of the real appreciation 
due to portfolio investments. Private transfers (mainly remittances) are the flows that 
have  the  least  appreciation  effect.  This  may  suggest  that  remittances  are  not 
procyclical. 
The cross-country experience of controls on inflows and outflows provides some conjectures 
for policy purposes. These are summarised below: 
 
It  is  evident  that  while  the  controls  on  capital  inflows  have  proved  somewhat 
effective in containing pressures on foreign exchange markets, the experiments with 
controls  on  outflows  by  the  EMEs,  particularly  in  crisis  situations  did  not  help  in 
alleviating the exchange market pressures. 
                                                 
2   Jean-Louis  Combes,  Tidiane  Kinda,  and  Patrick  Plane:  “Capital  Flows,  Exchange  Rate  Flexibility,  and  the 
Real Exchange Rate”, IMF Working Paper, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
      While controls to limit short-term inflows could be helpful in specific circumstances, 
such restrictions in force for longer-term entail costs. However, temporary uses of 
controls are more effective and can even improve the financial environment. 
It is important to recognize that neither the use of capital controls is uniform nor the 
results are identical. In addition, their impact can be subdued by global conditions. 
In  case  of  pressures  arising  out  of  capital  outflows,  the  controls  in  the  form  of 
numerous restrictions on the banks’ external transactions were not fully effective as 
they were circumvented in many instances. 
Moreover,  the  various  instruments  of  controls  provided  only  temporary  relief  or 
contained the initial pressures on forex markets when there were internal or external 
imbalances (i.e., high fiscal deficit, weaknesses in the financial sector, high current 
account deficit). 
Offshore  markets  for  the  domestic  currency  (e.g.,  NDF  markets)  proved  to  be  an 
important source of speculation and in some instances control measures could not 
succeed.  
In  case  of  crises  countries,  the  instruments  deployed  to  control  outflows  were 
ultimately  replaced  by  the  abandonment  of  exchange  rate  band/peg  in  favour  of 
float. 
Indian context 
The  policy  approach  in  India  to  the  issue  of  capital  flows  has  evolved  from  the  broader 
objective of maintaining financial and macroeconomic stability and not merely addressing the 
singular variable of exchange rate. The salient elements of this framework have been: 
i.  
an  explicitly  stated  active  capital  account  management  framework,  based  on  the 
policy  stance  of  encouraging  non-debt  creating  and  long-term  capital  inflows  and 
discouraging debt flows;  
having the policy space to use multiple instruments – quantitative limits, price based 
measures  as  well  as  administrative  measures,  particularly  for  foreign  currency 
borrowing by corporates; 
short term debt permitted only for trade transaction; 
avoiding  the  “original  sin”  of  excessive  foreign  currency  borrowings  by  domestic 
entities, particularly the sovereign; 
prudential  regulations  to  prevent  excessive  dollarization  of  balance  sheets  of 
financial sector intermediaries, particularly banks;  
cautious approach to liability dollarisation by domestic entities and  
significant  liberalization  of  permissible  avenues  for  outward  investments  for 
domestic entities. 
ii.  
iii.  
iv.  
v.  
vi.  
vii.  
Recent trends 
During the past five years, like other Emerging Market Economies (EMEs), India has been 
experiencing consistently strong capital flows, barring the crisis year of 2008–09. During the 
crisis year of 2008–09, net capital flows plummeted to USD 6.8 (0.5 per cent of GDP) from 
USD 106.6 billion (8.7 per cent of GDP) in 2007–08. The net capital flows again surged to 
USD  53.6  billion  (4.1  per  cent  of  GDP)  during  2009–10.  During  the  first  half  of  2010–11 
(April–September 2010), the net capital flows were USD 36.7 billion, which was 59.6 per cent 
higher than the net flows during the same period of the previous year (USD 23.0 billion). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  latest  trends  in  capital  flows  indicate  that  the  net  capital  flows  during  2010–11  are 
expected  to  be  higher  than  in  2009–10.  FII  investment,  ECBs  and  trade  credit  dominate 
capital flows with FIIs flows remaining as the major driver of capital flows during the current 
year  so  far.  During  the  period  up  to  February  4,  2011,  the  net  FIIs  flows  stood  at 
USD 29.6 billion  as  against  USD  22.4  billion  during  the  corresponding  period  of  2009–10. 
The ECBs registered during April–December 2010 amounted to USD 15.8 billion as against 
USD 13.8 billion during April–December 2009. 
 
FCCBs  have  constituted  a  significant  part  of  the  ECBs  raised  during  the  last  few  years, 
except for the sudden decline in the immediate aftermath of the crisis.  
 
Table 2 : Issuance of FCCBs (USD million) 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
However, with focus on capital flows on a net basis, it is often not realized that portfolio flows 
were US$174 billion a year over last three years on a gross basis, far outstripping FDI flows 
at  US$37  billion  a  year.  In  gross  terms,  over  the  last  five  years  (2005–06  to  2009–10)  FII 
flows  have  accounted  for  47%  of  the  gross  capital  inflows  to  India  as  against  9%  for  FDI 
inflows.  This  of  course  has  more  to  do  with  the  nature  of  these  flows  with  a  much  larger 
churn  for  portfolio  capital.  High  gross  flows  make  economy  more  susceptible  to  such 
reversals and as such we need to continue to maintain adequate buffers. 
In the current context, a high CAD has been absorbing much of the capital flows in aggregate 
terms.  The  concerns,  however,  arise  on  account  of  the  composition  of  flows  coupled  with 
lower order of reserves accretion and faster increase in external liabilities. 
The enhanced exposure to external liabilities is reflected in the sharp increase in the ratio of 
external debt to foreign exchange reserves from 89.1 per cent of GDP in 2008–09 to 99.1 per 
cent as at end June 2010. Moreover, the ratio of short-term debt to reserves has increased 
from 17.2 per cent to 21.0 per cent during the same period. Another issue that may come up 
going  forward  relates  to  repayment  of  FCCBs.  The  redemption  pressures  on  account  of 
FCCBs  would  start  building  up  from  2010–11  and  peak  in  the  next  couple  of  years  till  
2012–13. 
  
The  relaxation  of  buy-back  guidelines  and  refinancing  has  helped  the  corporates  to  better 
plan  for  the  impending  repayments.  The  lessons  of  the  crisis  will  hopefully  lead  to  better 
management and accounting of such liabilities by the corporates.  
As  is  evident  from  the  accretion  to  reserves  and  given  the  current  account  deficit,  unlike 
other  central  banks  from  emerging  markets,  RBI  has  been  the  least interventionist.  India’s 
foreign exchange reserves (excluding valuation effects) increased by US$ 7.0 billion during 
the  first  half  of  2010–1.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  as  on  January  14,  2011  stood  at 
US$ 297.4 billion. Though it is recognized that foreign exchange reserves can only be partial 
antidote to capital flow volatilities, they indeed work as comfort buffers during times of crisis.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Key issues and road ahead 
Going forward, the issue in our context is not really about the limited context of capital flows 
but  a  more  fundamental  one  of  the  capital  account  management  architecture  which  is 
responsive to the needs of the real economy and maintaining financial stability. The issue of 
opening up of the capital account fully has become, so to speak, the last frontier in reforming 
the  financial  sector.  In  some  quarters,  the  capital  account  constraint  has  come  to  be 
perceived as impacting other elements, particularly the development of markets.  However, 
what such arguments fail to recognise is that the macroeconomic framework is an intricately 
inter-connected model with several cross-impact elements. One can’t touch just one element 
without disturbing some other. 
It thus becomes necessary to progress with liberalisation of different elements of the capital 
account  within  the  overall  context.  We  have  been  measuring  our  readiness  in  terms  of 
certain  metrics  but  these  have  proved  to  be  contextually  variable.  The  practical  approach 
seems  to  be  to  move  towards  further  liberalisation  but  retain  the  broad  principles  of  the 
approach  pursued  hitherto.  In  this  context,  let  me  touch  upon  the  key  issues  in  regard  to 
major elements:  
FDI flows 
 
 FDI contributes to stable growth through transfer, diffusion and spill-over effects and 
it is considered stable. Except for a few sectors the policy is liberal and investments 
can be made under the automatic route. There have been some concerns on the 
declining FDI flows in the recent past though as stated earlier it has little to do with 
the  regulatory  framework  per  se  except  in  certain  sectors.  The  moderation  in  FDI 
inflows  to  India  during  April–November  2010  has  been  driven  by  sectors  such  as 
construction, mining and business services. Certain structural factors, if addressed 
expeditiously, could raise the share of India in the projected FDI flows to EMEs in 
the near future. According to the IIF, net FDI flows to EMEs are forecast to increase 
by 11 per cent in 2011. 
In this context, it may  need to be recognised that FEMA, in terms of its scope, is 
concerned only with the transactions, both capital and current account, and not with 
the  economic  activity  per  se.  FDI  policy  is  not  just  a  capital  account  issue  but  is 
linked to Government’s regulatory policies governing specific sectors that are much 
broader in nature. This too needs to be addressed appropriately.  
Portfolio flows 
 
The Report of the Committee on Foreign Investment has recommended introducing 
a  single  channel  of  foreign  investments,  QFI,  for  all  foreign  investors.  While  the 
regulations for various channels is well appreciated, the Committee has suggested 
opening  up  the  QFI  route  to  all  foreign  investors,  including  individuals,  subject  to 
compliance with KYC requirements. The issue here is not merely access to stock 
markets  but  has  much  larger  implications.  In  effect,  it  would  imply  permitting  all 
foreign residents to open accounts in India for their transactions and permitting them 
access to other market segments for their hedging requirements. The entire gamut 
of  ramifications  needs  to  be  thought  through  carefully  as  this  would  result  in  full 
capital account convertibility.  
Investments in debt 
 
The recent experience of many countries during the crisis as well as the worsening 
external  sector  ratios  for  India  preclude  any  case  for  further  liberalising  the  debt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   Having a dominant investor class in the short term segment, susceptible to sudden 
stops and reversals, is clearly a risk from macroeconomic perspective. As illustrated 
by the chart below, FIIs have demonstrated a clear preference for short term tenors, 
with 40% each of the investment in government and corporate debt in tenors up to 
one year.  
 The  time  honoured  principles  that  underlie  opening  up  of  debt  markets  to  foreign 
investment are convergence in nominal and real interest rates on sustainable basis, 
low debt/GDP ratio and low fiscal deficit to GDP ratios on a consistent basis. In case 
of sovereign borrowing, given the huge market borrowing requirements, there will be 
increased susceptibility to global market developments and rating changes if there is 
increased participation of foreign investors. In the recent market turmoil, while the 
private sector did feel the adverse impact of worsening global credit conditions, the 
sovereign  borrowing  program  was  largely  unaffected  from  direct  impact  on  this 
count.  
Outflows 
 
The regime for outward flows by individuals, mutual funds as well as corporates, has 
been significantly liberalised over the years. The most visible manifestation of this 
policy  has  been  the  increasing  cross-border  acquisitions  by  Indian  companies 
(Table 2).  
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Liberalising outward flows may not be a solution to offset large portfolio inflows as is 
often recommended. The modus operandi of overseas acquisitions is to undertake 
acquisitions  through  SPVs  overseas.  The  funding  is  often  arranged  through 
overseas  banks  backed  either  by  shares  or  assets  of  the  target  company  and/or 
guarantees by the Indian parent. The actual outflow in the form of equity and loans 
is  therefore  not  equivalent  to  the  actual  value  of  the  deals.  Similarly,  we  have 
allowed  mutual  funds  to  invest  unto  USD  8  billion  overseas;  only  around 
USD 1 billion of this limit has been used. Such outflows may potentially take place at 
inopportune times from a systemic perspective. It this becomes imperative from a 
financial stability perspective to have some prudential limits in place.  
Access to financial markets 
 
 One  of  the  key  arguments  favouring  a  more  open  capital  account  has  been  the 
attendant benefits it brings to the development of domestic markets. It was believed 
that free capital flows into the financial markets are necessary for efficient allocation 
of resources and for completion of markets by providing more liquidity. The potency 
of  this  argument  has  at  least  partly  been  dented  by  the  crisis  which  has 
demonstrated that pursuit of development of financial markets per se cannot be an 
end in itself. 
However,  trying  to  balance  all  objectives  does  bring  its  own  challenges  for 
policymaking.  It  has  been  argued  that  in  today’s  financial  world  of  complex 
derivatives, it is really not possible to have restrictive policies for flow of capital. The 
significant increase in the NDF volumes involving INR is a case in point. The recent 
BIS  Triennial  Survey  was  pretty  revealing  in  this  regard.  From  a  regulatory 
perspective,  the  real  issue  is  the  impact  of  this  market  on  the  onshore  markets. 
 
Our  preliminary  estimates  have  not  been  able  to  establish  a  causal  relationship 
between  the  NDF  and  onshore  markets  but  going  by  the  experience  of  other 
countries,  the  NDF  market  can  indeed  be  a  source  of  vulnerability.  It  does  raise 
certain  issues  particularly  regarding  the  nature  of  operations  of  banks  as  well  as 
corporates  having  cross-border  presence  which  may  need  to  be  looked  into. 
Recently, there were reports that Korea has a similar audit of some overseas banks 
over  trading  in  currency  derivatives  which  are  suspected  of  being  “speculative 
moves”. 
 
It is often suggested that the way to deal with the NDF market is to bring it onshore. 
In other words allow non-deliverable forwards in the Indian market with free access 
to all non-residents which have the same impact as full capital account convertibility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  Another  related  issue  is  that  of use  of  Rupee  for  trade  invoicing.  It  is argued  that 
rupee invoicing may be a preferred option to help domestic exporters and importers 
to deal with currency volatility. Even now, there are no regulatory restrictions coming 
in  its  way.  The  issues are  twofold:  first,  the  acceptability  of  rupee  invoicing  to  the 
overseas trade counterparty; and two, the attractiveness of rupee for credit facilities. 
Acceptability  may  be  increased  by  devising  a  mechanism  to  permit  the  overseas 
party to hedge its rupee exposures onshore. The RBI is willing to examine this and I 
would urge FEDAI to come up with feasible suggestions in this regard.  
The guidelines on CDS will be released shortly. One of the issues is the access to 
this  market  for  FIIs.  RBI  is  examining  the  suggestion  to  allow  them  to  hedge  the 
credit risk in India provided they have invested in the underlying bonds.  
Conclusion 
The balance of costs and benefits of capital flows for recipient countries has started getting 
reassessed in the aftermath of the crisis. A similar reassessment happened after the Asian 
crisis.  Many  studies  have  since  concluded  that  the  cross-country  evidence  on  the  growth 
benefits  of  capital-account  openness  is  inconclusive  and  lacks  robustness.  The  present 
crisis, however, has led to a shift in the approach to capital account from its narrow exchange 
rate  implications  and  management  of  capital  flows  is  now  accepted  as  a  legitimate 
instrument of growth, macroeconomic policy and financial stability. The role of forex reserves 
in  providing  insurance  is  also  recognized  particularly  since  countries  with  large  foreign 
exchange reserves were better positioned to weather the liquidity crisis. 
India  has  now  had  some  experience  with  the  above  model  of  a  framework  and  the  way 
forward seems to be continuing liberalisation within this framework. 
To conclude, I would like to flag a few issues from a systemic perspective: 
 
In an open economy like ours, there is need for greater recognition of currency and 
interest rate risks and the risk management in banks and corporate firms need to 
gear up their risk management practices further in this area. It is our experience that 
a  large  number  of  corporates  still  do  not  have  well-designed  risk  management 
policies  and  practices  to  take  care  of  volatile  exchange  rate  movements  and  give 
scant regard to tail risks. There is also need for greater disclosure and adherence to 
accounting standards for financial instruments. 
There  is  also  need  to  more  comprehensively  qualitatively  assess  our  external 
liabilities  to  also  encompass  liabilities  of  subsidiaries  and  branches  of  Indian 
financial  institutions  overseas,  not  in  nominal  terms  but  through  a  risk-based 
approach on the probability of recourse to parent bank liquidity support.  
Operations of foreign financial entities in domestic markets also have implications on 
capital  account  due  to cross  border  fund  flow and  derivative  positions.  During  the 
crisis period, funds were held abroad temporarily to support parent bank liquidity. In 
India.  there  are  prudential  regulations  on  banks’  recourse  to  overseas  funding 
markets,  including  for  foreign  banks.  More  local  funding  of  local  assets  reduces 
systemic risk and helps to curb excessive risk taking and credit growth. 
  I  hope  that  we  will  continue  to  have  constructive  engagement  with  FEDAI  and  I  wish  the 
conference all success. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
