Sarah Bloom Raskin: Interchange fees 
Testimony by Ms Sarah Bloom Raskin, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit, 
Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington  DC, 
17 February 2011. 
 Chairman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the subcommittee, thank you 
for  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  Board’s  proposed  Regulation  II,  which  implements  the 
interchange fee provisions of section 1075 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The proposed rule has two 
main  components.  First,  the  proposal  implements  the  statutory  prohibition  on  network 
exclusivity  arrangements  and  merchant  routing  restrictions.  Second,  as  required  by  the 
statute, the proposal establishes standards for determining the maximum permissible level of 
debit  card  interchange  fees  that  issuing  banks  covered  by  this  portion  of  the  statute  may 
receive.  
These provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the Board’s implementing regulations may result 
in  significant  market  changes.  The  nature  of  these  changes  is  subject  to  debate,  and  the 
banking  industry,  the  retail  community,  and  consumers  have  very  different  perspectives 
regarding the expected effects and their desirability. I will provide some context regarding the 
role of interchange fees and other restrictions in the debit card system, describe the Board’s 
proposed interchange rule and alternative approaches that we considered, and discuss some 
of the concerns that have been raised regarding the effect of the statutory requirements on 
various parties.  
Overview of debit card market 
To put these provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and our proposed rule in context, debit cards 
now play a prominent role in our payments system. For millions of consumers, debit cards 
provide a convenient means of payment to merchants for goods and services. These cards 
access  balances  that  are  held  in  the  cardholder’s  transaction  account  at  a  depository 
institution or have been loaded on a gift card or other form of prepaid card. The results of a 
recent Federal Reserve survey show that debit cards are now used in 35 percent of noncash 
payment  transactions,  and  have  eclipsed  checks  as  the  most  frequently  used  noncash 
payment method.1 Debit card payments have grown more than any other form of noncash 
payment over the past decade, increasing from slightly more than 8 billion payments in 2000 
to almost 38 billion payments in 2009. Debit cards are accepted at roughly 8 million merchant 
locations in the United States.  
Interchange fees are a controversial feature of the debit card system. Most consumers are 
not aware of these fees. Interchange fees are fees paid by a merchant’s bank, also known as 
the  acquirer,  to  a  cardholder’s  bank,  also  known  as  the  issuer,  for  each  debit  card 
transaction.  The  interchange  fee  schedules  are  determined  by  card  networks  and  are 
generally  the  same  for  all  issuing  banks  participating  in  a  network.  Merchants’  banks 
generally pass the costs associated with interchange fees through to merchants. In recent 
years, increases in debit card interchange fee rates, together with the significant growth in 
the  volume  of  debit  card  transactions,  have  led  to  a  substantial  rise  in  the  total  value  of 
interchange  fees  paid  by  merchants.  This  increase  in  the  aggregate  value  of  interchange 
                                                 
1   See http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/other/20101208a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fees has precipitated a national and international debate about the appropriate level of those 
fees.  
Supporters  of  the  current  interchange  system  contend  that  payment  cards  provide 
substantial value to both consumers and merchants, and that interchange fees are essential 
for  the  proper  operation  of  the  card  networks.  Interchange  proponents  believe  that 
interchange  fees  play  an  economically  important  role  in  influencing  the  incentives  of 
merchants  to  accept  cards,  card  issuers  to  issue  cards,  and  consumers  to  hold  and  use 
them.  Interchange  proponents  argue  that,  when  setting  its  fees,  a  card  network  must 
recognize the need to attract consumers and merchants, both of whom are necessary for the 
card network to exist. In this view, the resulting fees attempt to balance the two sides of the 
payment  card  market  to  maximize  the  value  of  the  network,  including  the  value  of  card 
services for both consumers and merchants.  
Critics of interchange fees focus on their level and even their very existence. They argue that 
merchants  have  limited  ability  to  drop  a  network’s  card  brand  once  their  customers  have 
come  to  expect  acceptance  of  those  cards.  Moreover,  critics  contend  that  merchants  are 
constrained  from  charging  customers  different  prices  for  different  payment  methods.  They 
also argue that networks and issuers impose restrictions that eliminate merchants’ choice of 
network over which to route transactions. They assert that, because of these characteristics 
of the debit card market, merchants generally do not have the leverage to control the costs of 
accepting debit cards and that network competition tends to result in higher interchange fees 
as  networks  strive  to  attract  issuers  (the  recipients  of  interchange  fee  revenue)  and 
cardholders (who are beneficiaries of attractive account terms, such as rewards programs, 
funded by interchange fee revenues).  
Proposed Regulation II 
The statute addresses transaction routing flexibility for merchants and debit card pricing in 
several ways. As discussed in more detail below, the statute provides for a minimum number 
of networks per debit card and establishes the ability of merchants to direct the routing of 
debit card transactions over those networks. The statute also contains provisions, not subject 
to  implementing  rules  by  the  Board,  that  protect  the  merchant’s  ability  to  provide  pricing 
incentives for customers to use different forms of payment.2 In addition, the statute provides 
overall limitations on interchange fees through standards to be set by the Board.  
Input to the rulemaking. As input to the development of our proposed rule, Board staff held 
numerous  meetings  with  card  issuers,  networks,  merchants,  consumer  advocates,  and 
others to deepen our understanding of the debit card industry. These discussions provided 
information  about  the  structure  and  mechanics  of  the  debit  card  system,  fraud  losses  and 
fraud-mitigation activities, and fees and costs associated with debit card transactions. Staff 
also  reviewed  written  submissions  by  interested  parties  that  highlighted  issues  to  be 
considered in implementing the statute.3 
To obtain further input, last fall the Board surveyed debit card issuers that would be subject 
to the interchange fee standards, payment card networks, and large merchant acquirers. We 
requested  information  about  the  volume,  costs,  fees,  fraud-prevention  activities,  and  fraud 
losses  associated  with  different  types  of  debit  card  transactions.  We  also  asked  about 
                                                 
2   The  statute  prohibits  payment  card  networks  from  inhibiting  merchants  from  providing  a  discount  or  other 
incentive for any particular form of payment, as long as any discount for card use is clearly disclosed and does 
not differentiate on the basis of issuer or payment card network. 
3   The  meeting  summaries  and  written  submissions  are  posted  on 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/reform_interchange.htm. 
the  Board's  public  website  at 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
network exclusivity arrangements and routing restrictions. The information gathered through 
these surveys informed our development of the proposed rule.  
Based on this information, we published a proposed rule for public comment in December. 
The  comment  period  closes  next  Tuesday,  February  22.  We  will  carefully  review  all  the 
comments we receive before we adopt a final rule.  
Let me turn now to the substance of our proposed rule. I will summarize each major statutory 
requirement,  and  then  describe  how  the  proposed  rule  implements  it,  including  alternative 
approaches we considered.  
Prohibition on network exclusivity and routing restrictions. The statute requires the Board to 
prescribe rules related to the routing of debit card transactions. First, the Board must adopt 
rules  that  prohibit  issuers  and  payment  card  networks  from  restricting  the  number  of 
networks on which a debit card transaction may be processed to fewer than two unaffiliated 
networks.  Second,  the  Board  must  adopt  rules  that  prohibit  issuers  and  networks  from 
inhibiting the ability of merchants to route debit card transactions over any network that may 
process such transactions. Together, these provisions appear designed to give merchants a 
choice of networks over which a debit card transaction may be routed. The statute applies 
these  provisions  to  all  issuers,  including  the  small  issuers  and  government-administered 
payment and other prepaid programs that are exempt from the interchange fee standards.  
The  Board  requested  comment  on  two  alternative  interpretations  of  the  prohibition  on 
network exclusivity arrangements. The first possible interpretation would require issuers and 
networks to allow a debit card transaction to be routed over at least two unaffiliated payment 
card networks. Under this approach, an issuer could, for example, enable a debit transaction 
to  be  routed  over  one  signature-based  network  and  one  unaffiliated  personal  identification 
number or PIN-based network. The second possible interpretation would require a debit card 
to  have  at  least  two  unaffiliated  payment  card  networks  for  each  method  of  authorization 
available to the cardholder. For example, under the second interpretation, a debit card that 
can be used for both signature and PIN debit transactions would have to be able to be routed 
over  at  least  two  unaffiliated  signature  debit  networks  and  two  unaffiliated  PIN  debit 
networks. This latter approach would provide more merchants with routing choice,4 but would 
entail  far  more  substantial  operational  changes  by  debit  card  networks,  issuers,  merchant 
acquirers, merchants, and their processors.5  
As noted above, the law also requires rules that prohibit issuers and networks from inhibiting 
merchant routing choice. The proposed rule includes examples of issuer or network actions 
that would impede merchant routing flexibility, such as issuer or network rules that require 
routing of a transaction over a particular network when multiple networks are available.  
These proposed network exclusivity and routing rules, along with the statutory provisions that 
provide  merchants  more  flexibility  to  set  differential  prices  based  on  method  of  payment 
used,  could  promote  competition  among  networks  and  place  downward  pressure  on 
interchange fees.  
Interchange  fee  standards.  In  addition  to  these  market  approaches  to  constraining 
interchange  fees,  the  law  also  limits  the  amount  of  any  interchange  fee  that  an  issuer 
                                                 
4   This approach would provide routing choice to merchants that only accept signature debit. About 6 million of 
the 8 million merchant locations in the United States that accept debit cards do not have PIN debit capability 
and only have the capability to accept signature debit transactions. In addition, there are currently operational 
or market impediments to using PIN debit for certain types of transactions, such as most online transactions. 
5   This approach would require issuers to have multiple signature debit networks, such as Visa and MasterCard, 
on their cards (unless a card had only PIN functionality). The signature debit network over which a transaction 
is routed is determined by the first digit of the card number; therefore, the industry currently does not have the 
capability  to  enable  transactions  using  a  particular  debit  card  to  be  routed  over  either  of  two  signature 
networks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
receives for a debit card transaction to an amount that is “reasonable and proportional to the 
cost incurred by the issuer with respect to the transaction.”6 The Board is required by law to 
establish  standards  for  assessing  whether  an  interchange  fee  meets  the  reasonable-and-
proportional requirement; the statute directs the Board to adopt these standards by April 21. 
In  developing  these  standards,  the  statute  explicitly  requires  the  Board  to  consider  certain 
factors  and  not  to  consider  other  factors.  In  particular,  the  statute  instructs  the  Board  to 
consider the functional similarity between debit card transactions and checks, which clear at 
par  (i.e.,  with  no  interchange  fees).7  The  statute  also  directs  the  Board  to  distinguish 
between the issuer’s incremental cost to authorize, clear, and settle a particular transaction, 
which the Board must consider, and other costs that are not specific to a particular electronic 
debit transaction, which the Board may not consider.8 These are the directives that Congress 
provided in the law.  
The statute exempts certain issuers and cards from the restrictions on interchange fees. In 
particular,  the  law  states  that  the  interchange  fee  standards  do  not  apply  to  issuers  that, 
together with affiliates, have assets of less than $10 billion.9 In addition, the law states that 
the  standards  do  not  apply  to  debit  cards  used  in  government-administered  payment 
programs and certain reloadable, general-use prepaid cards.10  
As stated above, the statute requires the Board to consider “the incremental cost incurred by 
an  issuer  for  the  role  of  the  issuer  in  the  authorization,  clearance,  or  settlement”  of  a 
particular  transaction.  We  considered  limiting  the  allowable  costs  to  only  those  costs 
associated  with  authorizing  a  debit  card  transaction.  This  approach  would  reflect  a  key 
distinction between debit card and check transactions: the fact that debit card transactions 
are authorized by the issuer, whereas check transactions are not (although merchants may 
purchase  a  third-party  check  guarantee  service).  However,  because  the  statute  explicitly 
instructs  the  Board  to  consider  clearing  and  settlement  costs,  in  addition  to  authorization 
costs,  the  proposal  includes  those  costs,  rather  than  limiting  allowable  costs  only  to 
authorization costs.  
We also considered including other costs that are associated with a particular transaction but 
that are not directly associated with authorizing, clearing, and settling the transaction. Such 
costs might include, for example, the cost of providing cardholder rewards and the cost of 
responding  to  cardholder  inquiries  regarding  specific  transactions.  However,  given  the 
statute’s  mandate  to  consider  the  functional  similarities  between  debit  card  and  check 
transactions,  and  the  fact  that  these  costs  are  not  charged  to  merchants  in  check 
transactions,  our  proposal  limits  allowable  costs  to  those  costs  that  the  statute  explicitly 
directs the Board to consider. We specifically requested comment on whether other costs of 
a  particular  transaction  should  be  included  as  allowable  costs  and  what  criteria  should  be 
used to determine the costs to be included.  
As I mentioned earlier, the statute directs us to consider the incremental cost of a particular 
transaction. There is no single, generally accepted definition of the term “incremental cost,” 
as  it  applies  to  a  particular  transaction,  so  arriving  at  a  definition  was  challenging.  The 
incremental  cost  of  a  particular  transaction  could  be  interpreted  to  be  the  same  as  the 
marginal  cost  of  that  transaction.  This  approach  of  interpreting  incremental  cost  would  be 
impractical, in part because marginal cost cannot be identified from cost accounting data and 
can differ for each transaction.  
                                                 
6   EFTA § 920(a)(2), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(2). 
7   EFTA § 920(a)(4)(A), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(4)(A). 
8   EFTA § 920(a)(4)(B), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(4)(B). 
9   EFTA § 920(a)(6), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(6). 
10   EFTA § 920(a)(7), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(7). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  proposed  rule  interprets  the  incremental  cost  as  average  variable  cost.  This 
interpretation of incremental cost excludes fixed costs, such as network connectivity costs, 
and  common  or  overhead  costs,  based  on  the  premise  that  these  categories  of  costs 
generally  cannot  be  attributed  to  any  particular  transaction,  given  that  they  could  not  be 
avoided  if  any  particular  transaction  did  not  occur.  Under  this  view,  the  exclusion  of  fixed 
costs is required by the statute’s explicit directive that the Board may not consider costs that 
are not specific to a particular transaction. If marginal cost does not vary materially over the 
relevant  volume  range,  then  average  variable  cost  will  provide  a  close  approximation  of 
marginal cost. Hence, average variable cost appears to be the closest approximation of what 
the statute requires when it directs the Board to set standards for “incremental costs.”  
In addition to requesting comment on using the average variable cost of authorizing, clearing, 
and settling a debit card transaction as the standard for determining whether an interchange 
fee is reasonable and proportional to the issuer’s incremental cost, the Board also requested 
comment on two alternative approaches for implementing that standard. The first approach is 
based on each issuer’s allowable costs with a safe harbor and a cap. The second approach 
adopts a cap that is applicable to all covered issuers.  
We  developed  these  approaches  for  implementing  the  standard  after  analyzing  the  data 
collected  in  our  surveys  and  considering  the  economic  incentives  and  burdens  associated 
with  various  approaches  to  implementation.11  Under  the  first  alternative,  an  issuer  would 
comply with the standard if it received an interchange fee that did not exceed the lesser of its 
allowable average variable cost and a cap, which we proposed initially be set at 12 cents per 
transaction.  Eighty  percent  of  issuers  that  responded  to  the  survey  and  provided  the 
necessary information reported average variable costs of authorizing, clearing, and settling a 
debit card transaction that were below the proposed 12 cent cap. This alternative would also 
permit an issuer to comply with the standard by receiving an interchange fee that does not 
exceed the level of a safe harbor. If the interchange fee is at or below the safe harbor, the 
issuer would not need to determine its maximum interchange fee based on allowable costs. 
The proposed rule initially sets the safe harbor at 7 cents per transaction, which represents 
the  median  average  variable  cost  of  authorizing,  clearing,  and  settling  a  debit  card 
transaction reported by issuers that responded to our survey and provided that information. 
Under the second alternative, an issuer would comply with the interchange fee standard as 
long as it does not receive an interchange fee above the cap. The proposed rule provides the 
same initial cap of 12 cents per transaction.  
The statute requires the Board to collect data from card issuers or payment card networks as 
necessary  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the  statute  (and  to  publish  aggregate  data  on  a 
biannual basis). The Board expects that it would adjust the cap or safe harbor amounts in the 
future, if warranted by future data collections.  
Fraud-prevention adjustment. The statute permits, but does not require, the Board to allow 
for an adjustment to an interchange fee to account for an issuer’s costs in preventing fraud, 
provided  the  issuer  complies  with  standards  established  by  the  Board  relating  to  fraud-
prevention activities.12 The statute excludes fraud losses as a category of costs that may be 
recovered  through  the  fraud-prevention  adjustment.  The  proposed  rule  does  not  currently 
include  a  specific  adjustment  to  the  amount  of  interchange  fees  for  an  issuer’s  fraud-
prevention  costs  because  at  the  time  the  proposed  rule  was  issued,  the  Board  had 
insufficient  information  upon  which  to  propose  a  specific adjustment  and  the  standards  an 
                                                 
11   We  believe  that  both  alternatives  provide  better  economic  incentives  for  covered  issuers  to  improve  the 
efficiency  of  their  card  operations  than  would  be  provided  by  an  approach  based  solely  on  each  issuer's 
allowable costs. The safe harbor in the first alternative and the cap in the second alternative are also intended 
to reduce the administrative compliance burden on industry participants and would improve the consistency 
and ease of enforcement by supervisors. 
12   EFTA § 920(a)(5), 12 USC § 1693o-2(a)(5). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
issuer  must  meet  to  qualify  to  receive  it.  Instead,  the  Board  requested  comment  on  two 
general approaches and posed a number of questions related to those alternatives.  
Under the first approach, the fraud adjustment would allow issuers to recover costs incurred 
for implementing major innovations that would likely result in substantial reductions in total, 
industry-wide  fraud  losses.  Under  the  second  approach,  the  fraud  adjustment  would 
reimburse the issuer for reasonably necessary steps it takes to maintain an effective fraud-
prevention  program.  The  second  approach  would  not  prescribe  specific  technologies  that 
must be employed as part of the program. After considering the comments we receive, the 
Board  plans  to  issue  a  specific  proposal  on  the  fraud-prevention  adjustment  for  public 
comment.  
Prohibition  against  circumvention  or  evasion.  The  statute  grants  the  Board  authority  to 
address  circumvention  or  evasion  of  the  interchange  fee  restrictions.  Under  the  proposed 
rule,  a  finding  of  circumvention  or  evasion  will  generally  depend  on  the  facts  and 
circumstances.  The  proposed  rule,  however,  specifically  provides  that  circumvention  or 
evasion  occurs  when  an  issuer  receives  compensation  from  a  payment  card  network  (for 
example, in the form of incentive payments) that exceeds the total amount of fees that the 
issuer  pays  to  the  network.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  net  compensation  from  the 
network would effectively serve as a transfer to an issuer in excess of the amount allowed 
under  the  interchange  fee  standard.  The  proposal  requests  comment  on  other  forms  of 
circumvention or evasion that should be addressed in the rule.  
Consideration of key issues. The public comment period is still open on the Board’s proposal. 
The Board has already received thousands of comments raising a variety of issues, and we 
expect  to  receive  many  more  in  the  next  several  days.  In  addition,  one  issuing  bank  has 
already initiated a court challenge to the constitutionality of the statute. In light of the novelty 
and unusual complexity of the issues raised in this rulemaking effort, my colleagues and I are 
very interested in reviewing the full range of comments offered on our proposed rule and are 
reserving judgment on the terms of the final rule until we have the opportunity to benefit from 
these comments.  
A common theme among many commenters and the court challenge is concern about the 
effect  that  the  statute  may  have  on  debit  card  issuers,  including  small  issuers.  As  I  noted 
earlier,  the  statute  exempts  small  issuers  from  the  interchange  fee  standards.  Community 
banks and credit unions are concerned that the interchange revenue they currently receive 
will decline to the extent networks do not implement a two-tier interchange fee system that 
retains the current interchange fee levels for exempt issuers. They are also concerned that 
even if the networks did differentiate between covered and exempt issuers, some merchants 
would steer their customers to use lower-cost payment options.  
Another concern expressed by small issuers is that the statute does not exempt them from 
the prohibitions on network exclusivity and routing restrictions. Small issuers are concerned 
that  they  will  incur  additional  costs  to  participate  in  additional  debit  card  networks.  Small 
issuers  are  also  concerned  that  these  provisions  may  provide  an  incentive  to  networks  to 
lower  their  interchange  fees  to  encourage  merchants  to  route  their  debit  card  transactions 
through  that  network,  thus  lowering  interchange  revenue  to  all  issuers,  including  small 
issuers.  
The plaintiff in the suit against the Board on this rulemaking, on the other hand, is a debit 
card  issuer  that  does  not  qualify  for  the  small  issuer  exemption  and  is  concerned  this 
exemption  will  effectively  put  large  issuers  at  a  competitive  disadvantage  vis-à-vis  small 
issuers,  which  are  not  subject  to  the  interchange  fee  restrictions.  It  contends  that  small 
issuers will be able to continue to fund their debit card operations through interchange fees 
charged to merchants while larger issuers will either be unable to recoup their total costs or 
will  be  forced  to  increase  fees  to  their  customers,  and  thus  risk  losing  the  account 
relationships.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Commenters also have differing perspectives on the potential effect of the statute and the 
proposed  rule  on  consumers.  The  magnitude  of  the  ultimate  effect  is  not  clear  and  will 
depend on the behavior of various participants in the debit card networks. For example, card 
issuers may choose to make up their lost interchange fee revenue by imposing higher fees, 
or reducing rewards programs, for debit card use or for deposit accounts in general. On the 
other  hand,  consumers  will  benefit  to  the  extent  merchants  pass  on  their  interchange  fee 
savings in the form of lower prices.  
Conclusion 
The provisions of section 1075 of the Dodd-Frank Act raise a number of complex issues. The 
Board is devoting substantial resources to understanding and addressing these issues within 
the  parameters  established  by  the  statute.  We  welcome  input  from  the  public  and  from 
members of the Committee in this effort.  
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
