Louis Kasekende: The evolving nature of macroeconomic management 
in Sub-Saharan Africa and its implications for IMF programs 
Speech by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at a retreat with 
the IMF Resident Representative, Kampala, 26 January 2011. 
 Introduction  
Macroeconomic management is changing in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), especially in the so 
called “frontier markets”. It is becoming more sophisticated as a result of improvements in 
technical  capacities  (in  central  banks  and  finance  ministries)  and  because  of  the  need  to 
tackle more complex macroeconomic challenges, including those arising from global financial 
integration. One implication of these changes is that policymakers in SSA will, in future, place 
more  emphasis  on  demand  management  within  a  business  cycle  framework  than  has 
hitherto been the case. The shifts in the nature and focus of macroeconomic management 
have  been  given  impetus  by  Africa’s  experience  of  managing  the  impact  of  the  global 
economic crisis, which on balance was quite successful; although there was a slowdown in 
economic  growth  in  SSA  in  2008  and  2009,  most  economies  in  the  region  avoided 
recession.1 I want to highlight some of these changes to macroeconomic management and 
discuss  what  this  might  mean  for  IMF  programs  in  SSA.  These  remarks  are  intended  to 
provoke discussion about what I think are important issues for SSA and the IMF, and which 
will have to be addressed sooner or later.  
IMF programs in SSA  
IMF programs were originally designed for a specific purpose – to help economies adjust to 
temporary  balance  of  payments  (BOP)  deficits.  Hence  they  combined  emergency  liquidity 
support  with  quantitative  targets  for  monetary  and  fiscal  aggregates  designed  to  constrain 
aggregate  demand  and  protect  the  BOP  (and  hence  the  recipient’s  capacity  to  repay  the 
IMF).  
This is not the role of IMF programs in many countries of SSA today. Instead, SSA countries 
have implemented IMF programs on a long term basis – through a succession of consecutive 
IMF programs; even when these economies are not facing BOP crises and often when they 
don’t even borrow from the IMF (or only borrow token amounts).2  
The design of Fund programs in SSA – whether ESAF, PRGF, PSI etc – in terms of their 
macroeconomic conditionalities (the quantitative performance criteria) – is fundamentally the 
same whether viewed in a cross sectional perspective (across different countries in SSA) or 
through  time  (e.g.  over  the  last  25  years).  This  is  despite  their  being  substantial 
heterogeneity among SSA economies and the significant changes that have occurred within 
the same economies over the last 25 years.  
This begs three questions which I want to address.  
                                                 
1   See Brixova and Ndikumana (2010) and IMF (2010). 
2  
IMF  (2008)  sets  out  the  rationale  for  the  IMF’s  engagement  in  Low  Income  Countries  (LICs).  The  IMF 
perceives its role as extending far beyond support for the BOP. Instead this document states (page 3): “Fund 
engagement with LICs over the past decade has been focused on supporting macroeconomic stability – its 
key  global  mandate  –  as  part  of  broader  development  efforts  to  reduce  poverty,  raise  growth  and  secure 
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
1. 
2. 
3. 
Is the technical design of the macroeconomic conditionalities in Fund programs still 
appropriate for the macroeconomic challenges faced by all SSA economies, and in 
particular for the more advanced economies in the region; the “frontier markets”?  
Should the IMF be more open minded about heterodox policy measures which are 
being implemented by many emerging market economies in Latin America and Asia, 
and which are attracting interest among African policymakers?  
Is  there  still  any  value  for  SSA  economies,  which  don’t  face  temporary  BOP 
problems and don’t need to borrow from the IMF, in implementing IMF programs? 
Might these programs have actually become counterproductive?  
international 
The technical design of IMF programs in SSA  
I want to focus here on the design of the macroeconomic conditionalities of IMF programs, 
which are fairly homogenous in SSA (there is much greater heterogeneity in the structural 
conditions).  
With very few exceptions, IMF programs in Africa comprise quantitative targets for monetary 
aggregates,  net 
reserves,  government  domestic  borrowing  and  non 
concessional external borrowing. These are the key targets in an IMF program; in practice, it 
appears that the structural conditions are accorded less importance.  
One  can  argue  that  the  quantitative  targets  are  well  suited  to  a  certain  type  of  economy 
facing  specific  challenges;  notably  a  low  income  economy  with  a  very  shallow  financial 
sector,  inadequate  international  reserve  cover  and  for  which  the  key  macroeconomic 
challenge  is  to  restore  macroeconomic  stability  after  a  period  of  severe  macroeconomic 
turbulence.  This  was  the  situation  on  Uganda  in  the  1990s  (as  well  as  many  other  SSA 
economies at that time) and still applies to some countries in SSA today.  
However, the economic situation in several SSA countries has evolved radically in the last 
two decades and they face very different macroeconomic challenges to those faced 20 years 
ago. Approximately a fifth of SSA economies, comprising about 50 percent of the region’s 
GDP excluding South Africa, are now described as “frontier markets”. The frontier markets 
are characterized by strong private sector led economic growth and financial sectors which 
are  beginning  to  attract  investment  from  abroad.  They  are  starting  to  acquire  similar 
economic characteristics to the emerging markets of Latin America and Asia.3  
The  key  macroeconomic  challenge 
to  restore 
macroeconomic stability; many achieved this in the 1990s (they are mature stabilizers in the 
ergot  of  the  Policy  Support  Instrument).  Most  have  a  good  record  of  macroeconomic 
management over many years. In the years leading up to the global economic crisis, good 
macroeconomic  management  created  the  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  space  which  enabled 
them to adopt countercyclical macroeconomic policies to offset the contractionary impact of 
the  external  shocks  they  faced  as  a  result  of  the  global  crisis.4  In  many  respects  the 
response of some SSA economies to the global economic crisis was not very different from 
that of emerging market economies in other continents.  
The  post  crisis  global  environment  will  probably  be  more  volatile  than  it  was  prior  to  the 
global crisis, as the large global imbalances unwind, exacerbating shocks to SSA’s external 
terms of trade and capital flows. The primary challenge for macroeconomic management in 
the frontier markets of SSA in the post crisis world will be to steer the economy with minimum 
volatility  to  prices  and  output  in  the  face  of  domestic  and  external  shocks  emanating  from 
these  economies 
longer 
is  no 
for 
                                                
 
3   Nellor (2008). 
4   Kasekende, Brixiova and Ndikumana (2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
both the supply and demand side of the economy. This has two important implications for the 
reform  of  macroeconomic  management.  First,  macroeconomic  policy  must  include  an 
element of short term aggregate demand management, something which is relatively new in 
most  SSA  economies.  Second,  it  must  recognize  that  there  are  multiple  macroeconomic 
targets and hence potential tradeoffs; output stabilization and inflation for example.  
How  relevant  are  the  macroeconomic  conditionalities  in  IMF  programs  to  the  challenges 
facing macroeconomic management in the frontier markets of SSA? Arguably, all of the main 
quantitative targets in IMF programs are deficient.  
Fiscal targets  
The main quantitative target pertaining to fiscal policy in IMF programs in SSA is government 
net  domestic  borrowing.  As  a  fiscal  target  this  has  three  drawbacks  for  a  frontier  market. 
First, with the deepening of domestic financial markets in these countries, and the possibility 
of attracting external portfolio investment into the domestic securities markets, rigid ceilings 
on government domestic borrowing are no longer as critical for macroeconomic stability as 
they were in the past. Second, the domestic borrowing target imparts a pro-cyclical bias to 
fiscal  policy;  when  budget  revenues  fall  because  of  lower  than  forecast  economic  activity, 
public spending must be cut to meet the target. Third, it provides only a partial indicator of 
the  stance  of  fiscal  policy  –  its  impact  on  aggregate  demand  –  which  is  what  matters  for 
macroeconomic  management.5  A  more  comprehensive  indicator  would  be  an  appropriate 
measure  of  the  fiscal  deficit,  preferably  a  structural  measure  of  the  deficit  to  avoid  a  pro-
cyclical bias.  
Monetary aggregates  
Monetary aggregates as targets for monetary policy are an effective tool for bringing down 
inflation from high levels (which was a priority in the 1990s), but they are much less useful for 
controlling  inflation  when  it  is  already  at  low  levels,  because  of  the  instability  of  money 
demand.6  Monetary  targets  are  also  an  impediment  to  the  more  activist,  discretionary, 
monetary policy which is needed to meet the challenges facing macroeconomic management 
in the frontier markets. Some form of an inflation targeting lite monetary policy framework is 
better  suited  to  meeting  these  challenges;  a  monetary  policy  framework  which  has  been 
adopted  by  many  emerging  market  central  banks.  Retaining  monetary  targets  in  IMF 
programs is an obstacle to the progressive reform of monetary policy in SSA.  
Floors on net international reserves  
Targets for international reserves are clearly needed for countries facing BOP crises in which 
protecting the international reserves from further depletion is a policy priority. But it is difficult 
to  understand  why  such  targets  should  be  accorded  the  same  priority  for  countries  which 
have accumulated large holdings of international reserves, equivalent to five or six months of 
imports and which face no immediate threat to their BOP. In these circumstances the targets 
constrain  the  country’s  capacity  to  use  its  own  foreign  exchange  reserves  for  purposes  of 
exchange rate management. Exchange rate policies should be determined on their merits, 
not  as  a  by-product  of  an  IMF  program  target  which  is  intended  for  an  entirely  different 
purpose.  
                                                 
5   For example, Government spending from external grants and loans can make a substantial contribution to the 
fiscal stance without affecting net domestic borrowing. 
6   Thornton (2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Non concessional external public borrowing  
IMF  programs  in  SSA  impose  limits  (in  some  cases,  zero)  on  non  concessional  external 
public  borrowing.  There  is  a  rationale  for  such  limits  for  countries  facing  external  debt 
problems, and which require debt relief to restore debt sustainability. But they should not be 
retained  indefinitely  for  many  years  after  a  country  has  received  debt  relief  (under  HIPC 
and/or MDRI) and is not at risk of external debt sustainability.  
There are important benefits to be gained by SSA countries from accessing commercial debt 
markets. Sources of public finance are diversified; dependence on donor aid is reduced; and 
sovereign borrowing costs can provide a benchmark for the private sector to access foreign 
capital.  Commercial  borrowing  entails  fewer  conditionalities  and  lower  transactions  costs 
than borrowing from the traditional donors. Furthermore, SSA Governments need to obtain 
and  maintain  a  good  sovereign  credit  rating  from  the  rating  agencies  in  order  to  access 
commercial  bond  markets.  This  provides  a  powerful  incentive  to  policymakers  to  pursue 
sound macroeconomic policies.  
Instead of ceilings on non concessional external public borrowing, it would be preferable to 
establish  an  overall  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio  as  a  medium  term  fiscal  anchor,  based  on 
agreed  debt  sustainability  criteria.  Public  debt  should  include  both  external  and  domestic 
debt,  so  that  governments  can  choose  the  optimal  balance  within  the  overall  debt 
sustainability  constraint.  If  the  debt/GDP  ratio  was  expressed  in  terms  of  the  net  present 
value of debt, countries could then choose between contracting concessional debt or a lower 
amount of commercial debt. This would ensure that the key policy objective of maintaining 
fiscal  sustainability  is  met  but  leave  governments  free  to  manage  the  composition  of  their 
borrowing according to their own preferences.  
Should SSA countries consider more heterodox policies?  
Successful emerging market economies have often employed an eclectic range of economic 
policies,  in  areas  such  as  exchange  rate  management  and  financial  sector  policy. 
Policymakers in SSA can learn from their experience. This experience suggests that there is 
scope for expanding the set of feasible policy choices available in SSA. I will highlight three 
examples.  
Exchange rate management  
The  exchange  rate  is  a  very  important  price  in  developing  economies,  which  shouldn’t  be 
ignored by macroeconomic management. It matters for inflation, output and financial stability, 
all of which are policy objectives.  
Many emerging market central banks manage their exchange rates to some extent, without 
necessarily pegging the rate, because exchange rate movements can have severe adverse 
macroeconomic effects.7 For example, several Latin American countries are currently trying 
to  push  down  the  value  of  their  currencies  because  the  recent  appreciation  has  badly 
affected their competitiveness.  
External shocks transmitted through the exchange rate may become more pronounced in the 
frontier  markets  of  SSA  as  their  economies  become  more  integrated  into  global  financial 
markets. Hence managing exchange rates will become more important for macroeconomic 
management. This does not mean that managing the exchange rate should take precedence 
over  all  domestic  policy  objectives;  rather  central  banks  should  recognize  that  optimal 
macroeconomic  management  can  encompass  balancing  multiple  objectives  rather  than  an 
exclusive focus on a single objective.  
                                                 
7   Calvo and Reinhart (2002). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Capital controls  
Emerging markets are starting to take a more favourable view of the costs and benefits of 
capital  controls,  especially  controls  on  short  term  portfolio  capital  flows,  as  a  tool  for  both 
macroeconomic management and financial stability. This is for two reasons. First, even for 
economies which are capital scarce, the developmental value of short term portfolio capital 
flows  appears  tenuous.  Second,  exchange  rate  volatility  triggered  by  inward  or  outward 
capital surges can be very disruptive to the real economy and the banking sector, especially 
if domestic agents have foreign currency liabilities.  
The  main  drawback  of  capital  controls  is  that  they  are  often  not  very  effective,  because 
private  agents  find  ways  to  circumvent  them  if  the  incentives  are  strong  enough. 
Nevertheless, this is not sufficient reason to eschew their use entirely; even if capital controls 
are  only  partially  effective  they  could  still  prove  useful  for  stabilizing  the  economy  and 
mitigating risks to the financial sector, as a complement to other policy tools.  
Industrial policies  
Industrial policies, broadly defined, have acquired, justifiably, a bad reputation in SSA. When 
they  were  used,  mainly  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  for  the  most  part  they  failed  badly  for 
political  economy  reasons.  But  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  notably  in  East  Asia,  industrial 
policies  have  been  more  successful,  and  we  should  try  and  learn  lessons  from  this 
experience.8  
The  alternative  of  laissez-faire  economic  policies,  while  it  has  been  successful  in  many 
respects in SSA, has also failed in one crucial area. Laissez-faire policies have not brought 
about anywhere near enough private investment in modern industries to create large scale 
employment  and  accelerate  the  structural  transformation  of  SSA  economies.  In  most  SSA 
economies the majority of the labour force still earns their living outside of the modern sector 
of the economy.  
We need to reconsider whether public policy should not play a more active role in guiding 
resource  allocation  in  the  economy;  specifically  to  stimulate  private  investment  in  labour 
intensive modern industries. Policies will need to be carefully designed to mitigate the risk of 
“government failure” (for example as a result of rent seeking), but that is not a reason for not 
attempting  to  design  and  implement  feasible  industrial  policies  which  can  meet  the 
developmental needs of SSA.  
Should SSA countries implement IMF programs over the long term?  
As already noted, many SSA countries have been implementing successive IMF programs 
for up to two decades, even though they have no need to borrow from the IMF and don’t face 
BOP  problems.  Is  this  still  optimal?  It  is  certainly  not  without  costs,  which  go  beyond  any 
problems with the technical design of IMF programs already discussed.  
There appear to be two reasons why SSA countries which don’t require emergency support 
for  their  BOP  still  implement  IMF  programs.  First,  the  IMF  provides  an  external  “agent  of 
restraint”  to  protect  the  macro  economy  from  the  short  sightedness  of  domestic  politicians 
and bureaucrats who might otherwise implement excessively expansionary macroeconomic 
policies if left to their own devises. Second, budget support donors sometimes demand the 
imprimatur  of  an  IMF  program  as  a  condition  for  disbursing  their  aid.  Neither  reason  is 
entirely convincing.  
                                                 
8   Rodrik (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
If SSA countries really need external agents of constraint, there are viable alternatives to IMF 
programs. Many SSA countries seek sovereign credit ratings on a regular basis, for which 
sound macroeconomic policies are imperative. Arguably, the fear of a very public downgrade 
of  a  sovereign  credit  rating  is  a  much  more  powerful  incentive  for  sound  macroeconomic 
policy than the fear of an IMF program going off-tack, as the latter is subject to at least some 
degree of negotiation between the authorities and the IMF, with both sides anxious to avoid 
this outcome if possible.  
In  addition,  regional  institutions  such  as  the  East  African  Community  have  developed 
macroeconomic  targets  to  promote  eventual  monetary  union,  which  their  members  are 
committed to complying with. In terms of supporting sound macroeconomic management, the 
convergence criteria of the EAC – which include targets for international reserves and fiscal 
deficits – are not inferior to the targets in IMF programs. Hence, it is not clear why we still 
need  IMF  programs  as  agents  of  constraint  for  macroeconomic  policy.  As  for  the  budget 
support  donors,  whether  they  would  really  cut  their  aid  if  IMF  programs  were  no  longer 
implemented in SSA is debatable. In any case, donor aid is becoming less important as a 
source of budget funding for the frontier markets.  
There  are  also  drawbacks  to  long  term  IMF  involvement  in  SSA  which  should  not  be 
underestimated.  In  particular  there  are  political  costs.  IMF  conditionalities  generate 
resentment  in  SSA  because  they  are  perceived  as  an  affront  to  national  sovereignty.  For 
countries  which  only  gained  independence  less  than  50  years  ago  this  sentiment  is 
understandable.  While  policy  conditionalities  can  be  considered  a  necessary  evil  for 
countries  which  need  to  borrow  from  the  IMF,  it  is  hard  to  justify  them  politically  when  no 
borrowing from the IMF is needed.  
Unfortunately this means that many sound economic policies become tainted by association 
with unpopular conditionalities, which makes a rational debate about economic policy harder 
to conduct in developing countries. If the IMF was not perceived to be imposing economic 
policies on a sovereign state, it might find a more receptive audience for the policy advice it 
provides through the Article IV consultations or Technical Assistance missions.  
Withdrawing from long term engagement through non lending programs would allow the IMF 
to re-focus on providing emergency liquidity support to SSA countries facing BOP crises. If 
the  external  economic  environment  remains  volatile,  it  is  likely  that  there  will  be  many 
instances  where  individual  SSA  countries  will  need  temporary  assistance  to  support  their 
BOP.  The  IMF  should  work  to  strength  its  modalities  for  extending  emergency  liquidity 
assistance, so that it can be provided more rapidly and flexibly whenever the need arises. 
The IMF should collaborate with other international and regional financial institutions, such as 
the  African  Development  Bank,  to  put  in  place  an  effective  liquidity  support  mechanism  to 
meet the needs of SSA countries.  
References  
Brixiova,  Zuzana  and  Ndikumana,  Leonce  (2010),  “Supporting  Africa’s  Post  Crisis  Growth: 
The Role of Macroeconomic Policies”, Working paper 117, African Development Bank.  
Calvo,  Guillermo  A.  and  Reinhart,  Carmen  M.  (2002),  “Fear  of  Floating”,  The  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, Vol 117, pp379–408.  
International  Monetary  Fund  (2008),  “The  Role  of  the  Fund  in  Low  Income  Countries” 
background paper.  
International  Monetary  Fund  (2010),  Sub-Saharan  Africa  Regional  Economic  Outlook, 
October. 
Kasekende,  L.  Brixiova,  Z  and  Ndikumana,  L.  (2010),  Africa:  Africa’s  Countercyclical 
Responses to the Crisis, Journal of Globalization and Development, Vol 1, Issue 1.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Nellor, David C. (2008), “The Rise of Africa’s Frontier Markets”, Finance and Development. 
Vol 45, no 3.  
Rodrik, Dani (2009), “Growth after the crisis”, paper prepared for the Commission on Growth 
and Development, Harvard Kennedy School.  
Thornton,  John  (2008),  “Money,  Output  and  Inflation  in  African  Economies”,  South  African 
Journal of Economics, Vol 76, no 3 pp356–366. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
