Øystein Olsen: Financial economics and the challenges in managing 
Norway’s Government Pension Fund 
Introductory remarks by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at  the  NBIM  (Norges  Bank  Investment  Management)  Financial  Research  Conference,  Oslo, 
30 August 2011. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to welcome each of you to the first NBIM Financial Research 
Conference. The objective of today’s conference is to present and discuss a set of papers at 
the forefront of academic research on financial economics. 
This  event  is  also  part  of  Norges  Bank’s  efforts  to  strengthen  ties  with  the  academic 
community. In addition to some of the best researchers in financial economics, we have in 
this  room  some  of  the  top  investment  professionals  in  Norway.  The  opportunities  for 
interesting discussions should be good. 
At  the  outset,  the  intention  of  this  conference  was  to  present  leading  academic  research, 
without  placing  weight  on  its  direct  relevance  to  NBIM.  However,  as  this  conference  will 
show,  there  is  considerable  common  ground  between  the  research  frontier  of  financial 
economics and our challenges in managing the Government Pension Fund. 
Over  the  last  three  decades,  researchers  have  moved  a  long  way  from  the  Capital  Asset 
Pricing Model. One important result of empirical financial research is that expected returns 
on traded assets vary much more over time and across assets, than was previously thought 
and implicitly assumed by the CAPM. 
Researchers have documented and studied how asset valuations seem to move far more on 
news  that  affects  risk  premiums  than  on  news  on  future  cash  flows.  This  was  vividly 
illustrated by the market turbulence of 2008–2009, as well as the last few weeks. 
In  their  investigation  of  why  risk  premiums  vary  so  much,  researchers  have  moved  far 
beyond  the  simplest  models  of  introductory  finance  classes.  Theoretical  progress,  data 
availability and computational advances have made  it possible to study the implications of 
potentially important features: 
 
 
 
 
Models of investor heterogeneity, non-tradable, non-financial risk, market frictions and time-
varying uncertainty go a long way in accounting for variations in market risk premiums. This 
has  profound  implications  for  portfolio  theory  and  practical  portfolio  strategies.  Modern 
portfolio theory builds on differences in defining characteristics between investors. Investors 
with distinctly different non-tradable, non-financial risk, who are affected differently by market 
frictions and regulations, should hold different portfolios. 
In the NBIM Strategy Plan for 2011–2013, we stated that we will implement an investment 
strategy  built  on  the  Fund’s  defining  characteristics  –  with  strategies  that  are  long-term 
oriented, scalable, and focused on underlying value. This sentence covers a wide range of 
interesting questions. All the speakers today will, in fact, offer perspectives on the challenges 
outlined here. 
All the prominent scholars who are presenting papers today will analyse some of the aspects 
of how and why market risk premiums vary. Financial regulations and financial frictions are 
investors are different and not necessarily fully informed or rational; 
markets are incomplete and have frictions; 
returns might have fat tails and face sudden disasters; 
and government regulations are important. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
important  to  our  understanding  of  why  risk  premiums  change  over  time.  A  thorough 
understanding  of  financial  regulations  and  financial  frictions  might  also  be  important  in 
identifying unique investor characteristics. 
Axel Weber will shed light on the implications of financial sector regulation on the functioning 
of markets and the pricing of assets. 
Lasse Pedersen has provided valuable research on the micro structure of funding markets 
and  how  liquidity  risks  create  systemic  problems.  In  particular,  he  will  cover  frictions  in 
financial markets. 
It  is  quite  clear  that  the  Government  Pension  Fund  differs  from  the  average  investor  in 
important respects. In addition, we need to understand how variation in risk premiums can be 
consistent  with  highly  competitive  financial  markets.  Why  don’t  all  investors  buy  “value”  or 
rebalance? 
Ken  Froot  will  talk  about  rare  events  and  disaster  risks,  how  these  events  are  priced  in 
markets.  He  will  also  give  insights  on  individual  investor  characteristics  which  give 
comparative advantages in holding these priced risk premiums. 
Ken  French  will  speak  about  two  ways  for  an  investor  to  generate  excess  returns: 
informational advantages and systematically harvesting risk premiums which the investor has 
a comparative advantage in holding. 
Both Froot and French will mainly talk about average portfolio weights in highly competitive 
markets. In the last talk today, Stan Zin will cover how different investors will change asset 
weights over time. He will also discuss what kind of risks an investor is exposed to through 
rebalancing and why investors might look at the same risk-reward trade-off differently. 
All of these exciting papers we will discuss today offer interesting perspectives for academic 
researchers and practitioners alike. As I argued at the start of my talk here, the challenges 
facing the management of our fund overlap with the research frontier of financial economics. 
However, we should not expect final and absolute answers. CAPM, partly developed by our 
own Jan Mossin, represented a huge leap forward in 1966. Today it has been replaced by 
better  tested  theories,  just  as  future  research  will  make  today’s  research  frontier  look 
antiquated. 
Rounding  off  the  day,  the  CEO  of  NBIM,  Yngve  Slyngstad,  will  present  the  Norwegian 
Finance  Initiative.  This  is  part  of  NBIM’s  efforts  to  build  capacity  to  ensure  our  strategies 
have a well-founded theoretical basis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
