Anselmo Teng: Macao’s financial sector development 
Address by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the 2011 
Monetary  Authority  of  Macao  (Autoridade  Monetária  de  Macau  –  AMCM)  Spring  Cocktail, 
Macao SAR, 29 March 2011. 
 The Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Francis Tam, 
The Honourable Deputy Director of the Economic Affairs Department of the Liaison Office of 
the Central People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Chen Xiang, 
The Honourable Deputy Director-General of the Office of the Commission of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs in the MSAR, Ms. Han Xiao-yan, 
The Honourable Chairman of AMCM Audit Committee, Mr. Leonel Alberto Alves, 
Honourable Guests, 
Friends of the Press, 
Dear colleagues, 
A Chinese poem portrays a fine day in Spring like today, “The mellow wind from the East is 
soothing  which  embodies  a  warm  day  in  Spring  when  everything  starts  anew.  The  early 
goldfinches  compete  for  warm  branches  while  newly  arrived  swallows  are  busy  in  picking 
dirts  for  nest”.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Year  of  the  Rabbit,  following  our  fine  tradition,  the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Macao  hosts  again  a  Spring  Cocktail  Party.  This  afternoon,  we  are 
honoured to have the presence of Mr. Francis Tam, Secretary for Economy and Finance to 
come to officiate this occasion and to share with our friends of the financial sector the joy of 
lucrative results achieved in the year of the Tiger and to bid well wishes to each other. I duly 
represent the AMCM Board of Directors to thank Mr. Tam for his presence. Simultaneously, I 
would  like  to  extend  my  warm  and  candid  appreciation  and  welcome  to  our  guests, 
practitioners of our financial sector, and friends of the press. 
In the past year, under the care and auspices of the Central Government, the endeavour of 
our  citizens  led  by  the  MSAR  Government,  Macao  saw  encouraging  results  scored  by  its 
pillar  industry  in  tandem  with  the  gradual  global  economic  recovery.  All  walks  of  trade  in 
Macau  displayed  vitality  again.  The  overall  economy  scored  remarkable  GDP  growth  of 
26.2%.  Under  the  direction  and  support  of  Mr.  Tam,  AMCM  and  our  financial  practitioners 
have been able to maintain the stability of our financial system. Our financial sector grasped 
the  development  opportunity,  enhanced  internal  control  and  risk  management,  which 
reinforced its ability to combat risk and effectively staved off threats arising from crisis from 
abroad; perfected financial services and promoted market development. 
To  AMCM,  last  year  was  a  year  of  consolidating  the  financial  sector  through  continued 
enhancement  of  financial  risk  supervision.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  AMCM 
followed  up-to-date  development  of 
to 
strengthen  financial  supervisory  work  in  line  with  the  fresh  standards  and  requirements 
imposed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. At the same time, AMCM rolled 
out specific guidelines on risk mitigation, which reinforced the legal aspect of financial risk 
management to assist our practitioners in their risk-aversion endeavour. 
Through the collective endeavour of our financiers, the Macao banking sector, in the midst of 
overall  economic  recovery,  scored  results  with  flying  colours  again,  which  laid  down  solid 
foundation  in  the  realization  of  our  long  term  sustainable  development.  As  per  the  end  of 
2010, total assets of the banking sector amounted to MOP540 billion, a year-on-year growth 
of  26.5%;  aggregate  deposits  totalled  MOP341.5  billion,  a  year-on-year  growth  of  11.3%, 
while  loan  portfolio  stood  at  MOP245.7  billion,  a  year-on-year  growth  of  31.7%,  making  a 
loan  deposit  ratio  of  71.9%;  initial  overall  profit  for  the  banking  sector  amounted  to 
MOP3.54 billion.  The  whole  banking  sector  had  a  high  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  15.3%, 
financial  supervision,  continued 
international 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
which  far  exceeded  international  standard;  non-performing  loan  ratio  was  a  meagre  0.4%, 
which reflected fine asset quality. As for RMB business, as per end of 2010, RMB deposits 
amounted to RMB 13.3 billion, a year-on-year expansion of 5.9 times; in February 2011, it 
went up to RMB23.2 billion, an increase of 74.4% compared to 2010 end. At the same time, 
banks  settled  RMB  business  valued  at  RMB6  billion  for  the  period  starting  October  2009, 
when  cross  border  RMB  trade  settlement  business  started,  to  end  of  2010.  Moreover,  to 
widen  the  spectrum  for  investment  and  fund  management  for  Macao  residents  and 
institutions, with the green light given by the People’s Bank of China, the settlement channel 
for Macao entities in the purchase of RMB bonds issued in Hong Kong was opened. 
In  the  realm  of  insurance  supervision,  apart  from  perfecting  offsite  surveillance  measures, 
the  inspection  and  appraisal  of  financial  status  of  insurance  companies  were  also 
strengthened. In addition, via the supervision of adequacy of technical reserves of insurance 
companies,  the  risk-resistance  and  indemnity  payment  capability  of  insurance  companies 
was  enhanced.  In  the  year,  supervision  and  onsite  inspection  of  insurance  companies, 
pension funds management companies and insurance intermediaries were strengthened with 
a  view  to  appraising  their  compliance  and  implementation  of  provisions  under  compulsory 
insurance  regulations,  AML/CFT  guidelines  and  internal  supervision  applicable  to  various 
insurance institutions. 
With the benefit of the recovery of the overall economic vitality, coupled with appropriate and 
effective supervision, the insurance sector of Macao operated in a stable manner last year, 
various premiums registered stable growth, profits were up to expectation. As per the end of 
2010,  total  premiums  for  the  insurance  sector  reached  MOP3.78  billion,  a  year-on-year 
growth  of  15.7%,  of  which  life  insurance  premiums  were  MOP2.69  billion,  a  year-on-year 
growth of 15.3%, while non-life insurance premiums reached MOP1.09 billion, a year-on-year 
growth of 16.7%. On the other hand, pension funds management institutions also displayed 
their function in providing social protection and maintaining social stability. As per the end of 
2010,  total  assets  of  funds  under  the  management  of  such  institutions  exceeded 
MOP6.2 billion, which covered more than 80,000 employees, the growth rates were 24% and 
6.7% respectively. 
The pace of economic recovery for advanced industrial nations remained slow. Headed by 
the  FED  of  the  US,  central  banks  of  western  nations  took  one  step  further  in  quantitative 
easing in formulating their monetary policy. As a result, interest income derived from major 
overseas financial markets stayed at a historically low level all year round. At the same time, 
in the face of sovereign debts of the Eurozone and financial crisis arising therefrom, prices of 
financial  products  and  currency  exchange  rates  exhibited  greater  volatility.  Against  such  a 
backdrop,  AMCM  adopted  a  more  prudent  investment  strategy  for  the  exchange  reserves 
and  the  MSAR  Reserve  Fund.  As  per  the  end  of  2010,  our  exchange  reserves  stood  at 
MOP190.2 billion, a year-on-year growth of 29.8%, or MOP43.6 billion. The MSAR Reserve 
Fund  also  grew  by  MOP300  million  to  MOP13.1  billion,  or  a  growth  of  close  to  2.3%; 
basically fulfilled the target of maintaining growth and its intrinsic value. 
The year saw the expiry of the issuing right of Pataca notes of the two notes issuing banks. 
After  negotiation,  a new  10  year  notes  issuing  agreement  was  signed  with  the two  banks, 
which  would  ensure  issuance  and  supply  of  Pataca  notes.  In  addition,  in  the  realm  of 
enhancement  of  financial  infrastructure  facilities,  the  seriously  mooted  Pataca  Real  Time 
Gross Settlement (RTGS) finalized its initial open tender process in the year and will enter 
into system development phase. Once implemented, the RTGS will enhance the efficiency of 
Pataca fund availability and settlement. 
On the financial research and statistics front, we actively participated in the cooperation with 
international organizations in items relating to money, finance, economics and statistics. As a 
result, data information was published in a timely manner, which enabled the quality of our 
financial  statistics  dissemination  to  be  aligned  with  international  standards.  Through 
cooperation and communication with counterparts, we perfected financial data dissemination 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mechanism  and  formed  a  systematic  financial  information  dissemination  platform.  At  the 
same time, we embarked on studies on special topics conducive to the practical situation of 
Macao  and  published  the  results,  which  would  provide  valuable  reference  to  the  MSAR 
Government, financial sector, academia and the general public. 
In our communication and cooperation with entities abroad, AMCM, as usual, continued to 
deepen liaison with financial regulatory authorities of the Mainland of China and Lusophone 
countries.  We  established  communication  mechanism  via  conclusion  of  memorandum  of 
understanding. On the back of the established regional cooperation agreement framework, 
we enhanced cooperation with the Mainland, particularly the Pearl River Delta. On the other 
hand, AMCM made use of the opportunity of the “3rd Ministerial Conference of the Forum for 
Economic and Trade Cooperation between China and Portuguese Speaking Countries” held 
in Macao to organize jointly with the Development Bank of China and solely two seminars 
entitled  “Conference  of  Financiers  and  Entrepreneurs  of  China  and  Portuguese  Speaking 
Countries”  and  “Financial  Theme  Seminar  for  Chinese  and  Portuguese  Financiers” 
respectively.  The  move  further  elevated  the  function  of  Macao  as  trade  and  economic 
cooperation platform between China and Portuguese speaking countries. Simultaneously, it 
created  venue  for  communication  and  partnership  for  local  financial  institutions  and  their 
counterparts in Portuguese speaking countries, which would enable the gradual exploitation 
of new business opportunity for Chinese and Portuguese financiers. 
Also, AMCM established a regular work liaison mechanism with China UnionPay and arrived 
at  consensus  on  cooperation  to  reinforce  management  of  authorized  accounts  and  risk 
prevention. 
Looking forward to 2011, we can expect global economic recovery to continue its cheerful 
pace. However, there are a number of uncertain factors in the process. The sovereign debt 
crisis of Eurozone may linger, which may lead to the necessary tight fiscal policy adopted by 
some European countries and adverse effect arising from debt burden. Coupled with the fact 
that  protectionism  may  rear  its  ugly  head,  and  the  daunting  effect  of  geopolitical  risks  of 
Middle East and North Africa, negative impacts will be inflicted on world economic recovery. 
As  the  underlying  economic  recovery  appears  moribund,  it  is  the  main  stream  view  that 
global interest rates will stay at a lower lever. However, it appears that inflation expectation is 
gathering stream. The authorities concerned therefore have to make necessary preparation, 
as the prevailing loose monetary policy may come to an end. 
This year marks the inauguration of the “12th Five Year Plan” of our Motherland, which will 
lay the foundation of stepping stone for a new phase of development. Following the gradual 
realization  of  the  “Outline  of  the  Plan  for  the  Reform  and  Development  of  the  Pearl  River 
Delta  Region”,  “Hengqin  Island  Overall  Development  Plan”  and  the  “Guangdong-Macao 
Cooperation  Framework  Agreement”,  the  improvement  and  enhancement  of  the  CEPA, 
coupled  with  the  strengthening  of  our  role  as  the  service  platform  for  economic  and  trade 
cooperation  between  China  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries,  the  implementation  of  all 
these will bring more business opportunity and room for development to the Macao financial 
sector. Certainly, our market practitioners are bracing for a bright new business world ahead.  
Last but not the least, I would like to propose a toast to the continued prosperity, security, 
strength  and  harmony  of  our  Motherland  and  compatriots;  to  the  sustainable  development 
and prosperity of the MSAR; to the steady growth and helpfulness of our financial sector; to 
the health and success of our guests and friends. Cheers! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
