Jean-Claude Trichet: Intervention at the Eurofi Financial Forum 2011 
Speech  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Eurofi 
Financial Forum 2011, Wroclaw, 15 September 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be back here at the Eurofi Financial Forum.  
These events always provide a very good opportunity to exchange views on issues that are 
central  to  the  effective  functioning  of  the  financial  sector  and  its  key  task  of  supporting 
sustainable growth in the real economy.  
As we are all well aware, this is a very challenging time for the advanced economies. We 
avoided a dramatic economic depression in the autumn of 2008 – following the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers three years ago to this very day. But we still have a long way to go to move 
beyond this crisis. 
At  the  Pittsburgh  Summit  two  years  ago,  the  G20  leaders  reiterated  their  promise  to  do 
“everything necessary to ensure recovery, to repair our financial systems and to maintain the 
global  flow  of  capital”.  Now,  more  than  ever,  we  need  to  make  significant  progress  in 
delivering on those promises. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  what  has  been  achieved  so  far  by  our  collective  efforts  to 
repair  our  financial  systems  –  in  particular,  the  establishment  of  the  new  European 
supervisory structure, the agreement on Basel III and the global framework for systemically 
important financial institutions (SIFIs). 
But I also want to look at the road ahead: we must not stop here and leave our task half-
finished.  
There is still very important work to be done on a number of regulatory challenges.  
And  with  all  our  reforms  and  with  all  our  new  institutions  of  economic  and  financial 
governance,  we  must  ensure  timely  implementation  so  that  we  can  ensure  that  we  have 
done everything to make a difference as regards the resilience of the global, regional and 
national financial systems.  
The ESRB 
Let  me  start  with  some  of  our  accomplishments  before  moving  on  to  highlight  some  key 
areas where we need to make progress. The first accomplishment is the establishment of the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  earlier  this  year.  As  you  know,  the  ESRB  brings 
together  the  policy  makers  such  as  central  banks,  supervisors  and  the  Commission,  thus 
fostering  a  broad-based  review  of  risks  and  vulnerabilities  and  a  deeper  understanding  of 
interlinkages and spillovers between different parts of the financial system. This wide-ranging 
perspective, which encompasses both micro and macro elements, is an essential feature of 
the  new  European  supervisory  framework  and  it  fills  a  gap  identified  at  the  global  level. 
Although the ESRB does not have direct binding powers, the effectiveness of its “comply or 
explain” mechanism builds upon the high reputation of the ESRB’s members and the quality 
of its analysis.  
In  its  last  meeting  in  June,  the  ESRB  underlined  the  threat  to  financial  stability  stemming 
from the interplay between the vulnerabilities of public finances in certain EU Member States 
and the banking system, with potential contagion effects across the Union and beyond. To 
ensure the resilience of the EU financial system and limit the potential for adverse spillovers, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the ESRB at the time also stated that backstop plans should exist, starting with resources 
from private markets and, if necessary, with public funds.  
As  we  also  said  at  the  time,  we  are  furthermore  working  on  specific  issues  such  as  FX 
lending, complex financial products and mismatches in the funding structure between various 
currencies.  Let  me  mention  that  we  have  our  next  ESRB  General  Board  meeting  next 
Wednesday.  
Basel III implementation 
As regards Basel III, compared with Basel II, the new framework envisages higher minimum 
capital  requirements,  better  risk  capture,  stricter  definition  of  eligible  capital  elements  and 
more transparency. These elements should substantially improve banks’ capital position and 
loss absorbing capacity, thus enhancing the resilience of the financial sector.  
The new Basel framework also introduces entirely new concepts, such as a non-risk-based 
leverage ratio and mandatory liquidity requirements. It has been agreed that these measures 
will  be  introduced  gradually  during  a  transition  period.  It  is  essential  that  prior  to  their 
introduction the potential impacts of these new elements on financial markets are carefully 
assessed to ensure that these measures do not hinder banks providing funding to the real 
economy. 
A  major  challenge  ahead  is  the  consistent  and  timely  implementation  of  the  Basel  III 
framework. It is of the essence that we all adhere to the agreed timeline, ensuring that our 
banks  have  a  strong  capital  base.  Only  when  implemented  in  a  consistent  manner  across 
jurisdictions  will  the  expected  significant  net  social  benefits,  including  reduced  volatility  of 
credit and GDP growth as well as the lower probability of occurrence of systemic crises, be 
achieved.  To  reap  the  benefits  of  the  new  framework,  a  consistent  implementation  of 
Basel III is essential.  
In  this  context,  I  welcome  the  European  Commission’s  proposal  on  the  implementation  of 
Basel  III  in  the  EU,  issued  in  July  in  the  form  of  a  fully-fledged  capital  requirements 
regulation.  
With this step, the EU has demonstrated its strong commitment to the rapid implementation 
of  the  Basel  III  agreement.  As  it  was  already  said  earlier  in  this  Eurofi  colloquium,  great 
attention is presently given to this very important piece of legislation, to verify and make sure 
that 
the 
Basel Committee, the FSB and the G20. I am confident that this work will be satisfactorily 
concluded.  
the  agreements  reached  at  global 
line  with 
through 
level 
fully 
in 
is 
it 
SIFIS 
Another  important  step  taken  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  markets  is  the 
agreement reached on global systemically important financial institutions. A key lesson from 
the  crisis  is  that  incentives  need  to  be  put  in  place  for  banks  to  reduce  their  “systemic 
footprint”.  
So  I  am  very  pleased  that  at  end-June  this  year  the  Group  of  Governors  and  Heads  of 
Supervision, which I had the privilege to chair, adopted the consultative document regarding 
global  systemically  important  banks.  The  envisaged  measures  have  several  objectives. 
These objectives include reducing the probability of an adverse event occurring, reducing the 
extent or impact of the failure of a systemically important bank and reducing the cost to the 
public sector. 
The  framework  is  built  on  two  building  blocks  that  increase  the  loss  absorbency  of  global 
systemically important banks. The first building block is a gradual capital surcharge based on 
the degree of systemic importance, ranging from 1% to 2.5 % of risk weighted assets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  second  building  block  is  that  the  additional  capital  requirements  have  to  be  met  with 
common  equity.  The  unambiguous  choice  of  common  equity  as  the  unique  instrument  to 
meet the capital surcharge should ensure robustness. These measures complemented with 
supervisory judgement should capture structural and cyclical changes in the banking system.  
Shadow banking 
The introduction of more stringent capital requirements for credit institutions under Basel III 
as well as the requirements for global systemically important banks, may provide incentives 
for  banks  to  shift  part  of  their  activities  outside  the  regulatory  perimeter.  It  is  therefore 
decisive  that  we  continue  our  work  to  improve  our  capacity  to  identify  and  assess  the 
potential risks stemming from the shadow banking system. 
We need to develop a better understanding of the interconnections between regulated and 
non-regulated entities. We also need to explore the possible channels of contagion that may 
result in adverse market dynamics. Gaining a better understanding of the functioning of the 
shadow banking system is a key element of and a precondition for improving the efficiency of 
financial regulation and supervision across markets and jurisdiction. 
I  strongly  encourage  the  FSB  to  continue  to  work  very  actively  on  all  of  its  work  streams 
regarding the regulation of the non-banking sector. This includes regulatory reform of money 
market funds, securitisation and the interaction with the banking sector. I am looking forward 
to the progress report to be delivered for the G20 meeting in October. 
Further regulatory challenges 
In a number of key domains, decisions have been taken by the international community. It is 
no time to challenge them. It is time to implement.  
In a crisis period where confidence is of the essence, it would be extremely damaging if the 
authorities  were  to  hesitate,  demonstrate  an  absence  of  resolve  and  of  the  fortitude  that  is 
required by the circumstances. I see resistance of some in the financial sector against Basel III. 
I  see  similar  messages  on  the  SIFIs.  For  me,  it  is  crystal  clear:  what  has  been  decided  is 
decided.  
But there are other areas of regulatory reform where work is still underway. Let me briefly 
highlight two key areas on which we need to stay committed and where swift progress is of 
the essence. 
First, there is the review of the Markets in Financial Instrument Directive (MiFID), on which a 
proposal is expected to be released by the European Commission this autumn, will represent 
a  key  step  in  the  right  direction.  Amending  the  MiFID  should  enable  the  EU  regulatory 
framework to keep pace with financial innovation while responding to the G20 commitments 
to deal with less regulated and more opaque parts of the financial system.  
Second, it is key that transparency is enhanced across the board: with regard to markets, 
institutions and products. Lack of information contributes to the mispricing of risks, mistrust 
among  market  participants  can  turn  situations  into  downturns.  In  order  to  build  confidence 
and  contribute  towards  the  stability  of  markets  it  is  important  that  financial  innovation  and 
technological  advances  contribute  to  the  ability  of  financial  markets  to  sustainably  provide 
financial services to the real economy. We need to establish a harmonised framework that 
enables  coordinated  action,  increases  transparency  and  reduces  the  risks  posed  by  these 
market  practices.  Moreover,  we  need  to  better  identify,  monitor  and  assess  the  potential 
threat to market stability posed by High Frequency Trading.  
The  IOSCO  consultation  on  Regulatory  Issues  Raised  by  the  Impact  of  Technological 
Changes on Market Integrity, carried out in response to a G20 Leaders request during the 
Seoul  Summit  in  2010,  recalls  that  “the  benefits  from  technological  advances  should  not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
overshadow the risks that these innovations pose to the efficiency and integrity of markets. 
These changes raise issues that should be addressed by regulators in order to maintain the 
integrity  of  financial  markets.”  IOSCO  is  currently  assessing  the  responses  to  this 
Consultation  and  steps  that  could  be  taken  to  help  mitigate  these  possible  risks.  I  look 
forward to the report for the G20 Finance Ministers in October.  
Conclusion 
In  conclusion  I  would  like  to  send  these  messages  and  make  a  comment  on  the  central 
banks role in present time:  
My  first  message  is  to  underline  once  again  that  all  what  has  been  decided  has  to  be 
implemented strictly, comprehensively, and fully. As the continuous challenges demonstrate 
clearly, we are not back to “business as usual” as some thought some months ago. We need 
resolve and fortitude of the public authorities and lucidity on the part of the private sector.  
Secondly, a lot remains to be done. No complacency should be tolerated in any field. And I 
cannot help saying that on top of what is clearly identified by the international community as 
the  urgent  issues  in  discussion  in  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  we  are  far  from 
understanding the potential global systemic instability that is associated today with the sheer 
size  of  the  non-banking  sector  which  experienced  an  exponential  growth  over  the  last 
20 years.  I  would  call  all  of  us  to  better  understand  this  aspect  of  the  global  financial 
dynamics.  
Thirdly, more directly linked to the present tensions in the European sovereign debt, I would 
only remind all of us that the central banks – and the ECB in particular but with all others – 
have  called  permanently  for  sound  fiscal  management,  sound  economic  policies  and 
structural  reforms,  strict  implementation  and  reinforcement  of  the  European  economic  and 
fiscal governance – tirelessly, not only in stress times, but also in times of generalised benign 
neglect  of  both  governments  and  markets.  We  call  all  authorities  to  implement  swiftly  all 
decisions and to be constantly ahead of the curve. As institutions that are independent, that 
are devoted to stability and that are medium- to long-term oriented, central banks are more 
than ever an anchor of stability and confidence. This is especially the case in an environment 
which is turbulent since 4 years, in open crisis of the financial sector since 3 years – shall I 
say exactly 3 years – and in a market environment characterised by acute tensions of some 
sovereign signatures in the advanced economies since one year and a half. It is exactly what 
is inspiring the Governing Council and the General Council of the ECB: to offer the most solid 
anchor of stability possible to all economic agents and, overall, to our own people. For in very 
difficult times, all depends on the confidence of our fellow citizens. It is what is inspiring the 
27 central banks of the European Union. It is what is inspiring the sister central banks in all 
the world.  
We are just coming from Basel, the BIS headquarters. Reporting to the press on the Global 
Economy Meeting, I stressed that we were all very closely “united in purpose”: each of us in 
our  own  economy,  with  their  different  features  and  challenges,  striving  to  solidly  anchor 
inflation expectations, preserve stability and consolidate confidence.  
The  globally  co-ordinated  decision  we  published  this  afternoon  on  US  dollar  liquidity-
providing operations is a clear illustration of our very close cooperation at the global level and 
of the “unity in purpose” that I was mentioning last Monday.  
I thank you very much for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
