Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Financial Times Deutschland 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  the 
Financial  Times  Deutschland,  conducted  by  Mr  Wolfgang  Proissl  on  14  July  2011  and 
published on 18 July 2011. 
 FTD: The euro crisis is eating its way from the periphery to the core of the euro area. Is the 
euro in danger?  
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  No,  not  the  euro.  The  euro  is  a  currency  and  the  European  Central 
Bank is responsible for it. The euro is a highly credible currency. It has been stable and has 
kept its value extremely well over the past 12 years. That is what the Treaty demands of the 
ECB. That is what the people of Europe and of Germany are asking for. And it is consistent 
with  the  aim  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  which  is  an  inflation  rate  of  just  below 
2 % and  close  to  2 %  over  the  medium  term.  The  average  yearly  inflation  has  been 
1.97 % over 12 years which is a better result than over the last 50 years. In Germany the 
stability  of  prices  is  even  more  impressive:  1.5 %  per  year  from  1  January  1999  to 
31 December 2010. 
FTD: So is the talk of a crisis an exaggeration? 
Trichet: There are important problems at present which are related to bad public finances, by 
way  of  consequence,  to  financial  stability.  But  these  problems  are  the  responsibility  of  the 
governments in question. Each government must keep its own house in order. In addition, 
the European Commission and all governments are responsible for ensuring that the fiscal 
policy of all euro area countries is constantly surveyed and monitored in line with the Stability 
and Growth Pact. We always made publicly the point that governments must live up to their 
responsibility. 
FTD: Now that the markets are losing confidence in Italy and Spain, can Europe still manage 
this crisis?  
Trichet: Naturally the Europeans can manage the issue. It is not a question of technique. It is 
a  question  of  will  and  determination.  And  the  situation,  at  the  level  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole, is more sound than in the equivalent advanced economies. For example at the end of 
the year the euro area will post around 4 ½ % of GDP public finance deficit when the US and 
Japan will post around 10 %.  
FTD: The ECB argues against private sector involvement in the second rescue package for 
Greece on the grounds that, in international terms, this is not usual in such cases. But even 
the International Monetary Fund is now in favour of involving private bondholders. Why is the 
ECB still resisting such a move? 
Trichet: If you read carefully what the IMF writes, you will see that it is much more prudent. In 
any case you know the position of the Governing Council on Greece, which I repeated in our 
last press conference. More generally, all over the world, the best private sector involvement 
is  foreign  direct  investments,  privatisation  and  going  back  as  soon  as  possible  to 
spontaneous market financing.  
FTD: Is the ECB sticking to the line that any solution for Greece that leads to a credit event, a 
selective default or a default must be avoided? 
Trichet:  The  Governing  Council  has  not  changed  its  position.  Again  we  are  in  a  domain 
where Governments are responsible. Our duty is to say clearly what we judge appropriate in 
order to avoid the risk of adverse developments in the euro area and in Europe. As you know 
there has been several times in the past when our advice was not followed, such as when we 
advised solemnly against watering down the letter and the spirit of the Stability and Growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Pact. If this advice had been followed, we may have avoided some of the problems we are 
facing today. 
FTD: How is the ECB helping to battle the crisis?  
Trichet: The most important thing for the Governing Council of the ECB is, for the future as it 
did in the past, to stick to its mandate and ensure price stability for the euro. The fact that the 
euro is a stable and credible currency is a prerequisite, a necessary condition for mastering 
this difficult situation. The ECB is an anchor of stability and confidence which is particularly 
fundamental at a time when everything else seems to be moving and shifting. 
FTD: To cope with the crisis the European Central Bank used non-standard measures. The 
Securities Markets Programme, special treatment for government bonds of Greece, Ireland 
and  Portugal,  the  liquidity  provision  for  banks.  How  far  does  the  ECB  go  with  its  special 
rules?  
Trichet:  We  can  not  accept  to  put  in  questions  our  role  as  the  anchor  of  stability  and 
confidence in the euro area and in Europe. If a country defaults, we can no longer accept as 
normal eligible collateral defaulted bonds issued by the government of that country. Because, 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Governing  Council,  this  would  impair  our  ability  to  be  an  anchor  of 
confidence and stability. 
FTD:  What  does  the  ECB  say  to  the  fact  that,  in  the  context  of  the  second  package  for 
Greece, governments have nonetheless been talking about solutions such as a debt rollover 
or a partial debt buyback, which could lead to default?  
Trichet:  The  responsibility  for  this  lies  with  the  governments.  The  governments  have  been 
warned, in no uncertain terms and using all possible means. I have said so publicly. I have 
explained in detail to the Heads of State and Government and to the finance ministers, on 
several occasions, that, if a country defaults, we will no longer be able to accept its defaulted 
government bonds as normal eligible collateral. The governments would then have to step in 
themselves to put things right. That would then be their duty. 
FTD: What does that mean in concrete terms?  
Trichet:  In  the  event  of  a  decision  by  the  governments  leading  to  a  selective  default  or  a 
default, which, again, we are warning against loud and clear, the governments would have to 
take care that the Eurosystem is presented collateral that it could accept.  
FTD: When it comes to deciding whether a default has occurred, will the ECB rely, as it has 
until now, on the rating agencies, or might the decision not be dependent on what they say? 
Trichet: Again, it is not the working assumption of the Governing Council.  
FTD: Let’s talk about the crisis management of the euro area governments. The Heads of 
State  and  Government  and  the  finance  ministers  give  the  appearance  of  being  a  chaotic 
bunch. They often create such a cacophony that it inflames the crisis rather than dampening 
it. What needs to change?  
Trichet: There is an absolute need to improve “verbal discipline”. The governments need to 
speak  with  one  voice  on  such  complex  and  sensitive  issues  as  the  crisis.  It  is,  of  course, 
complex to take into account the need for sound, shared management of the Economic pillar 
of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  whilst  fully  respecting  the  functioning  of  the 
17 democracies  of  the  euro  area.  But  speaking  with  one  voice  in  a  period  of  crisis  is  of 
essence. And, after all, it is what was possible after Lehman Brothers at the end of 2008.  
FTD: Some euro area governments have said that Chancellor Merkel has frequently acted 
too slowly and has thus made the crisis even worse. Is that true? 
Trichet: Not in the least. I would see a discussion of this kind as being completely misplaced 
in the current situation.  
FTD: Do you fear that the euro area countries could fail to get the crisis under control?  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Trichet: No. The countries of Europe have always demonstrated that they pull together when 
the challenges are very high. My strong belief in the continued integration of Europe, as a 
key historical endeavour to ensure stability, prosperity and peace, has not been shaken in 
any respect by the crisis. 
FTD: Some governments want to beat the crisis by merging national government bonds to 
create eurobonds. Is this a good idea?  
Trichet: The Governing Council has looked at the various proposals and is not in favour of 
them  at  present.  What  counts  now  is  that  we  make  optimal  use  of  the  instruments  at  our 
disposal.  This  includes  a  quantum  leap  in  the  economic  surveillance  governance  of  euro 
area  countries.  In  addition,  the  adjustment  programmes  for  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal 
must  be  implemented  in  a  decisive  manner.  It  also  means  that  the  European  Financial 
Stability Facility (EFSF) should be used as flexibly and effectively as it possibly can be.  
FTD: The stress tests are very detailed in terms of various exposures of the tested banks 
(sovereign  risk,  housing  risk,  etc.)  Some  critics  fear  the  stress  tests  will  now  lead  to 
speculation against certain banks. Do you think this fear is justified?  
Trichet:  I  welcome  the  publication  of  the  EU-wide  stress-testing  exercise,  which  was 
prepared  and  conducted  by  the  EBA  (European  Banking  Authority)  and  the  national 
supervisory  authorities.  I  trust  it  is  an  important  tool  to  enhance  transparency  in  the  EU 
banking  system.  I  also  support  the  EBA  recommendations  to  promptly  remedy  the  capital 
shortfall of the banks that do not meet the threshold ratio of 5 % core Tier 1 capital (as of 
end-April) and to strengthen the capital position of those banks that are above but close to 
the threshold.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
