Vítor Constâncio: ECB Annual Report 2010 
Introductory statement by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  presentation  of  the  ECB  Annual  Report  2010,  to  the  Committee  on  Economic  and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 2 May 2011. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a great pleasure to present to you the European Central Bank’s Annual Report for 2010 
which forms a core part of our accountability towards the European Parliament. It is the first 
time  for  me  to  appear  before  your  Committee  in  my  capacity  as  the  Vice-President  of  the 
ECB and I am looking forward to an enriching exchange of views.  
I will first briefly review the economic and monetary developments over the past year, explain 
our  monetary  policy  decisions,  and  summarise  our  current  assessment  of 
the 
macroeconomic outlook. I ask for your understanding that my remarks on the outlook should 
not be construed as providing indications on the prospective monetary policy stance, as we 
are in the so-called purdah period, where the members of the Governing Council refrain from 
comments on the current outlook for monetary policy. I will also briefly touch upon the current 
fiscal  challenges  in  the  euro  area  and  issues  related  to  financial  stability  and  regulation. 
Before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  address  the  EU  economic  governance  framework, 
following  in  particular  the  reports  adopted  by  this  Committee  and  the  start  of  the  trialogue 
discussions. 
Economic and monetary developments and outlook  
Monetary  policy  in  2010  and  in  early  2011  continued  to  operate  in  a  very  complex  and 
challenging environment. Renewed tensions in some financial market segments in May 2010 
posed new challenges for the conduct of monetary policy. 
Since early 2010, the economic recovery in the euro area has gained momentum. This has 
been  mainly  driven  by  continued  strong  external  demand.  At  the  same  time,  domestic 
demand strengthened during the review period. Overall, following the 4.1% decline in 2009, 
euro area real GDP increased by 1.8% in 2010. This outcome was much more favourable 
than expected one year ago.  
Looking  forward,  we  expect  the  euro  area  economy  to  further  benefit  from  the  ongoing 
recovery in the world economy. At the same time, private sector domestic demand should 
increasingly  contribute  to  economic  growth,  benefiting  from  the  accommodative  monetary 
policy stance and the measures adopted to improve the functioning of the financial system. 
The Governing Council assesses the risks to this outlook to be broadly balanced in a context 
of elevated uncertainty. 
As regards price developments in the euro area, inflation has been on an upward trend since 
early 2010, mainly reflecting rises in global commodity prices. The average annual inflation 
rate rose to 1.6% in 2010, and continued increasing in early 2011, reaching 2.7% in March 
and according to Eurostat flash estimate 2.8% in April. While domestic price pressures are 
still moderate, risks to the inflation outlook have moved to the upside. These relate mainly to 
higher than expected energy prices. In addition, increases in indirect taxes and administered 
prices may be greater than expected, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming 
years.  Finally,  the  ongoing  recovery  in  economic  activity  could  result  in  stronger  than 
expected  domestic  price  pressures.  While  our  monetary  analysis  indicates  that  the 
underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  is  still  moderate  and  money  based  medium  term 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
forecasts  show  inflation  subdued,  monetary  liquidity  may  facilitate  the  accommodation  of 
price pressures stemming from other factors.  
Under these conditions, the Governing Council of the ECB, at its meeting of 7 April 2011, 
decided  to  increase  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points,  after  maintaining  them 
unchanged for almost two years at historically low levels. This step was warranted to adjust 
the very accommodative monetary policy stance in the light of upside risks to price stability. 
Indeed,  it  is  essential  that  recent  price  developments  do  not  give  rise  to  broad-based 
inflationary pressures over the medium term through second round effects. Our decision to 
raise rates will contribute to keeping inflation expectations in the euro area firmly anchored in 
line with the Governing  Council’s aim of maintaining inflation rates below but close to 2%, 
over the medium term. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to contribute to 
economic growth. Historically, interest rates remain low across the maturity spectrum. Thus, 
our  current  monetary  policy  stance  remains  accommodative,  supporting  economic  activity 
and job creation.  
In view of the ongoing financial tensions, the ECB kept several of its non-standard monetary 
policy measures in place in 2010 and early 2011, notably the full allotment of liquidity at a 
fixed interest rate in most refinancing operations. In addition, in May 2010, the ECB decided 
to launch the Securities Markets Programme, enabling the Eurosystem to purchase private 
and  government  bonds,  with  the  aim  of  supporting  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy. 
Liquidity  effects  stemming  from  these  purchases  have  been  fully  neutralised  by  liquidity-
absorbing  operations.  All  the  non-standard  measures  taken  during  the  period  of  acute 
financial  tensions  are,  by  construction,  temporary  in  nature  and  will  be  adjusted  when 
appropriate.  
Fiscal policies and bond markets 
Turning to fiscal policies, fiscal deficit and debt ratios had deteriorated substantially in 2008 
and 2009. In 2010 the euro area deficit to GDP ratio only broadly stabilised at a very high 
level, while the debt ratio continued to increase.1 Individual countries experienced extremely 
high deficit rates.  
Taking a broader view, the economic recession amplified imbalances in fiscal policies that 
had built up gradually long before the crisis. In particular, many countries failed to implement 
sound fiscal policies during good economic times. Temporary revenue windfalls were used to 
finance permanent expenditure increases and some countries failed to achieve structurally 
sound fiscal positions despite a long period of strong economic growth. On the institutional 
side,  the  EU  fiscal  framework  (which  had  been  revised  in  2005)  was  too  weak  and  not 
implemented with sufficient rigour. 
Reflecting  large  fiscal  imbalances  and  a  loss  of  investor  confidence,  government  bond 
spreads increased drastically for some euro area countries and became very volatile in 2010. 
The  willingness  of  investors  to  support  government  financing  needs  declined.  Greece  and 
Ireland in 2010 required financial support by means of joint EU/IMF programs. Portugal also 
asked for assistance in April.  
Looking  ahead  it  is  essential  that these  three  countries  undertake  drastic  reforms.  Greece 
and Ireland have to fully implement the agreed programmes and for Portugal the approval of 
a convincing adjustment programme is now of the essence.  
                                                 
1   According to Eurostat’s press release on the Spring 2011 deficit notifications the euro area deficit was 6.0% of 
GDP 2010, only slightly lower than 2009 (6.3%); the euro area debt ratio rose to 85.1% of GDP in 2010, from 
79.3% in 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
More  generally,  all  euro  area  governments  need  to  achieve  the  consolidation  targets  for 
2011.  For  the  following  years,  consolidation  targets  need  to  be  underpinned  by  concrete 
consolidation measures. The deadlines to correct excessive deficits agreed in the ECOFIN 
Council  need  to  be  respected.  Estonia  and  Luxembourg  are  the  only  euro  area  countries 
currently not subject to an excessive deficit procedure. In view of very high expenditure ratios 
in the euro area, consolidation plans need to focus on expenditure reduction. Strengthening 
confidence in the sustainability of public finances is key, as this will reduce interest rate risk 
premia and improve the conditions for sound and sustainable growth. 
Moreover,  it  is  key  to  strengthen  incentives  for  sound  economic  policies,  notably  in  good 
economic times. I will turn to efforts in this area shortly.  
Financial stability  
I would now like to touch briefly on financial stability issues. The start of the preparatory work 
for  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  –  the  body  in  charge  of  macro-prudential 
oversight in the EU – allowed its smooth establishment in 2011, together with the European 
Supervisory  Authorities.  The  ESRB  is  now  fully  operational,  with  its  General  Board  having 
already met twice and its advisory committees in place.  
The  ECB  has  been  entrusted  with  the  provision  of  analytical,  statistical,  logistical  and 
administrative support to the ESRB. Hence, the ECB is making the utmost effort to enhance 
its capabilities and analytical tools for conducting systemic risk analysis. 
In the context of the Basel III framework, the ECB fully supports the European Commission’s 
work on the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) IV. The Commission’s proposal by mid-
2011, as envisaged, would provide the European Parliament and the Council with sufficient 
time to put the new framework in place by the end of 2012.  
The  ECB  Annual  Report  highlights  our  support  to  the  Commission’s  initiative  regarding  a 
crisis  management  and  resolution  framework  for  EU  financial  institutions.  The  EU  clearly 
needs better tools with well designed triggers to tackle problems in the banking sector more 
effectively. National regimes should be harmonised as much as possible and arrangements 
for better coordination between Member States in crisis situations need to be devised.  
The ECB shares the overriding policy objective of the new EU regime to provide a framework 
within which financial institutions can fail, while at the same time safeguarding the stability of 
the  EU  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  minimising  public  costs  and  economic  disruption. 
From this perspective, a credible resolution framework that disciplines large and cross-border 
financial institutions, in particular, is essential. In this context, the setting up of a network of 
national  resolution  funds  that  could  evolve,  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  to  a  European 
Resolution Fund, is undoubtedly very important. The ECB is also actively contributing to the 
discussions  in  the  FSB  and  the  G20  to  putting  in  place  arrangements  that  will  reduce  the 
systemic risk emanating from so-called global systemically important financial institutions. 
As  regards  the  new  round  of  the  EU-wide  stress  test,  which  will  be  conducted  under  the 
aegis  of  the  newly  established  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA),  it  is  designed  as  a 
sufficiently severe and rigorous exercise to be credible. It is expected to reduce uncertainty 
among market participants concerning the health of European banks.  
Let  me  just  mention  some  of  the  enhanced  features.  First,  the  assumed  macroeconomic 
shock  is  stronger  than  in  the  previous  exercise.  In  addition,  the  EBA  has  provided  more 
rigorous  guidance  to  banks  on  the  cost  of  funding  and  static  balance  sheet  assumptions. 
Second, the capital metrics is now Core Tier I capital ratio instead of the broader concept of 
Tier I capital used previously. Third, a stricter peer review will be performed, with enhanced 
disclosure  of  results.  Finally,  Member  States  have  committed  to  specific  and  ambitious 
strategies for the reinforcement of vulnerable institutions. In this context, it is important that 
appropriate backstops be in place for those banks which do not pass the test. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Economic governance 
Let me finally congratulate your Committee on its recent vote on the economic governance 
package.  ECON  has  undoubtedly  taken  an  important  step  towards  the  much  needed 
strengthening of economic and budgetary surveillance in the EU and the euro area. 
In  particular,  I  very  much  welcome  the  fact  that  the  automaticity  of  procedures  has  been 
stepped up by extending the use of reversed qualified majority voting. The room for halting or 
suspending procedures against those Member States breaking the rules must be reduced. 
The  strengthening  of  the  Commission’s  role  in  the  procedures  that  the  approved  reports 
propose  in  this  context  are  therefore  welcome.  Moreover,  the  political  and  reputational 
measures  that  you  are  proposing  are  necessary  to  foster  early  compliance  with  the 
surveillance framework. An earlier and more gradual application of financial sanctions within 
the macroeconomic surveillance framework goes in the same direction. Your support in the 
same framework for a clear distinction between Member States belonging or not to the euro 
area  is  also  positive.  The  requirements  of  avoiding  negative  imbalances  must  be  more 
demanding for members of the monetary union. This type of distinction, making full use of 
the  Treaty’s  new  Article  136,  has  to  be  to  be  applied  in  different  domains,  drawing  the 
appropriate  lessons  of  the  crisis  for  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  union.  Finally, 
compliance  by  Member  States  with  the  obligations  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is 
facilitated by the strong national budgetary frameworks that you want to establish within the 
euro  area  by  proposing  several  concrete  mandatory  features.  The  proposal  of  a  financial 
sanction  for  the  manipulation  of  data  is  also  to  be  welcomed,  as  well  as  the  institutional 
provisions for reliable, timely and accurate statistical information. 
At the same time, there are certain aspects of the Committee’s position, on which we have 
concerns.  Most  importantly,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  should  not  be  softened  by 
introducing  further  exceptions  and  a  longer  list  of  “relevant  factors”  (including  cyclical 
developments to some public investments or state aid measures for the financial sector), that 
can be invoked in the assessment of compliance with the deficit and debt criteria. This could 
create  further  room  for  unwarranted  discretionary  decisions  and  may  open  the  door  to  lax 
fiscal policies at a time of much needed fiscal consolidation.  
As  regards  macroeconomic  surveillance,  we  have  often  emphasised  that,  in  order  to  be 
effective, it should have a clear focus on a restricted number of indicators capturing macro-
economic  imbalances  per  se.  This  procedure  is  specifically  targeted  at  macroeconomic 
imbalances,  meaning  extreme  and  persistent  divergences  from  a  sustainable  trend  that 
threaten  the  proper  functioning  of  monetary  union.  It  is  not  about  achieving  higher  growth 
potential which is of course highly desirable and is the goal of the EU 2020 strategy. This 
does not imply that I do not recognise the need to co-ordinate all the dimensions of economic 
policy under the umbrella of the European Semester.  
Overall, the Reports approved by your Committee are a positive contribution for the trialogue 
that follows and that, I hope, can be successfully finalised so that the economic governance 
package can be adopted and implemented as soon as possible.  
Conclusion 
Madam Chair, honourable Members, 
The  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  for  Europe  are  responsible  for  the  vast  programme  of 
reforms  that  we  have  been  implementing.  Last  year,  focused  in  the  euro  area,  the  crisis 
highlighted the interplay between the sovereign debt problems and the financial sector, since 
they  represent  two  faces  of  the  same  crisis.  Weak  financial  sector  can  have  an  adverse 
impact  on  public  finances,  while  deficient  fiscal  policies  and  macro  imbalances  can  have 
negative  repercussions  on  the  financial  sector.  Resolving  both  problems  will  put  the  euro 
area on a track of renewed sustainable growth, leaving this crisis behind us. This requires 
the  implementation  of  effective  economic  governance  that  can  ensure  fiscal  sustainability, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
competitiveness and growth, the completion of the permanent European Stability Mechanism 
and  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  new  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision.  In  all 
these endeavours, the European Parliament and the ECB share common values and goals 
and will, I am sure, continue to collaborate in order to ensure the success of Europe.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
