Ivan Iskrov: Growth and the financial system – lessons from emerging 
Europe with a focus on Bulgaria 
Speech by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, at the conference on 
“Achieving  sustainable  growth  in  South  East  Europe:  macroeconomic  policies,  structural 
reforms,  socio-political  support,  and  a  sound  financial  system”,  organised  by  the  Bank  of 
Greece and St Antony’s College (Oxford), Athens, 11 February 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here at this conference, organised by the Bank of Greece together with 
St. Antony’s College, Oxford. Above all, let me thank Governor Provopoulos for the invitation 
and the opportunity to come here and, together with my distinguished colleagues from South 
East Europe, to be able to talk before such a reputable audience. 
As a central banker, certainly the financial industry is of direct interest to me. But although 
the topic of this panel is “growth and the financial system”, I would also like to go beyond it 
and touch upon other issues discussed so far today. 
Politics and politicians do matter 
The topics of the panels overlap and the four main sessions are arranged in a very logical 
sequence. I am saying this, because the financial sector does not function in isolation from 
the rest of the economy and the political stance. A strong financial system cannot co-exist 
with a fragile economy and political instability (at least not for long). The opposite is also true: 
weak financial markets and weak institutions hamper the sustainable growth. 
For example, the recent crisis drew the attention to the banking industry, many times blamed 
to have caused the global turmoil. There is no use repeating now how guilty the banks are, 
that is, the well-known sequence of events: the “sub-prime” lending, the “toxic” assets, the 
need  to  bail  out  banks  and  the  subsequent  economic  and  fiscal  dimensions  of  the  crisis. 
However, we should not turn a blind eye to the root cause: the role of politics and politicians. 
What about the call for “affordable housing” which was dominating the political ideology in 
the last two decades in the US (and not only there)? What about the related environment of 
low policy rates, coupled with the failure of regulators to identify and control systemic risks? 
Was that not really at the root of the asset bubbles and risky behaviour of the banks? We all 
know the answers. The “greedy” bankers are not the only ones to blame. 
Learning from emerging Europe 
At least, that is the story in the “advanced” countries. We should bear in mind that no shocks 
came from the so-called “periphery” of the euro area and emerging Europe. Rather, the crisis 
set  in  with  the  failure  of  financial  markets  and  institutions  in  countries  where  they  had 
supposedly been best regulated, most experienced and of highest liquidity. Being part of the 
global  markets,  the  countries  of  emerging  Europe  became  also  part  of  the  crisis.  From 
today’s perspective, they could serve as a good example of mitigating and weathering the 
crisis.  
So how can the experience of this region contribute to a better understanding of the interplay 
between finance and growth and the various policy choices? 
The  countries  of  emerging  Europe  gained  experience  from  their  own  deep  crises  over  a 
decade  ago.  In  most  of  them,  output  collapsed  at  the  start  of  transition.  Then  almost 
everywhere  there  was  a  banking  crisis,  leading  to  heavy  private  and  public  losses.  But 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
valuable  lessons  were  learned  during  the  economic  transformation.  Some  of  the  pressing 
issues were bank insolvencies, debt restructuring and privatisation. The key lesson was that 
everyone, including not only the general public but also the elected politicians themselves, 
pays a higher price when reforms are delayed. This is true even if such reforms seem painful 
and unpopular in the short run. 
Ten of the former transition economies are today members of the European Union (three of 
them – Slovenia, Slovakia and Estonia – already joined the euro area). But EU accession 
was not granted automatically. Membership was not a gift. Many criteria had to be complied 
with, including the assessment of whether the country had a “functioning market economy” 
and its “capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union”. That 
necessitated  radical  legal  and  institutional  reforms  in  the  candidate  countries.  Transition 
Europe had no choice but to learn by experience, well before the recent global crisis, what 
policies were ultimately beneficial for sustainable economic growth and for the stability of the 
banking system. These policies included: privatisation and limiting the role of the state in the 
economy;  increasing  the  flexibility  of  labour  markets;  opening-up  to  foreign  investments; 
liberalisation and eliminating barriers to competition; combatting corruption and other forms 
of public sector inefficiency, etc. 
The lessons from the previous crises and the EU accession experience are the major factor 
why  emerging  Europe  is  showing  such  resilience  and  flexibility  now.  These  are  the  main 
reasons why the region has been weathering the current crisis relatively better than the rest 
of the continent. 
The case of Bulgaria: using growth to save for a rainy day 
By way of illustration, let me focus on the experience of Bulgaria. My country went through a 
severe  banking  and  financial  crisis  in  1996–1997,  when  one  third  of  the  banks  went 
bankrupt.  There  was  hyperinflation  and  the  confidence  in  the  national  currency  vanished. 
That prompted the introduction of a very conservative monetary regime, the currency board, 
in July 1997. After that, inflation and interest rates went down swiftly and sustainably. Since 
then the Bulgarian economy has been growing in an environment of practically non-existent 
exchange  rate  risk,  with  highly  flexible  labour  markets,  hard  budget  constraints  and  fiscal 
discipline.  The  ratio  of  public  debt  to  GDP  fell  from  105%  in  1997  to  16%  in  2010.  The 
currency board arrangements are and will be our main anchor of stability and predictability till 
the euro adoption. Irrespective of all electoral cycles, the support for the currency board by 
the business community, the general public and all political parties has stayed intact. 
The  current  crisis  started  to  affect  Bulgaria  towards  the  end  of  2008,  with  the  decline  in 
external demand and the lower capital inflows. However, the banks in Bulgaria did not have 
any exposure to foreign “toxic” assets and did not suffer directly from the “domino effect” of 
collapsing  financial  institutions  abroad.  The  Bulgarian  case  was  different  from  the  Anglo-
Saxon  scenario  because  we  had  learned  our  lessons  from  1996–1997  and  we  had 
accumulated  enough  reserves  to  serve  as  a  cushion.  To  talk  in  numbers,  the  government 
entered  the  crisis  with  a  fiscal  reserve  of  12%  of  GDP  at  the  end  of  2008.  The  gross 
international reserves of the Bulgarian National Bank were 36% of GDP then. The banking 
system average capital adequacy was 14.9% in December 2008. 
Our  banking  system  has  never  been  a  source  of  problems.  Engaged  in  traditional 
commercial banking, our banks were affected by the crisis only when the general economic 
activities declined and as a result some of their clients found it harder to service their loans. 
The  banking  system  itself  withstood  the  crisis,  displaying  outstanding  soundness  and 
stability.  But  this  did  not  happen  on  its  own,  neither  was  it  simply  due  to  the  presence  of 
reputable names on our market. 
We, the BNB, as supervisors have always believed that the good times with strong growth 
must  be  used  to  “save  for  a  rainy  day”.  The  consistent  countercyclical  policies  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Bulgarian National Bank played a key role for the good performance of the banking sector, 
both before and during the crisis. 
In the booming years before the crisis, the BNB insisted on a build-up of capital and liquidity 
buffers,  discouraging  banks  from  excessive  asset  growth  and  risk-taking.  Some  of  the 
measures then included: 
 
broadening  the  deposit  base  for  the  calculation  of  MRRs;  gradually  excluding  the 
recognition of cash balances as reserve assets; 
raising the MRR rate to 12%; 
imposing additional tough MRRs on banks with excessive lending growth; 
keeping the capital adequacy ratio at 12% even after our EU accession (that rate is 
50% higher than the existing minimum Basel 2 rule); 
keeping  risk-weightings  higher  than  what  was  required  under  the  EU’s  Capital 
Requirements Directive; 
excluding the interim profits when calculating banks’ capital; 
discouraging foreign currency lending (except in euro for obvious reasons); 
imposing a conservative LTV threshold for mortgage loans, etc. 
 
 
 
However, when the business cycle turned down, our focus shifted towards providing capital 
relief, supporting liquidity, and easing lending for temporarily constrained, but solvent clients. 
Some of the steps then involved: 
 
gradually lowering the MRR rate to 7% on average (from 0% to 10% depending on 
the source of funding); 
making it easier for credit institutions to renegotiate credit conditions; 
expanding the range of acceptable collateral; 
adjusting  risk  weights  down  to  the  requirements  of  the  Capital  Requirements 
Directive  (e.g.  retail  exposures  previously  risk-weighted  at  100%  and  exposures 
backed  by  eligible  residential  mortgages  and  risk-weighted  at  50%,  started  to  be 
weighted at 75% and 35%, respectively); 
prohibiting the distribution of dividends during the crisis period (for 2008 and 2009, 
for 2010 selectively); 
getting  commitments  by  the  foreign  banks  to  keep  their  exposures  to  their 
subsidiaries, etc. 
   Our bank supervision was not influenced by short-term political considerations. The BNB’s 
measures  were  then  often  seen  by  some  politicians  and  entrepreneurs  as  being  too  strict 
and  unnecessarily  conservative,  even  “hampering  the  economic  growth”.  Especially  during 
2005–2007, optimism was dominating. But we never gave in to pressure. 
If regulators do not stay countercyclical in both “good” and “bad” times, the effects of future 
negative shocks are amplified. That lesson, which is only now being learned in many West 
European  countries  because  of  the  current  crisis,  has  been  a  milestone  of  supervision  for 
many  years  in  Bulgaria.  With  respect  to  bank  regulations  and  the  supervisory  tools  and 
practices, today Bulgaria is rather advanced, and not a “catching-up” economy. This is also 
true for most of the other countries in the region as well. 
As  the  crisis  unfolded,  the  quality  of  assets  deteriorated  with  NPLs  reaching  11.9%  by 
December  2010  (up  from  2.4%  at  the  end  of  2008)  but  sufficient  capital  buffers  were 
preserved. The banking system continued to make profits despite the rise in non-performing 
loans and the subsequent increased provisioning. Today the average capital adequacy ratio 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
exceeds 17%, with Tier 1 capital adequacy above 15% and overall liquidity ratio of around 
24%. That is not the case in the most developed markets. 
the  most  prudent  policies  and  sound 
Beware of superficial announcements 
It is equally important to stay aware of the consequences of speculative public speaking and 
bad  communication.  Despite  even 
financial 
fundamentals, stability may be put at risk by repeated negative superficial public comments. 
Let  me  tell  you  now  that  an  important  share  of  our  work  during  the  crisis  was  devoted  to 
monitoring  and  promptly  reacting  against  the  numerous  ridiculous  statements  that  were 
coming from abroad, even from international financial institutions of good reputation. That is 
why two months ago the Bulgarian National Bank organised a seminar for the local media 
where  we  presented  a  “Top  30”  list  of  failed  doomsday  scenarios  and  forecasts  made  by 
foreign and Bulgarian observers since 2008. 
The Greeks are well aware how the accumulation of adverse market sentiments may lead to 
“self-fulfilling prophecies”. 
And  a  few  words  on  the  so-called  “Greek”  banks  in  Bulgaria.  This  may  serve  as  another 
example in this respect. After one year of much talking about them, these subsidiaries have 
kept  doing  well.  There  has  been  no  withdrawing  of  liquidity  from  Bulgaria  to  support  the 
parent institutions in Greece, nor have local residents moved their deposits to other banks. 
The  banks’ shareholders  confirmed  their  long-term  commitments  to  stay  and  even  expand 
activities in Bulgaria to exploit the opportunities on our market. Generally, the indicators of 
Greek  subsidiaries  in  Bulgaria  are  equal  or  higher  than  the  average  of  the  system  as  a 
whole. 
We as supervisors and guardians of financial stability had to spend much time to dispel all 
the rumours and fears. These efforts were not in vain. 
Continuing reforms, letting banks work 
Governments need to stay firm in their efforts to conduct fiscal consolidation complemented 
by the necessary structural reforms. Politicians must not be afraid of reforms the needs for 
which are well understood. Even in the short run, reform-minded politicians get social and 
political rewards, as long as their message is clear. That has been demonstrated recently in 
both  emerging  Europe  (with  the  re-election  of  a  reformist  government  in  Latvia)  and  also 
here in Greece (during the local and regional government elections last autumn). 
Policymakers should not yield under populist pressures. Better financial consumer protection 
and  prudential  regulations  are  certainly  needed.  But  the  banking  industry  should  not  be 
overburdened and prevented from fulfilling its traditional functions. Measures such as bank 
levies or the taxes on bank transactions, etc., may be very close to crossing that “red line”. 
The global crisis has not changed the fact that financial development is a powerful driver for 
economic growth. Let us not make the banks a scapegoat! 
Thank you for your attention! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
