Kiyohiko G Nishimura: The current state of Japan’s economy and 
monetary policy stance 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders in Kanagawa, Kanagawa, 21 April 2011. 
 Introduction 
More than a month has now passed since the Great East Japan Earthquake. The disaster 
claimed  many  lives  and  many  people  are  still  missing.  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere 
condolences to the victims of the disaster. Moreover, many continue to face severe hardship, 
and I would like to offer my heartfelt sympathy to all of those who are suffering. 
Even  in  Kanagawa  Prefecture,  many  people  have  been  affected  by  the  disaster,  due,  for 
example,  to  rolling  blackouts.  I  appreciate  being  given  this  opportunity  to  speak  and  to 
exchange  views  with  government  and  business  leaders  in  the  prefecture,  despite  these 
difficult times. And I would like to express my gratitude for your cooperation with the various 
business operations of the Bank of Japan’s Yokohama Branch. 
Before we start to exchange views, let me talk about developments in economic activity and 
prices in Japan, taking into account the effects of the disaster, and about the Bank of Japan’s 
response following the earthquake. 
Developments in the global economy 
I. 
Before outlining developments in Japan’s economy, let me first discuss developments in the 
global economy. 
In the first half of 2010, the global economy continued to recover from the sharp downturn 
caused by the financial crisis triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 
2008. However, the pace of recovery slowed temporarily during the summer and autumn of 
2010 and the recovery seemed to be pausing at one point. In the early phase of economic 
recovery following major downturns, we can often observe a sharp rebound as inventories, 
for example, are restored to previous levels. Thus the slowdown in 2010 was attributable to a 
tailing-off of this strong rebound, combined with the fact that the effects of various demand-
boosting measures, such as subsidies for car purchases, implemented in many countries as 
a means of addressing the financial crisis, had almost run their course. 
Nevertheless, from around the end of the autumn of 2010, the global economy exited this 
temporary deceleration phase and its growth rate has since been increasing again. 
Looking at developments by region, growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
started  accelerating  in  the  autumn  of  2010.  At  present,  in  addition  to  high  growth  in 
household  consumption,  there  has  been  continued  demand  for  investment  in  social 
infrastructures as well as factory construction and machinery facilities. It has been suggested 
that, on the back of large-scale monetary easing in advanced economies, funds that were not 
able  to  find promising  investment  opportunities in  advanced  economies  have  been  flowing 
into  some  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  thereby  stimulating  economic 
activity there through asset transactions and investment, which has also been contributing to 
economic expansion in these economies. 
In advanced economies, the U.S. economy, which had been showing signs of deceleration 
from the summer to autumn of 2010 due to the waning effects of fiscal stimulus measures, 
appears  to  have  returned  to  a  moderate  recovery  path  thereafter,  partly  due  to  effects  of 
further monetary easing and fiscal stimulus measures including the extension of tax cuts. In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Europe, economic conditions have differed by region. Germany and Scandinavian countries 
have  been  recovering  strongly,  supported  in  particular  by  buoyant  exports  to  emerging 
economies.  In  contrast,  peripheral  European  economies  such  as  Greece,  Ireland,  and 
Portugal  have  been  faced  with  severe  fiscal  problems,  and  have  been  experiencing 
difficulties  conducting  economic  policy  as  a  result.  In  the  middle  are  France  and  other 
countries that continue to recover moderately. It could be said that the eurozone has become 
a  “three-speed  economy,”  but  our  assessment  is  that  economic  activity  in  the  region  as  a 
whole has been recovering moderately. 
As for the outlook, the global economy is expected to continue recovering, driven by strong 
growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. As in 2010, the growth rate of the 
overall global economy in 2011 and 2012 is likely to exceed the average rate recorded during 
the  decade  before  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis  triggered  by  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers.  However,  uncertainty  remains  high  concerning  the  global  economic  and  price 
environments. In advanced economies, for example, the United States faces a balance-sheet 
adjustment problem, and there are fiscal problems in Europe, as I have just mentioned. In 
addition,  international  commodity  prices  have  been  at  high  levels  as  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  which  are  less  efficient  in  energy  usage  and  distribution 
processes than advanced economies, continue to grow at a high rate. 
II. 
Developments in economic activity and prices in Japan 
Developments in Japan’s economy before the earthquake 
Amid these developments in the global economy, from the beginning of autumn to the end of 
2010, the improvement in Japan’s economy weakened and there was a temporary pause in 
economic recovery. This was largely due to the fact that exports – particularly of automobiles 
and  related  items,  capital  goods  and  parts,  and  electronic  components  –  were  somewhat 
weak.  This  weakness  in  exports  is  attributed  to  a  temporary  slowdown  in  the  pace  of 
economic recovery overseas as well as the effects of the yen’s appreciation in the summer of 
2010 and inventory adjustments in IT-related goods such as personal computers. 
From the beginning of 2011, however, exports and production were gradually returning to an 
upward  trend,  supported  by  a  resumption  of  growth  in  overseas  economies.  Private 
consumption had been improving, with car sales resuming an uptrend after the fall following 
the  expiration  of  subsidies  for  energy  efficient  cars,  and  business  fixed  investment  and 
housing investment was also starting to pick up from the significant decline after the financial 
crisis. In other words, before the earthquake it appeared that economic activity in Japan was 
gradually emerging from its temporary pause. 
Developments in Japan’s economy after the earthquake 
The  effects  of  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  on  March  11  changed  the  situation 
considerably. 
According to Cabinet Office estimates, the amount of damage to capital stock will be about 
16 to 25 trillion yen, or about 3 to 5 percent of Japan’s annual nominal GDP. The extent of 
the  damage  from  this  disaster  will  be  significantly  greater  than  that  from  the  Kobe 
Earthquake,  which  caused  about  10  trillion  yen  in  damage  to  capital  stock.  Of  all  natural 
disasters in Japan since the start of the Meiji era in 1868, only the Great Kanto Earthquake of 
1923 has caused more damage. More than 100,000 people lost their lives in that earthquake 
or remained unaccounted for thereafter, and the direct economic damage amounted to about 
30 percent of nominal GNP at the time. 
Moving  on  to  the  economic  situation  after  the  March  11  earthquake,  Japan’s  economy  is 
under strong downward pressure, mainly on the production side. The disaster has caused 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
two types of supply constraints, which I will explain shortly. As a result of these constraints, 
production in some industries has declined substantially, which has had a severe impact on 
exports  and  domestic  shipments.  Business  sentiment  has  also  deteriorated  and  consumer 
appetite has waned. 
One  of  these  supply  constraints  is  the  widespread  damage  to  production  facilities  and 
associated  malfunctioning  of  the  supply  chain  networks  that  deliver  parts.  The  Kobe 
Earthquake  had  a  devastating  impact  on  city  functions  in  the  part  of  southern  Hyogo 
Prefecture that was directly hit, but the affected areas were not so widespread. In contrast, 
the March 11 earthquake caused devastating damage over a much wider area, destroying 
the  production  facilities  of  many  industries,  including  the  electrical  and  general  machinery 
industries. I have heard that some firms in the Kanagawa Prefecture have production bases 
in  the  Tohoku  region  that  have  been  affected.  Production  of  electronic  components  and 
devices  had  been  thriving  in  the  affected  areas,  and  there  were  more  than  a  few  parts 
manufacturers producing unique products with dominant global market share. Damage to the 
production facilities of these firms has meant that many other firms face difficulties procuring 
parts  –  typified  by  the  automobile  industry,  which  relies  on  computerized  and  customized 
parts  produced  under  strict  quality  control.  This  is  causing  constraints  on  production 
throughout Japan. 
Another  supply  constraint  is  the  constraints  on  power  supply.  More  than  20  percent  of 
generating capacity has been lost in the Tokyo Electric Power Company’s service area, due 
to damage not only to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant but also to several thermal 
power  plants.  The  Tohoku  Electric  Power  Company  has  also  lost  about  30  percent  of  its 
supply capacity. This has resulted in disruption to stable power supply, as rolling blackouts 
were at one point implemented in the Kanto and Tohoku regions to avoid unexpected large-
scale  blackouts  due  to  power  supply  constraints.  There  are  some  industries,  such  as  the 
food and chemical industries, which need time to start up or shut down production facilities or 
need  continuous  power  distribution  to  ensure  the  quality  of  their  products.  It  has  been 
pointed out that production levels have declined in these industries because of the absence 
of stable power supply, even though their production facilities were not significantly damaged 
by the earthquake. 
Meanwhile,  on  the  demand  side,  while  demand  for  necessities  increased  temporarily,  a 
deterioration in firms’ appetite for investment and households’ appetite for consumption, due 
to  rising  uncertainty  about  the  future,  seems  to  be  exerting  overall  downward  pressure  on 
business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption.  For  example,  sales  at  electrical 
appliance  stores  and  department  stores  declined  significantly  after  the  earthquake,  as  a 
result  of  a  deterioration  in  households’  appetite  for  consumption  coupled  with  shortened 
business hours due to power supply restrictions. 
Aspects to consider in the outlook for Japan’s economy 
Next, I will talk about the outlook for Japan’s economy. 
The Bank presents its outlook for economic activity and prices on a quarterly basis. At the 
Monetary Policy Meeting to be held on April 28, next week, the Bank will present its outlook 
until fiscal 2012. Today, I would like to discuss three key aspects to consider in projecting the 
outlook for economic activity and prices in Japan. 
The  first  aspect  is  when,  how,  and  to  what  extent  the  current  supply-side  constraints  that 
Japan’s economy is facing will be removed. 
The sharp downturn in Japan’s economy after the earthquake has been, simply put, triggered 
by supply-side shock from damage to production facilities, including damage to power supply 
capacity caused by the earthquake and tsunami. Therefore, the key for the outlook is when 
and how the supply-side constraints caused by the disaster will be removed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
On  this  point,  I  must  say  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  when  they  will  be 
removed. This is due to a high degree of uncertainty about the following three problems. 
The  first  problem  is  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  say  with  any  certainty  when  the  production 
capacity lost as a result of the disaster will be restored. Firms are making strenuous efforts 
to,  for  example,  resume  operations  at  affected  production  facilities  and  ensure  substitute 
production by factories in non-affected areas. However, progress in these efforts has been 
slow due to various supply-side constraints including unstable power supply. Another factor 
that makes it difficult to remove such constraints is that some of the electronic components 
and  high-end  materials  produced  in  the  affected  factories  are  hard  to  replace  because  of 
quality requirements and high levels of customization. 
The second problem, which is also related to the issue of restoring production capacity, is the 
question  of  when  the  disruptions  to  supply  chains  will  be  removed.  At  present,  firms  are 
working  to  repair  or  rebuild  supply  chains  by,  for  example,  seeking  to  secure  alternative 
suppliers, including from overseas, and reviewing product specifications. However, as supply 
chains are complex and interconnected, if a bottleneck occurs in any one part of the chain, 
accurately  gauging  its  impact  and  addressing  the  problem  present  various  difficulties. 
Therefore,  a  considerable  amount  of  time  is  considered  necessary  to  reconstruct  supply 
chains. 
The  third  problem  is  uncertainty  as  to  when  constraints  on  electric  power  supply  will  be 
removed. Electric power companies and other related parties are doing all that they can to, 
for example, resume operations of facilities to restore supply capacity. Firms are also taking 
various measures to address the situation. One such measure is changing working hours. 
For  example,  one  firm  in  Kanagawa  Prefecture  has  changed  the  working  hours  of  some 
divisions.  These  divisions  now  start  work  two  hours  earlier  in  the  morning  to  reduce  the 
amount of electric power used. Another measure is operating at non-peak times, such as at 
nights or on holidays. And a third measure is using in-house power generators. Households 
have also been asked to conserve electricity and voluntary conservation has been ongoing. 
These efforts have recently eased constraints on economic activity due to power shortages. 
However, demand for electricity will surge in the summer due to the use of air conditioners, 
and therefore, the balance between electricity supply and demand will tighten again and a 
certain degree of supply constraint is likely to emerge. 
Taking  these  points  into  account,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  supply-side  constraints  will  be 
removed  anytime  soon.  I  must  say  that  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  remain  under  strong 
downward pressure, mainly on the production side, for some time to come. However, looking 
ahead  to  the  autumn  and  beyond,  the  supply-side  constraints  are  likely  to  ease  as  the 
tightness in electricity supply and demand balance improves and progress is expected to be 
made  in  the  reconfiguration  of  supply  chains.  If  that  is  the  case,  as  long  as  the  global 
economy  continues  to  record  high  growth  led  by  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies, which is likely, a recovery in production in Japan and ensuing increase in exports 
will probably serve as one driving force behind a recovery in Japan’s economy. 
The second aspect that I consider important for projecting the outlook for Japan’s economy 
after  the  earthquake  is  how  to  assess  uncertainty  regarding  overseas  economies.  This 
aspect is important because one of the driving forces of future economic recovery in Japan 
will be growth in overseas economies. 
As  pointed  out  prior  to  the  earthquake,  a  factor  that  could  lead  overseas  economies  to 
deviate  upward  from  projections  is  the  possibility  of  a  further  acceleration  of  growth  in 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  that  have  been  enjoying  robust  domestic 
demand and receiving capital inflows from other countries. While many of these economies 
are  in  the  process  of  adjusting  their  accommodative  monetary  policies,  concerns  about 
overheating and inflation have yet to be dispelled. For example, in China, rises in real estate 
prices  and  wages  have  become  pronounced.  On  the  other  hand,  factors  that  could  lead 
overseas economies to deviate downward from projections include developments in global 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial  markets  triggered  by  sovereign  risk  problems  in  peripheral  European  economies, 
and, uncertainties about the outlook for the U.S. and European economies, although these 
uncertainties have now diminished to some extent. 
The  third  aspect  to  consider  when  projecting  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  after  the 
earthquake is how efforts to restore capital stock damaged by the disaster will progress, as 
well as how indirect effects of the accident in the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant will 
change with time. 
As I have explained, the significant short-term economic impact of the disaster is the impact 
of supply-side constraints. With time, however, these constraints will be eased, and at the 
same time, the efforts of the private and public sectors to restore capital stock damaged by 
the  disaster  –  roads,  ports  and  harbors,  factories,  commercial  facilities,  and  houses  –  will 
become more pronounced. If such “rebuilding demand” emerges, it will contribute to Japan’s 
economic growth. However, I must say that there is considerable uncertainty with respect to 
the timing and scale of any such demand. 
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  the  important  point  is  how  the  disaster  will  affect  the 
structure of Japan’s economy and the economy’s growth potential. I am not an expert in the 
accident  at  the  nuclear  power  plant  itself,  but  I  think  that,  in  terms  of  its  effects  on  the 
economy, due attention should be paid to the risk that delays in resolving the problems at the 
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant lead to continued power supply shortages, and that 
the spread of harmful rumors at home and abroad could have a significant impact on Japan’s 
exports  and  tourism  industry.  Moreover,  as  they  seek  to  reconstruct  their  supply  chains, 
some  firms  could  consequently  speed  up  the  process  of  shifting  their  production  bases  to 
overseas locations. There is also a risk that the disaster and power plant accident might put 
a  chill  on  corporate  investment  and  households’  consumption,  thereby  reducing  growth 
expectations for Japan’s economy. 
Developments in prices 
I will now move on to developments in prices. 
Recently,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  decline  in  consumer  prices  (excluding  fresh  food)  has 
continued to slow. In particular, if the effects of subsidies for high school tuition are excluded, 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  has  recently  become  slightly  positive,  mainly  due  to  the 
effects of the rise in international commodity prices. 
As  for  the  future  price  environment,  short-term  bottlenecks  might  emerge  in  individual 
markets  for  goods  and  services  due  to  supply-side  constraints  caused  by  the  earthquake. 
However,  the  short-term  outlook  for  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  is 
unpredictable,  because  of  the  simultaneous  occurrence  of  severe  supply-side  constraints 
due to the disaster, and a plunge in demand arising from the decline in firms’ appetite for 
investment  and  households’  appetite  for  consumption.  However,  over  the  longer  term,  the 
aggregate supply and demand balance is expected to improve gradually as economic activity 
returns to a moderate recovery path. 
There are also various uncertainties regarding the outlook for prices. First, if corporate and 
household medium- to long-term inflation expectations decline, actual prices could be lower 
than projected. On this point, I would like to draw attention to the possibility of the year-on-
year rate of change in the consumer price index being revised downward with the base-year 
change  scheduled  for  August  2011.  We  need  to  examine  whether  the  revision  affects 
corporate and household inflation expectations. On the other hand, if international commodity 
prices increase further, Japan’s prices could be higher than projected. Furthermore, foreign 
exchange rates, if they become volatile, will also affect consumer prices, not only by causing 
swings in economic activity but also through changes in import prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Bank of Japan’s response after the earthquake 
III. 
As I have explained, the disaster has brought about significant changes to Japan’s economy. 
In  addressing  the  disaster,  the  Bank,  since  immediately  after  the  earthquake  struck,  has 
been  taking  a  range  of  active  measures,  from  the  following  three  main  perspectives: 
maintaining  the  functioning  of  financial  and  settlement  systems;  ensuring  the  stability  of 
financial markets; and supporting economic activity. I would now like to explain the Bank’s 
response to the disaster. 
Maintaining the functioning of financial and settlement systems 
What  the  Bank  did  first  after  the  earthquake  was  to  do  everything  possible  to  ensure  the 
safety and security of the financial infrastructures. When there is high uncertainty over the 
future  of  the  economy,  one  of  the  most  paramount  challenges  is  to  steadfastly  maintain 
financial infrastructures to prevent rising concern among the people. With this in mind, the 
Bank has been doing its utmost to maintain the functioning of the financial and settlement 
systems, which are the critical infrastructures that support people’s lives, as well as striving 
to ensure financial market stability. 
In terms of maintaining the functioning of the financial and settlement systems, the Bank has 
been  taking  all  possible  measures  to  provide  cash  to  the  disaster  areas  the  entire  time, 
including holidays, since immediately after the earthquake, aiming to meet the cash needs of 
people in those areas. In such areas, many financial institutions, despite themselves being 
affected by the earthquake and tsunami, have been striving with a strong sense of mission to 
restore their operations, and open as many branches and offices1 as possible to smoothly 
enable individuals in need of cash to withdraw deposits and to meet firms’ growing needs for 
operating  funds  or  on-hand  cash.  The  Bank’s  branches  and  offices  in  the  Tohoku  region, 
including those in the severely damaged areas of Sendai and Fukushima, started providing 
cash from the weekend immediately after the earthquake and provided a total of more than 
310 billion yen in cash in that week. This is three times the amount usually provided in the 
same period in normal times. 
On March 11, the day the earthquake occurred, the Bank, jointly with the Financial Services 
Agency, asked financial institutions to take appropriate measures to accommodate the needs 
of those affected by the disaster, such as permitting the withdrawal of deposits even in cases 
where depositors had lost passbooks and seals. 
In addition, the Bank’s Head Office and other branches also continue to provide central bank 
services such as exchanging banknotes and coins that were damaged by the earthquake.2 
As for wholesale payments and settlements for funds and securities, Japan’s major payment 
and settlement systems, including the Bank of Japan Financial Network System, or BOJ-NET 
– the core settlement system for funds and Japanese government bonds – have, thanks to 
                                                 
1  According to the Financial Services Agency, 95 percent of financial institutions’ branches and offices in the 
disaster areas were open for business as of April 15. 
2  The Bank replaces banknotes and coins which are contaminated, damaged, or worn out and unfit for reuse, 
based on criteria specified by law. The Bank provides this service at its Head Office and branches. Those who 
live far away from the Bank’s Head Office and branches are asked to visit a neighboring financial institution, 
as the Bank has requested financial institutions to handle such exchange. The criteria are as follows: Provided 
that the banknote still has two sides, damaged, or burnt banknotes can be exchanged for new ones. 
(1) If two-thirds or more of a banknote’s original size remains, it can be exchanged for its full face value. 
(2) If less than two-thirds but two-fifths or more of a banknote’s original size remains, it can be exchanged for 
half of its face value. 
(3) If less than two-fifths of a banknote’s original size remains, it cannot be exchanged. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  efforts  of  the  related  parties,  been  operating  as  usual  for  the  entire  time  since  the 
earthquake occurred, despite various difficulties in the aftermath. 
Ensuring the stability of financial markets 
To  ensure  financial  market  stability,  the  Bank  has  been  providing  ample  liquidity  after  the 
earthquake.  When  the  economy  is  faced  with  a  major  crisis  and  there  is  heightened 
uncertainty  about  the  future,  participants  in  the  financial  markets  attempt  to  retain  a  large 
amount  of  funds  at  hand.  If  they  fail  to  obtain  sufficient  funds,  financial  markets  could 
destabilize due to heightened uncertainty, which could eventually adversely affect economic 
activity.3  To  prevent  such  a  situation,  the  Bank  has  been  providing  ample  liquidity  since 
immediately after the earthquake, striving to ensure financial market stability by maintaining a 
sense  of  security  on  the  funding  front,  and  trying  to  avoid  adverse  effects  on  corporate 
activity and people’s daily lives from the financial side. 
More specifically, on Monday, March 14, the first business day after the disaster, financial 
institutions’  precautionary  demand  for  funds  surged  and  tensions  intensified  in  the  money 
markets.  To  address  the  situation,  the  Bank  provided  a  total  of  21.8  trillion  yen  in  funds, 
almost  three  times  as  much  as  the  largest  daily  funds  provision  during  the  financial  crisis 
after the failure of Lehman Brothers. Thereafter, the Bank continued to provide ample funds 
to sufficiently meet market demand. As a result, the outstanding current account balance of 
the  Bank  significantly  exceeded  the  high  of  36  trillion  yen  recorded  during  the  period  of 
Japan’s “quantitative easing” policy. 
The Bank went beyond simply providing a large quantity of funds. It also carefully devised 
types and timings of market operations according to market conditions. For instance, based 
on the fact that a slight weakness was seen in financial intermediation functions in the CP 
market due to uncertainties about the future following the earthquake, the Bank purchased 
CP under repurchase agreements on March 22 for the first time in a year. The  Bank also 
conducted  outright  purchases  of  CP  on  March  25.  As  a  result,  issuance  spreads  on  CP 
declined to just slightly above their levels prior to the earthquake4 and funding through CP 
continued without major problems. 
In coordination with the U.S. Federal Reserve System, on March 29, the Bank started to offer 
market  participants  in  Japan  one-week  U.S.  dollar  funds,  in  addition  to  the  existing  three-
month  funds,  in  its  U.S.  dollar-funds  supplying  operation.  This  measure  was  taken  not 
because domestic financial institutions were having difficulties securing U.S. dollar funding at 
the time. Rather, it is taken because the establishment of convenient measures for providing 
U.S. dollar funding in advance is expected to contribute to preventing economic activity from 
being adversely affected by a widespread deterioration in business sentiment or an increase 
in investors’ risk aversion. Therefore, although there were no bids for the operation, its very 
existence is said to have given a great sense of security to the market. 
                                                 
3  For instance, it is well known that the United States as a whole experienced considerable economic disruption 
in the aftermath of the San Francisco Earthquake of  1906 due to  a shortage  of liquidity (see, for  example, 
Bruner, Robert F. and Sean D. Carr, “The Panic of 1907: Lessons Learned from the Market’s Perfect Storm,” 
August 2007, Wiley). 
Issuance spreads on an a-1 rated CP with a maturity of three months rose immediately after the earthquake to 
a range of 0.06 to 0.12 percent from 0.00 to 0.03 percent beforehand, but declined to the level of 0.03 percent 
in the period from March 28 through April 1, and they have recently been at more or less the same level as 
prior  to  the  earthquake  in  terms  of  the  average  value  of  the  issuance  rates  of  CP  issued  by  business 
companies  (except  electricity,  gas,  and  other  financial  companies),  as  released  by  the  Japan  Securities 
Depository Center (JASDEC). 
4 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Enhancing monetary easing to support economic activity 
The Bank also moved swiftly to support economic activity. Its Monetary Policy Meeting was 
scheduled to be held over two days starting from the next business day after the earthquake, 
which was also the beginning of the next week. As the Bank deemed it desirable to examine 
the possible effects of the disaster and promptly announce a monetary policy stance, thereby 
ensuring stability in the financial markets, it shortened the duration of the meeting to one day 
and decided on March 14, the first business day after the earthquake, to enhance monetary 
easing. 
What we feared most immediately after the disaster was a situation in which a deterioration 
in  business  sentiment  or  an  increase  in  investors’  risk  aversion  in  financial  markets  would 
lead to an increase in various risk premiums, thereby adversely affecting economic activity. 
Accordingly, the Bank decided to increase the amount of the Asset Purchase Program, by 
doubling its purchases of assets to about 10 trillion yen in total, mainly risk assets such as 
exchange traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
Financial system and financial conditions after the earthquake 
Thanks mainly to these measures, functioning of financial and settlement systems has been 
maintained in Japan and stability has been ensured in the financial markets. 
As for the effects of the disaster on the financial system, as I mentioned earlier, a significant 
number  of  financial  institutions’  branches  have  been  physically  damaged.  However,  given 
that financial institutions have been striving to bolster their capital by raising additional capital 
and  increasing  internal  reserves,  and  that  financial  institutions  have  not  had  any  liquidity 
concerns thanks to the Bank’s ample liquidity provision, we believe that stability of Japan’s 
financial system is not threatened by the disaster. 
As  for  the  financial  environment  surrounding  Japanese  firms  and  households,  financial 
conditions have generally continued to ease, although weakness has been observed in the 
financial positions of firms, mainly small ones, since the earthquake. I have heard that, even 
here  in  Kanagawa  Prefecture,  some  non-manufacturing  firms  whose  ability  to  procure 
financing tends to be heavily dependent on their revenues have been concerned about their 
own financing conditions after the earthquake. 
Funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in the disaster areas and 
broadening of the range of eligible collateral 
The  Bank’s  measures  I  have  explained  so  far  are  those  responses  taken  in  the  time  of 
emergency immediately after the earthquake occurred. In addition, as a next step, the Bank 
decided at its latest Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 6 and 7 that it would be necessary 
to support the smooth financial functioning of financial institutions in disaster areas so that 
restoration and rebuilding in these areas could steadily progress. 
Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  a  funds-supplying  operation  that  provides 
financial institutions with offices in the disaster areas with a one-year loan of 1 trillion yen in 
total at a rate of 0.1 percent per annum in order to provide financial support for their initial 
response  efforts  to  meet  expected  demand  for  funds  for  restoration  and  rebuilding.  In  line 
with this, the Bank also decided to broaden the range of collateral eligible for money market 
operations  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  financial  institutions  in  the  disaster  areas  have 
sufficient funding capacity. 
Let  me  explain  briefly  the  background  to  this  decision.  The  household  sector  and  the 
corporate  sector  have  ample  funds,  as  they  have  maintained  excess  savings  over  a 
protracted  period,  and  therefore,  from  a  macroeconomic  viewpoint,  financial  institutions 
would have no difficulty in financing. However, financial institutions in the disaster areas have 
to meet high demand for funds, ranging from the immediate demand from firms for cash for 
operating funds and cash on-hand, and from individuals for living expenses, as well as future 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
demand  for  funds  for  restoration  and  rebuilding.  Considering  the  damage  caused  to  the 
affected areas, however, new deposits are unlikely to increase for the time being and an effect 
is likely to materialize from loans going into arrears. Given such circumstances, in addition to 
the current provision of ample funds, providing financial institutions in the affected areas with 
funds with even longer maturities will reassure them that they will be able to meet financing 
needs. Moreover, if financial institutions in the affected areas are able to fulfill their financial 
functions without problem, the people are likely to feel a greater sense of security as a result. 
So far, I have explained the Bank’s responses after the earthquake. The Bank will continue 
to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and prices, including the effects of the 
disaster, and take appropriate policy actions as necessary. 
Concluding remarks 
In  visiting  Yokohama  for  today’s  meeting,  I  am  reminded  of  the  story  I  heard  from  my 
grandmother about the remarkable way that this city was rebuilt after being utterly destroyed 
by the Great Kanto Earthquake. 
The  Great  Kanto  Earthquake,  which  occurred  on  September  1,  1923,  caused  devastating 
damage  to  Yokohama.  More  than  20,000  residents  of  Yokohama,  or  about  5  percent  of 
Yokohama’s population at the time, either died in the earthquake or remained unaccounted 
for thereafter. As a proportion of its total population, Yokohama’s loss was greater than that 
of Tokyo’s.5 Moreover, because a huge fire started immediately after the earthquake, about 
80 percent of the city was burned down. It was so devastating a situation that, according to 
the  then  Mayor  of  Yokohama,  rumors  spread  that  Yokohama  would  never  recover. 
Nevertheless,  about  30,000  new  houses  were  built  in  the  year  after  the  disaster,  which 
corresponded  to  about  40  percent  of  the  houses  that  had  been  lost,  and  bank  deposits 
exceeded  their  levels  prior  to  the  disaster  by  the  end  of  that  year.  Four  years  on,  the 
population  of  Yokohama  City  had  reached  530,000,  significantly  higher  than  the  450,000 
before the earthquake. 
One  characteristic  of  Yokohama’s  rebuilding  after  the  Great  Kanto  Earthquake  was  that  it 
aimed not only to rebuild but also to reinvent itself as an industrial city rather than its pre-
earthquake  existence  as  a  city  dependent  only  on  commercial  trades.  This  had  been  a 
challenge facing Yokohama since before the earthquake. The rebuilding plan boldly included 
rezoning of land and improvements in the road network and parks. Moreover, in tandem with 
the rebuilding, a railroad network was developed that connected city areas with the suburbs, 
and progress was made in developing industrial and residential areas.  
As  just  described,  Yokohama’s  success  in  rebuilding  seems  to  be  down  to  the  forward-
looking  attitude  and  determination  to  rebuild  of  the  people  of  the  day,  and  the  vision  and 
enterprising spirit that they had to use the rebuilding as an opportunity to draw a blueprint for 
new growth. Mr. Sankei (Tomitaro) Hara, who led the rebuilding of Yokohama, said that while 
Yokohama  had been burned to the ground, the fire was  not able to touch the spirit of the 
people. If I may refer to his words again, he also said that Yokohama City had become a 
blank slate, and from a blank slate anything was possible. You can draw the latest picture by 
incorporating new culture. 
I would like to conclude by sincerely wishing that rebuilding in the affected area will make the 
same  kind  of  steady  progress  that  was  made  in  Yokohama  following  the  Great  Kanto 
Earthquake,  and  that  the  economy  in  the  affected  areas  ends  up  even  better  placed  with 
greater growth potential. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
5  The proportion of the population of Tokyo that died in the earthquake or remained unaccounted for thereafter 
was in the range of 2.0–3.0 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
