José Manuel González-Páramo: The banking sector towards the “new 
normal” – some considerations 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the “Jornada de la Banca” organised by PricewaterhouseCoopers 
(PwC) and IE (Instituto de Empresa) Business School, Madrid, 27 January 2011. 
I am grateful to Natalja Benkovska, Csaba More and Balázs Zsámboki for inputs into this speech. 
Ladies and gentlemen: 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a privilege for me to participate in this conference, dedicated to the very important topic 
of  the  challenges  and  opportunities  that  the  banking  sector  will  face  when  its  ongoing 
restructuring process comes to an end and the new regulatory and supervisory framework is 
implemented.  The  organisers  may  be  asking  themselves  (and  also  asking  us):  “and  now, 
what?” Well, we may reply that now it is time for the “new normal”. This is a simple answer 
that entails a number of complex demands. This is why it is useful as a starting point to recall 
the recent past. 
The protracted financial crisis that we have experienced since 2007 has unveiled important 
sources of vulnerability in the financial system. These include weaknesses of the regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework  of  the  banking  sector,  which  failed  to  ensure  the  safety  and 
soundness of financial institutions both individually and as a system. This has prompted the 
relevant  authorities  to  pursue  a  number  of  reforms  of  the  microprudential  supervisory  and 
regulatory framework, while also assigning central banks all over the world macroprudential 
tasks in recognition of the importance of the systemic component of financial stability. 
In  addition,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  the  relationship  between  financial  development  and 
economic  growth  is  not  really  linear  and  that,  when  financial  sectors  become  “too  large” 
relative to their home economies, risks to financial stability and macroeconomic stability may 
arise. Moreover, the crisis has undermined the sustainability of some business models that 
were  rather  widespread  among  large  international  banks,  while  also  exposing  the 
shortcomings  of  corporate  governance  and  of  the  evaluation  and  management  of  the 
different sources of risk within financial institutions.  
There are of course many other lessons that we can draw from the crisis, but given the time 
constraints, the rest of my intervention will focus only on some key aspects of the regulatory 
reform, on issues related to the size of the banking sector, on the business models of banks 
and on their corporate governance. I will conclude with a short reference to the new role of 
central banks in macroprudential supervision. Let me first say a few words to explain how the 
crisis has affected the macroeconomic and financial environment in which banks operate. 
Towards a new economic and financial paradigm: the “new normal” 
II. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  it  is  very  likely  that  many  fundamental  elements  of  our 
economies and financial systems work differently than in the past in a number of aspects, 
reflecting processes of adjustment in the behaviour of agents and policy-related reforms that 
are  currently  under  way.  More  generally,  empirical  evidence  shows  that  systemic  banking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 in 
for 
implications 
theory  have  different 
two  decades  of  significantly 
crises typically affect the structure and dynamics of economic systems over very protracted 
periods.1 
Before venturing into the future, let me recall the main elements of the pre-crisis economic 
and financial paradigm, i.e. the “old normal”.  
 
Reduced macroeconomic volatility. Prior to the deterioration of the crisis in October 
2008,  our  economies  experienced 
reduced 
macroeconomic  volatility.  A  number  of  empirical  studies  documented  a  significant 
decline  in  the  variability  of  both  economic  growth  and  inflation  in  almost  all  major 
industrialised economies. Most of the debate among monetary economists focused 
at the time on the predominant source of “the Great Moderation” among three main 
candidates:  (1)  better  macroeconomic  policies,  (2)  structural  changes  in  the 
economies, and (3) less disruptive distributions of shocks (“good luck”). While the 
alternative  explanations  could 
the 
sustainability of the decline in macroeconomic volatility, in general few doubts were 
expressed  about  the  steadiness  of  this  new  state  of  the  world:  the  “Great 
Moderation” was here to stay.  
Sustained  economic  growth.  The  decline  in  macroeconomic  volatility  was  also 
accompanied  by  a  significant  improvement  in  economic  performance  as  agents 
were  able  to  extract  the  dividends  of  sustained  price  stability  and  reduced 
uncertainty  about  macroeconomic  activity.  Potential  growth  in  most  developed 
economies  rose,  enabling  their  citizens  to  benefit  from  protracted  periods  of 
economic  expansion,  only 
relatively  moderate 
recessions. 
Strong  dynamics  of  house  prices.  Sustained  economic  growth,  supported  by  low 
and stable interest rates, contributed to improving expectations about asset prices, 
particularly about house prices. Optimistic expectations about housing markets at a 
time  of:  (a)  increasing  deregulation  and  liberalisation  of  the  banking  and  financial 
sectors,  (b)  fast  financial  innovation,  and  (c)  progressive  globalisation  of  financial 
markets,  led  to  rapid  appreciation  of  house  prices,  which  was  supported  by 
excessive  indebtedness  of  households  in  some  countries.  The  rise  in  household 
indebtedness and house price inflation was particularly significant in those countries 
in which the decline in nominal interest rates as a result of the shift to price stability 
had been more pronounced.  
Increased profitability of the financial sector at a time of historically low risk premia. 
In  the  years  preceding  the  crisis,  the  profitability  of  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions significantly improved as a result of generally favourable economic and 
financial  conditions.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  improvement  in 
profitability had taken place against a background of: (1) unusually subdued volatility 
in  financial  markets,  (2)  credit  risk  premia  at  historically  low  levels,  (3)  very  high 
valuations of asset prices, and (4) relatively light regulation and supervision in some 
countries. Moreover, the improvement in the financial positions of banks had taken 
place in an environment characterised by ample market liquidity across a number of 
global financial markets, which led to almost no liquidity risk premia being priced in. 
As the crisis is still unfolding, we cannot tell with certainly how our economic and financial 
systems will function in the future. However, we can safely predict that many of the elements 
of the old paradigm will no longer be valid. This will give rise to an economic and financial 
“new normal” in the post-crisis period. Some of the its main elements, that can be sketched 
out based on previous experiences of systemic banking crises, are as follows: 
interrupted  by 
infrequently 
                                                   
1   Reinhart, C.M. and K.S. Rogoff (2008), “The aftermath of financial crises”, NBER WP 14656. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Somewhat higher macroeconomic volatility and lower potential growth 
Protracted periods of adjustment in housing markets and in the construction sector 
An upward shift in the pricing of credit and liquidity risk  
Stricter regulation in order to strengthen the resilience of the financial sector, though 
probably at the cost of making financial intermediation somewhat more expensive  
Evolving  role  of  central  banks  (stronger  inclination  towards  “leaning  against  the 
wind” policies and the assignment of macroprudential objectives)  
Changes in the macroeconomic environment, regulatory and supervisory framework as well 
as  industry  structure  may  have  very  significant  implications  in  the  way  the  financial  sector 
operates in the future. Let me briefly elaborate on some of those implications. 
The banking sector after the crisis 
III. 
An  important  consequence  of  the  financial  crisis  is  the  significant  transformation  which  is 
taking  place  in  the  EU  banking  sector.  The  global  overhaul  of  banking  regulation  and 
supervision  resulting  from  the  crisis,  the  demanding  macroeconomic  environment  and  the 
ongoing deleveraging and banking restructuring in some European countries are key factors 
which are shaping the future of the banking industry both in the short- and medium-term.  
In the context of the lessons learnt from the crisis and of the regulatory reform, the rest of my 
speech  will  focus  on  the  main  aspects  of  this  reform  and  the  developments  in  the  size  of 
banking  sectors,  banking  business  models  and  corporate  governance.  I  will  conclude  by 
discussing the role of central banks in the new macro-prudential supervisory framework. 
Regulatory and supervisory framework 
III.1 
The  crisis  has  revealed  serious  gaps  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for 
financial institutions, both with regard to the prudential rules on capital and those on liquidity. 
Several  systemically  important  institutions  that  seemed  to  have  a  solid  financial  position 
before the crisis proved not to be sufficiently resilient to withstand the shocks that have hit 
the  financial  system  in  the  past  three  years  and  a  half.  Consequently,  governments  and 
central banks had to provide an unprecedented amount of support, and in parallel with this 
process, several initiatives have also been launched that resulted in a major overhaul of the 
regulatory and supervisory framework. 
A core element of the regulatory reform was the complete revision of the Basel II framework 
(now commonly referred to as Basel III) that has been recently agreed by the members of the 
Basel  Committee  and  endorsed  by  the  Group  of  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of 
Supervision. The key elements of the new framework include: 
(1) 
a  new  definition  of  regulatory  capital  that  will  improve  both  the  quality  and 
consistency of the capital base,  
the introduction of capital conservation buffer requirements that would constitute an 
additional  layer  of  protection  for  banks,  especially  in  periods  of  excessive  credit 
growth, 
the strengthening of the risk coverage of the capital framework that would represent 
a revision of the prudential rules on securitisation and trading book activities as well 
as the counterparty credit risk framework,  
the  planned  introduction  of  a  non-risk  based  leverage  ratio  that  would  serve  as  a 
supplementary  measure  to  the  risk-based  requirements  to  contain  the  build-up  of 
excessive leverage and address model risks associated with the risk-based capital 
framework, and  
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
(5) 
the  development  of  a  liquidity  risk  framework  that  would  aim  at  improving  the 
resilience to liquidity shocks of the banks. 
The  new  measures  will  be  introduced  over  a  transition  period  of  8  years,  and  have  been 
calibrated with the aim of avoiding severe implications for the national banking system, while 
supporting economic recovery2.  
“Too large” financial sectors?  
III.2 
Turning to the developments in the banking sector, let me recall that the size of the financial 
systems dramatically increased during the past few decades both in Europe and in the US.3 
To  judge  whether  the  financial  sector  has  grown  “too  large”,  it  is  crucial  to  answer  the 
question  of  whether  or  not  the  expansion  of  finance  before  the  crisis  was  driven  by 
fundamentals.  
On the one hand, it is clear that this process was fuelled by fast economic growth and a rapid 
accumulation  of  savings  in  emerging  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  developed  countries 
engaged in rapid innovation in the field of financial products, which allowed the more efficient 
channelling  of  domestic  and  global  savings  towards  productive  investments.  The  most 
striking  developments  in  this  respect  occurred  with  credit  default  swaps  (CDSs)  and 
securitised  products.  This  increase  in  financial  innovation  may,  in  turn,  have  led  to  an 
inefficient allocation of resources, excessive risk-taking and over-leveraging of the system. 
Examples  of  such  resource  misallocation  include  the  expansion  of  the  US  subprime 
mortgage market and of the shadow banking system.  
Similarly, while we have always known that financial innovation can contribute to enhancing 
risk diversification, it is clear that innovative financial instruments also have the potential to 
undermine financial stability. For example, the complexity of new instruments might lead to a 
misallocation  of  capital  and  risk  among  market  participants.  In  this  respect,  the  crisis  has 
exposed the fragilities of the securitisation process, including the misalignment of incentives 
among agents participating in the origination and in the distribution, lack of transparency with 
regard to the risks underlying securitised products and the inadequate management of the 
risks  associated  with  the  securitisation  business.  It  is  by  now  evident  to  everybody  that 
weaknesses  in  the  business  model  based  on  “originate-to-distribute”  contributed  to  the 
worsening of loan quality.4 
The  experience  of  the  crisis  also  suggests  that  most  investors  hugely  underestimated  the 
risks of the most complex financial instruments. This is precisely why there is an increasing 
demand  for  transparency  about  both  the  degree  of  risk  of  individual  instruments  and  the 
exposures of institutions to different instruments, markets and counterparties. The EU-wide 
stress test exercise proved to be an important step toward a more transparent assessment of 
the  exposures  of  individual  institutions  to  different  instruments  and  countries.  The 
                                                 
2   The impact assessments carried out by the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board with relation to 
the  transitory  and  long-term  effects  of  the  Basel  reform  package  revealed  that  the  costs  of  financial 
intermediation  may  temporarily  rise  during  the  implementation  phase  (e.g.  in  terms  of  increasing  spreads, 
lower credit volumes and a more moderate GDP growth). However, in the long run, the net positive benefits 
are expected to dominate as a result of lower probability of crises to occur. 
In the euro area, the expansion of banks’ balance sheets has been around 400% between 1992 and 2007 
(just before the crisis) whereas nominal GDP has increased only 130%. As a result, the ratio of banking sector 
total assets to GDP, a measure of the depth of bank intermediation, increased from 145% in 1992 to 331% in 
2007. It should be also noted that the reported assets understate the growth of bank activity in that period, as 
a lot of it took place off-balance sheet. 
3  
4   See, among others, G. Dell’Ariccia, D. Igan and L. Laevan, “Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evidence 
from  the  Subprime  Mortgage  Market”,  IMF  Working  Paper,  No  08/106,  IMF,  2008;  and  A.  Maddaloni  and 
J.-L. Peydro, “Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision, and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from Lending 
Standards”, ECB Working Paper No. 1248, October 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
forthcoming EU-wide stress test will be more comprehensive and detailed than the previous 
exercise,  thereby  playing  an  even  more  important  role  in  supporting  banks’  access  to 
medium- and long-term funding.  
Going back to the ongoing regulatory reforms, while the overall impact in terms of the size of 
the  banking  sector  is  expected  to  be  moderate  on  average,  some  business  lines  or 
institutions  may  be  relatively  more  severely  affected.  Overall,  credit  institutions  that  are 
smaller  and  focused  on  the  traditional  retail  banking  business  are  not  expected  to  be 
severely  affected  by  the  new  prudential  rules.  However,  some  large  universal  banks 
(especially those with significant investments in other financial institutions and in insurance 
companies,  often  across  borders)  will  face  new  challenges,  mainly  resulting  from  the  new 
definition of capital and from the introduction of the leverage ratio.  
These large institutions are typically more leveraged than their smaller counterparts and, as 
a result of the introduction of certain adjustments in the calculation of the regulatory capital, 
their capital bases may need in some cases to be strengthened further in order to include 
only high quality resources with true loss absorbing capacity. Given that the structure of the 
financial system is rather heterogeneous across EU countries, the national banking sectors 
will have to face different challenges in the years ahead. 
It is important to emphasise in this context that several policy initiatives have been launched 
recently  to  address  the  specific  risks  associated  with  systemically  important  financial 
institutions (SIFIs). In particular, the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision agreed in 
September  2010  that  SIFIs  should  comply  with  additional  capital  requirements  over  and 
above  the  Basel  III  minimum  requirements.  Extensive  work  is  currently  being  carried  out 
under the aegis of the Financial Stability Board to develop a framework for the regulation of 
global and national SIFIs and also to enhance the banks resolution regimes so as to be able 
to handle systemic crises in an effective and efficient way. 
At  the  same  time,  in  the  short-  to  medium-term  it  will  be  inevitable  to  improve  the  cost 
efficiency  of  banks  as  well  as  to  make  changes  in  the  ownership  structure  and  in  the 
business activities of certain institutional models, while also restructuring some segments of 
the national banking sectors. To live under the “new normal”, banks must first get there. This 
may  require  consolidation  as  well  as  changes  in  corporate  governance,  transparency  and 
business models.  
Business strategies and corporate governance 
III.3 
Business models 
The  crisis  has  shown  the  vulnerabilities  of  some  business  models.  In  particular,  it  has 
exposed the fragilities of those models based, on the one hand, on “originate-to-distribute” 
activities and securitisation techniques, and, on the other hand, on excessive dependence on 
wholesale  and  capital  markets  for  funding.  Although  no  business  model  outperformed  the 
others during the crisis, there is evidence that banking models based on higher diversification 
of activities and funding proved to be the most resilient. This explains why such models are 
becoming increasingly attractive within the European banking landscape5.  
                                                 
5   The Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) of the ESCB conducted a study based on structured interviews of 
selected market participants and academics in London, Frankfurt and Paris during the winter 2009–2010. The 
questions  focused  on  market  participants’  expectations  in  the  medium  term,  i.e.  during  the  coming  3  to 
5 years,  as  regards  the  bank  business  models,  consolidation  and  integration  processes,  and  bank  funding 
structures  in  the  EU.  The  main  results  of  this  exercise  were  published  in  the  ECB  report  “EU  Banking 
Structures”  in  September  2010.  According  to  the  results,  market  participants  expect  the  diversified  banking 
model to increase in importance at the cost of specialised banking models, although with more concentration 
on core businesses within the banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Indeed,  diversified  business  models  act  as  better  shock  absorbers  in  times  of  stress,  and 
their  ability  to  perform  well  under  stressed  conditions  represents  an  additional  incentive  to 
adopting  them.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  rating  agencies,  investors  and 
counterparties  have  significantly  reduced  their  tolerance  to  leverage  and  now  discriminate 
more between firms with different risk profiles.  
In this regard, the main priority of EU banks in terms of their business strategies in the post-
crisis  period  is  currently  to  focus  on  their  balance  sheet  structure  (e.g.  the  composition  of 
lending and of their funding sources), with a view to making it more robust and transparent.  
Furthermore,  some  banks  still  remain  too  dependent  on  central  bank  facilities  for  their 
funding,  which  is  not  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  This  requires  efforts  to  adjust  business 
strategies  towards  more  sustainable  models.  There  is  some  evidence  that  point  to  an 
increasing recourse to retail deposits among large EU banks. After experiencing a reduction 
during the years prior to the crisis, retail deposits started on an upward trend in late 2008, 
and such trend has continued into 2009 and 2010. A remaining challenge is though the fact 
that at present banks are often competing for the same deposits, which makes it difficult to 
achieve substantial increases in their deposit bases and may also erode their margins.  
At  the  same  time  banks  have  reviewed  the  geographical  location  of  their  assets.  The 
increasing internationalisation of important European groups reveals the preference among 
large EU banks for regional diversification. 
Reforms of the regulatory framework that aim to render bank business models more resilient 
are a key factor that will contribute to moving funding structures away from volatile short-term 
sources  towards  more  stable  long-term  ones,  such  as  capital  and  deposits.  As  a 
consequence of the substantial strengthening of the regulatory requirements on trading book 
exposures and on securitisation, the relative attractiveness of traditional investment banking 
activities  is  expected  to  decline.  Similarly,  with  the  envisaged  introduction  of  the  non-risk 
based  leverage  ratio,  certain  institutions  specialised  in  business  lines  that  are  traditionally 
considered  as  relatively  low-risk  (e.g.  mortgage  lending)  may  need  to  reconsider  their 
activities and look for alternative sources of revenue. 
Risk management 
Apart from the regulatory initiatives, the banks’ internal risk management represents a first 
line  of  defence  against  increasing  risks.  The  need  for  improved  risk  measurement  and 
management practices with regard to the main risks institutions are exposed to (e.g. credit, 
liquidity  and  market  risks)  has  also  been  recognised  in  a  number  of  industry  studies  that 
have identified areas in need of improvement6.  
Supervisory  authorities  have  issued  guidelines  on  required  improvements  in  corporate 
governance  and  risk  management  (in  areas  such  as  liquidity  and  stress  testing)  and  have 
also issued supplemental guidance under Pillar 2 (the supervisory review process) of Basel II 
that  addresses  the  flaws  in  risk  management  practices  revealed  by  the  crisis.  Although 
progress has been made in improving internal risk management systems, considerable work 
must yet be done.7 
                                                 
6   The industry has published reports highlighting the need for improved risk measurement and management, 
including the provision of information to and involvement of senior management with regard to the risk profile 
of the institution. See for example publications by the Institute of International Finance: Reform in the Financial 
Services Industry: Strengthening Practices for a More Stable System (Dec. 2009), Principles of conduct and 
best  practice  recommendations,  Financial  services  industry  response  to  the  market  turmoil  of  2007–2008 
(Jul. 2008), report by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group entitled Containing Systemic Risk: The 
Road to Reform (Aug. 2008). 
7   Conclusion  reached  in  a  recent  report  by  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group  entitled,  Observations  on 
developments in risk appetite frameworks and IT infrastructure, December 23, 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Looking forward, the re-shaped banking strategies need to reflect a better balance between 
risk and returns. An important challenge for the EU banking sectors in the next few years will 
be to find the optimal level of return that preserves long-run profitability, without incurring in 
unknown risks.  
Central banks and the new macro-prudential supervisory framework 
III.4 
Let  me  conclude  my  speech  by  providing  a  brief  reference  to  the  new  macro-prudential 
supervisory framework in Europe.  
The financial crisis has provided a vivid illustration of the importance of having in place an 
effective  framework  of  macro-prudential  surveillance  that  can  complement  micro-prudential 
supervision  both  at  the  national  level  and  in  a  cross-border  context.  Thus,  in  order  to 
enhance  their  abilities  to  assess  and  address  potential  systemic  risks,  over  the  past  few 
years  significant  work  has  been  undertaken  by  authorities  at  country,  regional  and  global 
levels with the aim of setting up a macro-prudential policy framework. In this respect, a major 
achievement at the European level has been the establishment of the European  Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB), entrusted with the responsibility of macro-prudential oversight at the EU-
level.  The  ECB  plays  a  key  role  by  providing  the  ESRB  with  a  Secretariat,  and  thereby 
logistical, administrative and analytical support. 
A  key  objective  of  the  ESRB  is  to  link  systemic  risk  analysis  with  appropriate  policy 
responses.  The  analytical  work  will  focus  on  identifying,  measuring  and  assessing  the 
potential  sources  of  systemic  risks  on  the  basis  of  broad  and  deep  information,  and  on 
applying a wide range of analytical tools to process the relevant data. The work will entail the 
assessment  of  the  potential  impact  of  the  risks  identified  and  of  the  ability  of  the  financial 
system to withstand the related shocks. On the basis of the outcome of its risk analysis and 
assessment,  the  ESRB  may  issue  concrete  and  well  targeted  risk  warnings  or  policy 
recommendations. 
There is no doubt that the establishment of the ESRB introduces a new function at the EU 
level that will enhance the ability of European and national authorities to promote the stability 
of the EU financial system as a whole.  
Conclusions 
IV. 
Let me now conclude. This conference has provided many interesting contributions about the 
future of the banking sector in the post-crisis macroeconomic and financial environment. This 
is an issue of crucial importance for our economic welfare, given the fundamental role played 
by banks in most European countries. This is why it is important to stress that there is still 
much work to be done before we can exit from the crisis. 
In  an  economic  and  financial  context  which  is  still  fragile,  the  adjustment  towards  a  “new 
normal”  continues  posing  important  challenges  and  needs.  It  is  essential  that  we  continue 
making progress in reforming both the microprudential and macroprudential regulatory and 
supervisory framework. At the same time, the banking sector must continue addressing with 
perseverance,  rapidity  and  determination  the  vulnerabilities  in  strategies  and  business 
practices  of  individual  institutions  revealed  by  the  crisis.  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  the 
banking sector will become part of the solution to the problems that still represent obstacles 
to economic growth and employment creation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
