Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Thai monetary policy in the environment of 
excess global liquidity 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thailand 
Focus  2011  –  Enhancing  Thailand’s  Competitiveness  over  the  Next  Decades,  Bangkok, 
28 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s an honor to speak before you today at the Thailand Focus conference. Early this morning 
you  heard  Prime  Minister  Abhisit  Vejjajiva  speak  on  Thailand’s  competitiveness;  and  later 
Finance  Minister  Korn  Chatikavanij  on  fiscal  policy.  To  close  the  circle,  I  will  speak  on 
monetary policy to complete your view on the investment opportunities and prospects of the 
Thai economy. As international investors, I believe, you want to have a firm understanding of 
the  country’s  policy  environment.  This  is  what  I  will  discuss  today  –  the  monetary  policy 
options  going  forward  in  light  of  my  assessment  of  the  global  economy  and  the  Thai 
economy. 
The assigned title of my talk today is “Thai Monetary Policy in the Environment of Excess 
Global Liquidity”. Let me stress that I have a different opinion on the issue of excess global 
liquidity than most. Global liquidity is currently problematic in the sense that it is fluid, rather 
than excessive. Let me discuss why. 
First, let me give you my assessment of the global economy. The global economy has 
entered  a  phase  of  fluid  global  liquidity  amid  uneven  recovery  and  shifting  risk 
appetite. This phase is characterized by weak recovery in the advanced economies which 
prompted loose monetary policy and extraordinary monetary measures such as QE2 in the 
US  that  have  resulted  in  artificially  low  interest  rates  in  the  advanced  economies.  These 
record-low  interest  rates  encouraged  investors  to  seek  out  higher  return  in  risky  emerging 
market assets, particularly here in Asia. In addition to the push factor of low interest rates 
and  weak  recovery  in  the  US  and  Euro  area,  strong  economic  fundamentals  in  Asia,  as 
reflected in growth and eventual currency gain, served as a pull factor.  
As  a  result,  capital  became  more  “fluid”  –  constantly  in  search  of  yield  and  therefore  very 
sensitive to news and rumors. Such search for risky yield resulted in capital inflows into EME 
assets last year, as you all know. These inflows contributed to the large appreciation of the 
Thai baht last year, and indeed other emerging markets. 
Here I want to emphasize that the inflows was due to a reallocation in global portfolio, or a 
change in portfolio choice, if you will. There is a misperception that the additional inflow 
of  “fluid”  capital  stemmed  from  excess  global  liquidity.  Global  liquidity  had  not 
significantly increased. As a simplification, think of global liquidity as an ocean. The amount 
of  water  is  finite.  But  unusual  weather  can  stir  otherwise  calm  waters  into  a  storm. 
Metaphorically speaking, the new global environment of loose monetary policy and uneven 
recovery had caused large waves of liquidity to travel from the advanced economies to our 
shores. Capital inflows helped fuel emerging market growth, contributing even more to the 
uneven  global  recovery.  Looking  a  bit  further  ahead,  as  the  recovery  solidifies  in  the 
advanced  economies  and  inflation  risk  rises  in  emerging  markets,  diminishing  growth 
differentials will diminish, spurring volatility in capital flows. Choppy waters may be ahead.  
So I’ve given you my view of the current global environment of fluid, if not excess, liquidity. 
So if excess liquidity is not the main issue, what is? On top of the list we have oil prices, 
Japan crisis and geopolitical risk in the Middle East and how these risks interact with 
global fluid liquidity. Which naturally leads me to the next question – what are the global 
growth scenarios in such a context? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In our central scenario or most likely scenario, we see continued global growth. The 
US and Euro area shows signs of a firmer recovery, amid monetary and fiscal stimuli. Latest 
data  show  strong  consumption  and  production.  But  structural  obstacles  do  remain;  for 
example,  unemployment  and  real  estate  market  issues  in  the  US  and  sovereign  debt 
problems  in  the  Euro  area.  The  growth  prospects  of  Asian  economies  remain  robust, 
underpinned by strong fundamentals. However, inflation risk is rising, and fast. On the tragic 
Japan  crisis,  our  current  view  is  that  its  impact  on  the  global  economy  should  prove 
temporary.  History  suggests  that  Japan  will  quickly  rebuild  and  recover.  And  the  main 
engines of global growth still remain. The current surge in oil and commodity prices also 
poses a challenge to global growth, though, we expect the supply shock to have a limited 
impact due to several reasons: first, increased oil resiliency, second, real oil prices are still 
lower than its peak in 2008 and third, many emerging markets administer prices to cushion 
the blow. 
There  is  a  downside  risk  that  this  environment  of  global  liquidity  amid  uneven 
recovery  and  geopolitical  risk  in  the  Middle  East  may  threaten  global  growth  and 
stability.  This  scenario  has  a  low  probability  of  happening.  Nevertheless,  we  should  be 
mindful of it. In this scenario, oil prices will surge upward again and remain high due to strong 
demand  from  emerging  markets,  partly  fueled  by  global  liquidity,  and  supply  constraints 
arising  from  adverse  weather  and  widespread  and  protracted  unrest  in  the  Middle  East. 
Global recession may result; or worse, global stagflation. The outcome depends on how US 
and  Euro  policy  makers  will  respond.  US  and  European  monetary  policymakers  are 
therefore between a rock and a hard place of balancing structural risks to growth and 
new risks to inflation. If US or Euro recovery is still fragile, policymakers may choose to 
keep  interest  rates  low,  prompting  stagflation  further  down  the  road.  The  US  and  Euro 
policymakers are therefore in a race against time. Their economic stimulus packages must 
revitalize the economy before the negative side-effects return home to derail the recovery. 
In such a world, what can the Bank of Thailand do? In my view, also shared with many 
others’,  monetary  policy  should  be  poised,  pre-emptive  and  perceptive  taking  into 
account the central scenario, let me say more concretely what this means. 
First, on poise. Last year was the year of transition as the Thai economy moved out of crisis 
toward recovery. This year is the year of regaining poise as the balance of risks shift to 
inflation amid a selfsustaining recovery. 
A  self-sustaining  recovery  means  robust  and  broad-based  growth.  Indeed,  we  have 
seen expansion across consumption, investment, and exports. Economic performance beat 
expectations throughout last year. For 2011, we project 3–5 percent growth as the economy 
returns to its long-term average growth. The surge in oil and commodity prices is projected 
not  to  weigh  on  the  growth  prospects  of  the  Thai  economy,  due  to  falling  oil  intensity  and 
strong and broad-based growth. The oil price spike this time round is also not as severe as 
previous  episodes.  On  the  recent  and  unfortunate  Japan  crisis,  we  believe  it  will  have  a 
limited  impact  on  the  Thai  economy.  As  a  share  of  Thai  exports,  the  Japanese  market 
accounts for only about 10 percent. But of course, there is a risk of a protracted nuclear crisis 
dampening economic activity with adverse implications for global growth.  
In  such  an  economy  with  strong  growth  prospects,  there  is  less  need  for  policy  to 
accommodate growth going forward but more need to be concerned about inflation. Strong 
domestic  demand  and  diminishing  excess  capacity  will  surely  lead  to  price  pressure  as 
producers compete for scarce resources. And as the recovery goes from strength to strength 
and inflationary pressure rises, so must the monetary policy stance regain its poise – poised 
at a neutral rate that is neither too accommodating nor too tight. After all, monetary stimulus 
can only do so much and excessive stimulus can lead to financial imbalances. 
Let me share my view on the surge in oil and commodity prices and, in particular, how 
we  should  respond  to  this  challenge.  The  brief  answer  is  that  monetary  policy  stance 
continues  to  be  one  of  regaining  poise  with  increased  vigilance  over  inflation.  The  long 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
answer is a bit more complex. The first-round supply-side shock of a rise in oil price should 
be allowed to pass through into domestic prices. Central banks should take care not to over-
react to such price changes as they only reflect the welcome process of market re-balancing 
demand  and  supply.  However,  there  is  a  possibility  that  a  supply  shock,  especially  if  it  is 
long-lived,  may  result  in  second-round  inflation.  By  second-round  inflation,  I  mean  a 
persistent  and  general  rise  in  prices.  Second-round  inflation  may  materialize  if  inflation 
expectations become unanchored and result in a change in price setting behavior fueled by 
strong  domestic  demand  such  that  prices  rise  across  the  board  –  something  that  every 
central bank must pre-empt by anchoring expectations to short-circuit the vicious cost-price 
spiral.  
So  is  second-round  inflation  a  risk  in  our  final  assessment?  The  spike  in  oil  and 
commodity prices adds to already present inflationary pressure. Monetary policy must 
therefore be pre-emptive, as well as poised. Since last year, domestic demand has been 
strong. The output gap is projected to close later this year. Capacity utilization has increased 
and hiring has become more difficult. These indicators point to excess demand that may lead 
to inflationary pressure. On top of that, a sustained and large supply shock amid strong 
demand  is  like  adding  fuel  to  the  fire.  It  can  unhinge  inflation  expectations.  And  price 
controls can only delay the inevitable price pressure. There is therefore an increase in the 
risk to second-round inflation which necessitates additional monetary response. A downside 
risk  of  high  oil  prices  to  global  growth,  and  therefore  Thai  economic  growth,  also  exists. 
However,  in  the  central  scenario,  the  balance  of  risks  has  clearly  shifted  to  inflation.  Our 
projections point to a significant risk that core inflation may breach the upper end of the band. 
As such, regaining poise by moving toward the neutral rate will allow us to pre-empt 
inflation risk. 
By now, you are probably wondering what the neutral rate is. Let me comment briefly on 
this mysterious topic. First, on the concept – the monetary policy stance is normal or neutral 
if  aggregate  output  is  at  its  potential  output  and  the  monetary  policy  is  not  exerting  any 
pressure  on  growth  and  inflation  but  simply  promoting  their  stability.  In  practice,  however, 
determining  the  neutral  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  not  an  exact  science.  The  potential 
output alone is never observed with precision, as it depends on our labor force productivity, 
our  competitiveness  in  the  global  market,  our  demographic  structure,  and  the  degree  of 
distortions caused by public policies and other market failures, to name a few. Uncertainties 
about  these  structural  determinants  make  it  difficult  to  ascertain  precisely  the  output 
potential, and by implications, the neutral interest rate. Finding the neutral rate would depend 
on incoming information about both the demand outlook and supply-side factors. That said, I 
would also add that real neutral rate should be in or close to positive territory. Currently the 
real interest rate is negative. 
I  have  said  that  this  year  is  the  year  of  regaining  poise,  but  regaining  poise  in  an 
unbalanced world of fluid global liquidity is not easy. There may be more exchange rate 
volatility  on  the  back  of  fluid  flows.  Hence,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  pursued  a  managed 
floating  exchange  rate  policy  to  lessen  volatility.  Emerging  markets  in  Asia  have  pursued 
varying  degrees  of  capital  controls.  On  this  point,  let  me  say  that  my  view  is  that  capital 
control measures are options in our toolkit but they have to be appropriately designed. 
The  trend  has  shifted  from  controlling  capital towards  more  friendly  pre-emptive  prudential 
regulation to manage flow types rather than barring overall flows. On a related point, there 
has been talk that the current environment of fluid global liquidity has led to depressed 
long rates in Asia, thereby complicating the conduct of monetary policy. This is indeed a 
possibility. However, capital inflows do not significantly weaken the interest rate tool of the 
Bank of Thailand. The Bank of Thailand focuses on short-term rates in conducting monetary 
policy as the Thai economy is bank-based and most short and long-term loans have free-
floating interest rates. 
I have discussed how monetary policy should be poised and pre-emptive. Lastly, monetary 
policy must also be perceptive, or at least strive to be so, of medium and longer-term 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
issues. Let me highlight three issues: beyond normalization, financial imbalances, and global 
imbalances. 
On  the  first  issue,  what  lies  beyond  normalization?  The  prospect  of  further  tightening 
depends  on  how  far  the  balance  of  risks  will  shift  to  inflation  and  financial  imbalances.  A 
prolonged oil price surge may trigger inflation and tightening in Thailand. The downside risk 
scenario  of  high  oil  prices  and  global  recession  or  global  stagflation  may  materialize, 
depending  on  the  complex  interplay  between  uneven  global  recovery,  fluid  capital,  supply 
shocks  and  policymakers’  response.  The  global  environment  is  constantly  changing.  New 
information and developments force us to revise our views. In such a world, being poised is 
particularly important. For being poised allows for a timely response as long as we are aware 
that we are performing a balancing act on top of the US/Euro balancing act. 
On the second issue, financial imbalances may foment under the radar and are difficult 
to  detect.  Granted,  I  have  said  that  monetary  policy  should  be  perceptive.  But  as  you  all 
know there are limits to the far-sightedness of economists or central bankers as the global 
financial crisis so painfully showed. To paraphrase Mark Twain: “it’s not what you know, but 
what  you  don’t  know  that  gets  you.”  Hence  it  would  be  wise  to  prepare  for  the  worse  by 
building resiliency from within. A framework for macroprudential policy is needed. Let me 
remind  you  that  The  Bank  of  Thailand’s  mandate  covers  both  monetary  and  financial 
stability. Monetary policy focuses primarily on  price stability.  Macroprudential policy should 
focus on financial stability. We therefore see no conflict between joint use of macroprudential 
and  interest  rate  instruments  as  they  primarily  serve  different  objectives.  Prudential 
measures constitute the first line of defense against financial imbalances by serving as “sand 
in the wheel”, so as to dampen the financial cycle, weaken procyclicality, and hence reduce 
the  propagation  of  financial  shocks.  The  interest  rate  tool,  in  comparison,  is  too  blunt. 
However, as the last line of defense, monetary policy can be used to lean against the winds 
of excessive asset prices. The prudential measure we announced last year – a loan-to-value 
limit of 90 percent for condominium purchases – is an example. The measure in itself is not 
particularly  binding;  it  is  more  significant  as  a  pre-emptive  move  designed  to  signal  policy 
resolve  in  mitigating  possible  build-up  of  real  estate  bubbles.  Ongoing  financial  sector 
reform will also build financial sector resiliency. Thailand’s financial master plan, now in 
its  second  phase,  continues,  and  focuses  on  liberalization  through  increased  competition, 
raising efficiency, and strengthening the financial infrastructure. 
On the third issue, global current account imbalances remain problematic, as they did 
before the global crisis. As long as structural problems remain in the US and Euro economies 
and China retains its present economic policies, it is likely global imbalances will persist into 
the  medium  term  with  the  risk  of  a  disruptive  correction  down  the  road.  Such  a  correction 
may  be  particularly  painful  for  small  open  economies.  Firmer  policy  coordination  between 
large economies is needed to ensure a smooth resolution of global imbalances. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am close to the conclusion of my talk today. I have given you my assessment of the global 
economy,  my  thoughts  on  our  policy  options  going  forward,  and  how  monetary  policy 
should be poised, pre-emptive and perceptive. 
One theme I emphasized today was the global environment of fluid capital and its attendant 
risks. As a point of departure, let me address how you, as the investor, can thrive in 
such  a  world  of  risk  while  investing  in  Thailand.  There  is  no  easy  answer.  Different 
investment  strategies  face  different  risks.  Investors  themselves  are  the  most  qualified  for 
evaluating  and  managing  their  own  risk  exposures  given  their  investment  opportunities. 
However, I can tell you that the Bank of Thailand will take care of the risks to the system, by 
maintaining price stability in the long-run while mitigating economic cycles in the short-run. 
Our flexible inflation-targeting framework targets core inflation between 0.5 and 3.0 percent 
while  taking  into  account  economic  growth.  And  in  this  framework,  the  exchange  rate  is  a 
managed-float and plays a supporting role as an adjustor against external shocks, leaving 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
room to the interest rate as the main instrument of price stability. The managed-float is based 
on three elements: volatility, competitiveness, and fundamentals. Volatility is managed so as 
to  limit  disruption  to  the  private  sector  in  the  short-run.  Competitiveness  is  maintained  by 
containing  excessive  currency  movement  relative  to  the  region.  And  most  importantly, 
fundamentals must be allowed to determine exchange rate movements in the long-run. 
But monetary policy alone is not enough to ensure competitiveness in the long-run. 
For  that  we  must  have  sound  fiscal  policy  that  supports  our  national  infrastructure  with 
prudent debt management; and structural polices that address education, productivity, and 
institutional  frameworks.  At  this  point,  I  hope  we  have  clearly  laid  out  the  policy  vision  for 
Thailand  that  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  your  investment  decisions,  risk  management,  and, 
ultimately, your continued partnership in the Thai economy. 
On that note, let me conclude my talk here, so that you can proceed with the other interesting 
program that will follow after this. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
