Deepak Mohanty: How does the Reserve Bank of India conduct its 
monetary policy? 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Lucknow, 12 August 2011. 
 The assistance provided by Shri Jeevan Khundrakpam is acknowledged. 
I  thank  the  Indian  Institute  of  Management  (IIM),  Lucknow  for  inviting  me  to  address  this 
distinguished gathering. I do see many bright young prospective managers in the audience. 
As  you  step  out  of  the  portals  of  the  Institute,  you  will  be  faced  with  the  challenge  of 
managing  some  or  the  other  key  aspect  of  our  economy,  be  it  agriculture,  industry  or 
services. This evening, let me give you a flavour of how do we manage monetary policy in 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India?  In  central  banking  parlance  this  is  known  as  the  operating 
procedure  or  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Essentially,  it  is  the  day-to-day 
management of monetary policy in pursuit of ultimate objectives of price stability and growth. 
In my presentation, I will address the following questions: Why is monetary policy operating 
procedure important? How do major central banks operate their monetary policy? What is the 
Reserve Bank’s monetary policy operating framework? How effective is the Reserve Bank’s 
monetary  operating  framework?  I  will  conclude  by  highlighting  some  challenges  in  the 
operations of monetary policy on the way forward. 
Why is monetary policy operating procedure important? 
Monetary policy as an arm of public policy has set objectives and priorities. These objectives 
are derived from the respective mandates of central banks. It ranges from a single objective 
of  price  stability,  considered  to  be  the  dominant  objective  of  monetary  policy,  to  multiple 
objectives that include growth and financial stability as well. 
Central  banks  strive  to  achieve  these  objectives  indirectly  through  instruments  under  their 
direct control and on the basis of the empirical relationship these instruments have with the 
final  objectives.  This  requires  articulation  of  a  consistent  monetary  policy  framework  that 
enables transmission of policy signals in such a way that monetary and financial conditions 
are  influenced  to  the  desired  extent  to  attain  the  objectives.  Monetary  policy  framework, 
however,  is  a  continuously  evolving  process  contingent  upon  the  level  of  development  of 
financial markets and institutions, and the degree of global integration. 
As long as the value of money was linked to gold or silver, monetary policy had a secondary 
role.  With  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rate,  monetary 
policy framework evolved from that of setting an intermediate target. Under this framework, 
central banks, through the instruments under their direct control, were trying to influence an 
intermediate  target  such  as  money  supply  which  had  a  stable  relationship  with  the  final 
objectives of price and output. This framework was abandoned by advanced central banks 
towards  the  late  1980s  because  of  the  unstable  relationship  of  money  with  the  final 
objectives attributed to financial innovations. As an alternative, since the late 1980s, many 
central  banks  began  to  adopt  inflation  targeting  framework  in  which  inflation  was  directly 
targeted  as  the  sole  final  objective.  The  recent  global  financial  crisis  has,  however, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
questioned  the  virtue  of  this  framework,  as  sole  focus  on  price  stability  failed  to  ensure 
financial stability (Subbarao, 2010).1 
Among advanced central banks, while the Bank of England is an inflation targeting central 
bank, there are many others which follow an eclectic approach. For instance, the US Federal 
Reserve  follows  a  framework  termed  as  risk  management  approach  wherein  a  view  on 
interest  rate  is  taken  on  consideration  of  balance  between  risks  to  inflation  and  growth. 
Similarly,  the  European  Central  Bank  takes  policy  decisions  based  on  a  twin  strategy 
comprising  economic  and  monetary  analysis.  It  is,  however,  important  to  note  that 
irrespective  of  differences  in  frameworks,  price  stability,  interpreted  as  low  and  stable 
inflation, remains the dominant objective of monetary policy for all these central banks. 
Once  a  monetary  policy  framework  is  in  place,  it  needs  to  have  a  supporting  operating 
procedure through which monetary policy is implemented. An operating procedure is defined 
as  day-to-day  management  of  monetary  conditions  consistent  with  the  overall  stance  of 
monetary policy. Generally, it involves: (i) defining an operational target, generally an interest 
rate; (ii) setting a policy rate which could influence the operational target; (iii) setting the width 
of corridor for short-term market interest rates; (iv) conducting liquidity operations to keep the 
operational  target  interest  rate  stable  within  the  corridor;  and  (v)  signalling  of  policy 
intentions. 
In addition, most central banks require commercial banks to keep minimum cash reserves 
with them. Commercial banks also require cash to meet the currency demand of their clients. 
The inter-bank transactions are also ultimately settled in their accounts with the central bank. 
The demand for and supply of cash reserves provide the lever to central banks not only to 
modulate liquidity in the system but also to set interest rate in the money market. 
Through the calibration of monetary conditions by using instruments under its direct control, 
a central bank guides the operating target to the desired level. Under a monetary targeting 
framework, bank reserves used to be the operating target. Central banks used to influence 
money supply through varying required reserves. Though cash reserve requirements remain 
in  the  toolkit  of  central  banks,  they  are  not  actively  used  by  advanced  economies  as  an 
operating target in normal times. Consequently, most of the central banks now signal their 
monetary policy stance by setting interest rates in the money market. The operating target, 
therefore, is one of the short-term market interest rate. 
The  operating  target,  however,  is  only  an  intermediate  objective  of  monetary  policy.  The 
ultimate objectives are price stability, growth and financial stability. The effect of interest rate 
on these ultimate objectives would depend upon how the signals are transmitted through the 
financial  system  and  how  businesses  and  households  respond  to  these  changes.  These 
transmission channels could be commercial interest rates, asset prices, exchange rate and 
expectations.  The  main  transmission  channel,  however,  is  the  commercial  interest  rate 
channel  whereby  change  in  the  policy  interest  rate  impacts  deposits  and  lending  rates  of 
financial  institutions,  and  alters  the  spending  and  investment  decisions  of  households  and 
businesses.  The  relative  importance  and  effectiveness  of  each  of  these  four  channels  of 
transmission, however, are conditioned by development of financial markets and institutions, 
and the degree of global integration. 
                                                 
1  Subbarao, Duvvuri (2010), “Financial Crisis – Some Old Questions and May be Some New Answers”, Tenth 
C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture delivered at the Council for Social Development, Southern Regional Centre, 
Hyderabad on August 5, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
How do major central banks operate their monetary policy? 
I propose to briefly highlight the operating procedures of the US Federal Reserve (Fed), the 
Bank  of  England  (BoE)  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  This  will  facilitate  a 
comparison of the RBI’s operating procedure vis-á-vis the international best practice. 
Federal Reserve Bank 
Depository institutions or commercial banks in the US are required to maintain a prescribed 
minimum  reserve  at  the  Fed.  The  actual  reserve  balance  for  a  bank,  however,  keeps 
fluctuating  during  a  day  with  continuous  receipts  and  payments  taking  place.  While  some 
banks  expect  the  end-of-day  reserve  balance  to  fall  short  of  the  minimum  required,  other 
banks  anticipate  a  surplus  balance.  Thus,  banks  expecting  surplus  reserve  balance  at  the 
Fed  lend  to  banks  expecting  to  end  with  deficit  reserve  balance.  The  market  in  which  the 
lending of Federal Reserve balances takes place is known as the federal funds market. The 
overnight  interest  rate  at  which  the  loan  is  made  is  called  federal  funds  rate.  The  federal 
funds rate eventually gets transmitted to other interest rates and impact the economy. Thus, 
the operating procedure of the Fed is focussed on keeping the federal funds rate at a pre-
announced target level. 
First,  based  on  the  outlook  of  inflation  and  growth,  the  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  is 
announced by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Second, the Fed attempts to 
adjust  the  total  supply  of  reserve  balances  so  that  it  exactly  equals  demand  at  the  target 
federal  funds  rate.  This  adjustment  of  total  supply  of  reserve  balances  available  to 
commercial  banks  is  carried  out  primarily  through  open  market  operations  (OMO)  where 
government  bonds  or  other  securities  are  exchanged  for  reserves.  The  OMO  is  largely 
conducted by arranging overnight repurchase (repo) auctions with primary dealers. 
Besides OMO, credits provided by the Fed to banks at a rate higher than the federal funds 
rate – called discount rate – play an important role in the implementation of monetary policy. 
Credits are provided under two programmes, viz., primary credit and secondary credit. Under 
primary credit, the Fed extends short-term credit to eligible banks at a rate above the target 
federal funds rate. Since the Fed operates in a systemic liquidity deficit mode, the interest 
rate on primary credit acts as the upper ceiling for the federal funds rate. Secondary credit is 
provided only under abnormal circumstances when depository institutions do not qualify for 
primary  credit  or  for  resolution  of  financial  difficulties.  Understandably,  the  interest  rate 
charged for this credit is higher than that for primary credit. 
As such, there was no lower bound for federal funds rate. However, since December 2008, 
the Fed has been providing remuneration to all reserves at the rate of 25 basis points. This 
rate on reserves is expected to act as the lower bound to the federal funds rate. 
Bank of England 
Let me first illustrate the normal monetary operating procedure of the BoE which has been 
suspended since March 2009 following the global financial crisis. Each of the UK banks and 
building societies, eligible and participating in the reserves-averaging scheme, is required to 
set  its  own  target  of  average  sterling  reserve  balances  it  will  hold  during  a  reserve 
maintenance period.2 The BoE remunerates these reserves holding at the Bank Rate so long 
as they are, on an average, over the maintenance period, within a small range around the 
target. Thus, to keep the reserve balances within the target range, banks lend and borrow 
among themselves in the sterling interbank market. The aim of the BoE is to ensure that the 
                                                 
2  Following quantitative easing by way of large-scale asset purchases through creation of central bank reserves, 
BOE has suspended the reserves averaging scheme since March 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
sterling interbank market rates are in line with the Bank Rate by operating at the margin as 
supplier or taker of funds. 
The policy rate, i.e., the Bank Rate is set by the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) based on 
macroeconomic  conditions.  Changes  in  the  Bank  Rate  affect  the  whole  range  of  interest 
rates set by commercial banks, building societies and other institutions. Thus, the level of the 
Bank Rate denotes the stance of monetary policy. To keep the aggregate supply of reserves 
at the desired level, the BoE undertakes OMO of varying maturities. The short-term repos 
are conducted at the Bank Rate.3 The BoE also conducts outright OMO to influence liquidity 
conditions which are unlikely to be reversed quickly. 
Modulation of reserve supply by the BoE at the aggregate level, however, does not always 
ensure  that  the  average  reserves  holding  of  an  individual  bank  is  within  the  target  range. 
Average reserves outside the target range attract a charge. However, to avoid the charge, 
two overnight operational standing facilities are made available to banks. One is an overnight 
collateralised lending facility from which banks, in the event of reserve shortfall, can borrow 
from the BoE against high quality collateral at a rate higher than the Bank Rate. The other 
facility  is  an  uncollateralised  deposit  facility  for  surplus  reserves  at  a  rate  below  the  Bank 
Rate.  Typically,  a  commercial  bank  will  be  unwilling  to  deal  in  the  inter-bank  market  on  a 
term worse than the above two facilities. Thus, the two rates act as the ceiling and floor of an 
interest rate corridor around the rate at which inter-bank dealings take place. 
Since March 2009, the BoE has been undertaking asset purchases financed through creation 
of  central  bank  reserves,  known  as  quantitative  easing.  As  a  result,  supply  of  reserves  is 
largely  determined  by  asset  purchases  decision  of  the  BoE,  rather  than  the  demand  for 
reserves  by  banks.  Under  this  potential  imbalance  in  the  demand  and  supply  of  reserves, 
continuation  with  reserve  requirement  could  have  resulted  in  loss  of  control  over  market 
interest rates. Thus, the BoE suspended reserve averaging regime in March 2009. Instead, 
the BoE currently operates a “floor system” whereby all reserves balances are remunerated 
at the Bank Rate. Thus, there is no need for the deposit facility for reserve account holders. 
But,  some  operating  standing  facilities  participants  do  not  have  reserve  account  with  the 
BoE, meaning the deposit rate still acts as the floor for them. Since March 2009, the deposit 
rate has been set a zero. The short-term OMOs have also been suspended, as there are no 
reserve targets currently.4 
European Central Bank 
The key monetary policy instrument of the ECB is a liquidity injection OMO called the Main 
Refinancing Operation (MRO). The Governing Council of ECB decides the minimum bid rate 
in  the  MRO  repo  auction  which  is  the  policy  rate.  Through  the  MRO,  the  ECB  guides  the 
overnight  inter-bank  market  rate,  viz.,  euro  overnight  index  average  (EONIA)  around  the 
minimum bid rate. 
Further, for the purpose of controlling EONIA, and reducing its volatility, a marginal lending 
facility  and  a  deposit  facility  are  provided.  The  two  rates  in  the  standing  facilities  form  the 
upper and the lower bound of the interest rate corridor within which overnight inter-bank rates 
fluctuate.  Besides  the  above  main  operation,  the  ECB  conducts  OMO  for  longer  term 
refinancing  operations, 
fine-tuning  operations  and  structural  operations.  The  credit 
institutions or banks in the euro area are also subject to minimum reserve requirement with 
the respective national central banks (NCBs). 
                                                 
3  With  the  suspension  of  reserves  averaging  scheme,  short-term  OMO  has  also  been  suspended  since 
March 2009. 
4  Bank of England (2010), “The Framework of the Bank of England’s Operations in the Sterling Money Markets”, 
Updated, December. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A snapshot of the practice in the Fed, the BoE and the ECB is given in Table below (Table). 
Key features of major Central Banks operating procedures 
Table:  
 MSF= Marginal Standing Facility; and ECR = Export Credit Refinance (available at repo rate up to 15 per cent of 
outstanding export credit); LAF= Liquidity Adjustment Facility. 
* Since March 2009, BOE has suspended the reserve averaging regime and short-term open market operations 
on account of its asset purchases through creation of central bank reserves (known as quantitative easing). 
Source:  Adapted  for  advanced  countries  from  Friedman  B.M.  and  Kenneth  N.  Kuttner,  Handbook  of  Monetary 
Economics, Vol.3B, North Holland, 2011. 
From  this  survey  of  advanced  economies,  five  key  features  of  monetary  operations  stand 
out.  First,  there  is  a  minimum  reserve  requirement.  Second,  there  is  a  single  policy  rate. 
Third,  the  objective  of  the  policy  rate  is  to  target  a  short-term  money  market  rate.  Fourth, 
there is a corridor around the policy rate charted by interest rates for standing facilities which 
aim  to  contain  the  volatility  in  the  target  interest  rate.  Fifth,  the  interest  rates  on  standing 
facilities are determined with reference to the policy rate. 
What is the Reserve Bank of India’s operating framework? 
The monetary policy framework and the associated operating procedure of monetary policy 
in  India  have  also  evolved  over  time.  On  3rd  May  2011,  the  Reserve  Bank  in  its  Annual 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Monetary Policy Statement announced a revised monetary policy operating procedure based 
on the recommendations of a Committee constituted for the purpose.5 Before I delve into the 
current  operating  procedure,  let  me  give  you  a  snapshot  of  the  evolution  of  our  monetary 
policy operations since the inception of the Reserve Bank of India in 1935. 
First, in the formative years during 1935–1950, the focus of monetary policy was to regulate 
the  supply  of  and  demand  for  credit  in  the  economy  through  the  Bank  Rate,  reserve 
requirements and OMO. 
Second,  during  the  development  phase  during  1951–1970,  the  need  to  support  plan 
financing  through  accommodation  of  government  deficit  financing  by  the  RBI  began  to 
significantly  influence  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  led  to  introduction  of  several 
quantitative  control  measures  to  contain  the  consequent  inflationary  pressures  while 
ensuring credit to preferred sectors. These measures included selective credit control, credit 
authorisation scheme (CAS) and “social control” measures to enhance the flow of credit to 
priority sectors. The Bank Rate was raised more frequently during this period. 
Third,  during  1971–90, the  focus  of  monetary  policy  was  on  credit  planning.  However,  the 
dominance  of  fiscal  policy  over  monetary  policy  accentuated  and  continued  through  the 
1980s. To raise resources for the government from banks, the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) 
was progressively increased from the statutory minimum of 25 per cent of banks’ net demand 
and time liabilities (NDTL) in 1970 to 38.5 per cent by 1990. And to neutralise the inflationary 
impact  of  deficit  financing,  the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  was  gradually  raised  from  its 
statutory minimum of 3 per cent to 15 per cent of NDTL during the period. 
Fourth,  the  1980s  saw  the  adoption  of  monetary  targeting  framework  based  on  the 
recommendations of Chakravarty Committee (1985). Under this framework, reserve money 
was used as operating target and broad money (M3) as an intermediate target. A number of 
money market instruments such as inter-bank participation certificates (IBPCs), certificates of 
deposit (CDs) and Commercial Paper (CP) were introduced based on the recommendations 
of Vaghul Committee (1987). 
Fifth, structural reforms and financial liberalisation in the 1990s led to a shift in the financing 
paradigm  for  the  government  and  commercial  sectors  with  increasingly  market-determined 
interest  rates  and  exchange  rate.  By  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  in  its  liquidity 
management operations, the RBI was able to move away from direct instruments to indirect 
market-based  instruments.  The  CRR  and  SLR  were  brought  down  to  9.5  per  cent  and 
25 per cent of NDTL of banks by 1997. 
Sixth,  the  monetary  policy  operating  procedure  also  underwent  a  change  following  the 
recommendation  of  Narasimham  Committee  II  (1998).  The  RBI  introduced  the  Interim 
Liquidity Adjustment Facility (ILAF) in April 1999, under which liquidity injection was done at 
the  Bank  Rate  and  liquidity  absorption  was  through  fixed  reverse  repo  rate.  The  ILAF 
gradually  transited  into  a  full-fledged  liquidity  adjustment  facility  (LAF)  with  periodic 
modifications based on experience and development of financial markets and the payment 
system.  The  LAF  was  operated  through  overnight  fixed  rate  repo  and  reverse  repo  from 
November 2004. 
The LAF helped to develop interest rate as an instrument of monetary transmission. In the 
process, two major weaknesses came to the fore. First was the lack of a single policy rate. 
The operating policy rate alternated between repo and reverse repo rates depending upon 
the prevailing liquidity condition. In a surplus liquidity condition, the operating policy rate was 
the reverse repo rate, while in a deficit liquidity situation it was the repo rate. Second was the 
lack of a firm corridor. The effective overnight interest rates dipped below the reverse repo 
                                                 
5  Report  of  the  Working  Group  on  Operating  Procedure  of  Monetary  Policy  (Chairman:  Deepak  Mohanty) 
http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=24063 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
rate  in  surplus  conditions  and  rose  above  the  repo  rate  in  deficit  conditions.  Moreover, 
overnight call rates became unbounded under occasional liquidity stress. Thus, more often 
the overnight interest rate remained outside the corridor. 
New operating procedure 
Against this background, the new operating procedure retained the essential features of the 
LAF framework with the following key modifications. 
First,  the  weighted  average  overnight  call  money  rate  was  explicitly  recognised  as  the 
operating target of monetary policy. 
Second, the repo rate was made the only one independently varying policy rate. 
Third,  a  new  Marginal  Standing  Facility  (MSF)  was  instituted  under  which  scheduled 
commercial  banks  (SCBs)  could  borrow  overnight  at  their  discretion  up  to  one  per  cent  of 
their respective NDTL at 100 basis points above the repo rate. 
Fourth, the revised corridor was defined with a fixed width of 200 basis points. The repo rate was 
placed in the middle of the corridor, with the reverse repo rate 100 basis points below it and the 
MSF rate 100 basis points above it. The current operating framework is illustrated in Chart 1. 
 The new operating procedure improves upon the earlier LAF framework by removing some 
of the major drawbacks. It is also a move towards international best practices. It is expected 
that the new procedure will improve the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. 
First, explicit announcement of an operating target makes it clear to the market participants 
about the desired policy impact. Second, a single policy rate removes the confusion arising 
out of policy rate alternating between the repo and the reverse repo rates. It also improves 
the  accuracy  of  signalling  monetary  policy  stance.  Third,  the  institution  of  MSF  provides  a 
safety valve against unanticipated liquidity shocks. It will help stabilise the overnight interest 
rate around the repo rate, particularly during deficit liquidity situation. Fourth, a fixed interest 
rate corridor set by MSF rate and reverse repo rate, by reducing uncertainty and avoiding 
communication  difficulties  associated  with  a  variable  corridor,  will  help  keep  the  overnight 
average call money rate close to the repo rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
How effective is the new operating framework? 
While it is too early to judge the efficacy of the new operating procedure, experience of over 
3 months suggests that overnight interest rate was more stable following the implementation 
of the new procedure (Chart 2). 
 The  new  operating  framework  with  the  modified  LAF  presupposes  the  dominance  of  the 
interest rate channel of monetary transmission. This means that once the RBI changes policy 
repo  rate,  it  should  immediately  impact  the  overnight  interest  rate  which  is the operational 
rate and then transmit through the term structure of interest rates as well as bank lending 
rates. However, there are challenges. The strength of transmission through the interest rate 
channel  depends  on  several  factors,  particularly  on  liquidity  conditions.  Recent  experience 
suggests that as long as systemic liquidity was in surplus, the transmission of policy signal 
was weak. But once systemic liquidity turned into deficit, the response of the overnight call 
rate to policy rate was stronger (Chart 3). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The  next  in  the  sequence  of  policy  transmission  is  the  general  money  market.  Empirical 
evidence  suggests  a  strong  correlation  between  the  weighted  average  call  rate  and  other 
money market interest rates. In other words, they move in tandem (Chart 4). 
The  direction  of  transmission  from  the  money  market  interest  rate  to  debt  market  is  the 
same,  but  the  magnitude  depends  on  several  factors  including  supply  and  demand  of 
securities, inflation expectations and economic activity. Debt-market interest rates moved in 
response to changes in the money market interest rates once call money rates rose from low 
levels (Chart 5). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
The  transmission  to  the  credit  market  is  much more  complex  and  occurs  through  the  cost 
channel. Policy rate changes get translated to deposit rates depending on liquidity conditions 
and  credit  demand.  As  the  cost  of  deposits  rises  alongside  money  market  rates,  lending 
rates respond to policy rate changes with a lag (Chart 6). 
 It  can  thus  be  seen  that  the  strength  of  transmission  of  monetary  policy  depends  on  the 
ability of the central bank to keep liquidity in deficit mode. This raises the question: can the 
Reserve Bank keep the liquidity in the system in a deficit mode at all times? In this regard, 
monetary developments over the last few years have been instructive. Liquidity is created in 
the  central  bank  balance  sheet  by  expansion  of  either  net  foreign  assets  (NFA)  or  net 
domestic assets (NDA) or both. For emerging market economies (EMEs) like ours, if capital 
inflows  are  far  in  excess  of  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the  economy,  it  creates  domestic 
liquidity  beyond  the  desired  level  as  excess  foreign  exchange  is  absorbed  by  the  central 
bank.  It  normally  takes  offsetting  action,  by  reducing  NDA  in  its  book,  to  neutralise  the 
expansionary effect of foreign currency assets. This operation is known as sterilisation. 
It can be seen from Chart 7 that during 2006–07 and 2007–08, NFA of the RBI increased 
sharply  following  strong  capital  inflows.  Hence,  the  RBI  had  to  resort  to  sterilisation  by 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reducing  NDA  to  contain  liquidity,  i.e.,  reserve  money.  In  contrast,  in  2009–10  when  there 
was  foreign  exchange  outflow  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  RBI  had  to  expand 
NDA  to  maintain  an  adequate  level  of  rupee  liquidity.  The  year  2010–11  provides  a  more 
balanced  picture  with  a  mix  of  NFA  and  NDA  contributing  to  desired  liquidity  expansion. 
Hence, in a normal situation it may not be very difficult to keep liquidity in a deficit mode. 
In the case of excessive capital inflows it could still be feasible to keep the system in liquidity 
deficit  mode.  If  surplus  capital  inflows  are  taken  into  balance  sheet  of  the  RBI,  other 
instruments  such  as  market  stabilisation  scheme  (MSS)6  bonds  and  cash  reserve  ratio 
(CRR) could be utilised to bring the system into deficit mode. However, occasionally it may 
not be possible to bring the system into deficit mode despite deployment of all instruments as 
was seen during 2006–08. In recognition of the fact that monetary transmission will be better 
if the liquidity in the system is in deficit, the Reserve Bank’s position on liquidity as articulated 
in  the  recent  monetary  policy  statements  aims  to  “....  manage  liquidity  to  ensure  that 
monetary  transmission  remains  effective,  without  exerting  undue  stress  on  the  financial 
system”.7 
Challenges on the way forward! 
The new operating procedure of monetary policy has been drawn up in order to remove the 
drawbacks  experienced  in  the  earlier  LAF  framework  and  it  is  consistent  with  the 
international best practices. The announcement of an explicit operating target, institution of 
an  independently  varying  single  policy  rate  and  an  interest  rate  corridor  set  by  MSF  and 
reverse  repo  will  all  improve  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  India.  At  the  same 
time, there are three main challenges going forward, which need to be recognised. 
One,  international  best  practices  and  our  own  empirical  evidence  suggest  that  the 
transmission  of  policy  signals  to  the  operating  target  and  other  short-term  market  interest 
rates is most effective under deficit liquidity conditions. The challenge is to keep the systemic 
liquidity  in  a  deficit  mode  consistently.  This  needs  an  accurate  forecasting  of  liquidity.  But 
several  autonomous  factors  limit  the  ability  of  the  RBI  and  market  participants  to  forecast 
liquidity.  Foremost  among  these  factors  is  the  uncertainty  arising  out  of  government  cash 
balances and unanticipated swings in capital flow. We need to put in place a system which 
can reasonably forecast the changes in these autonomous determinants of liquidity, so that 
commensurate action can be taken. 
Two,  even  if  uncertainties  of  sudden  swings  in  liquidity  are  not  there,  there  could  be 
prolonged phases of autonomous liquidity infusion due to sustained capital inflows or liquidity 
drain  due  to  persistent  surplus  of  government  cash  balances.  The  challenge  in  this  case, 
however,  is  in  having  the  capacity  to  conduct  longer  term  liquidity  management  operation 
through instruments such as long-term and outright OMO, MSS and CRR. It is a challenge 
because  the  success  of  these  instruments  is  circumscribed  by  market  appetite.  These 
instruments  also  need  to  be  augmented  by  a  scheme  of  auction  of  government  cash 
balances. 
Three, effective transmission of policy signals to the operating target, while necessary, is not 
a sufficient condition for the success of monetary policy. Needless to say, the success lies in 
the  achievement  of  the  ultimate  objective  of  sustained  growth  with  price  and  financial 
stability.  This  entails  improved  transmission  of  short-term  interest  rates  to  other  long-term 
commercial  interest  rates.  This  will  require  further  deepening  of  financial  markets  and 
removal of structural rigidities coming in the way of market determination of interest rates. 
                                                 
6  MSS-bonds  are  short-  to  medium-term  government  bonds  used  for  sterilisation  purposes.  The  proceeds  of 
these bonds remain impounded in the RBI balance sheet. 
7  First Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2011–12, July 26, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
