José Manuel González-Páramo: Monetary and fiscal policies in times of 
crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  conference  of  the  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Policies  Network 
(MONFISPOL), Goethe Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 19 September 2011. 
I would like to thank Giovanni Lombardo, Günter Coenen, and Frank Smets for their inputs to this speech. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  this  conference.  These  are 
exceptionally hard times for policymakers around the world, and probably the most exciting 
times  for  researchers.  I  am  sure  that  the  financial  crisis  will  prove  to  be  a  source  of 
inspiration  for  the  economics  profession  in  general  and  for  economic  policy  analysis  in 
particular.  
The  economic  literature  provides  useful  insights  into  the  nature  and  causes  of  the  current 
crisis. I am thinking in particular of the literature highlighting the fragility of equilibria and the 
possibility of self-fulfilling prophecies. A literature that includes the seminal work of Diamond 
and Dybvig (1983) on bank runs, which has inspired a large number of papers dealing with 
financial crises like the present one.1 Equally relevant has been the large literature on self-
fulfilling  sovereign  debt  crises,  building  on  papers  like  Calvo  (1988)  and  Cole  and 
Kehoe (2000), as well as the literature on public debt sustainability and fiscal and monetary 
policy interactions, including Leeper (1991, 2011) among others.  
That said, while the literature provides important insights, actual decision making during the 
crisis, like in other exceptional circumstances, had to be based on practical experience and 
necessarily involved judgment. 
Furthermore,  it  is  also  clear  that  we  cannot  be  content  with  the  current  state  of  economic 
analysis. The rich body of economic knowledge that has helped us rationalize the crisis ex 
post has not been equally helpful in foreseeing and avoiding it. Economic research has made 
significant progress since its origins. Yet, recent events have reminded us how far we are 
from the “end of economics”. 
This  conference  offers  an  example  of  the  type  of  work  that  we  should  promote.  As  I 
understand 
the  evaluation  of 
macroeconomic policy by advancing the analysis of optimal fiscal and monetary policy in a 
monetary  union  such  as  the  euro  area.  At  the  ECB,  we  enthusiastically  welcome  and 
promote this type of research.  
In my talk I will discuss the challenges that the current crisis has posed to policymakers, and 
central banks in particular. I will first try to give a brief account of the origins and evolution of 
the crisis, of the policy interventions and of what I think needs to be done in order to prevent 
the repetition of such events. I will then conclude by highlighting some of the issues that I 
think should be among the priorities in our research agenda. 
the  MONFISPOL  project  aims  at  contributing 
to 
it, 
                                                 
1  Gorton  (2010)  has  recently  described  the  current  financial  crisis  as  a  run  involving  the  “shadow”  banking 
system and the repo market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
II. 
The unfolding of the crisis 
The situation before the eruption of the crisis 
II.1 
The first seven years of the euro area were characterized by stability, both internally as well 
as globally. Indeed these were the years that saw the emergence of a number of papers trying 
to  make  sense  of  the  so-called  “Great  Moderation”:  a  phenomenon  that  started  in  the  mid 
1980s.  The  question  then  was  “why  did  macroeconomic  volatility  decline?”  Ben  Bernanke 
(then Governor of the Federal Reserve Board) identified “three types of explanations [in the 
existing  literature]  …  structural  change,  improved  macroeconomic  policies,  and  good  luck” 
(Bernanke, 2004). Now, of course, the question is: why are those tranquil times over?  
Up until the summer of 2007, the relative stability of corporate-bond and sovereign spreads  
– interrupted only by mild turbulences during the dot-com crisis at the turn of the millennium – 
can be observed against the backdrop of widespread moderation in macroeconomic volatility. 
Chart 1 shows a snapshot of the relative calm, before the recent storm, for BBB  corporate 
spreads for the euro area and the US as well as 10 year sovereign bond spreads (relative to 
the  Bund)  for  a  number  of  euro-area  countries.  To  a  large  extent,  the  positive  trend  in 
macroeconomic growth and stability and the low and stable credit premia are closely related.  
From US sub-prime turmoil to the global financial crisis 
II.2 
The protracted period of tranquillity was abruptly brought to an end by the collapse of the US 
housing bubble and the subsequent implosion of the sub-prime mortgage market. In the early 
stages,  the  financial  turmoil  was  circumscribed  so  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  assess  its 
severity. Furthermore there was a widespread belief that the real economy, both in the US 
and in the euro area, was sufficiently strong to withstand the financial turbulence (ECB, 2011).  
This  notwithstanding,  the  European  Central  Bank  did  not  fall  victim  to  complacency  and 
promptly intervened in the money market with an injection of 95 billion euros when severe 
strains emerged in that market in August 2007. This was the first of a series of interventions 
aimed at securing liquidity in the face of an interbank market paralyzed by fear. Concerning 
these  interventions,  it  is  particularly  worth  mentioning  the  high  degree  of  international 
coordination among central banks. Besides the simultaneous liquidity injections in domestic 
currencies that took place in many advanced economies, the ECB was able also to rapidly 
provide ample liquidity in dollars thanks to swap agreements with the Federal Reserve.2 
Despite these unprecedented interventions, and similar measures implemented in the US, in 
October 2008 Lehman Brothers collapsed wrecking havoc on international financial markets 
and the world economy. The spiralling of the crisis is evident if we look at the Libor-OIS and 
Euribor-OIS spreads in Chart 2. 
The  ECB’s  response  to  the  crisis  was  swift  and  combined  a  mix  of  standard  and  non-
standard monetary policy measures.  
As regards the former,  official interest rates were cut in a sequence of steps, bringing the 
main  refinancing  rate  from  4.25%  to  1%  within  a  span  of  6  months.  The  first  of  these 
reductions – on October 8, 2008 – was part of a concerted move with other major central 
banks.  
In order to meet banks’ increased demand for liquidity and to reduce uncertainty, a number 
of non-standard measures, which we have characterised as our “enhanced credit support” 
policy,  were  adopted.  The  most  important  of  these  have  been  the  fixed-rate  full-allotment 
                                                 
2 
In response to the most recent intensification of the crisis, the ECB, in coordination with the Federal Reserve, 
Bank of England, Bank of Japan and Swiss National Bank, decided on 15 September 2011 to conduct US-
liquidity providing operations with a maturity of approximately three months, thereby yet again demonstrating 
its willingness to act rapidly in times of crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
policy,  the  introduction  of  additional  and  new  long-term  refinancing  operations  and  the 
extension of the list of collateral eligible for monetary policy operations. By allowing banks to 
continue rolling-over their short and medium-term financing, the liquidity provision of the ECB 
avoided a fire-sale of assets.  
Like various other central banks, the Eurosystem has also embarked on outright purchases 
of securities, though on a relatively limited scale, in order to support the broader functioning 
of euro area financial markets.  
The Covered Bond Purchase Programme was  initiated in July 2009. This programme was 
part of the “enhanced credit support” measures and its objective was to support a financial 
market  segment  that  is  particularly  important  for  the  longer-term  funding  of  banks  and  the 
financing  of  the  real  economy  in  the  euro  area.  The  spill-over  effects  connected  with  the 
intensification of the financial crisis in September 2008 had led to a virtual shut down of the 
covered  bond  market,  notwithstanding  the  high  credit  quality  of  this  type  of  asset.  In 
response, the Eurosystem purchased EUR 60bn of covered bonds between July 2009 and 
June 2010. Empirical research conducted by ECB staff suggests that the CBPP has been 
successful in achieving its goals (Beirne et al., 2011). 
Not least due to strong and timely action by central banks and governments, worldwide signs 
of  stabilisation  in  financial  markets  emerged,  with  spreads  returning  to  pre-Lehman  levels 
and positive output growth resuming in the second half of 2009. In this respect, the ECB’s 
non-standard measures played a non-negligible role in supporting the euro area economy.  
From the financial to the sovereign debt crisis 
II.3 
Chart 1 also shows that sovereign credit spreads (relative to the German Bund) started to 
widen  already  in  the  early  stages  of  the  crisis  as  the  market  reassessed  risk  across  the 
board. But sizable repercussions on the sovereign bond market are noticeable only after the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  when  the  spread  on  Irish  and  Greek  long-term  government 
bonds soared above 250 basis points. This reflected the fact that, during the initial stages of 
the  crisis,  government  guarantees  for  the  financial  sector  and,  more  generally,  the  policy 
response  to  the  crisis  implied  a  transfer  of  risk  from  the  private  sector  to  the  government 
sector. However, as deficits surged and the Greek government revealed a much larger deficit 
than previously thought, the attention focused more on the state of public finance. From then 
on, and in particular after the downgrading of Greek bonds by all the major rating agencies, 
the  financial  crisis  that  originated  in  the  US  turned  into  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  with  a 
European epicentre. 
This  escalation  of  events  brought  the  crisis  to  a  new  dangerous  level.  While  in  the  early 
phases  concerns  focused  around  the  risk  of  a  protracted  recession  the  new  phase  raised 
concerns regarding the ability of some euro area countries to honour their debt obligations.  
The widening of sovereign bond spreads and the malfunctioning of securities markets in a 
number  of  countries  impaired  the  smooth  operation  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. In order to address this problem the Eurosystem initiated its Securities Markets 
Programme  (SMP)  by  means  of  which  private  and  public  securities  became  eligible  for 
outright purchase by the Eurosystem.  
A key distinguishing feature of asset purchases made under the SMP is that their liquidity 
impact  has  been  sterilised  through  the  conduct  of  weekly  liquidity  absorbing  operations. 
Overall,  there  has  been  no  net  injection  of  central  bank  liquidity  to  the  market  as  a 
consequence  of  these  operations.  These  measures  and  their  objectives  are  therefore 
fundamentally different from quantitative easing. For the ECB, non-standard measures have 
always  been  seen  as  a  means  of  coping  with  abnormal  functioning  of  some  key  markets, 
which,  if  unaddressed,  would  have  posed  problems  for  the  effective  transmission  of 
monetary  policy.  This  implies  that,  standard  and  non-standard  measures  are  seen  as 
complements,  not  substitutes.  We  have  never  chosen  non-standard  measures  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
alternatives or substitutes for changes in official interest rates. Indeed our standard and non-
standard  measures  were  implemented  in  parallel.  This  so-called  separation  principle  is 
illustrated by the rate increases in the first half of 2011 in a context of stable or reinforced 
liquidity measures. 
These  measures  seemed  to  produce  positive  effects  in  the  early  stages,  when  spreads 
stabilized and the market gave signs of increased confidence. Yet a slower than expected 
recovery and overstretched public finances have made investors and consumers retrench in 
the second and third quarters of 2011, with spreads widening again and for an even larger 
group of countries in the euro area, reaching over 2000 basis points for Greece. In order to 
diffuse tensions in the euro area secondary sovereign bond market, the ECB, in its 7 August 
statement, indicated that it would resume its Securities Markets Programme. Importantly, this 
statement  was  made  following  the  announcement  of  new  fiscal  and  structural  policy 
measures by the Italian and Spanish governments.  
Lessons to be learned 
III. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  clear  that  what  needs  to  be  explained  is  how  we  went  from 
historically tranquil times to the worst financial crisis since World War II and, eventually, to an 
equally severe sovereign debt crisis. Was it sheer bad luck? Or can we detect the seeds of 
the  crisis  in  policies  and  structural  changes  that  had  taken  place  before?  And  if  so,  what 
needs to be changed? 
It would be foolish to argue that what we have experienced in the last four years is the sole 
result of an exceptionally large adverse shock. Major structural changes in financial markets 
gave life to a gigantic securitization market which allowed financial intermediaries to diversify 
their portfolios and, hence, to reduce their exposure to risk. Or so market participants liked to 
believe.  As  in  the  case  of  collateralized  mortgage  obligations  (CMOs)  and  credit  default 
swaps on CMOs and CDOs, many securitised products had an unknown or very uncertain 
risk profile due to the novelty of the financial products and the lack of data. The systemic risk 
associated  with  these  assets  was  naively  underpriced,  and  the  consequence  was  an 
excessive exposure to risk. 
Such mechanism has been captured in a recent model by Boz and Mendoza (2011). They 
show that if investors have imperfect information on the risk profile of assets, and have to 
learn over time these characteristics, boom-bust cycles can easily emerge. In particular, after 
a positive shock that increases the availability of credit (e.g. financial innovation), financially 
constrained investors must assess the riskiness of the new environment: i.e. whether they 
are short lived or sufficiently persistent to warrant an increase in leverage. Given the limited 
information  available  on  the  new  environment,  mis-pricing  of  risk  is  very  likely.  The 
materialization of the underlying, yet mis-priced risk (like the widespread losses in the sub-
prime mortgage market) in an environment of over-leveraged investors could have negative 
consequences via the sudden deterioration of investors’ balance sheets, and hence of their 
collateral. 
In  a  similar  spirit  Brunnermeier  and  Sannikov  (2010)  and  Brunnermeier,  Eisenbach  and 
Sannikov (2011) emphasize the role of occasionally binding credit constraints in generating 
sudden contractions. They argue that in normal times (under moderate risk) borrowers are 
not  limited  by  the  value  of  their  collateral.  Only  when  risk  increases  and,  hence,  also  the 
likelihood  of  hitting  the  borrowing  constraint,  borrowers  will  start  liquidating  their  assets  in 
order to increase their safety buffer. This can lead to fire-sales of assets, which will in turn 
lead  to  a  deterioration  of  collateral  values  and  set  in  motion  a  vicious  spiral.  Most 
interestingly their analysis emphasizes the role of liquidity risk (as opposed to credit risk): the 
more illiquid is the asset the larger is the price effect of fire-sales. An initial increase of risk, 
that generates margin calls or increased haircuts, will lead to larger asset-price falls the more 
illiquid are these assets. For these reasons, financial intermediaries play a key role in this 
environment.  On  the  one  hand  they  increase  stability  by  providing  liquidity-transformation 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  Boz  and  Mendoza  and 
the  diversification  delusion  discussed 
services. On the other hand, when their net-worth deteriorates, their ability to provide liquidity 
(inside  money)  is  impaired  increasing  the  value  of  outside  (central-bank)  money.  As  the 
money  multiplier  shrinks,  “Fisherian  deflation”  sets  in  worsening  the  debt  burden  of 
borrowers and, hence, further amplifying the contraction.  
Regrettably, 
the 
understatement of the liquidity-risk channel in Brunnermeier et al. affected investors as well 
as policymakers and regulators. Indeed this same literature tells us that there can be ample 
scope for welfare improvements through economic policy. The fundamental reason for this 
public  role  is  that  private  agents,  typically,  are  not  large  enough  players  to  internalize  the 
general equilibrium – or even market specific – consequences of their portfolio decisions (as 
in  the case of  fire sales).  These  results  warrant  ample  liquidity  injections  by  central  banks 
and underpin the current wave of regulatory reforms undertaken in the European Union as 
well  as  in  other  major  economies.  Among  these  reforms,  it  is  important  to  mention  in 
particular the new Basel Accord (Basel III) on banks’ capital adequacy which is consistent 
with  the  idea  of  Brunnermeier  et  al.  that  critical  reductions  in  banks’  capital  can  generate 
dangerous  liquidity  shortages.  Equally  important  is  the  establishment  of  the  European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  with  macro-prudential  oversight  responsibilities  over  the 
financial system in the European Union, which directly relates to the limited ability of financial 
markets to internalize systemic risk. 
Another important lesson that has been learned, admittedly the hard way, is that it is very 
difficult, if at all possible, for the market to correctly price sovereign risk. Charts 1 and 3 offer 
a clear example of what I mean. In particular consider two of the most troubled economies, 
i.e. Greece and Ireland. The evolution of their public finances in the recent history leading up 
to  the  crisis  is  dramatically  different  (as  Chart  3  shows),  in  large  part  reflecting  the  deep 
differences  in  their  growth  experiences.  Up  to  the  start  of  the  crisis  Ireland  experienced  a 
rapid fall in the debt-to-GDP ratio, while Greek public debt had been hovering around 100% 
of GDP for the whole period (even considering older un-revised figures). Yet both economies 
were paying virtually the same rate on their debt as Germany did, the main reason being that 
the exchange rate risk had been removed by  the single currency. Furthermore the market 
might  have  also  made  the  assumption  that  by  being  in  a  monetary  union  each  member 
country  now  benefited  from  a  collective  euro  area  wide  implicit  guarantee  over  its 
government’s liabilities. But were those debt levels equally sustainable?  
Up to the crisis, the “Celtic Tiger” was seen as an example of good public finances, having 
reached a debt-to-GDP ratio of about 25% in 2007 from more than 80% in the mid 1990s. 
The  seemingly  healthy  picture  of  the  Irish  economy  concealed  deep  imbalances  that 
constituted implicit liabilities for the government. The real estate and banking sectors swelled 
to disproportionate levels compared to the ability of the government to intervene in case of 
major  disruptions.  A  similar  picture  is  offered  by  Spain,  although  in  a  less  dramatic  way, 
where the housing boom was the main driver of growth. It is obviously extremely difficult for 
the market to be able to assess these implicit liabilities. This is a further reason why macro-
prudential oversight by public institutions is crucial in order to mitigate the risks of systemic 
crises.  
With  hindsight,  we  can  say  that  the  excessive  compression  of  sovereign  risk  premia  has 
been unfortunate as it removed an important disciplinary device for issuing countries. There 
is widespread agreement that a new set of rules for fiscal discipline must be introduced. As 
the  ECB  already  pointed  out  at  the  time,  it  was  regrettable  that  France  and  Germany 
breached  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  in  November  2003  and  that  the  European 
Council failed to initiate the Excessive Deficit Procedures. The reform of the SGP undertaken 
in 2005 has addressed a number of weaknesses of the of the original design, in particular by 
enhancing  its  economic  rationale  and  by  calling  more  effectively  on  member  states  to 
undertake  fiscal  adjustments.  Nevertheless,  as  I  have  pointed  out  in  2005  (González-
Páramo, 2005), the reform had serious shortcomings, as it introduced more explicit flexibility 
and room for economic judgement. In this way, in order to guarantee sustainability, the new 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
pact  required  even  more  commitment  by  the  member  states  to  consolidate  their  public 
finances and to rigorously and consistently apply the new rules. In light of the current crisis, 
the next major challenge for the European Union will be to design rules that are at the same 
time credible, effective and enforceable. 
The recent Euro Plus Pact of March 2011 is an important step in the right direction. The ECB 
strongly supports the objectives of the pact, i.e. to foster competitiveness and employment, 
to  contribute  to  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  and  to  reinforce  financial  stability.  The 
pact has been reinforced by the statement made by the Heads of State or Government of the 
euro area on 21 July 2011 (see also Trichet, 2011). In particular, it has been reaffirmed that 
fiscal consolidation is a primary goal of member states. In this regard all countries not under 
a programme will have to achieve a deficit below 3% by 2013 at the latest. Indeed countries 
that  have  experienced  turmoil  in  their  sovereign  debt  market  have  already  taken 
unprecedented  measures  to  ensure  sustainability  of  public  finances.  The  ECB  will  monitor 
these developments very closely, as sound public finances are a fundamental prerequisite 
for a credible and effective monetary policy. 
Fiscal and monetary policy in the euro area: need for tighter governance 
IV. 
Allow me to dwell a little bit more on the sovereign debt crises and the challenges it poses to 
monetary  policy.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  economic  literature  has  long  emphasized  the 
intimate connection between fiscal and monetary policy. The relationship between monetary 
and  fiscal  authorities  can  be  of  two  alternative  types.  The  first  is  one  of  “dependence”  
– typically of the monetary authority on the fiscal authority. The second type is a relation of 
“mutual  independence”  with  a  well  defined  monetary  policy  mandate.  The  literature  has 
shown that countries displaying more independent central banks also enjoyed lower average 
inflation  rates  (e.g.  Cukierman,  1992  and  Walsh,  2003,  Chapter  8).  As  argued  earlier,  this 
set-up can deliver price stability and growth only if accompanied by clear and enforceable 
rules for the fiscal authorities. Ensuring this, as we know too well, is not a minor challenge.  
In  the  case  of  a  monetary  union  among  sovereign  countries  with  independent  fiscal 
authorities, the challenge is much bigger. In a monetary union the misbehaviour of one fiscal 
authority can be offset, at least partially, by the virtuous behaviour of other countries, and the 
more  so  the  smaller  is  the  economy  that  misbehaves.  In  the  face  of  these  free-riding 
incentives, the non-cooperative behaviour of the member states can generate unsustainable 
fiscal policies. 
A large number of papers have highlighted the challenges that come with the establishment of 
a monetary union among countries with independent fiscal authorities. We know, for example, 
that if there are no limits to non-monetary policies (e.g. fiscal policy), governments might have 
the  incentive  to  pursue  lax  policies  in  the  national  interest,  putting  pressure  on  the  central 
bank  to  increase  inflation  (Chari  and  Kehoe,  2008).  This  literature  has  long  called  for  a 
strengthening of fiscal rules, but also for euro-area wide bank supervisory bodies in order to 
bypass  dangerous  incentives  at  the  national  level  to  tolerate  imbalances  in  the  domestic 
banking sector, with associated risks of contagion and systemic crises (Uhlig, 2002). 
Indeed, the current dire situation is the result of the lack of effective and enforceable rules, 
i.e.  of  the  lack  of  a  credible  fiscal  commitment.  Before  the  crisis,  after  initial  efforts  to 
consolidate  public  finances,  some  governments  have  enjoyed  increasingly  feeble  external 
pressures  to  put  their  own  house  in  order,  thanks  mainly  to  favourable  global  economic 
conditions, and have reverted to unsustainable fiscal stances. Others have turned a blind eye 
on  the  domestic  economic  imbalances  that  were  building  up,  mainly  as  a  consequence  of 
abundant credit, and enjoyed the delusion of sustainable growth. As the crisis unfolded, all 
those vulnerabilities materialised calling for supranational interventions. As I have mentioned 
earlier, some of these interventions involved the ECB, as in the case of (sterilized) purchases 
of sovereign bonds in the secondary market. These type of unconventional interventions can 
only  be  seen  as  exceptional  measures  which  would  not  have  been  necessary  in  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
presence of appropriate institutional arrangements and credible rules for fiscal authorities. In 
designing  these  rules  and  institutions,  European  legislators  will  find  vast  insights  in  the 
existing economic literature.  
Priorities for the academic research agenda 
V. 
Let me conclude with a “wish list” for economic research.  
As I have alluded to before, current generation economic models used at central banks were 
ill equipped to signal the mounting risks of a global recession. The two sides of the current 
crisis – credit markets and sovereign debt crises – originate from the excessive leverage of 
private and public agents and by the extreme under-pricing of risk by investors.  
The DSGE literature has made considerable progress in this direction in the last 10 years. 
Most of this literature builds on the idea of asymmetric information and agency problems in 
financial markets.3 These models appeared at central banks quite some time before the crisis 
and  their  development  has  intensified  since  2007.4  The  main  lesson  that  we  have  learned 
from  this  literature  is  that  financial  frictions  can  generate  considerable  amplification  and 
enhance  persistence  of  aggregate  shocks.  They  may  also  be  a  source  of  sizeable 
international  spillovers.  Unfortunately,  though,  all  these  models  are  solved  using  linear 
methods  and  completely  lack  the  non-linearity  that  is  crucial  to  explaining  disproportionate 
effects of seemingly small shocks. Linearized models can explain the crisis, only ex-post, by 
hitting the economy with exceptionally large shocks.  
The model of Brunnermeier et al. that I have mentioned earlier is also based on the same 
type of financial frictions. Yet, by preserving the model’s non-linearity, it is able to generate 
endogenous  time-varying  risk  and  feedback-loops  that  can  bring  about  boom-bust  cycles 
from  even  modest  shocks.  Indeed  we  know  that  the  nonlinearity  implied  by  financial 
constraints can generate multiple equilibria, with the further possibility that non-fundamental 
shocks (so-called sunspots) can generate large economic fluctuations. In this regard, further 
research  on  non-linear  solution  techniques  should  have  high  priority  in  the  economic 
profession’s research agenda. 
The current financial crisis has certainly offered strong arguments to convince the sceptics 
that  financial  markets  must  not  be  neglected.  The  crisis  has  also  taught  us  that  another 
usually neglected market, the money market, is claiming its right to belong in business cycle 
models.  In  order  to  assess  the  fragility  of  the  financial  market  and  the  risk  of  a  systemic 
crisis,  we  need  models  where  the  liquidity-transformation  role  of  financial  intermediaries 
plays  an  explicit  part.  Some  of  the  models  that  I  have  referred  to  include  financially 
constrained banks. Yet most of them abstract from liquidity issues. On the other hand, quite 
some  progress  has  been  made  in  the  banking  and  finance  literature  –  typically  in  partial 
equilibrium or highly stylized models – in characterizing the interbank market. For example 
Heider, Herova and Holthausen (2009) show that private information in the interbank market, 
where  liquidity  plays  a  central  role,  can  generate  different  regimes,  including  turmoil  and 
market  breakdowns.  Here  too  there  is  a  high  premium  on  incorporating  these  ideas  into 
quantitative policy models.  
                                                 
3  This  literature  has  been  popularized  by  Bernanke  and  Gertler  (1989),  Carlstrom  and  Fuerst  (1997)  and 
Bernanke,  Gertler  and  Gilchrist  (1999)  in  models  of  costly  state  verification  (à  la  Townsend,  1969)  and  by 
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) in models of incomplete contracts and collateral constraints. 
4  One  of  the  early  contributions  in  this  direction  is  Christiano,  Motto  and  Rostagno  (2003),  which  formed  the 
basis for developing a rich DSGE model with financial frictions at the ECB. Related works developed at central 
banks include Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2007), Brzoza-Brzezina and Markarki (2010), Gerali et al. 
(2008), Darracq Pariès and Notarpietro (2008), Dib (2010), Darracq Pariès et al. (2010) and Lombardo and 
McAdam (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Some  progress  in  this  direction  can  be  seen  in  recent  work  by  Gertler  et  al.  (2010),  who 
show in a DSGE model how the monetary policy stance can influence portfolio decisions of 
financial intermediaries and, hence, their exposure to risk. This model has important policy 
implications  as  it  incorporates  the  moral-hazard  consequences  of  policy  decisions  and  of 
regulatory reforms, like new capital requirements and other macro-prudential regulations.  
Another  deficiency  in  standard  models  is  the  absence  of  a  meaningful  role  for  the  fiscal 
authority. As argued above, modelling the interconnection between public finances and the 
economy is a very difficult task, as the sudden deterioration of public finances can often be 
ascribed  to  the  materialization  of  implicit  commitments,  something  which  is  very  hard  to 
quantify ex-ante. Yet we know that in order to design appropriate policy responses to crisis 
events we need to have accurate predictions of their likely macroeconomic impact, which in 
turn  crucially  depends  on  the  state  of  public  finances.  An  early  description  of  the  deep 
interdependence of monetary and fiscal policy was provided by Sargent and Wallace (1981). 
More than a decade later the debate centred around the so called “Fiscal Theory of the Price 
Level” (FTPL, see Sims, 1994). Most of the DSGE models used for monetary policy analysis 
either disregard completely the fiscal side or assume a “passive” fiscal policy and an “active” 
monetary policy (as Leeper would put it). This constellation is certainly of interest but, in light 
of  the  recent  events  and  issues that  I  have  described  earlier,  quite  remote  from  reality.  In 
improving  our  policy  models  we  will  certainly  benefit  from  Leeper’s  research  agenda  (see 
e.g. Leeper, 2010). We may also benefit from the same inescapable logic of the FTPL as far 
as  the  interconnection  between  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  the  risk  of  sovereign 
default is concerned (as pointed out recently by Uribe, 2006). This is a further example of 
how non-linear dynamics can play a crucial role.  
The literature on self fulfilling debt crises mentioned at the beginning of my speech and the 
related developments in the literature on exchange rate crises (Obstfeld, 1996) emphasize 
the  importance  of  economic  policy  in  determining  the  conditions  under  which  self-fulfilling 
crises can occur. The level of public debt is often a key determinant of these conditions, as 
high  levels  of  debt  increase  the  cost  of  interest  rate  hikes  and  heighten  the  sensitivity  of 
public finances to risk premia. Embedding these concepts in our policy models would allow 
us  to  assess  changes  in  the  risk  of  self-fulfilling  crises  and  would  give  some  quantitative 
guidance in designing the appropriate policy responses.  
Finally,  the  standard  model  is  based  on  the  assumption  of  perfectly  and  equally  informed 
rational agents. As argued above, in the case of asset-backed securities, a decisive role was 
played by the limited knowledge of their risk profile (Boz and Mendoza, 2010). Many have 
described  the  origin  of  the  financial  crisis  as  the  result  of  second-moment  shocks.  In 
particular market agents realized that their guesses on asset price correlations were wrong. 
The  very  evolution  of  the  crisis  has  been  characterized  by  enormous  uncertainty.  The 
increase in uncertainty froze markets and paralyzed consumers and investors (e.g. Bloom, 
2009).  Policy  models  displaying  these  features  would  be  close  to  a  holy  grail  for  central 
bank’s policy analysis. 
All in all, there seems to be quite some ground to cover in macroeconomic modelling. Yet, 
the programme of this conference gives me further reasons to believe that it won’t be long 
before these wishes will be realized. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Bean, C. (2010), “Joseph Schumpeter Lecture: The Great Moderation, the Great Panic, and 
the Great Contraction”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 8, pp. 289–325. 
Beirne, J., Dalitz, L., Ejsing, J., Grothe, M., Manganelli, S., Monar, F., Sahel, B., Sušec, M., 
Tapking, J. and Vong, T. (2011), “The impact of the eurosystem’s Covered Bond Purchase 
Programme on the primary and secondary markets”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 122. 
Bernanke,  B.S.  (2004),  “The  Great  Moderation”,  Speech  delivered  at  the  meeting  of  the 
Eastern Economic Association, Washington, DC, February 20. 
Bernanke,  B.S.,  and  Gertler,  M.  (1989),  “Agency  Costs,  Net-Worth,  and  Business 
Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, 14–31. 
Bernanke,  B.S.,  Gertler,  M.  and  Gilchrist,  S.  (1999)  “The  Financial  Accelerator  in  a 
Quantitative  Business  Cycle  Framework,”  in  Handbook  of  Macroeconomics,  ed.  by 
J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford. Elsevier. 
Bloom, N. (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks”, Econometrica, Vol. 77, pp. 623–685. 
Boz,  E.  and  Mendoza,  E.  (2010),  “Financial  innovation,  the  discovery  of  risk,  and  the 
US credit crisis”, NBER Working Paper No 16020.  
Brzoza-Brzezina,  M.,  and  Makarski,  K.  (2010).  “Credit  crunch  in  a  small  open  economy”, 
National Bank of Poland Working Paper No. 75. 
Brunnermeier,  M.K.  and  Sannikov,  Y.  (2010),  “A  Macroeconomic  Model  with  a  Financial 
Sector”, unpublished. 
Brunnermeier,  M.K.,  Eisenbach,  T.M.  and  Sannikov,  Y.  (2011),  “Macroeconomics  with 
Financial Frictions: A Survey”, unpublished. 
Caballero,  R.J.  and  Krishnamurthy,  A.  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances  and  Financial  Fragility”, 
American Economic Review, Vol. 99, pp. 584–88. 
Calvo,  G.A.  (1988),  “Servicing  the  Public  Debt:  The  Role  of  Expectations”,  American 
Economic Review, Vol. 78, pp. 647–61. 
Carlstrom,  C.  T.,  and  Fuerst,  T.S.  (1997),  “Agency  Costs,  Net  Worth,  and  Business 
Fluctuations:  A  Computable  General  Equilibrium  Analysis,”  American  Economic  Review, 
Vol. 87, pp. 893–910. 
Chari,  V.V.  and  Kehoe,  P.J.  (2008),  “Time  Inconsistency  and  Free-Riding  in  a  Monetary 
Union Journal of Money, Credit and Banking”, Vol. 40, pp. 1329–1356. 
Cole, H.L. and Kehoe, T.J., (2000), “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises”, Review of Economic Studies, 
Vol. 67, pp. 91–116. 
Christiano, L. and R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003), “The Great Depression and the Friedman-
Schwartz Hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 36, pp. 1119–1197. 
Christiano, L.J., Trabandt, M. and Walentin, K., (2007), “Introducing Financial Frictions and 
Unemployment  into  a  Small  Open  Economy  Model”,  Sveriges  Riksbank  Working  Paper 
Series. No 214,. 
Cukierman,  A.  (1992),  Central  Bank  Strategy,  Credibility,  and  Independence:  Theory  and 
Evidence, The MIT Press. 
Darracq  Pariès,  M.  and  Notarpietro,  A.,  (2008)  “Monetary  policy  and  housing  prices  in  an 
estimated DSGE for the US and the euro area,” ECB Working Paper No. 974. 
Darracq  Pariès,  M.,  Kok  Sørensen,  C.  and  Rodriguez-Palenzuela,  D. 
(2010), 
“Macroeconomic propagation under different regulatory regimes: Evidence from an estimated 
DSGE model for the euro area,” ECB Working Papers No 1251. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Davig,  T.,  Leeper,  E.M.  and  Walker,  T.B.  (2011),  “Inflation  and  the  fiscal  limit”,  European 
Economic Review, Vol. 55, pp. 31–47. 
Diamond,  D.D.  and  Dybvig,  P.H.  (1983),  “Bank  Runs,  Deposit  Insurance,  and  Liquidity”, 
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, pp. 401–419. 
Dib,  A.  (2010),  “Banks,  Credit  Market  Frictions,  and  Business  Cycles,”  Bank  of  Canada 
Working Papers, No 10–24. 
ECB (2011), “Patterns of euro area and US macroeconomic cycles – what has been different 
this time?”, Monthly Bulletin, May. 
Gerali, A., Neri, S., Sessa, L., Signoretti, F. (2008). “Credit and Banking in a DSGE model of 
the Euro Area,” Banca d’Italia Working Paper, No 740. 
Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N. and Queralto, A. (2010), “Financial crises, bank risk exposure and 
government financial policy”, unpublished manuscript. 
Gorton,  G.B.  (2010),  “Questions  and  Answers  about  the  Financial  Crisis”,  NBER  Working 
Paper No 15787. 
Hart, 0. (1975), “On the Optimality of Equilibrium when the Market Structure is Incomplete”, 
Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 11, pp. 418–443. 
Heider, F., Hoerova, M. and Holthausen, C. (2009) “Liquidity hoarding and interbank market 
spreads: the role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Papers, No 1126. 
Leeper,  E.M.,  (1991),  “Equilibria  under  ‘active’  and  ‘passive’  monetary  and  fiscal  policies”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 27, pp 129–147. 
Leeper, E.M. (2010), “Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy”, NBER Working Paper No 16510.  
Lombardo, G. and McAdam, P. (2011), “Financial Market Frictions in a Small Open Economy 
for the Euro Area,” ECB Working Paper (forthcoming). 
Obstfeld,  M.,  (1996),  “Models  of  currency  crises  with  self-fulfilling  features,”  European 
Economic Review, Vol. 40, pp. 1037–1047. 
González-Páramo, J.M. (2005), Speech delivered at the Conference on “New Perspectives 
on Fiscal Sustainability”, Frankfurt, 13 October,  
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2005/html/sp051013.en.html. 
Sargent,  T.J.  and  Wallace,  N.  (1981),  “Some  unpleasant  monetarist  arithmetic”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 
Sims, C.A. (1994), “A simple model for study of the determination of the price level and the 
interaction of monetary and fiscal policy,” Economic Theory, Vol. 4, pp. 381–399. 
Townsend,  R.  M.  (1979):  “Optimal  Contracts  and  Competitive  Markets  with  Costly  State 
Verification,” Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265–293. 
Trichet, J.C., 2011, Statement on the decisions taken by the Euro Area Heads of State or 
Government at a press briefing on 21 July 2011, Brussels. 
Uhlig,  H.  (2002).  “One  Money,  But  Many  Fiscal  Policies  in  Europe:  What  Are  the 
Consequences?”,  CEPR  Discussion  Paper  No  3296.  Reprinted  in  Monetary  and  Fiscal 
Policies in EMU: Interactions and Co-ordination, edited by Marco Buti, pp. 29–56, Cambridge 
University Press, 2003. 
Uribe,  M.  (2006),  “A  Fiscal  Theory  of  Sovereign  Risk”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics, 
Vol. 53 pp. 1857–1875. 
Walsh, C.E. (2003), Monetary Theory and Policy, MIT Press, 2nd ed. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
