Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Overview of the global economy 
Statement  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee 
(IMFC)  Twenty-Fourth  Meeting, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 24 September 2011. 
 On behalf of the Constituency representing Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Indonesia, Lao P.D.R., Malaysia, 
Myanmar, Nepal, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Tonga and Vietnam. 
Global and domestic policy actions 
The IMFC is convening at a time when global growth outlook has dimmed considerably since 
our  Spring  meeting.  Recovery  in  major  advanced  economies  has  weakened  in  the  last 
several months. Meanwhile, growth in emerging market economies has moderated. Stresses 
in  the  Eurozone  periphery  have  not  abated  and  have  impacted  larger  economies, 
undermining  market  confidence.  Consequently,  the  clearest  risks  currently  to  the  global 
economy  are  unstable  debt  dynamics,  sluggish  economic  performance,  banking  sector 
funding  stresses  and  policy  responses  perceived  by  markets  as  inadequate.  Further,  risk 
aversion  in  the  current  environment  has  already  had  an  impact  on  emerging  market 
economies, including those with strong fundamentals. 
Risks  to  the  global  economy  and  financial  system  demand  decisive  policy  responses.  For 
advanced  economies  with  some  fiscal  space,  this  means  a  credible  medium-term  fiscal 
consolidation  plan  and  policy  flexibility  to  support  growth  in  the  near  term.  Eurozone 
economies under market pressure should deliver credible commitment to fiscal consolidation 
and implementation. While we welcome the measures announced at the Eurozone summit in 
July,  further  resolute  measures  to  strengthen  the  banking  sector,  credibly  restore  debt 
sustainability in the Eurozone periphery, and lift long-term growth potential through structural 
reform are necessary to restore market confidence in the short term and contribute to global 
growth and stability in the long term. The Fund should be pro-active in proposing solutions 
and mediating their adoption. 
We believe that progress in structural reforms will be key to restoring growth in the medium- 
and  long-term.  Although  each  crisis  is  different,  our  efforts  during  the  Asian  crisis  that 
brought  about  a  relatively  fast  recovery  may  provide  a  useful  lesson  for  countries  facing 
current  difficulties.  From  our  experience,  the  determination  to  undertake  and  stick  with 
structural  reforms,  particularly  in  the  financial  sector,  was  a  crucial  factor  that  led  to  an 
improvement in confidence, competitiveness and growth. 
The fund’s response 
i) Global Financial Safety Nets (GFSN) 
With substantial downside risks to growth in the global economy and heightened volatility in 
financial markets, the Fund should assess the adequacy of its resources against expected 
financing needs. At a minimum, there should be no reduction in Fund resources during this 
time.  In  this  regard,  countries  in  our  constituency  which  are  participants  of  the  New 
Arrangements to Borrow fully support the extension of the activation period to March 2012. 
We  also  regard  as  particularly  relevant  the  Fund’s  work  to  develop  a  more  coherent 
response  to  systemic  events,  including  short-term  liquidity  provision  to  crisis  bystanders. 
Rapid  liquidity  support  at  an  early  stage  is  critical  to  help  pre-empting  temporary  liquidity 
difficulties  in  sound  economies  from  escalating  into  a  wider  crisis.  We  call  on  the  Fund  to 
review its lending toolkit and emphasise that potential solutions should minimise stigma, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
send effective signals that differentiate crisis bystanders as fundamentally sound economies. 
A study of gaps and new solutions can be undertaken together with an early review of the 
Flexible Credit Line and Precautionary Credit Line. The latter should be aimed at improving 
the accessibility and flexibility of these instruments whilst limiting moral hazard. 
ii) Surveillance 
The  Fund’s  credentials  on  surveillance  suffered  a  setback  after  it  had  not  given  sufficient 
warning in the run-up to the 2008/9 crisis. The 2011 Triennial Surveillance Review (TSR) is 
therefore  a good  opportunity  for  the  Fund  to  address  the  shortcomings.  On  the  whole,  we 
welcome the key TSR objective of making the Fund’s surveillance as interconnected as the 
global economy itself. Given its universal membership, cross-country experience and deep 
technical  expertise,  the  Fund  is  uniquely  placed  to  identify  global  challenges  and  facilitate 
dialogue with country authorities to undertake appropriate policy responses. To leverage on 
this strength, the Fund needs to invest time to build stronger trust and consensus amongst 
members on its surveillance and analytical frameworks. 
The Fund is also well placed to integrate its macroeconomic and financial surveillance, and 
thus  to  identify  latent  vulnerabilities,  interconnections  and  transmission  channels.  Such  an 
integrated, risk-focused approach should aim to  inform timely policy interventions and limit 
contagion.  In  this  context,  we  welcome  both  the  spillover  reports  and  the  Consolidated 
Multilateral Surveillance  Report  presented  at  this  meeting as  steps in the  right  direction  to 
understand and act on the implications of increasing interconnectedness among members. In 
addition, the Fund needs to have a broader, more balanced surveillance mandate that better 
reflects the major areas of risks confronting the global economy, including risks in sovereign 
balance  sheets  and  the  financial  system.  We  call  on  the  Fund  to  adopt  a  new  Integrated 
Surveillance  Decision  that  replaces  the  2007  Decision,  which  focused  too  narrowly  on 
exchange rates. 
International monetary system 
We  encourage  the  Fund  to  continue  its  work  to  strengthen  the  international  monetary 
system.  The  experience  of  countries  in  our  constituency  attests  to  the  complex  policy 
challenges  posed  to  emerging  market  economies  by  volatile  capital  flows.  We  expect  the 
Fund’s  work  in  this  area  to  continue  to  be  even-handed,  non-prescriptive  and  to  take  into 
account  country  specificities.  Further,  we  look  forward  to  the  extension  of  staff  analysis  of 
capital flows and associated policies to cover both source and recipient countries. We also 
support the Fund’s work on examining the case for broadening the SDR basket. This could 
contribute towards the diversification of reserve holdings, thereby strengthening the stability 
of the international monetary system over the longer term. 
Governance reform 
Governance underpins the legitimacy and traction of the Fund’s activities and advice. For this 
reason,  we  support  the  Managing  Director’s  call  for  greater  progress  in  implementing  the 
2010  quota  reform  and  re-composition  of  the  Executive  Board.  We  also  emphasise  the 
importance of completing a review of the quota formula by January 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
