Malcolm Edey: The Reserve Bank’s strategic review of payments 
innovation 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Cards and Payments Australasia 2011, Sydney, 29 March 2011. 
 I thank Darren Flood for his assistance in preparing this speech. 
Thanks very much for the opportunity to speak here today.  
This  is  a  conference  that  is  all  about  innovation  in  the  payments  system.  I  know  that  the 
businesses represented here would all have their own approaches to innovation, and some 
of those will have been on display in the various presentations.  
But we also have a common interest in ensuring that the system as a whole can develop as 
efficiently and cost effectively as possible. I’ve been asked to talk today about the Reserve 
Bank’s role in that.  
As you know, the RBA launched a strategic review of payments innovation in July last year.  
In talking about the review, the first thing I want to stress is that we see this as very much a 
co-operative project. When we announced the review, the first thing we did was to call for an 
initial  round  of  consultations,  both  with  industry  and  with  any  other  interested  parties  that 
wanted  to  contribute.  We’ve  had  a  good  response  to  that.  We  have  had  discussions 
(sometimes multiple discussions) with most of the main market players; we have talked to 
people  working  in  particular  fields  of  payments  innovation;  and  we  have  had  some 
discussions with end-users of the payments system.  
Based on what we learn from that, we’ll be putting together a more detailed document for 
release around mid year, which will then be the basis for a more formal round of consultation 
in the second half of the year. We hope to have a final report ready by around year-end.  
I start with that description of the process because I want to emphasise that this is very much 
something that we’re doing with the involvement of the interested parties. It’s not just a top-
down exercise.  
The process still has some way to go, and I’m not going to pre-empt any conclusions today. 
But I want to use my time to report on what we’ve found so far, how we’re approaching the 
task, and the issues we’re likely to be focusing on from here.1  
Economic case for co-ordination in the industry 
The first question that might be asked is: why do we need a strategic review in this area, and 
why now?  
I have to say that there’s no particular trigger for having it now, but we do believe it’s a good 
general principle that these matters should be kept under periodic review. The RBA, through 
its Payments System Board, has a mandate to promote payments system efficiency. A good 
deal of our work in that area has focused on the efficiency of price signals. The Bank has 
taken the view that, where price signals are distorted for some reason, there is a case for 
using its regulatory powers to correct them.  
                                                 
1   To  clarify  the  scope  of  the  exercise,  this  review  is  about  low-value  payments  (in  other  words,  retail  and 
relatively  small  business-to-business  payments).  It's  not  about  the  high-value  wholesale  payments  system, 
which is subject to its own regular assessment process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
But efficiency also covers operational aspects of the system, including things like the cost, 
speed  and  reliability  of  payment  services  and,  the  subject  of  today’s  talk,  its  capacity  to 
innovate.  
When we think about innovation in a network setting like this one, it’s useful to distinguish 
between two types: proprietary innovations, where the benefits are localised to the business 
that’s  doing  the  innovating  (and  to  the  customers  of  that  business);  and  system-wide 
innovations, where the benefit accrues to users of the system as a whole.  
It’s  reasonable  to  expect  that  service  providers  will  do  a  good  job  with  the  first  kind  of 
innovation. In fact we see examples of that kind of development all the time. For example, we 
are  currently  seeing  financial  institutions  exploring  new  ways  to  use  mobile  devices  for 
payment  purposes,  including  for  making  person-to-person  payments  using  the  existing 
infrastructure.  Similarly  a  major  bank  is  promoting  the  ability  of  its  systems  to  update 
customer account information in real time.  
But  it’s  in  the  second  type  of  innovation  that  there  is  the  more  serious  potential  for 
inefficiency,  or  for  under-investment.  That  might  happen  through  a  lack  of  co-ordination 
among  industry  participants,  or  through  a  lack  of  incentive  for  individual  providers  to 
participate in system-wide improvements. We’re not starting with the presumption that that’s 
the case – only that it could be.  
As a regulator, we recognise that our approach to these questions has to be quite different 
from the way we approach other cases for regulatory involvement. The RBA has significant 
powers, as you know, to designate payments systems and to set standards. But we’re well 
aware  that  you  can’t  regulate  innovation  into  being.  That’s  not  the  intention.  As  far  as 
possible we’ll be aiming to work with industry, looking at whether there are areas where more 
co-ordination is needed, and assisting with that where we usefully can.  
Objectives of an efficient payments system 
In  taking  on  a  project  like  this,  it’s  useful  to  start  off  with  some  idea  of  the  characteristics 
we’re looking to promote in an efficient payments system. Here are some of the main ones:  
Timeliness 
Not  all  payments  are  time-critical,  but  users  of  the  system  should  at  least  have  options 
available  that  give  recipients  timely  access  to  their  funds  and  allow  timely  confirmation  to 
both parties. 
Accessibility 
It’s  desirable  that  everyone  who  needs  to  make  and  receive  payments  should  have  ready 
access to the payments system. 
Ease of use 
It goes without saying that systems that are easier to use are preferable to those that are 
more  cumbersome.  But  this  is  not  only  an  issue  of  convenience.  Systems  that  require 
manual  entry  of  account  and  transaction  details  are  prone  to  errors  that  can  be  
costly  to  correct  and  can  discourage  use.  That  is  one  reason  why  payment  cards  are  so 
popular  –  because  most  of  the  need  for  manual  entry  is  removed.  The  need  to  know  a 
recipient’s account details is another challenge for many payment systems. One of our oldest 
payment methods – the cheque – deals with that by only requiring the recipient’s name, with 
the recipient doing the rest. The challenge for electronic payment systems is to replicate or 
improve upon that sort of convenience.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Ease of integration with other processes 
Payments  are  rarely  made  in  complete  isolation.  Typically  they  are  made  as  part  of  a 
process that requires reconciliation and recording of information by the parties involved. It’s 
desirable that payment systems should be able to integrate efficiently with these processes. 
A  key  example  here  is  the  capacity  of  payment  systems  to  carry  additional  reconciliation 
information with the payment.  
Safety and reliability 
End users of a payment system need to have confidence that the system will be available 
when needed and that payments will reach the intended recipient at the time promised. They 
also need to be confident that the system is secure, so that using it will not expose them to 
future losses as a result of information being fraudulently obtained. Some of these problems 
can be addressed by system participants guaranteeing payments, but good system design is 
a more fundamental solution.  
Low and transparent costs 
Some would say that this has been a preoccupation of the RBA over the past decade. If two 
systems perform exactly the same function, we should of course prefer the cheaper one. But 
the reality is more complicated than that. Each system typically has different attributes from 
every  other  system,  and  so  end  users  need  to  make  choices  as  to  which  one  most  cost-
effectively meets their needs. That means that costs need to be transparent, so that those 
choices can be well-informed.  
These,  then,  are  some  of  the  qualities  that  we  might  regard  as  desirable  in  an  efficient 
payments system. You can probably think of a few more. But having given a list like that, we 
also need to recognise that there are trade-offs. Investment in innovation comes at a cost, 
borne initially by industry but ultimately by the customer. So in conducting the review, we’ll 
need to be talking with providers and users of payment services about both the costs and 
benefits they see in different approaches.  
Payments use study 
One  important  source  of  information  about  that  from  the  end-user  perspective  will  be  the 
Reserve Bank’s latest Payments Use Study. This was a study of around 1,200 households 
conducted in October/November last year, updating an earlier study from 2007. Participants 
were asked to keep a diary of their payments over a one-week period and were also asked 
about their attitudes to newer payment methods not covered in the diary, like contactless or 
mobile payments.2  
We expect to publish a detailed analysis of the findings later in the year, but I can give you a 
few preliminary results today that throw some useful light on the innovation review.  
Results from the diary data suggest two main conclusions on payment patterns.  
1. 
First, the broad patterns of payments behaviour observed in the 2007 study still hold.  
Cash remains the most widely used payment instrument in Australia and the 
a. 
dominant instrument for low-value payments.  
                                                 
2   The  study  was  conducted  by  Roy  Morgan  Research  on  behalf  of  the  RBA,  and  is  largely  a  repeat  of  the 
payments diary study undertaken as part of the 2007/08 review of the card payments reforms. It asked around 
1,200 study participants in late October and early November 2010 to carry a payments diary with them for a 
week and record details of all their payments and cash withdrawals. Details recorded included: the payment 
method used; the size of the transaction; the merchant category and the payment channel (for example, in 
person, internet, phone, or mail). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
2. 
b. 
c. 
Cards  are  the  dominant  payment  method  for  mid-value  payments  (between 
$50 and $500), with the use of credit cards growing relative to debit cards as 
the transaction value increases.  
BPAY  and  internet  banking  are  used  frequently  for  bill  payments  and  high-
value transactions.  
Second, payment patterns have nonetheless evolved to some degree in the three 
years since the initial study. In particular:  
a. 
Use  of  cash  has  declined  somewhat.  This  is  especially  noticeable  in  cash’s 
share of the value of what we would call traditional payment methods – down 
from around 40 per cent to 30 per cent of the value of those payments;  
Debit cards appear to have been substituted for cash, with scheme debit and 
EFTPOS transactions both gaining share.  
b. 
Those  are  the  broad  results  on  the  pattern  of  actual  payments  made.  A  questionnaire 
conducted  at  the  end  of  the  diary  study  also  gives  some  additional  information  as  to  how 
people think about different payment methods. Here are just a few samples.  
First,  on  the  use  of  cheques:  fewer  than  40 per  cent  of  consumers  reported  making  a 
payment by cheque in the past year. Of those 40 per cent, this graph shows the main reason 
that they chose to use a cheque (Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
 The most common reason was that people felt that they had no alternative for the type of 
payment they were making. That is significant, given that one of the issues being considered 
both by the industry and the current review is the scope for phasing out cheque use.  
Next, in order to understand the attributes that people value for point of sale payments, we 
asked people what factors influence their choice of payment method at the checkout.  
Perhaps not surprisingly, the most important factor was what they happen to be carrying with 
them at the time. Beyond that, the main factor cited in determining how people pay is the 
speed of processing the transaction, followed by the ability to use their own funds and the 
ease  of  managing  finances  (Graph 2).  The  importance  of  speed  is  significant  because  it 
helps  explain  why  people  continue  to  use  cash  for  small  value  transactions,  and  it  also 
indicates that the current push towards contactless cards might be quite important for many 
consumers.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 2 
 Given the increasing importance of internet payments over recent years, we also spent some 
time exploring consumers’ use of, and attitudes towards, different types of online payments.  
First  of  all,  we  found  what  seems  to  be  quite  high  adoption  of  online  payments.  Around 
90 per cent of respondents had access to the internet, either at home or at work. Of those, 
about 80 per cent reported having made an online purchase and almost 60 per cent reported 
an online transfer of funds to a family member or friend. A surprisingly high 60 per cent of 
people with internet access said they pay most of their bills online.  
We also tried to find out what things prevent people from making even greater use of online 
payments (Graph 3). The graph we have here shows the answers for online bill payments, 
but we also collected responses for online purchases and transfers.  
Graph 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 First of all, to explain the large bar at the bottom: we were asking people what would make 
them happier to use online bill payments, but what we found was that more than a quarter of 
respondents were already satisfied and didn’t think they could be improved. Beyond that, by 
far the biggest factor preventing people from making more use of online bill payments is the 
risk of fraud.  
This  was  even  more  marked  for  online  purchases,  where  around  half  of  respondents 
identified risk of fraud as a factor discouraging greater use. In fact, the level of satisfaction is 
lower for online purchases overall than for online bill payments and transfers. Probably this 
reflects a lower degree of comfort with online purchases using methods like credit cards and 
PayPal, compared to making bill payments using BPAY and internet banking transfers.  
Adoption of the other two new waves of payments technology – contactless payments and 
mobile payments – is much lower than online payments. Only around 3 per cent of survey 
respondents  had  made a  contactless  payment  in  the  last  month.  Less  than  10 per cent  of 
respondents had ever made mobile payments. Where they had, the main purpose was for 
phone-related  purchases  such  as  ringtones  or  games  (Graph 4).  Most  of  the  other  mobile 
payments made were effectively internet payments made using a smartphone.  
Graph 4 
 In  short,  the  survey  doesn’t  seem  to  point  to  any  major  dissatisfaction  with  payments 
services in Australia, but it sheds some light on why payment-use patterns are as they are, 
and some possible areas of improvement that can be looked at further. We’ll be publishing a 
fuller analysis of these results later in the year.  
Results of the initial consultations 
As I said earlier, we’ve had significant interest shown by a wide range of industry and other 
players in response to our initial request for comments. A number of interested parties have 
provided us with written submissions, and many more have made themselves available for 
informal  discussions  with  RBA  staff.  I  expect  we’ll  receive  a  more  substantial  body  of 
submissions during the second round of consultation in the second half of the year.  
The consultations to date have highlighted a number of quite specific issues that are going to 
be worth considering as part of the Strategic Review. I’ll briefly go through a cross section of 
those, but this is by no means exhaustive. I also note that many of these issues are not new, 
and are already being thought about by the industry.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Transmission of data with payments 
Successful  integration  of  payments  systems  into  other  processes  requires  that  sufficient 
information travel with the payment to allow proper reconciliation. A business owner making 
payment to a supplier might wish to convey information, not just on the invoice number, but 
(for example) on which items on that invoice are being paid and why. An employer making a 
payment to a super fund needs to be able to provide information on the relevant employee 
accounts, the amounts of each payment and even the type of payment. Even an individual 
sending money to a friend or relative might simply want to attach a personal message to that 
payment. At the moment, the choices are largely either:  
 
to limit the additional information to the 18 characters permitted by the direct entry 
system;  
to separate the payment from the information and put in place a process to bring 
them back together at a later stage;  
or to pay by cheque attached to the information source.  
 
The question for the review will be whether this is likely to represent a significant shortcoming 
in  our  payments  system  in  the  years  ahead?  And  if  it  is,  what  is  the  best  means  of 
addressing it and how should that be achieved?  
 Timeliness and ease of addressing payments 
There are times when we really need payments to be made quickly. The classic example is 
government emergency payments. Most government payments to individuals can be made 
perfectly adequately by the direct entry system. But in an emergency, the availability of funds 
the next day might not be sufficient. In recent times many such payments have been made 
using the RTGS system, even though this is a long way away from that system’s intended 
use. Even then, the speed can vary significantly depending on the systems of the recipient 
bank.  
A related issue is the ease of addressing payments to individuals. As I said before, writing 
someone’s  name  on  a  cheque  is  relatively  straightforward,  but  directing  an  electronic 
payment can be much more difficult. For most people this currently involves entering BSB 
and account number details into an internet banking package. This of course means having 
to  obtain  those  details  from  the  recipient  (who  mightn’t  even  remember  them)  and  then 
keying in all the details correctly. This probably does not meet the “ease of use” test.  
Overseas experience might give us some guide on this issue. For example we know that the 
United  States  is  putting  a  lot  of  emphasis  on  pre-paid  cards  for  government  payments, 
although  this  no  doubt  in  part  reflects  the  country’s  high  number  of  unbanked  welfare 
recipients. On  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic,  the  UK’s  Faster  Payments  system provides  a 
closely watched example of improving the timeliness of payments.  
Of course the Strategic Review is intended to be forward looking. So we should be asking, 
not just about the demand for these sorts of improvements, but also the extent to which likely 
developments could meet that demand over the next few years. These questions might also 
lead to a focus on the constraints that the major banks’ own internal systems place on their 
capacity to provide faster payments.  
The decline of cheques 
The number of cheques written in Australia has been declining by an average of 9 per cent 
per  year  over  the  past  decade.  Over  time,  this  is  adding  to  unit  costs.  The  result  is  that 
cheques, which were already an expensive form of payment, are becoming increasingly so. 
Nonetheless, our consultations have reinforced the fact that cheque use remains entrenched 
in  certain  areas  because  it  meets  a  number  of  specific  needs.  I  have  already  mentioned 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
several of these areas, including the ease with which cheques can be addressed to others 
and  accompanied  by  additional  information.  They  are  also  very  suitable  in  face-to-face 
exchanges and for providing an element of financial control.  
Any  decision  to  move  away  from  cheques  (and  I’m  not  pre-judging  the  issue)  will  be 
dependent on the industry’s capacity to develop suitable and equally convenient electronic 
alternatives. I’m aware that the industry is separately looking at this, but it seems appropriate 
that the Payments System Board should also be considering how the decline in cheques is 
addressed from a public interest perspective.  
In addition to these issues, there are a number of other things that we expect will come into 
consideration,  whether  as  stand-alone  topics  or  interwoven  with  other  discussions.  These 
include:  
 
Mobile  payments.  There  is  already  a  lot  of  interest  and  activity  in  this  area.  The 
Board’s main interest will be in determining whether there are impediments to the 
development of mobile payments, for example in relation to standards.  
Standards  themselves  cut  across  many  areas  of  payments,  including  messaging, 
device  and  security  standards.  Their  design  and  application  can  have  significant 
implications  for  efficiency  and  for  innovation.  The  increasingly  global  nature  of 
commerce  suggests  that  adoption  of  internationally  compatible  standards  will  be 
very important for maintaining a world class payments system.  
Electronic  purse  systems  –  that  is,  general  purpose,  prepaid,  and  typically 
contactless cards like Oyster in London and Octopus in Hong Kong. Where these 
have been successful, there tends to be significant interdependency with electronic 
transport  ticketing  systems,  which  have  been  slow  to  develop  here.  The  question 
once  again  is  whether  there  is  a  significant  impediment  to  development  of  these 
systems in Australia, given the already high use of payment cards.  
Security.  Our  survey  results  suggest  that  concerns  about  fraud  are  impeding  the 
take-up of online payments. This may also become an issue for mobile payments. A 
question  for  the  Strategic  Review  is  whether  there  is  a  need  for  increased  co-
ordination and co-operation on fraud issues.  
   Finally  it’s  worth  saying  that,  more  important  than  any  of  these  individual  issues  is  the 
overarching  environment  for  innovation.  I  made  the  distinction  at  the  start  between 
proprietary  and  system-wide  innovations.  Our  focus  in  this  review  is  very  much  on  the 
second one of those. This is the area that needs the most careful attention from a public-
interest  perspective,  because  it  requires  a  degree  of  co-operation  amongst  industry 
competitors that might not otherwise happen efficiently. It also requires that the interests of 
end-users and non-incumbents be taken into account.  
The next stage of the review will be seeking views on those issues, whether there are better 
ways to address them and whether there are new areas where a co-operative approach is 
needed. An inevitable component of that is what role the Reserve Bank should play, given 
that it has often stepped in, in one way or another, when a solely industry-based approach 
has not proved feasible.  
Conclusion 
What I’ve outlined today is a big agenda, and I expect it will keep us very busy in the time 
ahead.  
As I said at the start, this review is very much a co-operative effort. I and my staff appreciate 
the assistance we’ve had already, both from industry and from payment users. And we look 
forward to continuing to work with you to promote best-practice innovation in the Australian 
payments system.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
