Njuguna Ndung’u: Review of Forex Bureau guidelines 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the workshop 
on  the  review  of  Forex  Bureau  guidelines,  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies,  Nairobi,  24 
February 2011. 
 The Directors and Principal Officers of Forex Bureaus; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
1. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  officially  open  this  consultative 
workshop  that  will  comprehensively  review  the  Forex  Bureau  Guidelines.  At  the  outset,  I 
would  like  to  take  this  early  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  appreciation  to  all  forex 
bureaus  represented  here  and  to  those  that  took  time  to  study  the  proposals  made  and 
submitted comments on the guidelines. This has allowed the Central Bank of Kenya team to 
revise them considerably. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, forex bureaus were first licensed in January 1995 to foster 
2. 
competition in the foreign exchange market and to narrow the exchange rate spread through 
this  micro-structure  of  the  market.  As  you  are  aware,  the  forex  bureau  sub  sector  has 
experienced rapid growth since it was first established with the number of operating bureaus 
having increased from 48 in 1998 to 126 as at December 2010. This rapid growth has to do 
with  units  in  the  market  and  also  the  volume  of  their  trading.  But  this  has  also  come  with 
challenges. While the initial objectives have largely been met, it has become necessary to 
take stock of achievements and challenges so far. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  in  the  last  few  years,  the  Central  Bank  has  carried  out 
3. 
comprehensive  on-site  and  off-site  review  of  the  operations  of  forex  bureaus.  The  review 
exercises  have  revealed  major  weaknesses  in  the  operations  of  some  of  the  bureaus  that 
include; 
 
 
Engaging in unauthorized business activities; 
Non-compliance  with  the  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  such  as  the  Central 
Bank of Kenya Act and the laws that govern taxation; and 
Limited  understanding  of  regulations  and  weak  capacity  in  management  of  the 
bureaus. 
 It  is  in  light  of  this  that  Central  Bank  embarked  on  the  process  of  identifying  gaps  in  the 
regulatory  framework  and  reviewing  the  guidelines  in  order  to  streamline  the  sub-sector, 
facilitate growth and ensure that all the players operate in accordance with the law. 
4. 
The revised guidelines also seek to deal with the various challenges; strengthen the 
corporate governance structure and financial position of the bureaus; enhance competition in 
the foreign exchange market and more importantly re-define the basic tenets of this market. 
From the comments and discussions we have held, we know that forex bureaus in line with 
the  market  dynamism,  would  like  to  expand  their  sphere  of  operations  by  offering  more 
services and more products. In this regard and like any other good investment, the desire 
calls for enhancement of capital to be employed. In addition, the guidelines must be reviewed 
to align them with the provisions of the existing laws, like the Proceeds of Crime and Anti-
Money Laundering Act 2009, which came into operation on June 28, 2010. This law together 
with the guidelines define the reporting methods of transactions by institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, despite the numerous challenges experienced in the forex 
5. 
bureau  sub-sector  in  the  recent  past,  the  Central  Bank  recognizes  the  important  role  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sector plays in the economy by offering foreign exchange at competitive rates and providing 
employment  to  many  Kenyans.  But  the  market  can  only  expand  and  thrive  if  rules  and 
guidelines  are  followed.  In  this  case,  only  those  investors  who  are  ready  and  willing  to 
conduct  their  business within  the  set  rules  will  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  market.  As  we 
align ourselves with the dynamics of the market, adherence to the rules of the game become 
more important and critical for the survival of the market. 
6. 
To  enhance  market  discipline  and  encourage  constructive  engagement  with  the 
regulator and so develop the market, I urge the owners of forex bureaus to strengthen the 
Kenya Forex Bureaus Association (KFBA). This will entail reviewing the constitution of the 
association,  putting  in  place  a  code  of  conduct  and  allocating  more  resources  to  the 
secretariat. The main objective of the initiative is to develop a vibrant market, to promote and 
uphold professionalism, enhance high ethical standards, foster self-regulation and above all 
keep  the  line  of  engagement  with  the  regulator  alive  so  that  market  vulnerabilities  or  any 
challenges can be addressed. For these reasons, membership to the KFBA has been made 
mandatory and a pre-requisite for license renewal. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the workshop has been organized with one major objective 
7. 
of facilitating a consultative process. I therefore urge you all to actively participate fully and 
build consensus on the content of the guidelines before they are finalized. The Central Bank 
believes that this approach will foster an inclusive enabling environment for the growth and 
development of the forex bureau sub-sector. 
8. 
Finally,  let  me  once  again  reiterate  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  as  a  financial 
regulator of this market and as an  agent of developing this market will continue to pursue 
policies and guidelines that create a conducive environment for growth of the financial sector, 
encourage provision of financial services to the majority of the population at affordable cost 
and enhance the safety and soundness of the financial system. 
9. 
to declare this workshop officially open and presuppose a fruitful engagement. 
Thank you and God bless you all. 
With these few remarks, ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honour and pleasure 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
