Daniel Mminele: The current state of payment system integration 
Remarks by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) Payment System Integration Workshop, 
Centurion, 22 March 2011. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  
It is a pleasure to be with you once again, and an honour to have been asked to make a few 
remarks at the opening of the SADC Payment System Integration workshop. 
It  is  only  little  more  than  a  year  since  we  launched  the  project  to  integrate  the  region’s 
payment systems. If we cast our minds back, at that time we were all reasonably constructive 
about where the world was going. Most parts of the world had just emerged from a severe 
recession,  the  global  economy  had  been  successfully  pulled  away  from  the  brink,  and 
economic  indicators  were  generally  pointing  the  right  way,  albeit  with  some  risks  that  we 
could  identify.  We  had  subsequently  seen  very  encouraging  growth  rates  during  the  first 
quarter of 2010. 
All this, however, started to change during the second quarter, when the European sovereign 
debt  crisis  presented  new  challenges,  which  are  still  with  us  today,  and  in  the  process 
exposed  how  fragile  the  banking  and  financial  systems  still  were  after  the  crisis,  and 
delivering  the  very  sobering  message  that  the  road  to  a  strong  and  sustainable  global 
recovery  was  going  to  be  a  rather  slow  one,  and  would  be  uneven  across  countries  and 
regions. 
More  recently,  we  have  witnessed  a  series  of  natural  disasters,  and  geopolitical  risks 
increasing, the full impact of which on the global economy remains uncertain at this stage. 
And  of  late  in  some  parts  of  the  world  inflation  concerns  are  coming  to  the  fore  again, 
requiring  delicate  balancing  acts  on  the  part  of  policy  makers  to  ensure  that  inflation 
expectations remain anchored while avoiding any undue damage to recovery prospects. As 
we  will  be  starting  our  monetary  policy  committee  meeting  later  today,  I  will  certainly  not 
comment on the South African situation, but refer you to the statement that we will issue on 
Thursday afternoon. 
We have many lessons to learn from the crisis, while the crisis has also left many questions 
unanswered. 
These challenging and uncertain times that we are experiencing will in some way or another 
also have a bearing on the SADC payment system integration project. Two areas specifically 
spring to mind: The one being the evolving agenda and package of measures to address the 
root causes of the global banking crisis, the other being the events in Europe, where certain 
euro  zone  member  countries  had  to  be  rescued  by  others  together  with  multilateral 
organisations, resulting in the European integration project being put to a rather severe test.  
The two circumstances can present very different sets of challenges and could impact the 
SADC integration project in different ways, in that each could impact a different set of role-
players. The emergence of measures to address issues that led to the global banking crisis 
has  a  direct  impact  on  commercial  banks,  and  on  regulators  who  are  required  to  refine 
existing or introduce new regulatory and supervisory measures. The events in Europe, which 
revealed that, while there are no doubts about the benefits of monetary unions, under certain 
circumstances they can put serious constraints on countries, on the other hand may harbour 
even broader implications. Countries in the SADC region will probably carefully monitor the 
situation  in  Europe  to  reassess  the  admittance  criteria  and  control  measures  for  a  future 
SADC monetary union.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Commercial  banks  will  be  required  to  conform  to  more  stringent  regulatory  requirements 
because of the new measures introduced following the banking crises.  
Regulators are required to review their oversight and supervisory procedures of commercial 
banks.  A  higher  level  of  co-operation  between  regulatory  bodies  is  becoming  essential  to 
ensure that different facets of a commercial bank’s structure and operation are adequately 
examined. Joint oversight and mutual co-operation initiatives between regulators are being 
formalised by memoranda of understanding and we are observing the formalisation of roles 
of the different regulators in integrated environments. 
The  significant  commitment  required  of  commercial  banks  to  meet  the  new  requirements 
could result in a shift in focus away from regional initiatives. Regional initiatives could take 
lesser priority for the banks. 
The  role  of  the  SADC  Banking  Association  becomes  even  more  crucial  in  the  effort  to 
integrate the payment system environment. Commercial banks, despite their commitments to 
effect  changes  to  meet  new  regulatory  requirements,  should  continue  to  play  their  part  in 
making the regional integration initiative a success, not least because they stand to benefit 
from  the  opportunities  that  regional  integration  will  bring  with  it.  The  SADC  Banking 
Association is ideally positioned to work with the banking community, and a close working 
relationship with the project team is similarly of paramount importance.  
Events  of  the  recent  past  in  Europe  have  prompted  SADC  to  examine  more  carefully  the 
criteria for admittance to the monetary union. This together with the time being taken for the 
establishment of control measures and procedures, will more than likely delay the eventual 
establishment of the SADC Central Bank and the introduction of the SADC single currency.  
The dates initially contained in the Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan (RISDP), 
which called for the establishment of the SADC Free Trade Area (FTA) by 2008; a SADC 
Customs  Union  by  2010;  a  SADC  Common  Market  by  2015;  a  SADC  Monetary  Union  by 
2016; and a Single Currency by 2018, are now being reviewed.  
With  the  target  dates  being  reviewed,  sufficient  care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the 
momentum of the individual projects is not lost, and that the project teams should continue to 
focus on their goals. 
As members of these project teams, you are required to manage the uncertainties and the 
changing  operating  environment,  and  deliver  a  system  in  time  for  the  introduction  of  the 
SADC  currency.  The  changing  environment  and  possible  change  in  schedule  requires 
flexibility in the approach to managing the project. 
The  SADC  Payment  System  Project  team  has  therefore  made  some  adjustments  in  its 
approach and strategy. I believe that the consequences of this changed approach will be the 
focus for discussions at this workshop. 
Established  regional  structures  could  possibly  make  a  significant  impact  in  the  integration 
process. By simply broadening the base they could make ideal starting points for the SADC 
integration.  It  is  being  increasingly  suggested  that  structures  like  CMA  and  SACU  can  be 
leveraged  and  expanded  to  include  the  other  SADC  countries.  Legal  constraints  could  be 
addressed  and  legal  frameworks  enhanced  to  create  an  environment,  which  allows  SADC 
countries to be included as and when they meet the convergence criteria. 
The  Payment  System  Project  team  has  adopted  this  approach  for  the  payment  system 
integration  project  and  is  introducing  the  concept  of  a  model  for  integration  based  on  the 
CMA. I am sure the technical and legal issues will be discussed in detail at this workshop 
and that there will be ample opportunity to exchange views around the proposed strategy. 
The significant aspect of the CMA solution for payment systems is that parity already exists 
between the four currencies involved. This allows the project team to build a single-currency 
system  and  have  it  tested,  implemented  and  have  the  legal,  emotional  and  psychological 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
barriers removed. We all know how emotive an issue it will be to eventually let go of national 
infrastructures, even if it is for the greater good. 
The  SADC  integration  project  is  wide  ranging.  It  will  require  the  co-operation  and 
commitment of varied role-players to make it a success.  
It is therefore significant that the different sub-committees of the CCBG are represented here 
today. The speed at which different sub-committees are moving needs coordination so as to 
avoid a situation where the payment system project is running ahead of other projects. Your 
presence will enhance the discussions and will ensure that relevant issues are tabled and 
that they are adequately addressed. 
Your agenda for the next three days is quite rich. This could be a very significant three days 
for the SADC integration project. You may look back at this workshop, when the project is 
successfully completed, and appreciate some of the preparatory work that you would have 
completed over the next 3 days, and I am sure be proud to have been part of it. 
I wish you well in your discussions and that you have a successful workshop.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
