Timothy Lane: Curbing contagion – options and challenges for building 
more robust financial market infrastructure 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Society for 
Worldwide  Interbank  Financial  Telecommunication  Annual  Sibos  Conference,  Toronto, 
Ontario, 19 September 2011. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon and, to our guests from abroad, welcome to Canada. 
This  conference  is  taking  place  at  a  troubled  time.  Concerns  over  sovereign  debt  have 
intensified,  particularly  in  Europe’s  periphery.  Economic  growth  in  the  United  States  and 
other  advanced  economies  now  appears  to  be  significantly  weaker  than  expected.  In  the 
face of these developments, there has been mounting skepticism in a number of countries 
over whether policy-makers will be able to do what it takes to address these problems. 
The  current  bout  of  turbulence,  like  the  financial  crisis  of  three  years  ago,  serves  as  a 
reminder of why it is fundamentally important to have a resilient financial system. Periods of 
market  turbulence  are  a  fact  of  life.  In  a  resilient  system,  financial  shocks  are  absorbed, 
creating  losses  for  individual  investors,  but  leaving  the  system  intact.  If  the  system  is  not 
sufficiently resilient, however, shocks can be amplified. We saw this in 2008, when losses in 
a relatively small segment of the U.S. housing market cascaded into a near-meltdown of the 
global  financial  system.  That  process  reflected  a  mixture  of  frailties  –  excessive  leverage, 
reliance  on  forms  of  liquidity  that  proved  illusory  in  stressful  times,  the  use  of  securitized 
products  with  risks  that  were  not  fully  understood,  the  complex  web  of  counterparty 
relationships  that  spread  risk  and  bred  fear  in  core  funding  markets,  and  the  absence  of 
resolution mechanisms to deal with insolvency in systemically important institutions without 
endangering the entire system. 
In the wake of that crisis, leaders of the G-20 countries launched a broad agenda of reforms. 
These  reforms  aim  to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  have  adequate  levels  of  loss-
absorbing  capital  and  liquidity  to  cope  with  periods  of  market  stress;  to  establish  robust 
financial market infrastructure; and to develop stronger resolution mechanisms for financial 
institutions, particularly across borders. When implemented, the G-20 reforms will create a 
more  resilient  global  financial  system.  Canada  will  benefit significantly from  these  reforms. 
Even  though  our  financial  system  performed  much  better  through  the  crisis  than  those  of 
many other advanced countries, we are certainly not immune to events beyond our borders. 
In my talk this afternoon I want to focus on one element of the G-20 reform agenda: building 
robust financial market infrastructure. That infrastructure includes a number of components: 
payment and securities settlement systems, trading venues and exchanges, information and 
price providers, and collateral management systems. For the most part, these key elements 
not only functioned well during the crisis, they were in fact a source of strength. Just after the 
onset of the crisis, the CLS Bank, which settles foreign exchange transactions, successfully 
processed  roughly  three  times  its  normal  daily  volume  of  transactions;  and  CDSX,  which 
clears and settles trades in Canadian-dollar-denominated debt securities, handled double its 
normal volume. Efficient clearing and settlement systems such as these were able to perform 
a stabilizing role during the crisis. That is exactly what they were intended to do. 
The  crisis  did,  however,  illuminate  some  key  areas  in  which  financial market  infrastructure 
needed to be broadened and put to better use. Here, I am talking about expanding the use of 
central counterparties or CCPs to replace bilateral clearing and settlement for a number of 
core  markets.  In  my  presentation  today  I  am  going  to  review  how  bilateral  clearing 
contributed  to  contagion  during  the  financial  crisis,  describe  why  greater  use  of  resilient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial infrastructure is needed and tell you how CCPs will strengthen the financial system. 
CCPs are of particular interest to us at the Bank of Canada because we are responsible for 
overseeing  systemically  important  financial  infrastructure  that  affects  the  stability  of  the 
Canadian financial system and, therefore, the health of the economy. 
What happens when robust market infrastructure is not in place? 
During the crisis, we had two stark illustrations of why greater use of financial infrastructure is 
needed. The crisis did not start or end with the following shortcomings in bilateral clearing 
and  settlement,  but  they  were  channels  through  which  problems  in  an  obscure  part  of  the 
U.S. housing market cascaded into a global crisis. Although these are familiar stories, they 
illustrate the need for change. 
One  instance  is  the  near-failure  of  Bear  Stearns.  Bear  Stearns  wasn’t  one  of  the  largest 
investment  banks  in  the  United  States,  but  it  was  one  of  the  most  leveraged,  with  large 
broker-dealer and proprietary operations. It played a pivotal role in the global repo market, 
holding collateral for transactions and acting as a counterparty for repo financing. When the 
firm’s  mounting  losses,  extensive  leverage  and  reliance  on  potentially  unstable  short-term 
funding markets threatened to cause its failure, there was a risk that Bear Stearns’ collapse 
would cause serious disruptions in the repo market – a core funding market. Anticipations of 
disruptions  in  Bear  Stearns’  operations  led  cash  investors  and  collateral  providers  alike  to 
withdraw, initiating a process of leverage reduction through asset sales. Funding conditions 
for collateral providers deteriorated sharply, and the liquidity and efficiency of related markets 
were  severely  affected.  In  the  event,  Bear  Stearns  was  rescued  and  the  immediate  threat 
averted, but the danger was real. 
A  second  instance  is  related  to  Lehman  Brothers  and  its  role  as  a  counterparty  in  myriad 
bilaterally settled over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives transactions. Lehman’s default and the 
doubts it raised about the viability of the few remaining investment dealers struck at the heart 
of  both  the  funding  and  the  OTC  derivatives  market.  The  strains  broadened  to  a  general 
evaporation of market liquidity and a retrenchment from risk. 
In both cases, a basic problem was counterparty risk associated with financial contracts that 
are  cleared  and  settled  bilaterally.  Holders  of  such  bilaterally  cleared  repos  and  OTC 
derivatives were exposed not only to the market risk associated with the position taken in the 
financial instruments themselves, but also the risk that their counterparty would be unable to 
honour  its  commitment.  Counterparty  risk  became  a  key  channel  of  contagion,  posing  a 
major  threat  to  the  global  financial  system.  In  contrast,  some  of  Lehman’s  derivatives, 
notably  interest  rate  swaps  valued  at  $9  trillion,  were  cleared  through  a  CCP,  which 
successfully managed the impact of Lehman’s failure. 
What are the objectives for reform? 
At the Pittsburgh Summit, the G-20 leaders moved to put the lessons learned from the crisis 
into  practice.  Specifically,  they  called  for  all  standardized  OTC  derivatives  to  be  centrally 
cleared  and,  where  appropriate,  traded  on  exchanges  or  electronic  trading  platforms.  In 
addition, all trades, whether centrally cleared or not, are to be reported to trade repositories.1 
Efforts are under way in a number of countries, including Canada, to establish arrangements 
for clearing interest rate swaps and other OTC derivatives that were not previously centrally 
cleared.  In  Canada,  we  are  also  developing  a  new  CCP  for  repo  and  fixed-income 
transactions. 
                                                 
1  http://www.g20.org/Documents/pittsburgh_summit_leaders_statement_250909.pdf 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
These reforms will have far-reaching effects on global and Canadian financial markets. The 
move  to  CCPs  is  intended  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  the  network  and  enhance  netting 
efficiencies, and to establish robust risk management practices and clear default procedures. 
Since CCPs – which interpose themselves between buyer and seller in financial markets –  
concentrate risk by becoming the counterparty to all transactions, they must have stringent 
risk-management  standards.  The  use  of  sufficiently  robust  CCPs  is  likely  to  increase  the 
strength of the financial system. It will also reduce the counterparty credit exposures of major 
participants, which will be reflected in capital requirements for financial institutions. 
To  be  safely  cleared  the  contracts  that  CCPs  process  must,  at  a  minimum,  be  sufficiently 
standardized.  And  the  push  to  standardize  OTC  derivatives  contracts  will  have  important 
ancillary  benefits  for  how  these  markets  function.  Standardization  will  create  more  liquid, 
transparent and efficient markets for the contracts. It will also help set the stage for shifting 
trading onto exchanges or electronic trading platforms. 
The challenges of the G-20 reforms 
The  G-20  objectives  are  necessary  and  appropriate,  but  achieving  them  is  going  to  be 
challenging, for several reasons. 
First,  they  may  require  the  development  of  new  CCP  services,  a  complex  and  time-
consuming  process.  We  are  experiencing  this  in  Canada  in  connection  with  the  work  now 
underway  to  build  a  CCP  for  repos  and  fixed-income  transactions.  The  Canadian  industry 
selected the Canadian Derivatives Clearing Corporation (CDCC) to develop this facility. 
The process of creating a CCP for repos in Canada, although not yet complete, has been 
instructive. Two fundamental requirements are that the CCP has adequate and robust risk-
control systems and the capacity to implement them. Operational issues, such as developing 
and testing the relevant software – both for the CCP and its participants – and its interaction 
with existing systems, also take time to resolve. 
The  challenges  of  establishing  a  CCP  for  repos  are  considerable.  But  at  least  the  overall 
parameters are clear. Fulfilling the G-20 commitments on OTC derivatives is a more complex 
task,  requiring  coordination  among  many  stakeholders,  with  a  wide  range  of  possible 
outcomes. 
The complexity of clearing OTC derivatives 
Central clearing of OTC derivatives transactions will reduce systemic risk by decreasing the 
likelihood that one failing institution will bring down others. But, given the globalized nature of 
the  industry,  there  are  several  ways  to  make  the  transition  to  CCPs.  Clearing  could  take 
place  on  large  international  CCPs  serving  the  global  market  (such  as  ICE  Clear,  CME  or 
LCH.Clearnet), or new central clearing services could be established in individual countries.2 
We are seeing a variety of arrangements emerging. In some countries, such as Japan and 
Singapore, new central clearing services are under development. Other countries are likely 
to  rely  on  offshore  CCPs  or  –  as  in  Canada  –  are  still  evaluating  their  options.  The  task 
before  us  is  to  ensure  that  this  emerging  configuration  of  CCPs  achieves  a  significant 
reduction of systemic risk, both at the global level and for Canada. The G-20 commitment 
sets a very tight timetable for developing a strategy to meet this challenge. 
The selection of an appropriate CCP strategy for OTC derivatives is a particularly important 
issue  for  Canadian  market  participants  and  regulators.  To  put  it  in  perspective,  Canadian-
                                                 
2  Five Canadian banks currently qualify to be direct participants in LCH.Clearnet, the primary CCP for interest 
rate swaps. And interest rate swaps are the most important OTC derivatives products in the Canadian market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
dollar  OTC  derivative  contracts  have  a  notional  outstanding  value  of  just  under  $9  trillion. 
Moreover,  OTC  derivatives,  especially  interest  rate  swaps,  are  closely  connected  via 
arbitrage and financing relationships with other financial markets in Canada, including other 
derivative,  bond  and  money  markets.  That’s  big  enough  and  connected  enough  that  any 
disruptions  would  likely  result  in  significant  reverberations  throughout  our  markets.  At  the 
same time, these derivatives markets are innately global: for example, over half of the trading 
in Canadian-dollar interest rate products involves at least one party that is not a resident of 
Canada;  and  Canadian-dollar  OTC  derivatives  products  are  only  about  2  per  cent  of  the 
global market. Whatever solution we adopt must come to grips with both of these realities  
–  the  systemic  importance  of  OTC  derivatives  to  Canada and  the  globalized nature  of  the 
market. 
Large offshore CCPs serving multiple markets 
Given  the  globalized  nature  of  the  market,  clearing  through  large  offshore  CCPs  has 
important  advantages.  These  CCPs  can  benefit  from  economies  of  scale  and,  potentially, 
provide greater scope for netting and risk mutualization. 
A key concern, however, is access. Until recently, access was limited to the largest financial 
institutions with global reach. Access is now is being broadened, but the global dealers – the 
so-called  “G-14”  –  have  considerable  entrenched  advantages  in  settlement  costs.  Those 
institutions  that  do  not  have  direct  access  to  offshore  CCPs  would  have  to  clear  indirectly 
through one of the direct clearing members. 
The primary rationale for restricting access is risk control. Direct clearing members of a CCP 
are required to share the losses and take over positions in the event that another member 
fails – which requires that they have large financial resources and a wide scope of activities. 
But  here  lies  an  important  challenge.  In  carrying  out  the  G-20  mandate  requiring  all  OTC 
derivatives to be centrally cleared, it is essential to ensure that we do not unduly concentrate 
risk  in  a  relatively  small  number  of  institutions  that  are  direct  clearing  members  of  global 
CCPs.  These  were  the  very  institutions  that  spread  and  amplified  contagion  through  the 
global financial system in 2008. 
This potential concentration of risk has several dimensions. First, if one of the direct clearing 
members  fails,  that  poses  risks  to  the  CCP  and  to  the  other  direct  clearing  members. 
Second, the failure of one of these large institutions would pose risks to institutions that clear 
indirectly through it. Third, the offshore dealers may be able to use their dominance in direct 
clearing to heighten their competitive edge in other financial market activities, such as trading 
and other investment banking services. That, in turn, could lead to greater concentration of 
business, and of risk, across a whole range of activities. 
So if we are going to rely on central clearing through large offshore CCPs, direct access has 
to  be  broadened  in  a  manner  compatible  with  ensuring  that  these  CCPs  have  robust  risk 
controls. Indeed, financial market infrastructure standards are now being revised to ensure 
that CCPs and their members can withstand such shocks. 
There is also a need to ensure that indirect clearing is safe and efficient. Here, a key priority 
is  to  ensure  that  these  indirect  clearers’  positions  are  protected  through  appropriate 
segregation of collateral and portability of positions in the event that the direct clearer fails. 
The Bank of Canada is working at the international level, in co-operation with our colleagues 
at other Canadian agencies, to design measures for the safe and effective use of offshore 
CCPs no matter where they are located. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Domestic CCPs 
While offshore CCPs may be a suitable choice for some jurisdictions, a few countries have 
decided  to  develop  their  own  CCPs,  particularly  for  products  that  can  have  important 
repercussions on their domestic financial systems. 
So what would be the advantage of building a Canadian CCP to clear OTC Canadian-dollar 
interest rate derivatives? First and foremost, it would be more straightforward for Canadian 
authorities – including the Bank of Canada – to exercise our responsibilities for overseeing 
systemically  important  financial  infrastructure if a  CCP  were  located  in  Canada.  We  would 
also  be  better  placed  to  manage  a  crisis  and  provide  emergency  liquidity  support  for  a 
Canadian CCP should that be necessary. While cooperative arrangements for oversight and 
crisis management of offshore CCPs can be developed, and are currently being discussed at 
the  international  level,  this  work  is  still  in  progress.  Such  arrangements  will  need  to  be 
adequate to enable the Bank to fulfill its responsibilities for overseeing and safeguarding the 
stability of the Canadian financial system. 
A domestic CCP could offer other advantages as well. It could, in some situations, reduce  
– although certainly not eliminate – the impact on Canadian markets of financial shocks from 
abroad. It could be tailored to the needs of the Canadian financial system and support the 
development of market expertise and innovation. 
The key questions are whether a domestic CCP would be economically viable and whether it 
would  support  financial  stability  and  efficiency.  We  know  that  much  of  the  OTC  market  is 
global in nature and that, for a Canadian clearing service for OTC interest rate swaps to be a 
success, wide participation of both Canadian and global firms is necessary. Without that, the 
market  could  become  fragmented,  market  liquidity  could  decline  and  the  domestic  CCP’s 
own risk controls could be undermined. Yet another key question is whether a domestic CCP 
would adequately address the clearing needs of Canadian financial institutions. As a related 
point, a Canadian CCP would need to be reasonably cost-effective; otherwise it could push 
transactions offshore, undermining its potential benefits. 
Developing 
to  minimize 
fragmentation of the market. But establishing such links would be a complicated undertaking, 
and risk within the links would have to be properly managed. In practice, while a few CCP 
links exist and are in operation (for cash markets, in particular), there is not yet a generally 
accepted  model  that  could  be  used  for  the  establishment  of  links  among  CCPs  clearing 
trades in OTC derivatives. 
In assessing the best clearing strategy for Canadian OTC derivatives, the Bank of Canada is 
moving  forward  on  two  fronts.  First,  we  are  working  with  our  domestic  and  international 
counterparts  to  ensure  that  global  CCPs,  particularly  those  of  systemic  importance  to 
Canada,  are  able  to  deliver  the  intended  benefits  of  financial  stability.  Second,  we  are 
actively  exploring  the  possibility  of  developing  a  Canadian-domiciled  CCP,  in  collaboration 
with  the  financial  industry  and  other  public  policy  institutions.  We  must  choose  the 
arrangements that best support the stability and efficiency of Canada’s financial system. 
jurisdictions  could  help 
links  between  CCPs 
in  different 
Conclusion 
We  are  in  the  midst  of  an  enormous  financial  regulatory  transformation,  easily  the  most 
sweeping set of reforms in 70 years. Not only are the issues complex, they present cross-
border challenges that must be addressed at both the global level and in Canada. The Bank 
supports the objectives of the G-20 reform agenda. Reform is critical if we are to prevent a 
crisis  similar  to  that  of  2008  from  occurring.  However,  we  must  be  alert  to  the  risk  of 
unintended consequences. At the Bank of Canada, we are working actively, both here and 
internationally,  to  ensure  that  the  proposed  reforms  to  the  global  and  domestic  financial 
infrastructure  substantially  improve  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  and  significantly 
reduce systemic risk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
