Øystein Olsen: Ensuring financial stability in turbulent times 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Finance Norway conference, Oslo, 12 April 2011. 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 Introduction 
The experience of the past few years has clearly shown the cost of financial instability. The 
near seizure of the financial system in autumn 2008 gave rise to the most severe economic 
downturn of our time. There was a dramatic decline in international trade and in 2009 world 
GDP decreased for the first time in generations. 
Economic  policy  was  used  actively  in  most  countries  to  curb  the  economic  downturn. 
Substantial  resources  were  deployed  in  the  form  of  stimulus  packages  and  measures  to 
prevent  financial  market  collapse.  Nonetheless,  unemployment  in  the  OECD  area  rose  by 
15 million in the first year after the outbreak of the crisis. The downturn also led to a sharp fall 
in tax revenues. Budget deficits ballooned and government debt rose rapidly. 
Global economic growth has recovered, but the effects of the financial crisis are still evident 
and will continue to be for some time yet. Unemployment is still high and the current situation 
and prospects for several countries bear evidence of strained government finances. 
The financial crisis has followed a familiar pattern 
Our  actions  during  a  financial  crisis  are  very  important,  but  the  main  task  in  our  work  on 
financial  stability  must  be  to  prevent  crises.  History  has  shown  that  financial  crises  arise 
when  financial  imbalances  have  built  up  over  a  long  period.  Our  most  important  task  is 
therefore to contain the build-up of imbalances and secure a robust financial system. 
No two financial crises are alike. However, similar features can often be identified in the run-
up to the crises. This slide illustrates three features. These elements were also prominent in 
the unfolding of the most recent global financial crisis. 
 
The  first  feature  is  often  a  sharp  and  persistent  rise  in  property  and  other  asset 
prices. 
The  second,  strong  debt  growth,  is  closely  linked  to  the  first.  Rising  debt  and 
increasing property prices is a mutually reinforcing dynamic. Higher property prices 
lead to higher collateral values for loans. With easier access to credit, purchasing 
power increases. 
Debt growth exceeds growth in bank deposits and banks must increasingly resort to 
market-based funding to finance the rise in lending. They become ever more reliant 
on market funding, which is often short term. 
  When this cycle is allowed to continue for a period, the financial system becomes vulnerable. 
 
 
 
Banks accumulate large loans secured on inflated collateral values. 
Borrowers’ debt-servicing capacity becomes vulnerable to income loss. 
Banks  become  dependent  on  optimal  market  functioning  at  all  times  and  on  the 
confidence of market participants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
If  this  process  goes  too  far,  an  external  shock  could  turn  a  situation of  vulnerability  into  a 
crisis.  This  is  what  is  referred  to  as  systemic  risk  –  the  risk  that  shocks  will  weaken  the 
functioning of the financial system, rendering it unable to provide funding, execute payments 
or  redistribute  risk  effectively.  Systemic  risk  can  build  up  over  time  through  a  rapid  rise  in 
asset prices and debt and in the form of increasing interdependence among institutions. Or 
systemic risk can build up when many institutions are exposed to the same risk factor, for 
example on the funding side. 
Vulnerability also in Norway 
A financial crisis can be triggered by domestic conditions or it can be triggered by external 
factors. This time, the crisis came to Norway through external channels. International funding 
channels dried up, creating a liquidity crisis in the Norwegian banking sector. 
We  can  never  fully  insulate  the  financial  system  from  shocks.  But  we  can  increase  our 
resilience.  One  of  the  ways  we  can  do  this  is  by  keeping  our  own  house  in  order  –  by 
preventing major imbalances from building up in the economy or in the financial system, and 
by ensuring that the financial system in general is robust. We will then also be capable of 
withstanding disturbances generated by external conditions. 
As shown in Chart 3, there was also a clear build-up of financial vulnerability in Norway prior 
to the financial crisis. 
 
The rise in both house prices and debt in Norway was on a par with countries that 
were much harder hit by the crisis. 
In addition, Norwegian banks had also increasingly financed strong lending growth 
over a long period with market funding, of which a considerable share was short-
term  funding.  The  Norwegian  banking  sector  became  increasingly  dependent  on 
well functioning international money and capital markets, enabling banks to roll over 
their funding. 
 Nonetheless, the liquidity crisis never developed into a solvency crisis in Norway. Perhaps 
financial sector operators had learned from the previous banking crisis and engaged in more 
responsible  banking  during  the  upturn.  Furthermore,  they  were  subject  to  stricter  banking 
regulation in some areas. But other factors also played a role. 
 
Macroeconomic  developments  after  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis  were  more 
favourable in Norway than in other countries. The decline in output and the rise in 
unemployment were far more limited. Because of particular features of the industry 
structure in Norway, it took time for the full impact of the international downturn to 
reach our economy. In the meantime, an expansionary monetary and fiscal policy 
had  begun  to  take  effect.  Against  the  background  of  relatively  favourable 
macroeconomic conditions, the vulnerability related to a high household debt burden 
and elevated house prices never translated into higher losses for banks. 
In addition, a number of targeted measures were implemented to mitigate the impact 
of  tighter  market  funding.  Long-term  F-loans  were  provided  for  108  banks,  and 
20 banks and 4 mortgage companies were supported through the swap facility. In 
addition,  capital  was  supplied  to  a  number  of  banks  through  the  Norwegian  State 
Finance  Fund.  These  measures  were  not  without  financial  risk  for  the  Norwegian 
authorities  when  they  were  introduced,  although  it  does  not  appear  that  the 
measures will ultimately prove costly. 
 On the whole, the Norwegian economy fared well through the financial crisis. Nonetheless, 
the Norwegian economy and the Norwegian financial system were vulnerable in a number of 
areas. The continued existence of this vulnerability gives cause for concern. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
House prices are now rising rapidly again and have already passed the previous peak levels. 
Household debt growth in Norway has edged down, but the level of debt shows no signs of 
falling.  Overall  indebtedness  in  the  economy  is  also  higher  than  at  the  outbreak  of  the 
financial  crisis  and  the  proportion  of  market  funding  is  still  high.  There  is  therefore  every 
reason to keep a close eye on systemic risk going forward. 
Systemic risk and households 
In  our  view  monitoring  developments  in  the  household  sector  and  the  housing  market  is 
particularly important. There are many reasons for this. 
 
A good half of Norwegian banks’ loans are extended to households. The bulk of the 
loans is secured on the dwelling. 
The  loans  are  backed  by  collateral  whose  value  swings  considerably,  notably 
dwellings.  Longs  periods  of  upswing  in  the  housing  market  are  often  followed  by 
periods  of  decline.  Therefore,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  collateral  value  will 
cover the loan in the event of default. 
In addition, variable rate mortgages account for the bulk of housing loans in Norway, 
which means that changes in short-term interest rates have a substantial impact on 
household income. 
  In  spite  of  this,  the  direct  losses  associated  with  loans  to  households  are  seldom  large  in 
Norway. Even during the banking crisis a good 20 years ago, losses were limited. However, 
historically low losses are no guarantee of low losses in the future. 
The household debt to income ratio is now clearly higher than prior to the banking crisis. The 
increase has been highest for medium and lower income groups (deciles). As shown in the 
chart, there are also a far higher number of households that have a high debt to income ratio. 
The number is sufficiently high to engender negative spillover effects in the economy in the 
event of an abrupt change in behaviour. 
Such  spillover  effects  may  have  serious  implications  for  bank  losses,  which  is  the  main 
reason why we closely follow developments in the household sector in the work on financial 
stability. 
The interaction between different sectors of the economy and between the real economy and 
the  financial  economy  is  complex.  There  are  reinforcing  mechanisms  during  both  upturns 
and downturns. Norges Bank has therefore devoted considerable resources to developing a 
suite of models for analysing this interaction. 
Somewhat  simplified,  the  interplay  can  be  illustrated  by  developments  during  the  previous 
banking crisis in the early 1990s in Norway. Households had accumulated excessive debt at 
that time. They had to tighten spending in order to reduce debt. They increased their financial 
saving  markedly  and  reduced  spending  on  consumption  and  housing 
investment 
correspondingly.  This  resulted  in  a  sharp  fall  in  earnings  among  companies  that  provided 
goods  and  services  to  households.  Banks  sustained  substantial  losses  on  their  loans  to 
these  companies.  Bankruptcies  and  lower  activity  resulted  in  lower  household  income  and 
further spillovers to the economy. 
Such interaction effects are important in explaining that financial crises tend to follow in the 
wake  of  imbalances  in  the  property  market.  It  is  difficult  to  determine  with  certainty  when 
asset prices exceed levels that are not sustainable over time. Nevertheless, a long period of 
debt-financed increases in house prices seems to be a potent signal of a build-up of risk in 
the financial system, a signal that should be taken seriously. If we can restrain the build-up of 
such imbalances, we also reduce the risk of financial instability. 
The question can be raised as to whether the interest rate should be used to a further extent 
in preventing the build-up of systemic risk. Higher interest rates can curb the rise in both debt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and  house  prices  during  an  economic  upturn.  But  systemic  risk  will  depend  on  both  the 
vulnerabilities  that  accumulate  internally  in  the  banking  system  and  the  sources  of  risk 
outside  the  banking  system.  The  interest  rate  may  only  have  a  dampening  effect  on  the 
build-up along some of these dimensions. In the March issue of the Monetary Policy Report, 
we  wrote  that  the  consideration  of  guarding  against  the  risk  of  future  financial  imbalances 
that may disturb activity and inflation somewhat further ahead suggest that key policy rate 
should be increased in the near future. The consideration with regard to financial imbalances 
is thus part of the basis for setting the interest rate. 
At the same time, there are limits as to how many considerations the interest rate can bear. 
The interest rate also has effects on other assets prices, such as the krone exchange rate. A 
monetary policy that aims at bringing down the value of domestic assets can easily push the 
value of the krone in the opposite direction. In interest rate setting we can never lose sight of 
the primary objective of monetary policy, which is low and stable inflation. In assessing the 
different considerations, monetary policy must adhere to the operational mandate – low and 
stable  inflation.  Without  results  that  show  that  the  inflation  target  is  actually  attained  over 
time, there is a risk that monetary policy will lose credibility. 
We therefore need more targeted instruments to dampen the build-up of risk in the financial 
system.  The  most  important  component  is  a  long-term  framework  for  financial  market 
regulation that lays the basis for a robust financial system. The new Basel III framework is an 
important step in the right direction. An important feature of this regulatory framework is that 
the system-wide risk in the financial sector will be explicitly taken into account, and not only 
institution-specific  risk.  This  chart  showing  a  bank’s  balance  sheet  provides  a  simplified 
presentation of how the new regulation will affect banks. They will be required to hold more 
capital  and  capital  of  higher  quality.  New  capital  requirements  will  be  supplemented  with 
stricter liquidity management requirements and quantitative requirements regarding liquidity 
buffers and stable funding. This will reduce banks’ vulnerability to market turbulence. 
Under the new regulatory framework, it will be more costly for banks to expand rapidly. They 
will not have the option to finance growth with short-term market funding to the same extent 
as  earlier.  Moreover,  the  new  framework  includes  macro-prudential  measures  that  can  be 
triggered when necessary. Basel III includes a countercyclical buffer that is effective when 
credit  growth  becomes  excessive.  When  this  buffer  is  effective,  the  banks  must  set  aside 
more capital for their loans. This will increase their capacity to absorb future losses, which to 
some extent can also dampen credit growth during an upturn. In today’s situation in Norway, 
with elevated debt burdens and rising house prices, a countercyclical buffer could be a useful 
instrument. 
Basel  III  will  be  an  important  step  towards  a  framework  that  strengthens  the  basis  for 
financial stability. It will reduce the procyclicality of the financial sector. 
Higher capital requirements are an important component of the new framework. The capital 
requirements  are  set  in  relation  to  banks’  risk-weighted  assets.  The  risk  weights  in  the 
calculation are  therefore  also  important  for  the  system’s  robustness. This  may  give  rise  to 
challenges, particularly with regard to housing loans. 
Under Basel III, a bank must set aside about NOK 2.50 for every NOK 100 they lend if the 
regulation’s standard risk weights for residential mortgages are applied. This is to cover the 
equity  capital  and  conservation  buffer  requirements.  If  the  countercyclical  buffer  has  been 
turned on at maximum, the bank must provide one additional krone for each hundred kroner 
of loans. 
However,  Basel  III  also  provides  banks  with  the  option  of  full  use of  internal  models  for 
calculating their risk weights. When banks calculate risk weights using internal models, only 
institution-specific risk is taken into account and not system-wide risk. Norwegian banks that 
use such models arrive at risk weights that in some cases are a third of the standard weights, 
and  for  some  Swedish  banks  that  operate  in  Norway  they  are  even  lower.  The  capital 
requirements  are  then  reduced  correspondingly.  In  the  case  of  full  use  of  internal models, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
these banks will only have to set aside 1 krone for every NOK 100 in residential mortgage 
loans, even when the countercyclical buffer is fully turned on. This may seem unreasonably 
low for loans that may be a considerable source of risk accumulation in the financial system 
as  a  whole.  This  also  raises  the  question  of  whether  lower  limits  for  risk  weights  for 
residential mortgage loans for banks using internal models should be incorporated into a new 
regulatory framework. 
Crisis management and systemic risk 
Even  with  a  sound,  long-term  framework,  situations  will  arise  where  a  crisis  management 
system  is  needed.  Such  a  system  is  also  important  for  preventing  crises.  With  a  credible 
crisis  management  system,  a  bank  can  continue  providing  key  banking  services  when  it 
encounters problems, while the owners and unsecured creditors bear the losses. This is the 
most important instrument we have to counter moral hazard in the financial system. 
The system for crisis management in Norway was never put to the test during the financial 
crisis. International experience nevertheless suggests that changes to the Norwegian system 
should be made in order to improve it and enhance its credibility. Banks should be required 
to draw up plans for winding up operations without putting financial stability in jeopardy. For it 
to be credible, banks must have transparent group structures. In addition, clear rules should 
be introduced to define when the authorities are to intervene and apply the crisis resolution 
tools in a problem bank. This must occur before the problems in a bank become so serious 
that it can no longer operate without external recapitalisation. 
The  authorities  must  have  instruments  that  can  be  applied  rapidly  in  such  an  early 
intervention. In some countries the authorities already have the option of splitting up a bank 
and subsequently selling it in parts, or the option of transferring vital parts to a bridge bank 
for  continued  operation.  A  newer  instrument  in  the  international  debate  is  what  is  called 
internal  recapitalisation  –  or  bail-in.  Internal  recapitalisation  means  in  principle  that  debt  is 
converted  into  equity  capital.  This  can  provide  a  basis  for  the  bank  to  continue  operating. 
Creditors have to take the losses and the authorities do not have to provide capital. 
With  such  a  crisis  management  system,  lenders  will  have  a  stronger  financial  incentive  to 
monitor banks’ risk-taking. They can price funding so that it reflects to a further extent the risk 
taken by banks. This will reduce the risk of excess debt growth and lessen the likelihood of 
crisis. 
Conclusion 
As  I  mentioned  by  way  of  introduction,  our  most  important  task  in  the  work  on  financial 
stability  is  to  contribute  to  containing  imbalances  and  secure  a  robust  financial  system. 
Prevention  is  thus  a  key  component  of  the  work:  that  is  to  say  prevention  by  means  of  a 
sound,  general  framework  that  does  not stimulate  risk-taking  among  financial  market 
participants; prevention through surveillance of financial imbalances and through active use 
of instruments when we see clear signs of a build-up of serious imbalances. 
It is unlikely that we will be fully immune to financial instability. But with solid work in the area 
of prevention we will be better poised, also in turbulent times. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
A. House prices deflated by the consumer price index. Index 2000=100. Sources: Association of 
Norwegian Real Estate Agents, ECON Pöyry, Finn.no, Association of Real Estate Agency Firms 
and Statistics Norway. 
B. Corporate credit, mainland Norway (C3)/mainland GDP. Index 2000=100. Source: Statistics 
Norway.  
C. Market funding and other debt excluding deposits in Norwegian-owned banks and covered 
bond mortgage companies. As a percentage of total assets. Source: Norges Bank. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
