Lim Hng Kiang: Singapore’s key role in Asia 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 8th Annual Citi Asia Pacific Investor 
Conference 2011, Singapore, 16 February 2011. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning and a very warm welcome to everyone here today. It is my pleasure 
1. 
to join you here at the 8th Citi Asia Pacific Investor Conference.  
2. 
This  conference  is  taking  place  at  a  time  when  the  global  economic  recovery  is 
picking up pace. Against this backdrop, there will be many opportunities to be explored. I am 
confident that this conference will provide an excellent platform for participants to share ideas 
and build networks. 
3. 
The  world’s  economic  landscape  has  been  re-shaped  since  the  recent  global 
financial crisis. The recent crisis was said to be the worst since the Great Depression of the 
1930s. Today, the advanced economies which were at the epicenter of the crisis still face 
headwinds  in  their  recovery.  In  the  United  States,  economic  recovery  remains  fragile  after 
two  rounds  of  quantitative  easing  measures.  In  the  Euro-zone,  concerns  over  sovereign 
debts  have  yet  to  subside.  There  are  still  uncertainties  in  the  horizon  for  these  advanced 
economies. 
4. 
This time, Asia is at the forefront of the global recovery. Asia’s resilience, built up 
over the years since the Asian Financial Crisis, has enabled us to weather this crisis better. 
Many Asian economies rebounded quickly and strongly from the crisis. Following the onset 
of  the  crisis,  policymakers  in  Asia  took  prompt  actions  to  stabilise  their  economies,  using 
measures  such  as  fiscal  stimulus.  In  Singapore’s  case,  our  fiscal  flexibility  allowed  the 
government to introduce a SGD$20.5 billion resilience package in the FY2009 budget to help 
Singaporean businesses and households tide over the economic difficulties. This also helped 
strengthen our economy’s long term competitiveness.  
5. 
Starting  from  a  relatively  stronger  position,  Asia’s  role  in  the  global  economy  will 
become  more  important  as  we  continue  to  build  on  our  strengths.  Looking  ahead,  Asia’s 
economic prospects look promising, although the region is still at risk from external shocks. 
The IMF estimated that GDP growth for Asia will settle at a more sustainable 7 percent in 
2011.  However,  Asia  as  a  region  remains  inter-connected  with  other  major  economies 
through trade and financial linkages. Therefore, Asia is not insulated from external shocks. 
But Asian foreign policymakers have been quick to respond. To reduce reliance on exports, 
many Asian countries have taken measures to rebalance their economies towards domestic 
demand. The growing Asian demand will help support the global economic recovery; and in 
the longer term, contribute to the growth of our global economy. 
6. 
Going  forward,  it  is  widely  expected  that  Asia  will  continue  to  lead  the  global 
recovery. Investors are confident of Asia’s prospects due to sound economic fundamentals 
and 
investment 
opportunities. In particular, infrastructure financing is likely to be a major driver of demand for 
investments.  The  Asian  Development  Bank  estimated  that  USD$8  trillion  worth  of 
infrastructure  spending  is  needed  in  the  10  years  leading  up  to  2020  to  support  Asia’s 
growth. The demand for capital investments driven by the growth in Asia’s real economy will 
support the development of the region’s capital markets. As investors continue to invest in 
Asia, the depth, accessibility and efficiency of Asia’s capital markets will continue to improve. 
fiscal  strength.  The  booming  Asian  economies  will  present  many 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
With proper balance, the continuing inflows of funds, improvements in capital markets and 
growth in the real economy will create a self-reinforcing virtuous circle. 
7. 
Along  with  the  rise  of  Asia,  Singapore  will  continue  to  enhance  our  position  as  a 
Global-Asia  financial  and  business  hub.  As  a  well-connected  international  financial  centre, 
Singapore  can  be  the  base  for  global  players  to  tap  into  opportunities  offered  by  a  rising 
Asia. To do that, we will build on our strengths in areas such as trading, asset management 
and  infrastructure  financing.  We  will  also  continue  to  emphasise  the  importance  of 
strengthening  risk  management,  enhancing  transparency,  as  well  as  build  depth  and 
diversity in the offering of financial products and services. Let me cover these areas in turn. 
8. 
First,  in  the  area  of  strengthening  risk  management.  In  the  context  of  the  capital 
markets,  we  have  been  building  the  necessary  infrastructure  to  help  market  participants 
better manage their risks. There has been greater concern over counterparty risks since the 
financial crisis. This fear of counterparty default dented global trading and interbank lending 
activities.  To  allow  market  participants  to  better  manage  their  counterparty  risks,  the 
Singapore Exchange launched a new clearing service for OTC financial derivatives in 2010. 
This is the first such service in Asia. 10 international and local banks have since signed up 
with  SGX  to  clear  their  OTC  financial  derivatives,  and  there  are  intentions  to  expand  the 
product  suite  going  forward.  This  initiative  also  enhances  our  role  as  a  regional  risk 
management centre.  
9. 
In May last year, MAS published a consultation paper on amendments to the Code 
on  Collective  Investment  Scheme.  Among  other  things,  there  are  proposals  to  introduce  a 
number  of  measures  to  address  counterparty  risks.  For  instance,  MAS  has  proposed  that 
managers  may  only  enter  into  OTC  financial  derivative  transactions  with  counterparties 
subject  to  prudential  supervision.  If  the  financial  derivative  transaction  is  performed  on  an 
exchange  where  the  clearing  house  performs  a  central  counterparty  role,  the  counterparty 
risk can be taken as zero. MAS will be publishing its response to the consultation paper in 
due course.  
10. 
Singapore is also a key risk management hub for the commodities business. We are 
Asia’s  leading  OTC  commodity  derivatives  trading  hub,  accounting  for  more  than  50%  of 
Asia’s  volume.  There  is  also  a  confluence  of  users  and  suppliers  of  commodities  risk 
management  solutions  in  Singapore.  Apart  from  the  critical  mass  of  global  commodities 
traders, many global banks have also based their Asian commodities business in Singapore. 
These  banks  provide  sophisticated  risk  management  and  hedging  services  to  the  regional 
corporates. 
11. 
Let me now turn to how to enhance transparency. Sound corporate governance is 
fundamental to a successful disclosure-based regime. The financial crisis has highlighted the 
importance of risk management oversight at the Board level and sparked increased global 
discussions on the need for better corporate governance practices. In December last year, 
MAS  published  its  response  to  the  consultation  feedback  on  corporate  governance 
regulations and guidelines. The enhanced rules and guidelines underscore the important role 
played by the Board in overseeing the soundness of the financial institutions. 
12. 
MAS  has  also  been  promoting  improvements  in  the  disclosure  and  quality  of 
information available to investors. Since the third quarter of last year, financial institutions are 
required  to  provide  Product  Highlight  Sheets  when  offering  investment  products  to  retail 
investors.  This  will  provide  brief  highlights,  including  an  overview  of  product  features  and 
risks,  and  applies  to  products  that  are  accompanied  by  prospectuses,  including  exchange 
traded funds, asset-backed securities and structured notes. Since January 2010, real estate 
investment trusts (REITS) have also been required to hold annual general meetings (AGMs). 
These  mandatory  AGMs  provide  an  important  channel  for  communication  between  REIT 
managers and investors. This will also increase transparency and raise the accountability of 
REIT managers to investors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Last but not least, we remain committed to building diversity in Singapore’s financial 
13. 
markets.  We  will  continue  to  provide  a  conducive  business  environment  that  encourages 
innovation. On this front, we have seen increased diversity, both in terms of product offerings 
as  well  as  in  the  issuers.  In  the  area  of  product  offerings,  for  example,  we  have  seen  an 
increase in the offering of commodity-related financial products. The Singapore Commodity 
Exchange  launched  a  Robusta  coffee  futures  contract  in  April  last  year.  The  Singapore 
Mercantile  Exchange  launched  in  August  last  year  also  provides  a  platform  for  trading  a 
diversified basket of commodities including futures and options contracts on precious metals, 
agriculture commodities and energy. We have also replicated the success of the real estate 
investment  trusts  model  for  the  infrastructure  sector,  further  adding  to  the  diversity  of  our 
capital markets. 
14. 
On top of the increased diversity in product offerings, we are also encouraged by the 
increased diversity of issuers coming to tap into the depth and liquidity of our capital markets. 
Last  year,  we  saw  the  first  Russian  debt  issue  in  the  Singapore  market  when  VTB  Bank 
launched its Sing Dollar Eurobond here. This paves the way for other highly rated Russian 
issuers  to  access  our  markets.  In  the  area  of  Islamic  finance,  a  number  of  international 
players have also tapped our markets for their shariah-compliant instruments. They include 
Saudi Arabia’s Al Rajhi Group1 and Malaysia’s Khazanah Nasional2. In November last year, 
Sabana also launched the first shariah-compliant Real Estate Investment Trust in Singapore, 
which is also the world’s largest shariah-compliant REIT. 
15. 
Singapore plays a key role as a gateway to Asia, facilitating capital and investment 
flows. As a  regional financial hub, the developments in Singapore’s capital markets reflect 
the growing vibrancy, diversity, and sophistication of Asia’s capital markets. 
16. 
To  conclude,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  outlook  for  Asia  is  positive.  Although  the 
region’s  growth  is  expected  to  settle  to  a  more  sustainable  pace,  Asia  will  remain  at  the 
forefront  of  the  global  recovery.  Despite  facing  challenges  from  large  capital  inflows  and 
inflation, I am confident that Asia’s policy-makers will make appropriate policy adjustments in 
order to achieve long term sustainable growth.  
17. 
On this note, I wish you a fruitful and successful conference. Thank you.  
                                                 
1  Al  Rajhi  Group  and  Keppel  T&T  announced  a  joint  venture  agreement  to  establish  an  asset  management 
company to manage the world's first Shariah-compliant data centre fund – Securus Data Property Fund. The 
fund's initial closing was achieved in June 2010 at US$100 million with institutional investors from the Middle 
East and Asia. 
2  Khazanah Nasional Berhad issued its inaugural Singapore Dollar sukuk amounting to S$1.5 billion in August 
2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
