Inia Naiyaga: Exchange rate issues, monetary policy and inflation and 
more 
Response by Mr Inia Naiyaga, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the USP Fiji 
Update, Suva, 16 September 2011. 
 Professor Biman Prasad and his Team at USP 
The Diplomatic Corp 
Distinguished Speakers 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
A  very  good  morning  to  you  all.  Thank  you  for  the  kind  invitation  to  respond  to  the  three 
papers  that  have  just  been  presented  today.  I  also  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  all  the 
authors of the paper for their efforts in preparing their papers and also to Professor Biman’s 
Team for the excellent arrangements for this event.  
My  response  will  be  on  the  issues  relating  to  the  exchange  rate,  monetary  policy  and 
inflation, Fiji’s economic performance and some exchange control issues.  
1. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
2. 
a. 
Exchange rate issues 
There has been a growing tendency with empirical support towards more flexibility in 
the  choice  of  exchange  rate  arrangement,  globally.  However,  a  more  flexible 
exchange rate does not necessarily boost investor confidence as we have seen that 
most developing countries are currently trying to cope with the volatility of exchange 
rates. The pros and cons of moving to a more flexible exchange rate regime 
should be considered carefully.  
The  Reserve  Bank  reviews  its  exchange  rate  policy  to  ascertain  its  effectiveness 
and  appropriateness  in  supporting  its  twin  objectives  of  monetary  policy  –  that  is 
maintaining low inflation and maintaining an adequate level of foreign reserves. The 
Fiji  dollar  is  pegged  to  a  basket  of  five  currencies  (US  dollar,  Australian  dollar, 
New Zealand dollar, Japanese yen and the Euro). The Reserve Bank assessed and 
evaluated the possibility of a flexible exchange rate regime with technical assistance 
from the International Monetary Fund last year. The move towards greater flexibility 
remains  in  consideration  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  While  the  benefits  of  a  more 
flexible  exchange  rate  regime  are  clear,  the  timing  needs  to  be  carefully 
considered.  
We note the finding in Dr Jayaraman’s paper on the impact of Fiji’s exchange rate 
pass  through  to  inflation.  We  noted  that  the  conclusion  of  the  paper  is  in  line 
with  our  internal  assessment  of  the  exchange  rate  pass  through  effect.  The 
paper concludes that during the post coup period, a depreciation of Fiji’s domestic 
currency by 1 percent raises domestic prices by 0.37 percent, similar to our internal 
assessment of 0.4 percent.  
Monetary policy and inflation 
Regarding Dr Patrick’s paper on RBF’s commitment to its monetary policy objectives 
given the current economic background – The RBF remains committed to its twin 
objectives – that is to maintain low inflation and an adequate level of foreign 
reserves.  Inflation  has  been  high  at  the  moment  and  reached  10.4 percent  last 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
month. As we all know, the inflation outcome has been influenced by external 
and policy related factors – most of which are beyond the control of monetary 
policy. Imported inflation alone accounts for more than 60 percent of our domestic 
inflation outcome. With the current demand side inflationary pressures weak at the 
moment,  it  is  more  appropriate  that  monetary  policy  remain  accommodative  to 
support some growth in the economy while at the same time vigilant on the potential 
second-round impact on inflation. Inflation is forecast to subside to 7 percent by the 
end of this year and further to 4.5 percent by the end of next year.  
On to core inflation – in principle monetary policy should only respond to persistent 
price movements. The Reserve Bank has two core inflation measures which are the 
trimmed  mean  and  excluding  food  and  energy  items  inflation,  both  are  widely 
accepted  and  used  in  many  central  banks  to  exclude  temporary  price  pressures. 
Universally, it is hard to determine when that “temporary” impact will come to an end 
as there are a lot of factors that come into play at almost the same time. In Fiji, the big 
increase in food inflation from June 2010 to June 2011 to 11.3 percent was attributed 
to many factors. If we compare food inflation from June 2010 to December 2010, food 
prices  only  rose  by  around  2.0 percent  which  can  be  regarded  as  quite  stable.  As 
such most of the increase in food inflation only came about this year on account of the 
VAT rate change and the high food prices noted across the world during this period. 
By  January  2012,  we  should  see  the  impact  of  VAT  fall  from  the  core  inflation 
measure. As to the impact of high world food prices, as soon as prices of these food 
commodities normalise abroad, core inflation should return to normal levels.  
It was mentioned that Fiji had high rates of inflation by the middle of this year even 
after accounting for the impact of higher electricity tariffs and the increase in VAT 
which came into effect in November last year and January this year respectively. It 
was  also  mentioned  that  Seychelles  which  despite  having  a  larger  devaluation 
managed to bring down inflation to the same rate as Vanuatu. It is important to note 
that unlike Seychelles, Fiji’s major trading partners are Australia and New Zealand 
which  are  the  major  source  markets  for  our  imports  of  food,  beverages  and 
manufactured  goods.  The  strong  appreciation  of  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
dollar  over  the  year  has  exacerbated  the  impact  of  already  higher  import  prices 
feeding  through  to  domestic  inflation.  These  explain  the  large  difference  in  the 
inflation  rate  in  Fiji  by  mid  2011  even  after  accounting  for  the  VAT  and  electricity 
price increases. On Vanuatu, we find their low inflation rate presented this morning 
very intriguing and we will talk to our counterpart about their experience.  
Domestic economic performance 
The  presentation  by  the  IMF  Regional  Resident  Representative  –  Dr.  Yongzheng 
clearly  highlights  the  performance  of  Pacific  Island  countries  particularly  Fiji 
since the global downturn in 2008 coupled with the renewed risks and policy 
challenges  given  current  developments  especially 
the  advanced 
economies.  
We  also  agree  that  Fiji  economy  had  a  weaker  recovery  in  2010  from  the 
contraction  in  2009.  While  tourism  and  manufacturing  picked  up,  in  2010,  the 
sugar industry declined. However, other exports did pick up significantly in 2010 due 
to a rebound in global demand and also improvement in terms of trade for certain 
resource commodities such as gold, forestry and fish products.  
We need to note that the significant migration of skilled labour force has affected 
Fiji’s growth potential, which may explain why the recovery in the Fiji economy  
– despite its advantages – to some extent has been slower that most PICs. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
b. 
c. 
3. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
2 
 d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
4. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
The paper also raised some valuable points for Fiji and the Government has 
already  taken  steps  to  implement  some  of  these.  The  establishment  of  the 
Land Bank is to encourage landowners to deposit land so that it can be leased out 
under  long  term  tenure  for  commercial  purpose  use.  The  response  from  the  land 
owners  has  been  encouraging  so  far  with  the  area  of  land  deposited  in  the  Land 
Bank surpassing the 2011 target in June. Sugar reforms are also underway with 
the Government taking the lead role in addition to allocating around $122 million in 
the  2011  Budget  to  support  the  sugar  industry  directly.  Apart  from  the  sugar 
industry, there is an urgent need to fast track other public sector reforms to ensure 
long-term macroeconomic stability.  
The  good  news  is  that  a  stronger  rebound  in  our  domestic  economy  is 
envisaged for this year with growth expected across most sectors except for 
the  construction  sector.  The  current  performance  of  most  sectors  to  date  have 
been  mixed,  with  positive  performances  reflected  in  the  tourism  and  related 
industries although other sectors remained weak. The economy is expected to grow 
by  2.7 percent  in  2011,  however,  this  figure  is  currently  under  review.  The  new 
figure is expected to be announced during the 2012 Budget Address.  
As  mentioned  in  the  presentation,  the  growth  in  remittances  is  encouraging  and 
should  support  consumer  spending,  particularly  in  a  time  of  sluggish  economic 
growth.  Looking  ahead,  we  agree  that  it  would  be  prudent  for  such  funds  to 
also  be  directed  towards  investment  spending.  Ongoing  financial  literacy 
education  by  the  RBF,  financial  institutions  and  others,  could  encourage 
families  who  are  recipients  of  remittance  funds,  to  invest  these  money  in 
income and revenue generating activities.  
The views expressed on the effects of devaluation are noted. It is important to 
recognise that the positive effects of the devaluation were partially overshadowed by 
the downturn in global demand and the Fijian economy would have been in a much 
worse position now without the adjustment. We continue to encourage our exports 
sector to take advantage of this competitive gain by producing more to then be able 
to export more to other countries.  
Exchange controls and other clarifications 
A statement made earlier by Dr Patrick regarding exchange controls needs to 
be  corrected.  The  Reserve  Bank  assures  all  foreign  investors  that  all  funds 
introduced  into  Fiji  including  all  profits  are  free  to  be  repatriated  at  any  time.  At 
times,  the  outflow  is  staggered  for  large  amounts,  like  in  the  case  of  commercial 
banks. Over the last 6 years, a total of $1.05 billion was approved as outflows for 
profit remittances.  
In responding to the concerns on the compulsory surrender of foreign exchange, the 
Exchange  Control  Act  states  that  all  foreign  exchange  are  to  be  sold  to  a  foreign 
exchange dealer. However, in order to cover for exchange rate risks, we have 
been allowing companies and businesses to hold foreign currency accounts 
to meet overseas payments – the total in these accounts currently stands at 
$100 million.  
Regarding  our  foreign  reserves  cover,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  now  targeting  
4–5 months  of  imports  cover,  higher  than  the  standard  benchmark  of 
3 months.  The  standard  benchmark  of  foreign  reserves  is  under  study  at  the 
moment especially at the IMF given the growing complexity of our financial system 
and  the  associated  increased  vulnerability  factors.  We  are  doing  well  and  at  the 
moment,  our  foreign  reserves  level  at  $1.6 billion  is  sufficient  to  cover  around 
4.8 months of goods and non-factor services.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
d. 
Minor observation – It was noted in the first paper that we have six banks – we have 
four commercial banks and a development bank.  
Conclusion 
With the current challenges in our economic environment both globally and domestically, the 
Reserve Bank has been proactive in its roles to support our economic recovery. We 
have eased our monetary policy stance and more recently we have been conducting moral 
suasion with the commercial banks in an effort to stimulate investment and credit especially 
to the priority sectors and support growth in domestic demand. We have and will continue to 
relax exchange controls in order to support overseas current payments which are conducive 
for  business  growth.  This  will  also  instil  confidence  to  the  investors  and  encourage 
investment  as  well.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  rationalised  and  introduced  the  Import 
Substitution  and  Export  Finance  Facility  which  all  exporters  and  businesses  may 
access to boost exports and reduce imports. Energy renewable projects also qualify for this 
facility. $40 million is available under this scheme and the current usage is $20 million. The 
RBF  lends  funds  to  commercial  banks,  credit  institutions  and  FDB  at  2 percent  and  these 
lending institutions are allowed to charge interest rates up to a maximum of 6 percent.  
The current Government’s concerted effort is vital and timely and we also support the call 
made  by  this  panel  for  more  variants  on  fiscal  and  incomes  policies  given  the 
limitations  faced  by  the  monetary  authorities.  Nevertheless,  a  more  positive  outlook 
remains ahead with the reforms taking place and as the current mix of monetary and fiscal 
policies are aligned.  
From  the  presentations  that  we  have  heard  so  far,  investment  is  the  key.  We  need  to 
address all the obstacles to investment and address them accordingly. We need to ensure 
that the environment is conducive as well. It is also important that Fiji attracts the right type of 
investors.  
We have heard a lot of issues and questions so far. What we need is solutions – practicable 
and relevant solutions that can be implemented.  
Finally, I would like to add that this type of dialogue is healthy and provides an excellent platform 
for exchange of ideas so that we can all work together and move forward for a better Fiji. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
