Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Whither Europe after the crisis? 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  inauguration  of  the  Academic  Year  2011,  Institutions  Markets  Technologies 
(IMT) Lucca Institute for Advanced Studies, Lucca, 11 March 2011. 
 Introduction  
To understand how Europe will develop after the crisis, let me start with two observations. 
First, the crisis has caught Europe unprepared. Second, Europe has, in a sense, responded 
to the crisis in a surprising way.  
The  lesson  to  be  drawn  is  that  Europe  is  still  evolving,  growing,  continuing  on  its  path  of 
integration. This is not happening, however, according to some pre-defined, agreed plan, but 
rather in response to the challenges it faces, which in some cases are likely to endanger the 
very existence of the Union. Europe moves forward when it finds itself at risk of taking a step 
back. At that point the costs of immobilism exceed those of mobility. It manages to find the 
energy needed to overcome the political difficulties of making another step forward. That step 
is difficult because it requires a decision of all members – now 27 – who together are forced 
to  accept  that  the  costs  of  losing  the  common  good  are  higher  than  the  benefits  of 
maintaining their national prerogatives, often more symbolic than substantive.  
Europe’s integration is therefore largely unpredictable because it depends on the challenges 
and shocks facing European society, and on its ability to understand that the step forward 
brings more advantages than immobilism.  
Such unpredictability is the logical consequence of the original route that the EU countries 
are  following,  which  neither  takes  inspiration  from  existing  institutional  and  other  political 
realities,  like  the  United  States,  and  nor  does  it  seek  to  apply  pre-defined  constitutional 
models. Rather, it follows the principle of subsidiarity, according to which only those powers 
and competences are centralised which cannot be exercised more effectively at local level. 
This principle cannot be applied theoretically. It is experience that permits an assessment of 
how the national implementation of certain competences may lead to an inefficient outcome. 
An  awareness  of  the  need  to  assign  powers  to  a  European  institution  –  powers  which 
previously were exercised primarily at national level – can only arise after the failure of the 
decentralised approach. This kind of choice cannot however be taken for granted because 
no institution, national or international, readily surrenders its powers to another body.  
For example, it is not possible to determine in theory if the euro area is an optimum currency 
area  according  to  pre-established  objective  criteria.  A  thorough  analysis  would  probably 
stipulate the opposite. But experience has shown that the euro area is certainly not one in 
which it is an optimum arrangement to have 16 different currencies that float freely against 
each  other  or  are  tied  by  intervention  mechanisms.  The  experience  of  the  European 
Monetary  System  and  the  currency  turmoil  of  the  1980s  and  1990s  were  instrumental  in 
establishing  that  the  transition  to  a  single  currency  was  needed,  particularly  to  avoid  the 
collapse  of  the  Single  Market,  from  which  all  the  countries  have  benefited.  The  “cold” 
operation, attempted with the Werner Plan several decades earlier, at the end of the Bretton 
Woods system, did not and could not succeed because it was too much theory and too little 
“policy”. Without the failure of Bretton Woods and the European Monetary System, we would 
not have the euro today. There would have been no need.  
Proceeding on the path of European integration in this empirical way has two risks. The first 
is  that,  on  one  hand,  the  failure  of  the  existing  institutional  framework  must  be  sufficiently 
obvious  to  convince  Member  States  of  the  need  to  take  another  step  forward,  but  on  the 
other  hand  it  should  not  be  so  devastating  as  to  put  into  question  the  entire  Community 
structure. The second risk is that the constraints that are applied with each step forward in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  integration  process  to  define  its  boundaries  should  not  be  irremovable  to  the  point  of 
making the next step impracticable. That next step could in turn become necessary in the 
future if the preceding proved to be insufficient. 
I would like to develop these thoughts in three ways: first, remembering how Europe behaved 
during the crisis, then, considering the lessons to be drawn from the integration process, and 
finally,  thinking  about  the  long  term  and  the  path  that  has  to  be  taken  by  economic  and 
monetary integration.  
Europe facing the crisis  
My first observation is that the crisis has caught Europe – by which I mean the euro area – 
unprepared. The institutional design of the euro did not take into account the possibility of a 
crisis  like  the  current  one.  In  some  ways  it  is  understandable.  Such  crises  happen  rarely. 
Indeed,  the  specific  characteristics  of  the  euro  area,  having  a  single  currency  with  no 
centralised  taxing  power  nor  a  single  system  of  financial  regulation,  eluded  few  people. 
However,  it  was  felt  from  the  outset  that  the  incompleteness  could  be  offset  by  rules  of 
conduct and disciplinary procedures aimed at preventing crises. It was expected – perhaps 
naïvely – that the rules would be respected.  
But  then,  what  was  the  alternative?  To  wait,  as  some  had  suggested,  until  the  necessary 
conditions were created for a more complete fiscal and political integration before proceeding 
to  monetary  integration?  That  would  risk  delaying  monetary  integration  and  seeing  a 
repetition of the turbulence, and perhaps led to an implosion of the system and of the Single 
Market. It was then decided to make a start to Monetary Union without taking into account 
the possibility of serious financial or budgetary crises of the Member States. 
This type of behaviour is not surprising. It characterises innovation in general, even in the 
institutional  field.  The  first  cars  did  not  have  advanced  safety  systems  such  as  reinforced 
bumpers or air bags to protect drivers. Neither could they have been developed and patented 
before the first car appeared on the road. People had trust in the prudence of drivers, in the 
slow speed of the first cars and presumably believed that the limited number of cars on the 
road would keep accidents to a minimum. After realising that the accident rate was far higher 
than expected, the car makers decided to develop better systems of protection and the public 
authorities decided to regulate the issuing of driving licences.  
The experience of the first ten years of euro has shown that even with strict rules of conduct 
and coordination mechanisms the members of a monetary union may find themselves in a 
financial and budgetary crisis. The reasons vary. One is the circumvention of the rules, as in 
the  case  of  Greece,  which  managed  to  double  its  public  deficit  for  many  months  without 
notification.  A  second  reason  is  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances  in  the  private 
sector,  which  in  the  event  of  a  crisis  can  become  public  debt.  Under  these  conditions  a 
country  may  lose  access  to  the  financial  markets.  What  is  described  in  the  literature  as  a 
“sudden  stop”  in  the  influx  of  capital  occurs.  This  phenomenon  is  typical  of  developing 
countries,  which  borrow  in  foreign  currency  to  facilitate  the  inflow  of  capital.  In  advanced 
countries  this  type  of  problem  is  rare  because  the  debt  is  generally  denominated  in  the 
national  currency,  and  if  need  be  the  central  bank  moves  in  and  funds  the  Treasury, 
replacing  private  operators.  The  credit  risk  of  the  sovereign  issuer  is  avoided,  and 
transformed into a risk of monetisation of public debt and therefore of inflation.  
The euro area is in a particular position even for the constraints that are applied every time a 
step towards further integration is taken. In the case of Monetary Union the Treaty contains 
at least two provisions that do not make it possible to take the next step towards fiscal union 
without a further change to the Treaty itself. 
The  first  is  the  prohibition  imposed  on  the  central  bank  to  directly  finance  the  budgets  of 
Member States, as this would create an incentive for them to pursue deficit spending in the 
expectation that this will be financed through the common tax of inflation. The other provision 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  the  Treaty  is  the  so-called  “no-bail  out”  clause,  which  forbids  member  countries  from 
assuming  the  debts  of  other  countries,  transferring  resources  to  repay  them.  These  two 
provisions entail, in fact, the full separation between the monetary power, exercised at EU 
level, and the fiscal power of the Member States. In other words, it’s as if the public debt of 
the  euro  area  countries  were  denominated  in  foreign  currency,  outside  the  control  of  the 
country itself, with no possibility of being monetised. 
These constraints were put in the Treaty precisely to discipline the governments of member 
countries  so  that  they  avoid  excessive  borrowing  at  the  risk  of  them  losing  access  to  the 
financial market. Returning to the analogy above, it was decided to create a euro without air 
bags or safety net to cope with a country’s public or private financing crisis. It was believed 
that, to avoid crises, the member countries had sufficient budgetary disciplinary mechanisms 
in the form of the Stability and Growth Pact.  
Experience has shown however that even with the best of intentions, with prevention policies 
and  strict  controls,  road  accidents  occur  and  may  be  caused  either  by  inappropriate 
behaviour  or  by  external  factors.  Without  appropriate  safeguards,  not  only  do  those  who 
drive recklessly may be injured, but also those who happen to be passing by.  
Outside of Europe, the crisis was deemed by some as showing that the euro experiment was 
a failure. A number of scenarios were foreseen in turn: the implosion of the euro, a split-up 
into several parts and the exit of some countries. 
Evidently the reasons underlying the creation of the euro have not been understood. For this 
reason, the reaction of the European institutions has evoked surprise among those who had 
prematurely announced the death of the euro. On the other hand, continuing the analogy that 
I made earlier, giving up the euro when the first crisis comes would be like taking up cycling 
again after having your first accident with a car.  
Contrary  to  what  was  suggested  by  those  who  perhaps  had  an  interest  in  European 
countries  returning  to  pedalling  rather  than  driving  fast  cars,  the  engineers  in  Europe  got 
down to work to repair the car and make it safer, but also to ensure that the drivers are more 
cautious, with the penalty of costly fines. 
In less than 12 months, the institutional structure of the euro has changed dramatically. It is 
interesting to look back at where the euro was 12 months ago. In less than a year, the euro 
area countries have approved the €110 billion rescue package for Greece, against a drastic 
fiscal and structural adjustment programme; approved the creation of a European Financial 
Stability  Facility  with  €440  billion;  decided  to  amend  the  Treaty  to  create  a  permanent 
mechanism, inspired by the International Monetary Fund. The Stability and Growth Pact has 
been amended to constrain fiscal policy more and make sanction more automatic. A system 
of macroeconomic surveillance has been created to identify and counteract the payment and 
competitiveness  imbalances  within  the  euro  area.  Several  countries  have  adopted  serious 
measures of fiscal adjustment and implemented structural reforms. Meanwhile, the European 
Union has set up three new supervisory authorities: for securities and markets, for banking, 
and for insurance, as well as a European Systemic Risk Board. Another important aspect, to 
which I will return, is strengthening the coordination between the countries of the euro area, 
at the highest levels of government. 
A year ago, who could imagine that all these decisions would be taken? Certainly not those 
who  foresaw  the  disintegration  of  the  euro  and  did  not  understand  the  base  on  which 
Monetary  Union  was  built.  Fortunately,  many  of  them  changed  their  minds  and  no  longer 
consider that the euro is at stake, but rather the solvency of some of the member countries. 
A  surprise  was  not  only  the  reaction  to  the  crisis,  but  also  the  manner  and  timing  of  the 
decision-taking. Often late and under the pressure of the market.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Lessons of the crisis for European integration  
Without retracing all the steps that have characterised the last few months, some important 
aspects can be highlighted that can help us understand how Europe will evolve in the future.  
The first is the discovery by the political authorities and citizens of the euro area members, of 
what the founding fathers such as Kohl and Mitterrand, but also Thatcher, had sensed from 
the outset, namely that monetary union is a political union. It took a crisis to understand this, 
but only the crisis made us realise that the failure of the euro, its disintegration, would hurt 
everyone,  poor  and  rich  countries  alike,  creditors  and debtors.  Sharing the  same  currency 
inextricably  links  the  economic  destinies  of  the  member  countries.  It  means  suffering  the 
consequences of the behaviour of others, even when they are undisciplined. We cannot look 
away,  as  was  done  when  the  currencies  of  other  countries  were  allowed  to  devalue  in  an 
effort  to  regain  competitiveness.  We  need  to  restore  order  and  prevent  divergences, 
otherwise we shall be affected directly. We cannot even wait for someone else, such as the 
financial  markets,  to  discipline  our  neighbour,  neither  can  we  threaten  to  push  it  into 
bankruptcy, because the contagion would be immediate.  
The  analogy  of  the  joint  ownership  that  Carlo  Azeglio  Ciampi  has  often  applied  to  the 
European currency has never been so pertinent as in recent months. The awareness that the 
euro is a common good, to be safeguarded at all costs, has been repeatedly confirmed and 
led to courageous decisions.  
On the other hand, the public has been mobilised in support of joint intervention only when it 
perceived  the  possibility  of  losing  the  benefits  that  come  from  the  acquis  communautaire. 
This  explains  why  on  several  occasions  over  the  last  year  political  leaders  of  various 
countries have said that the euro was in danger. This was aimed at building a consensus for 
measures which in normal times would have been very difficult to accept. This approach to 
the problems has fuelled tensions on financial markets and in the end required interventions 
on an even broader scale. Instead of a broad and definitive plan, which would have solved 
the problem at its root, actions were taken which filled the gaps, one after the other, when it 
was needed. 
A second important aspect that has characterised the action in recent months concerns the 
difficulty  of  changing  the  European  institutional  structure  towards  greater  integration.  As  I 
mentioned  before,  monetary  unification  has  been  designed  in  such  a  way  that  it  does  not 
involve the transfer of other powers to the European level. Such a transfer is not possible 
without starting a complex procedure for amending the Treaties. This makes it very difficult to 
make the next steps. This is why the financial support created to help countries in difficulty 
(the Financial Stability Facility) has been defined so as to prevent it from being considered as 
a budget transfer mechanism. It will provide funding only at penalty rates and on condition of 
macroeconomic adjustment by the debtor country. Ultimately it became necessary to change 
– even if only one paragraph – the Union treaty. 
A third aspect that has characterised the decisions of recent months is the balance between 
solidarity  with  countries  in  difficulty  and  the  pressures  to  be  exerted  so  that  they  take  the 
necessary  measures  to  correct  the  imbalances.  Agreeing  to  support  countries  in  difficulty 
unconditionally would have fuelled moral hazard. Conversely, refusing to support them risks 
plunging the area into a financial crisis.  
It  is  difficult  to  strike  a  balance,  especially  when  the  economic  and  political  difficulties  are 
inspiring a search for scapegoats, even abroad. It’s easy to nourish nationalist sentiments in 
the countries in difficulty, shifting responsibility to the European institutions for having caused 
the  crisis  or  for  not  having  done  enough  to  prevent  it.  The  ECB,  for  example,  was 
reprimanded for having exacerbated the Irish crisis in November 2010, after demanding for a 
long time that the government swiftly adopt the necessary measures for fiscal consolidation. 
Recently,  a  former  Irish  Prime  Minister  has  even  had  the  honour  of  front  page  headlines 
when he reproached the ECB for not having sufficiently monitored the Irish banking system 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
when  it  is  well  known  that  in  Europe  the  powers  of  prudential  supervision  are  the 
responsibility of the national authorities, a competence that you do not want to give up. 
Faced  with  the  crisis  the  European  institutions  often  find  themselves  playing  the  role  of 
scapegoat. The national press of different countries, unfortunately, tends to pander to anti-
European sentiments and sometimes fuels conflict, without trying to explore the themes or to 
present the opposing viewpoints. 
This crisis has shown the difficulty of dialogue between public opinion in different countries, 
which obviously have access to news through the national media which in turn do not always 
try to present the views of the other party, much less that of European institutions. Such a 
mechanism tends to feed extreme and opposing positions between countries. It hinders the 
search for solutions that benefit the common interest. I think we should reflect further on this 
matter. 
The fourth aspect of this crisis has been a tendency to address and resolve issues mainly 
through an intergovernmental approach, rather than a Community method. This is obviously 
a problem when the common interest of the euro area does not necessarily correspond to 
the sum of national interests. It is one of the reasons why the Council’s decisions have often 
been  taken  at  the  last  minute,  under  pressure  from  the  markets,  when  the  danger  of 
immobilism is evident to all.  
One reason is that the political dimension of Monetary Union does not match the structure of 
European  institutions,  now  27,  and  includes  countries  that  do  not  share  the  conception  of 
common destiny associated with the euro. The European Commission, which considers itself 
a political and not a technical institution, has problems putting forward proposals which only 
concern monetary integration. Often it tends to act as a mediator, replicating the functions of 
the  Council.  The  Council,  in  turn,  does  not  exist  in  the  restricted  composition  of  the  euro 
area,  except  for  the  Eurogroup,  comprising  the  finance  ministers.  The  mechanism  for 
enhanced  cooperation  provided  for  in  the  Treaty  of  Lisbon  is  too  cumbersome.  The 
European  Parliament  seems  to  be  the  only  political  institution  that  aims  to  favour  the 
Community method, but does not have sufficient powers to assert itself. It played a limited 
role in managing the crisis.  
The ECB is the monetary policy institution of the 17 members of the Union that has the ability 
to  take  decisions  quickly  on  the  basis  of  a  common  goal.  It  has  had,  at  the  most  difficult 
moments, to ask the governments and parliaments of the Member States to take decisions in 
line  with  the  challenges  and  objectives  that  they  themselves  were  given  and  with  the 
commitment  to  do  everything  necessary  to  defend  the  currency.  The  national  political 
institutions have not yet, however, incorporated in their decision-making processes the fact 
that  they  share  a  single  currency,  which  requires  new  and  joint  responsibilities.  There  is 
insufficient  capacity  to  “think  European”,  that  is,  to  channel  national  decision-making  in  a 
broader framework, linked in particular to the single currency. For this reason it is necessary 
to  strengthen  the  decision-making  capacity  of  the  Eurogroup  and  extend  it  to  other  fora, 
particularly the heads of state and government of the euro area and perhaps even to labour 
ministers  and  others  which  affect,  for  example,  the  competitiveness  of  the  European 
economy.  
We  should  not  however  ignore  the  fact  that  significant  results  have  been  obtained.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, the euro is in a very different position compared to where it was a year 
ago.  Any  institutional  innovation  is  inevitably  incremental,  as  is  engineering.  It  is  also 
stimulated by the accidents along the way, if one knows how to draw the right lessons. This 
method of working however makes it difficult to draw a definitive framework for the European 
institutional structure, able to bring definitive stability to the system. 
We are expecting important decisions to be taken this month. There is a risk that, as in the 
past,  attempts  may  be  made  to  minimise  the  domestic  political  costs.  The  piecemeal 
approach followed in recent months may be easier for domestic public opinion to digest. But 
the lack of individual measures with respect to the overall size of the problem and market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
expectations may further prolong the uncertainty, as has happened in the past months. This 
may in turn increase the political cost of inaction. It is better at some point to take definitive 
measures that calm markets and convince them that the euro countries are indeed willing to 
do  whatever  is  necessary  to  safeguard  the  financial  stability  of  the  area,  as  their 
governments have been claiming for months. 
One of the problems this crisis has shown is that the political authorities and the markets find 
it difficult to understand each other. On the one hand, markets do not understand why the 
governments  of  European  countries  are  slow  to  adopt  the  necessary  measures  to  solve 
problems, postponing decisions and creating uncertainty about their actual intentions. On the 
other hand, the political authorities often do not understand how the financial markets work; 
they  deeply  despise  them  but  at  the  same  time  depend  on  them  to  finance  their  budgets. 
They  do  not  understand  that  announcements  and  good  intentions  are only  valid  in  normal 
times,  but  when  the  crisis  spreads  the  risk  of  losing  credibility  can  only  be  limited  with 
effective and timely action. They do not understand that market participants are looking for 
profit opportunities, and when they are offered one, they hurl themselves onto the next, in the 
expectation  of  making  a  similar  gain.  This  phenomenon  is  the  source  of  contagion. 
Threatening the markets with retaliation and coercive measures often discourages the more 
stable, long-term investors, while it rewards speculators with short horizons.  
The long period 
The piecemeal approach followed in recent months risks losing sight of the long-term goal. 
The measures may not be completely coherent. We came close to it last autumn, with the 
Franco-German proposal, endorsed by other countries, to make it easier for countries to go 
bankrupt. Fortunately, the idea has not gained acceptance, not only because of the ECB’s 
dislike but also because of the devastating effect it has had on financial markets. It will take 
time to recover from the loss of credibility suffered by Europe with that proposal. 
The proposal was based on the assumption that the best way to discipline governments and 
to ensure sounder public finances is to make it easier for a country to declare bankruptcy. As 
soon as a country has problems with its public finances, it should seek a restructuring of its 
debts or automatically extend its bond maturities as a necessary condition for receiving help 
from European and international institutions. 
This  idea  is  mistaken  for  several  reasons.  Firstly,  it  attributes  the  main  task  of  disciplining 
governments  to  the  financial  markets.  The  markets  –  according  to  its  proponents  –  work 
better if the conditions under which a state may fail are more explicit. This hypothesis – dear 
to many academics – does not however reflect reality. In the private sector bankruptcies are 
possible  and  are  subject  to  regulation,  but  markets  often  incorrectly  assess  the  risk  of 
securities issued by the private sector. The markets were wrong both before and after the 
crisis,  and  continue  to  make  mistakes,  even  with  regard  to  sovereign  risk.  Moreover,  they 
often  behave  inefficiently  and  facilitate  collusion,  especially  when  it  is  possible  to  buy 
derivatives that allow you to “bet” on a country’s bankruptcy, even without having invested in 
it. Giving the market the exclusive power to decide the fate of millions of people seems to me 
quite irresponsible. The recent European decision to limit the possibility of buying derivatives 
to hedge sovereign risk without the underlying security is therefore justified. 
It  is  precisely  because  this  approach  is  wrong  that  the  International  Monetary  Fund  was 
created more than 60 years ago. It intervenes to prevent markets from having the exclusive 
power to declare countries bankrupt, particularly when they are intent on consolidating their 
public finances. It is not clear why Europe should be more masochistic than others and do 
without the tools they have. 
Another  reason  is  that  the  credit  rating  of  a  country  is  not  as  simple  as  that  of  a  private 
company.  It  depends  on  the  ability  and  willingness  of  the  national  authorities  to  tax  and 
spend.  You  cannot  be  sure  that  financial  markets  are  better  equipped  to  assess  such 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
willingness  and  ability.  Experience  shows  the  opposite,  since  the  vast  majority  of  the 
countries that have resorted to the IMF in the last 20 years have also repaid their creditors. 
Moreover, a sovereign default has contagion effects on others. In such conditions it is not 
always easy to make a country go bankrupt if the costs of paying for it are to be borne by the 
rest of the area.  
We need start from the objective, which is to build a stronger euro, based on a more globally 
competitive  economy  and  with  sound  public  finances,  to  reflect  on  possible  long-term 
solutions. I wish to put forward my thoughts in a personal capacity. 
To strengthen the foundations of the single currency it is necessary to encourage virtuous 
behaviour both in the public and private sectors, which are largely the responsibility of the 
Member States. This can be achieved through monitoring processes, peer pressure as in the 
case of the Lisbon agenda, constraints and automatic or semi-automatic rules. Efforts in this 
direction  are  to  be  encouraged,  bearing  in  mind  that  the  more  automatic  the  rules,  the 
greater the devolution of sovereignty.  
This  crisis  has  shown,  however,  that  the  procedures  and  restraints  on  public  and  private 
behaviour  are  not  always  effective.  We  cannot  exclude  a  housing  crisis  in  one  country, 
excessive private debt in another, a cyclical or trend slowdown in yet another, a gradual loss 
of  competitiveness.  We  need  to  avoid  the  same  mistake  as  the  one  committed  in  recent 
years, assuming that crises will not occur.  
Efforts must therefore follow at least two lines. The first is to minimise the risk of crises. The 
second  is  to  minimise  the  impact  of  the  crisis,  in  particular  the  contagion  effect  on  other 
countries.  
The  first  line  of  intervention  is  one  on  which  work  is  being  done  with  great  intensity  and 
therefore I will not dwell on that. It is to strengthen the discipline of and restraints on fiscal 
policies and the behaviour of private operators. The first is obviously easier to do than the 
second. The proposals on the table aim to strengthen existing constraints and procedures via 
monitoring mechanisms and more or less automatic sanctions.  
If the objective is to ensure healthy and robust public finances in the euro area, it cannot be 
achieved only through monitoring procedures and under pressure from the financial markets. 
In my opinion, we have to turn the problem on its head. We need to ask ourselves what it 
takes to prevent countries from getting into a solvency crisis. In other words, if the goal is to 
have  sound  public  finances,  a  country  should  not  be  allowed  to  be  insolvent.  Countries 
belonging to Monetary Union should be prohibited from defaulting or restructuring their debt.  
The best way to prevent euro countries from defaulting is to lay down rules for debt which 
have  constitutional  weight.  These  rules  may  have  Community  status  or  be  incorporated  in 
national constitutions, as is already the case in some countries. But how to make sure that 
such rules are followed? How to make sure that the inevitable margins for discretion are not 
bypassed? 
One way to ensure that the discipline is actually binding is to empower a supranational entity 
in the euro area to issue government bonds for the Member States. The countries would in 
fact no longer have the capacity, technically or politically, to issue public debt on the market. 
This could be a first step towards a single European bond, which would be emitted by the 
supranational agency to finance public budgets of all countries, or those which share similar 
characteristics such as the highest rating. This development would not necessarily require an 
integration of budgetary policies, or therefore an integrated tax system. What is in common is 
just the tap, i.e. an integrated system of securities for issuing on the  market the  proceeds 
from  which  are  then  allocated  to  individual  countries,  according  to  joint  decision-making 
mechanisms.  The  European  Council  of  Ministers,  in  accordance  with  a  procedure  to  be 
specified, should decide how much debt can be issued by the agency as a whole and how to 
distribute it to individual states. In fact, by controlling the volume of emissions, the Council 
would have the power to decide the budgetary balance of individual countries. It might seem 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
at  first  glance  to  be  a  premature  step  in  the  euro  area’s  integration  policy.  In  reality,  the 
current  procedures  already  envisage  the  Council  approving  the  budgets  of  individual 
countries,  as  part  of  the  stability  programmes  presented  each  year  by  them.  Its  opinion  is 
however  not  binding,  while  in  our  case  it  would  indeed  be  so,  through  the  decision  on 
whether to issue debt securities. A key issue is the decision-making mechanism with which 
the  Council  would  approve  the  total  volume  and  that  of  individual  states.  It  is  therefore 
necessary to maintain the overall discipline of the system and avoid having to keep pace with 
financing larger public deficits. On the other hand, countries should have a strong incentive 
to limit the indebtedness of others to avoid becoming “contaminated”. 
I will stop here with this proposal which, I admit, is almost a provocation. Surely there is a 
need for more thought. But the goal must be to make financial crises less likely. 
The second line of action is how to reduce the impact of a crisis in one country on the rest of 
Monetary Union. Crises in fact cannot be ruled out, in particular as regards the private sector, 
and even phases of low growth or relative decline of one country compared with the rest of 
the area. What matters is to prevent one country’s problems from becoming problems for the 
others. 
Crisis contagion mainly passes through the financial system, particularly banking. Europe’s 
financial  system  is  sufficiently  integrated  to  transmit  impulses  related  to  a  local  crisis,  but 
insufficiently diversified to permit its mitigation. Moreover, given the decentralised structure of 
the regulatory and supervisory systems, the impact of a banking crisis is ultimately absorbed 
by  the  national  budgets.  The  Irish  crisis  shows  the  danger  of  a  fragile  banking  system 
becoming interwoven with fragile public finances. 
To reduce the dependence of the euro area as a whole on local events the link between a 
country’s  public  finances  and  its  national  banking  system  needs  to  be  severed.  This  link 
stems  from  the  assumption  –  mistaken  as  we  shall  see  –  that  regulation  and  prudential 
supervision must be carried out at national level because ultimately the country’s taxpayers 
have to bear the costs of any bank failures.  
The crisis has shown that this assumption is not true. The errors and negligence arising from 
Irish  regulation  and  supervision  are  paid  by  the  taxpayers  of  that  country  –  but  they  also 
expose  others  to  enormous  risks.  The  whole  of  Europe’s  banking  system  is  influenced  by 
what  happens  in  that  country.  For  example,  the  opaque  way  in  which  last  spring’s  bank 
stress tests were carried out in Ireland has weakened the credibility of the stress tests in all 
the countries. In a truly integrated market supervision cannot remain decentralised because 
the decisions that supervisors take do not only affect national taxpayers.  
The current decentralised system does not sufficiently penalise free riding, i.e. attracting to 
your country one part of the industry by lowering the level of regulation. In reality, taxpayers 
also benefit because the development of the financial sector, encouraged by deregulation, 
contributes to increased tax revenues that fund government spending. Only at critical stages, 
when  a  country’s  financial  system  is  in  trouble,  do  taxpayers  find  themselves  having  to 
compensate for the shortfall in tax revenues in that sector and in some cases seeking help 
from taxpayers in other countries.  
There is thus a need, at least within the euro area, to reduce the incentive for the national 
supervisors  to  give  preferential  treatment  to  their  national  system  compared  with  what  is 
done  elsewhere  in  the  Union.  The  creation  of  the  three  European  authorities  in  banking, 
capital  markets  and  insurance  is  a  step  towards  implementing  a  more  homogeneous 
regulatory system. We have to see how these authorities manage to achieve a sufficiently 
harmonised  system.  The  conduct  of  the  next  stress  tests  will  be  a  way  to  verify  it.  A 
mechanism  to  monitor  national  supervisory  authorities  has  to  be  established  to  check  the 
way  they  do  their  work,  including  stress  tests.  It  is  surprising  that  the  budgets  of  member 
countries  are  subject  to  assessments,  for  example  by  the  European  Commission,  while 
banking supervision is not subject to supranational control. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The current decision-making system, based on consensus, tends to favour the positions of 
those who discourage transparency, the robustness of the tests, the flow of information. If the 
results  of  the  next  stress  tests  do  not  convince  the  markets  that  they  have  been  done 
rigorously,  national  authorities  will  not  be  able  to  hide  behind  each  other;  all  would  lose 
credibility, including the newly created European Banking Authority. It inevitably would create 
the conditions for a subsequent institutional step, aimed at further transfer of sovereignty in 
respect of European supervisory affairs. 
Looking  ahead,  we  must  –  in  my  opinion  –  create  the  foundations  for  a  more  integrated 
mechanism, funded at European level, for preventing and resolving banking crises. Leaving 
crisis  resolution  to  voluntary  cooperation  is  not  sufficient  to  prevent  contagion  between 
banking systems and between them and the public debt of member countries. The pooling of 
the costs arising from any erroneous assessments by supervisory authorities would entail a 
joint assumption of responsibility by these authorities. If we want to avoid any recurrence of a 
crisis  like  the  Irish  one,  it  is  necessary  to  provide  for  an  integrated  European  supervisory 
system,  limiting  the  scope  for  discretion  by  the  national  authorities  and  subjecting  them  to 
close  monitoring.  The  consequences  of  an  oversized  and  highly  indebted  banking  and 
financial system are not in fact suffered only by the citizens and taxpayers of that country but 
by everyone in the euro area.  
One of the practical problems when following this path is that banking regulation is an issue 
that affects the entire Single Market, involving the 27 EU countries, not just those of the euro. 
Opposition to this integration in the banking sector mainly comes from countries outside the 
euro  area.  It  requires  therefore  the  ability  and  strength  of  the  euro  countries  to  give 
themselves greater powers with regard to their area which, as I said earlier, involves a much 
greater degree of political integration.  
Conclusions  
The euro’s situation has changed in these past 12 months. Important decisions have been 
taken.  The  area  has  a  system  of  checks  and  balances  that  others  do  not.  I  wonder 
sometimes what would happen if all the members of the European Council always thought 
along the same lines. It might seem an ideal world in which decisions would be taken quickly. 
But  in  what  direction?  If  everyone  thought  in  the  most  rigid  and  uncompromising  way  we 
might  have  risked  an  even  more  serious  crisis,  perhaps  triggered  by  the  failure  of  some 
countries, as happened after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. If everyone thought instead in 
the  most  flexible  and  lax  way,  we  would  risk  providing  unconditional  aid  and  encouraging 
indiscipline  in  public  budgets.  The  counterpositions  between  the  various  institutions  –  the 
Council,  Commission,  Parliament  and  Central  Bank  –  and  the  internal  discussion between 
the various members would permit the taking into account of various viewpoints, especially 
those  of  creditors  and  debtors,  and  allow 
the  Community  and 
intergovernmental approach as well as a combination of rules and discretion.  
In  recent  months,  decisions  were  taken  late  and  often  under  pressure  from  the  markets. 
There was a risk of immobilism and short-sightedness. These risks remain.  
However, I am convinced that at times of crisis, Europe has something extra that makes it 
move  forward  in  the  right  direction.  The  combination  of  common  historical  roots  and  the 
cultural  diversity  of  its  component  countries,  the  mixture  of  cooperation  and  competition 
between them have been and continue to be a source of progress and wealth. I am hoping 
for wisdom.  
Thank you for your attention. 
inclusion  of 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
