Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Expansión 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in 
Expansión, conducted by Mr Daniel Badía González on 14 September 2011, and published 
20 September 2011. 
 1. At the last meeting you said that the risks to inflation are balanced and you noted 
downside  risks  to  growth.  However,  the  ECB  raised  interest  rates  in  April  and  July. 
Does this new scenario leave room for possible rate cuts in the medium term? In 2008, 
following  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers,  there  was  a  major  shift  in  your 
monetary policy.  
At  the  last  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  we  delivered  two  main  messages.  In  our 
assessment the outlook for the real economy has deteriorated and we think that there are 
downside  risks  to  growth.  This  is  a  significant  change  compared  with  the  assessment 
three months ago, when we thought that the risks were balanced. On the other hand, in July 
there were upside risks to inflation, but now they are balanced. We will continue to keep price 
expectations  solidly  anchored.  This  is  a  major  asset  for  Europe:  it  protects  us  from  the 
materialisation of the risk of inflation as well as the materialisation of the risk of deflation.  
2. Investors are very concerned by the departure of Jürgen Stark, just a few months 
after Axel Weber stepped down. What are the consequences of his departure for the 
ECB and do you have any reassurance to offer in this regard? 
The Governing Council has been totally faithful to the primary mandate of the ECB which is 
price stability. The track record for the first 12 years is impressive: price stability is the best it 
has been for the last 50 years for 332 million fellow European citizens. We will continue to 
fulfil our mandate with dedication. Jürgen has been a marvellous partner and colleague for 
me  for  the  past  18  years.  He  has  always  demonstrated  a  very  strong  commitment  to  the 
consolidation of European unity. We have worked together for five years at the ECB and I 
must stress his constant loyalty to our institution. I have a deep esteem for him.  
3.  These  two  resignations  were  related  to  opposition  to  the  purchase  of  sovereign 
bonds. What is the limit of the Securities Markets Programme? 
The  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  is  a  non-standard  measure  that  the  Governing 
Council  decided  on  in  order  to  help  restore  a  more  correct  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism at a time when we are observing major disruptions to markets or segments of 
markets.  Since  the  start  of  the  crisis  in  2007  we  have  applied  a  strict  “separation  of 
principles” between the two categories of measures. On one side are the standard measures 
– the interest rates – that are designed to deliver price stability, and on the other are the non-
standard measures designed to be commensurate with the degree of disruption to markets. 
This is the case for all our non-standard measures: the supply of liquidity with a full allotment 
at  fixed  rate,  the  purchase  of  covered  bonds  and  the  SMP.  In  the  case  of  the  SMP,  we 
consider  that  governments  have  the  responsibility  to  ensure,  individually  and  collectively, 
financial  stability,  which  will  re-establish  a  more  correct  functioning  of  markets.  It  is  their 
responsibility and it is the commitment they took on 21 July.  
4. Has the current crisis exceeded all your expectations? 
I said myself, on behalf of the central bankers participating in the Global Economy meeting in 
2006 and at the beginning of 2007, that a significant market correction was likely because 
risks  were  underestimated,  insurance  premia  too  low  and  volatility  abnormally  low.  Since 
August  2007  we  have  experienced  several  episodes  of  a  global  crisis  that  is  extremely 
demanding  and  calls  for  all  authorities  and  entities,  public  and  private,  to  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
5. But what is the real source of the problem? 
The  current  episode  of  the  crisis  is  a  crisis  of  the  sovereign  signatures,  due  to  fiscal 
imbalances.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  constantly  advised  governments  that  they 
should strictly respect the Stability and Growth Pact, individually and collectively. I was on 
record,  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council,  in  stating,  many  many  times,  that  we  have  a 
single  currency  and  no  federal  budget,  meaning  that  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was 
fundamental  for  the  stability  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  We  fiercely 
defended  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  against  the  major  countries  of  Europe  when  they 
wanted to dismantle it in 2004 and 2005. Let me also stress that it is a global crisis, hitting all 
major advanced economies, with its epicentre in Europe. 
6. Angela Merkel sent us a very optimistic message about Greece this week. Do you 
think that, at present, there is a real risk that Greece will become insolvent?  
Greece has to strictly implement its adjustment programme and reach all its targets. This is 
absolutely fundamental. All governments have to fully implement their decisions which were 
adopted on 21 July in Brussels. 
7.  Nouriel  Roubini,  Bill  Gross  of  PIMCO  and  George  Soros,  among  other  renowned 
economists,  have  been  issuing  catastrophic  messages  about  the  future  of  the  euro 
since the start of the crisis. Don’t you think they should be more cautious, given that 
their views often have an impact on the market? 
One should not confuse the issue of financial stability in the euro area and the necessity to 
adjust  fiscal  policies,  which  are  an  important  and  pressing  problem,  with  the  euro  as  a 
currency. Since its inception, the euro has kept its value remarkably. Price stability has been 
ensured in a better fashion than with the previous national currencies. It is the currency for 
the euro area as a whole. And the euro area as a whole has a balanced current account and 
a public finance deficit much lower than many big advanced economies. Such a currency, 
with such strong underlying fundamentals, is solid and credible. 
8. Do you think that Spain is implementing sufficient reforms? What else can it do to 
restore investor confidence? 
Spain should resolutely continue to place particular emphasis on further structural reforms in 
order to have the highest possible level of growth potential, to improve its productivity and to 
restore investor confidence. 
9.  Most  European  governments  have  completed  the  process  of  restructuring  their 
financial sectors, but the Spanish government will still have to inject a large sum into 
several  financial  institutions  at  the  end  of  September.  What  is  your  view  of  the 
situation of Spain’s financial sector? 
The  situation  has  improved  considerably,  but  one  should  remain  permanently  alert.  Every 
month the Governing Council of the ECB calls upon all the banks in Europe to do all that is 
necessary to reinforce their balance sheets, to retain earnings, to be cautious and moderate 
as regards remuneration and to have recourse to a public backstop, where necessary. 
10. What are the challenges facing the new President, Mario Draghi? 
Every central banker faces the challenge of being the guardian of the currency, and therefore 
an  anchor  of  stability  and  confidence  in  a  very  demanding  period.  Mario  Draghi  needs  no 
particular  advice  from  me.  He  is  a  long-standing  member  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council 
and has been closely involved in all the decisions we have taken over the years. 
11. Could you give us your view of your eight years in office? Do you have any regrets 
or is there anything that you wish you had done differently?  
I have not gone yet and I have a very demanding task ahead of me in the remaining month 
and a half. In any case, I can assure you that it has been very inspiring to be President of a 
monetary institution that is responsible for issuing the common currency for 332 million people 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in 17 countries, including Spain. This is a great responsibility. As you know, in the Governing 
Council of 23 members, we are a team, together with Miguel Ángel Fernández Ordóñez and 
José  Manuel  González  Páramo.  We  are  all  very  close  and  this  is  something  that  is  very 
inspiring. The team’s spirit means so much to me.  
12. What is it that has gone wrong in this crisis? What recommendations would you 
give? 
Emerging  economies  have  shown  remarkable  overall  behaviour  in  the  face  of  this  crisis, 
unlike the advanced economies. I think the main lesson to be learnt is that we have to make 
a  difference  as  regards  the  resilience  of  the  advanced  economies.  And  this  requires  the 
implementation  of  a  very  robust  fiscal  policy,  a  very  strong  monitoring  of  competitive 
indicators in all economies and in particular in the euro area, and bold structural reforms.  
13. The markets fear liquidity problems in the European banking sector. Do you think 
this is an understandable concern? The ECB has just announced a joint action with 
the Federal Reserve System to lend dollars to the European banks. What has brought 
us to this situation? Could the ECB embark upon other measures, for example more 
twelve-month tenders? In addition, the liquidity crisis is reducing the banks’ capital. In 
this  context,  will  they  be  able  to  strengthen  their  positions  themselves  or  will  they 
require external support, perhaps through the European Financial Stability Facility or 
some other means?  
As  I  already  said,  the  European  banking  sector  has  to  reinforce  its  balance  sheet  and 
improve its resilience. As regards its access to liquidity, I think it is important for observers 
and market participants to know that the ECB is supplying liquidity in euro on an unlimited 
basis at fixed rates for durations of one week, one month and three months. And the eligible 
collateral in the hands of the banking sector is a multiple of the amount of liquidity we are 
presently  supplying  (around  €530  billion).  As  regards  the  liquidity  in  dollars,  we  just 
announced  last  Thursday  the  agreement  between  five  central  banks,  which  has  been  well 
understood  by  the  observers  and  illustrates  the  very  close  cooperation  which  exists,  in 
particular between the Federal Reserve System and the ECB. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
