Nils Bernstein: Proposals for mortgage credit regulation 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation, Copenhagen, 30 March 2011. 
 Growth  in  the  global  economy  has  accelerated  over  the  last  year  and  has  become  more 
robust.  But  recent  events  have,  once  again,  shown  how  unpredictable  the  world  is.  The 
turmoil  in  the  Middle  East  –  with  an  armed  conflict  in  Libya  –  and  the  natural  disaster  in 
Japan with its alarming consequences will not halt the global economic upswing, but they will 
have an impact. 
 Combined with a number of other factors, the upswing has contributed to a global price hike. 
Inflation  is  driven  by  rising  food  and  commodity  prices.  Commodity  prices  are  now  almost 
back at the high level seen before the financial crisis. It looks as if the crisis just led to a short 
interruption of an upward underlying trend in commodity prices.  
With higher inflation, the level of interest rates is likely to normalise sooner than the markets 
have previously expected. The anchoring of inflation expectations is important if the higher 
prices are not to spill over to wages and trigger a price-wage spiral. The European Central 
Bank has stressed its commitment to keeping inflation at bay, and there is reason to believe 
that  an  undesirable  price-wage  spiral  can  be  avoided,  as  long  as  there  is  plenty  of  spare 
capacity and labour. 
The financial crisis and not least the European sovereign debt crisis have clearly shown that 
there is a need for stronger economic cooperation in the EU. And so far the EU has been 
ready to respond to this need. The first important step was taken in the autumn, when the 
Commission and the Van Rompuy task force presented their proposals for strengthening the 
Stability and Growth Pact and other aspects of economic cooperation. The member states 
have now agreed on a series of amendments to strengthen fiscal discipline and – as a new 
element  –  introduce  a  surveillance  mechanism  to  prevent  fundamental  macroeconomic 
imbalances in EU member states, including those outside the euro area. 
The second important step was taken on 11 March, when the heads of state or government 
of the euro area member states agreed on the Euro Pact. The pact is first and foremost a 
strong  political  signal  of  shared  determination  to  introduce  initiatives  to  strengthen 
competitiveness,  employment,  fiscal  discipline  and  financial  stability.  As  a  non-euro  area 
member  state,  Denmark  did  not  have  to  join  the  Pact.  At  Danmarks  Nationalbank  we  are 
pleased  to  note  that  there  was  broad  support  for  doing  so  in  the  Danish  parliament, 
Folketinget. But I should add that words must always be followed by action if the Pact is to 
have any value. 
The  third  important  step  is  the  agreement  to  establish  a  permanent  crisis  resolution 
mechanism – the European Stability Mechanism, ESM. This debt-financing mechanism is to 
be established for euro area member states from mid-2013 and will replace the temporary 
financing  mechanism  for  euro  area  member  states  in  sovereign  debt  difficulties.  Together 
with IMF funding and possibly bilateral contributions, the ESM will help to ensure adequate 
responses to future sovereign debt crises. An important element of the plan is that the ESM 
will offer loans only if macroeconomic stabilisation programmes are implemented at the same 
time, imposing stringent economic policy obligations on the recipient member state. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  welcomes  these  improvements  of  the  framework  for  economic 
cooperation.  Since  our  currency  is  closely  tied  to  the  euro,  Denmark  will  benefit  from 
operating  within  the  same  overall  economic  framework  as  the  euro  area  member  states, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
thereby  contributing  to  robust  economic  cooperation  in  the  EU.  But  the  strength  of  the 
cooperation can only be put to the test in practice. 
The need for stronger economic cooperation is reflected in the different economic situations 
of the individual EU member states at present. 
The  best-performing  member  states  are  characterised  by  a  long  period  of  moderate  wage 
inflation relative to productivity developments, as well as balanced public finances. Germany 
and Sweden are cases in point. It is also worth noting that these two member states did not 
have housing bubbles that burst. 
At the opposite end of the scale we find a group of member states with large sovereign debt 
problems and sagging competitiveness. Their large government budget deficits and external 
deficits as well as their high government debts reflect that consumption and investment have 
been exceeding output for a long time. This can continue for a while, but naturally it is not 
sustainable in the long run. Consumption and investment have been driven by factors such 
as rapidly rising house prices that subsequently plummeted. 
Denmark is probably somewhere in between these two extremes. 
For the last 5–6 years, the Danish economy has seen an excessive boom followed by a deep 
recession that we are only slowly working our way out of. 
In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  the  private  sector  has  been  consolidating  strongly.  Corporate 
investments  are  low  compared  with  earnings,  and  over  the  last  18  months  private 
consumption has increased far less than disposable incomes. This means that consumption 
as a ratio of disposable incomes is low by historical standards. Real disposable incomes are 
likely to grow at a much slower pace in the coming years, but nevertheless we expect private 
consumption to increase somewhat, so that the consumption ratio will approach its normal 
level.  We  also  expect  a  certain  increase  in  private  investment  as  firms  benefit  from  rising 
demand, both at home and abroad. 
Based on the above, Danmarks Nationalbank expects growth in Denmark to be just under 
2 per  cent  p.a.  this  year  and  the  next  few  years.  This  is  slightly  higher  than  the  expected 
growth rate in the euro area, and also higher than the underlying growth in Denmark’s output 
potential. As a result, net unemployment is set to decline slowly towards its structural level of 
around 100,000. Structural unemployment is the level of unemployment that is sustainable in 
the long term and that is compatible with low and stable Danish inflation in line with that of 
the euro area. 
Although the loss of output was unusually large during the crisis, unemployment was so low 
at the outset that net unemployment has not risen much above its structural level after the 
crisis. Furthermore, as I have already mentioned, the economy is set to grow at a solid pace 
by Danish standards in the coming years. 
We can also see that the European sovereign debt crisis has made international investors far 
more aware of whether individual countries are pursuing responsible fiscal policies.  
That is why Danmarks Nationalbank repeatedly urges the Danish government to maintain the 
tight fiscal policy planned for the coming years. We do not need any new stimulus packages 
at  the  moment.  If,  contrary  to  expectations,  the  international  economy  goes  into  reverse 
again, it would be sad if Denmark uses up all its fiscal policy room of manoeuvre right now – 
at a time when the economy is actually moving forward. 
If our expectations are exceeded, it would not be good to have exploited the scope for growth 
beforehand. In that case the risk of renewed overheating would be imminent. 
 Denmark  experienced  strong  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  last  decade.  They  were  not  only 
attributable to the international financial crisis, but were to some extent self-inflicted. Partly 
because  fiscal  policy  had  been  eased  during  the  boom,  and  partly  because  we  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
introduced a number of housing market structures that amplify rather than dampen cyclical 
fluctuations. These include the freeze on property value tax in kroner and the development of 
new loan types, notably loans with deferred amortisation. They are also known as loans with 
payment  holidays.  Since  more  than  half  of  all  mortgage  loans  are  now  with  deferred 
amortisation, the holiday has almost become permanent. 
The freeze means that the effective property value tax declines in a boom when house prices 
go  up.  On  the  other  hand,  it  cannot  decline  when  house  prices  go  down.  Analyses  in 
Danmarks Nationalbank’s most recent Monetary Review (English version to be issued) show 
that price fluctuations can be dampened if the property value tax is, once again, allowed to 
move in parallel with house prices. 
Our analyses also indicate that home buyers to some extent see amortisation of mortgage 
loans as an expense in line with, say, interest and housing taxes. So the use of deferred-
amortisation  loans  amplifies  fluctuations  in  house  prices.  If  prices  go  up,  loans  with 
amortisation entail a larger increase in overall payments to service the loan compared with 
deferred-amortisation loans. The higher costs dampen the demand for housing and curb the 
price rise. Conversely, if house prices fall, loans with amortisation entail a larger decline in 
the  payments  compared  with  deferred-amortisation  loans.  This  stimulates  the  demand  for 
housing  and  helps  to  buoy  up  the  market.  In  other  words,  loans  with  amortisation  help  to 
stabilise  house  prices.  This  favourable  effect  is  lost  as  deferred-amortisation  loans  gain 
ground.  Our  analyses  show  that  deferred-amortisation  loans  have  contributed  more  to  the 
fluctuations in house prices than the freeze on property value tax.  
To  dampen  the  strong  fluctuations  in  the  housing  market,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has 
suggested  that  the  link  between  property  value  tax  and  property  value  should  be 
re-established  and  that  access  to  new  deferred-amortisation  loans  should  gradually  be 
phased out. 
There  have  been  widespread  concerns  that  our  proposals  could  be  detrimental  to  the 
housing  market.  On  the  contrary;  the  aim  is  to  increase  stability  and  provide  a  bulwark 
against excessive fluctuations in both directions. As for the potential problems in connection 
with the transition to a more stable system, I would like to emphasise two factors. 
Firstly, our proposals do not affect existing deferred-amortisation loans. We simply suggest a 
gradual  and  gentle  lowering  of  the  threshold  for  new  mortgage  loans  with  deferred 
amortisation. 
Secondly, we do not propose restoring the property value tax to the somewhat higher level 
applying before the tax freeze was introduced in 2002. That is another issue – which I will not 
discuss here. 
We are merely suggesting that further erosion of the property value tax should be prevented 
by  letting  taxes  match  developments  in  property  value  in  future.  This  could  act  as  an 
automatic  stabiliser.  If  interest  rates  suddenly  begin  to  rise  unexpectedly,  pressing  house 
prices down, our proposal means that the property value tax automatically decreases, and 
this will dampen the price fall.  
The stabilising effects of these proposals would provide considerable gains for the economy. 
That would also be in the interests of homeowners. If our proposals are rejected, we would 
like  to  hear  other  suggestions  for  preventing  large  future  fluctuations  in  house  prices  that 
could jeopardise economic and financial stability.  
* * * 
Both  internationally  and  in  Denmark  economists  are  discussing  the  lessons  to  be  learned 
from the financial crisis, and the future regulation of the financial system in the light of this 
experience. As I see it, an artificial distinction is being made in Denmark. In simplified terms 
you  could  say  that  there  is  broad  understanding  that  the  requirements  for  banks  must  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
tightened. In contrast, there seems to be little understanding that the same could apply to the 
activities of mortgage banks. In my opinion, we also need to focus on mortgage credit. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  proposal  to  phase  out  deferred-amortisation  loans  and  realign 
property value tax is one response to the lessons learned from the financial crisis. It can also 
provide part of the answer to another important question: how do we ensure the underlying 
collateral of covered bonds if house prices fall? I have previously pointed out that the need to 
provide  additional  collateral  in  that  situation  could  have  a  destabilising  effect,  and  I  have 
encouraged  the  Ministry  of  Economic  and  Business  Affairs  to  look  into  the  issue.  The 
problem is that mortgage loans granted on the basis of covered bonds cannot exceed 80 per 
cent of the value of the home. If the price falls so that the total mortgage exceeds 80 per cent 
of  the  value,  the  mortgage  bank  must  raise  additional  collateral  to  bridge  the  gap.  A 
permanently lower loan-to-value ratio for mortgages would directly address this issue, but as 
you know, it was not possible to muster support for this solution when covered bonds were 
introduced. 
Slow and gentle phasing-out of deferred-amortisation loans would help to solve the problem, 
as falls in house prices would be cushioned and the mortgages would gradually be repaid, 
thereby  reducing  the  risk  of  conflicting  with  this  rule.  We  need  mechanisms  that  will 
automatically  support  compliance  so  that  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  issue  new  debt 
instruments at a time when house prices are falling. But I am open to other suggestions. You 
just have to remember that money is most difficult to come by when you need it the most. 
 Let  me  now  turn  to  the  popular  adjustable-rate  mortgage  loans.  Variable-rate  loans  can 
actually help to stabilise the economy, provided that the Danish economy is moving in synch 
with that of the euro area. In that situation we will “import” euro area interest rates, which will 
fit in well with economic developments in Denmark. But if we are at another cyclical stage, it 
is, of course, important for fiscal policy to compensate for this. 
For a number of years, variable-rate loans have meant lower expenses for homeowners. The 
more  widespread  use  of  these  loans  make  households  more  vulnerable  to  rising  interest 
rates. If the yield on the bonds used to finance adjustable-rate loans rises, homeowners must 
foot  the  bill  –  even  if  the  increase  is  extraordinarily  high,  perhaps  in  connection  with  a 
currency crisis. It is very important that homeowners are aware of this risk and have taken it 
into account in their budgets. I have the impression that most households will be resilient to 
the rise in interest rates resulting from ordinary cyclical developments. 
What  concerns  me  most  about  adjustable-rate  loans  is  their  inherent  refinancing  risk. 
Mortgage  banks  offer  30-year  loans  financed  via  short-term  bonds  –  often  with  annual 
refinancing. Another lesson learned from the financial crisis is that there is a real risk that 
these markets will stop functioning at times, or that interest rates soar to extraordinary levels. 
I have already said on several occasions that it is a good idea to spread the auctions, and I 
would  like  to  acknowledge  –  once  again  –  the  initiatives  taken  in  this  respect.  I  strongly 
encourage all mortgage banks to follow suit. 
Refinancing risk is part of the product design. This is the risk that the forthcoming regulation 
on stable financing is addressing – and should address. The details are not in place yet, but 
it is planned to take effect in 2018. This will require major structural adaptations that cannot 
be  achieved  overnight.  The  mortgage-credit  market  is  like  a  super  tanker.  It  takes  time  to 
change  the  course  and  gradually  adapt,  so  preparations  must  start  well  in  advance. 
Mortgage banks should already begin to develop products that will adequately address the 
issue of refinancing risk. 
I  have  also  made  it  clear  to  the  financial  institutions  that  use  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s 
lending  facilities  is  not  an  acceptable  solution  for  managing  refinancing  risk.  I  take  this 
opportunity  to  repeat  that  message.  Securities  should  only  be  pledged  as  collateral  to 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  in  connection  with  ordinary  monetary-policy  operations.  If  we  find 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that  the  system  is  being  misused  to  support  the  housing  market,  we  will  take  action  and 
perhaps  have  a  friendly  talk  with  the  institution  in  question.  We  have  done  that  before. 
Eligibility as collateral must not be a precondition for a given mortgage-credit product. 
 Today  I  have  presented  a  number  of  proposals  for  regulating  various  issues  in  relation  to 
mortgage  credit  in  order  to  make  the  system  more  resilient  to  future  developments.  The 
financial crisis has demonstrated that rare misfortunes do actually strike from time to time. 
This should be taken into account in financial regulation. This applies not only to banks – but 
also to mortgage banks. 
Finally, I would like to thank the Federation for our good cooperation during the past year and 
for inviting me to speak at today’s meeting. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
