Guy Debelle: Collateral, funding and liquidity 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Conference on Systemic Risk, Basel III, Financial Stability and Regulation, 
Sydney, 28 June 2011. 
 I thank Chris Stewart and Matt Boge for their help in preparing this talk. 
Today  I  am  going  to  talk  about  a  few  interrelated  issues  concerning  the  banking  system: 
collateral, funding and liquidity.  
The  financial  crisis  brought  into  sharp  relief  the  liabilities  side  of  a  financial  institution's 
balance sheet, that is, the funding structure. This had previously been somewhat neglected, 
but  the  fates  of  Northern  Rock,  Bear  and  Lehmans  were  clearly  affected  by  the  nature  of 
their funding. While their funding structure played a significant part in the downfall of those 
institutions,  I  would  argue  the  ultimate  concern  was  about  the  quality  of  their  assets.  The 
funding problems were symptomatic of concerns about asset quality.  
In my view, the pendulum has swung too far in focusing on liabilities. Such a swing is evident 
in  the  proposed  change  to  Standard  &  Poor's  ratings  methodology  for  the  global  banking 
system.  The  proposed  new  methodology  shifts  the  assessment  of  financial  strength  of  an 
institution markedly towards funding and away from asset quality. Asset quality should still be 
paramount  and  should  be  given  a  far  larger  weight  than  liabilities  in  assessing  financial 
strength, along with the extent of leverage (capital).  
The  solvency  of  any  bank  first  and  foremost  is  a  function  of  the  quality  and  value  of  its 
assets. This is, of course, true of any entity, but it is particularly true for banks because of the 
implications asset quality has for liquidity and because of the leveraged nature of financial 
institutions.  
The crux of my argument today is this: if I am a creditor of a bank, my due diligence should 
be  spent  mostly  on  assessing  the  asset  side  of  the  bank's  balance  sheet  in  determining 
whether or not I will get repaid in full. If asset quality remains high, I should be confident of 
being repaid.  
Financial  institutions  prior  to  the  crisis  had  been  in  what  might  be  described  as  an 
asset-driven world. Banks grew their asset portfolio on the assumption (which was generally 
realised) that the funding required would be easily forthcoming to support the asset growth. 
To paraphrase Field of Dreams, the financial environment was ‘if you lend it, they will fund’.  
That environment has been turned on its head by the financial crisis. Financial institutions 
are now in a funding-driven world. They can no longer assume that the funding will be readily 
forthcoming at a given price. We are now much more in a liability-driven world.  
So the structure and maturity profile of liabilities does bear close analysis. Because banks 
are in the business of maturity transformation, liabilities mature at a faster pace than assets. 
Assets can be difficult to liquefy in the market, particularly in stressed circumstances. As a 
result, a bank generally meets the need to repay its liabilities as they fall due by issuing more 
debt.  
But the bank's ability to refinance its maturing liabilities still fundamentally depends on the 
asset portfolio. An investor's decision as to whether it will be willing to lend to the institution 
will be based on its credit assessment of the institution's assets. If there are doubts about the 
quality  of  that  asset  portfolio,  a  bank  will  find  it  considerably  more  difficult  to  obtain  more 
funding.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Liquidity1 
I  will  now  focus  more  directly  on  the  important  relationship  between  asset  quality  and 
liquidity.  
If a bank is experiencing a problem of illiquidity, the state of its asset portfolio is even more 
paramount. This relates to one of the fundamental tenets of central banking, most famously 
associated  with  Walter  Bagehot.  Writing  in  Lombard  Street  in  1873,  Bagehot  states  that 
central banks should lend freely (ie, liberally) at a high rate to solvent but illiquid banks that 
have good collateral.  
There  are  a  number  of  important  elements  to  Bagehot's  statement  which  I  am  going  to 
discuss in some detail.  
Starting at the end of the statement, and germane to the argument thus far, is that the bank 
must have good collateral. Therefore, critically, it is the asset side of the balance sheet which 
enables the bank to overcome a problem on the liabilities side: the central bank must be sure 
that it is lending against good collateral.  
The second aspect of the statement which bears further discussion is that the central bank 
should lend to solvent but illiquid banks. I don't see this as being materially separable from 
the collateral issue. As I have argued above, a bank's solvency is most strongly influenced by 
the quality of its collateral. Capital and leverage play an important role too.  
It is sometimes said that it might be difficult to determine whether the issue really is one of 
solvency rather than one of liquidity. Clearly, the fact that a liquidity issue has risen may well 
be a signal that the market has concerns about solvency. Hence the central bank certainly 
should pay heed to that signal from the market.  
But the experience of the past few years demonstrates liquidity crises can arise because of 
uncertainties that can be exacerbated by funding structures which are heavily skewed to the 
short term. In keeping with my argument thus far, in my opinion, it behoves the central bank 
to  look  through  those  uncertainties  to  the  underlying  asset  quality  of  the  institution  under 
question, and be prepared to lend secured against quality assets if the situation warrants.  
This is particularly true when there is systemic uncertainty. That is, counterparty risk aversion 
increases. Such instances have arisen on a number of occasions in recent years. As I have 
said  before,  in  those  circumstances,  the  central  bank  acts  not  so  much  as  lender  of  last 
resort, but as intermediary of last resort.2 Participants in the market are uneasy about lending 
to each other at any price, secured or unsecured, because of concerns about the solvency of 
the  counterparty.  The  central  bank  can  refrain  from  participating  in  the  risk  aversion  and 
intermediate  this  process  across  its  own  balance  sheet,  thereby  ameliorating  the  tensions 
created by the shortage of liquidity in the market.  
Together  with  the  provision  of  liquidity,  there  may  also  be  a  need  for  the  central  bank,  or 
prudential  regulator,  to  provide  information  about  the  quality  of  banks'  balance  sheets  to 
reduce the uncertainties that pervade. One could characterise the stress tests conducted in 
the  US  in  the  middle  of  2009  as  an  example  of  this.  Moreover,  by  providing  the  liquidity 
(against  collateral),  the  central  bank  is  indicating  its  confidence  in  the  solvency  of  the 
institutions that can be reinforced by this provision of information.  
                                                 
1  These issues are also covered in Stevens G (2008), “Liquidity and the Lender of Last Resort”, Seventh Annual 
Sir Leslie Melville Lecture, RBA Bulletin, May, pp 83–91. 
2  Debelle  G  (2009),  “Some  Effects  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  on  Australian  Financial  Markets”,  Finance 
Professionals Forum, Sydney, 31 March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The final aspect of Bagehot's statement is that the lending should be at a high rate.3 But a 
higher rate than what? A relevant benchmark is the rate at which the central bank provides 
liquidity in its normal operations. In the Reserve Bank's case, that is a rate which is a small 
spread (normally less than 10 basis points) to the cash rate. Emergency liquidity provision 
would clearly need to be a higher rate than this, otherwise institutions would avail themselves 
of  this  source  of  liquidity  even  in  normal  times.  That  is,  the  central  bank  should  be  a  last 
resort, not a first resort.  
Within the Reserve Bank's operating framework, a reasonable benchmark would be the rate 
charged on the standing overnight facility, which is 25 basis points above the cash rate.4 This 
facility  is  called  upon  at  various  times  throughout  the  year,  generally  as  a  result  of  small 
unexpected  technical  hitches  in  the  money  market.5  For  example,  over  the  past  financial 
year, it was utilised on two occasions, with a total of $363 million drawn, and for a term of no 
more than one day.  
But in a stressed situation, that rate is still likely to be less than the market rate, as otherwise 
there would be no need for recourse to the central bank. Thus the rate is penal relative to the 
normal cost of liquidity provision but not necessarily relative to the stressed market price of 
funding, a distinction which is often overlooked in such discussions.  
It is also worth noting that the central bank can apply a haircut to the value of the collateral it 
is  lending  against.  That  is,  it  will  not  lend  dollar  for  dollar  against  the  collateral  but  rather 
against  some  (generally  large)  fraction  of  its  value.  This  provides  protection  to  the  central 
bank. Of course, the issue of value can be difficult to determine in stressed situations. The 
current market price may well not be an adequate guide to the value of the collateral. But the 
central  bank  can  ensure  adequate  protection  for  its  liquidity  provision  by  setting  an 
appropriately sized haircut. That said, if the central bank assesses that there is indeed little 
concern about the quality of the collateral, this should not be too much of an issue.  
The final issue that often arises about the provision of liquidity support by the central bank is 
that of stigma. During the crisis, in some jurisdictions, banks were clearly loath to approach 
the central bank because of concerns about stigma. That is, the call on the central bank's 
liquidity facility, in and of itself, would exacerbate the stresses the institution was facing.  
In Australia, this has been much less of an issue. In part, I believe this reflects the design of 
the  Reserve  Bank's  market  operations  system.  The  key  aspect  is  that  a  wide  range  of 
counterparties  deal  with  the  Reserve  Bank  on  a  regular  basis  as  part  of  our  daily  liquidity 
operations.  Hence  banks  are  accustomed  to  dealing  with  us  and  have  a  well-established 
relationship with us.  
To recap, there is an important role for a central bank to play in a fractional reserve banking 
system as the lender of last resort. This is particularly the case in dealing with liquidity events 
where the central bank's provision of liquidity can be regarded as a public good.6 As noted, 
the  central  bank  does  not  provide  the  liquidity  insurance  for  free;  it  is  at  a  penal  rate. 
Moreover,  the  institution  must  hold  an  adequate  amount  of  collateral  that  is  of  acceptable 
quality to the central bank to lend against. Such collateral may well deliver a lower rate of 
                                                 
3  See again the Governor’s Melville Lecture as well as Charles Goodhart in “Myths about the Lender of Last 
Resort”, in C Goodhart and G Illing (eds) (2002), Financial Crises, Contagion, and the Lender of Last Resort: 
A Reader, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 227–248. 
4  To be clear, I am not talking about the proposed liquidity facility that will form part of the Australian approach 
to the Basel liquidity rules discussed below. 
5  RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) (2010), Annual Report 2010. 
6  See  Kearns  J  and  P  Lowe  (2008),  “Promoting  Liquidity:  Why  and  How?”,  in  P  Bloxham  and  C  Kent  (eds), 
Lessons  from  the  Financial  Turmoil  of  2007  and  2008,  Proceedings  of  a  Conference,  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, Sydney. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
return than other assets the bank might otherwise hold (although not necessarily so on an 
appropriately risk-adjusted measure).  
In  that  regard,  I  will  now  turn  briefly  to  the  Basel  liquidity  standards.  The  aim  of  those 
standards is to reduce the frequency with which banks might need to seek assistance from 
the central bank in a liquidity event to a very small number. It does so by making the size of 
the  liquidity  buffer  banks  are  required  to  hold  dependent  on  the  structure  and  maturity  of 
funding.  Thus,  while  the  central  bank  can  ultimately  liquefy  part  of  the  balance  sheet  of  a 
solvent institution in times of liquidity stress, in expectation, this would be a rare event. An 
institution  should  not  be  careless  about  its  funding  structure  on  the  presumption  of  that 
support.  
Relevant  to  the  arguments  I  have  presented  thus  far,  the  Basel  standards  also  make 
determinations  around  the  quality  of  assets  that  can  be  held.  The  Basel  guidelines  focus 
primarily  on  government  debt  as  the  liquid  asset.  That  is  clearly  not  possible  in  Australia, 
given  the  prudence  of  governments  over  a  long  run  of  years.  The  amount  of  government 
debt that the Australian banking system would need to hold to meet the liquidity standard is 
in excess of the stock on issue. Moreover, if the banks were to hold the stock on issue, the 
government  bond  market  would  no  longer  retain  any  liquidity,  which  would  be  completely 
self-defeating.  
Hence  it  was  announced  late  last  year  that  the  RBA  would  provide  a  committed  liquidity 
facility  to  meet  the  shortfall  between  banks'  holdings  of  government  paper  and  their  total 
liquidity needs. The banks will be charged an ongoing fee to be able to access the facility, 
the  size  of  which  is  still  under  consideration.  The  eligible  assets  for  the  facility  are  those 
currently eligible for the Reserve Bank's market operations.  
Funding and assets of the Australian banking system 
Having talked thus far about the fundamental importance of collateral quality in determining 
solvency and in determining liquidity provision, I will now spend the remainder of my address 
talking briefly about recent developments in the asset and liability structure of the Australian 
banking system.  
On the asset side, the most marked development has been the slowing in aggregate credit 
growth. Lending for housing has slowed from the double digit pace of the two decades until 
2007  to  its  current  pace  of  around  5–6 per cent.  This  is  noticeably  slower  than  growth  in 
household  income,  which  was  over  8 per cent  in  the  year  to  March.  For  those  who  like  to 
agonise about debt to income ratios, which I personally don't, this implies a marked change 
in that dynamic.  
On the corporate side of banks' assets, growth has been very subdued reflecting a number of 
different dynamics. The large investment boom currently underway is being financed in quite 
a  different  way  from  growth  episodes  in  the  past.  Companies  in  that  sector  are  funding 
themselves from cash or directly from global financial markets. Hence the domestic banking 
system  is  seeing  much  less  of  that  business  than  in  the  past.  To  put  it  another  way, 
intermediated business credit is likely to grow a lot slower in the period ahead than historical 
relationships with GDP and investment would lead one to believe. Finally, lending conditions 
to the commercial property sector remain tight as banks are still reluctant to increase their 
exposure to that sector.  
The changes in funding structure of the banking system are also quite stark (Graph 1). Most 
notably,  there  has  been  a  marked  increase  in  the  share  of  deposit  funding.  Over  the  past 
three years, banks' deposit funding has grown by about 15 per cent per annum. As a result, 
deposits  have  also  increased  by  about  9 percentage  points  as  a  share  of  overall  funding 
liabilities.  There  has  been  strong  growth  in  deposit  growth  from  households  as  well  as 
businesses. The former reflects the increased saving rate of the household sector, much of 
which  has  flowed  to  the  banking  sector.  The  latter  partly  reflects  the  strong  growth  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
corporate profits, particularly in the resources sector.7 While growth in business deposits has 
been considerably faster over the past 12 months, household deposit growth has still been a 
very robust 9 per cent.  
Through late 2009 and early 2010, the strength of growth in deposits reflected, in part, the 
intense  competition  amongst  the  banks  for  deposits.8  This  saw  the  yield  on  deposits  rise 
markedly as the Reserve Bank has documented in its regular output over the past few years. 
But that competition appears to have levelled off in recent months, yet deposit growth has 
still  continued  at  a  robust  pace.  I  would  characterise  the  recent  growth  as  being  more  an 
endogenous  counterpart  to  the  change  in  the  growth  and  funding  composition  of  the 
economy as a whole. One might expect that robust endogenous deposit growth to continue 
for some time yet.  
Graph 1 
 There  has  also  been  a  significant  drop  in  the  share  of  short-term  wholesale  funding, 
reflecting  regulatory  and  market  pressures.  The  share  of  long-term  wholesale  funding  has 
correspondingly risen, as banks have sought to term out the maturity of their liabilities. One 
noteworthy development that has generally escaped attention is that banks have raised less 
of  this  wholesale  funding  from  offshore  than  has  matured  over  the  three  of  the  past  four 
quarters. That is, in net terms, the banks have been repaying their foreign liabilities.  
The Australian banks' use of offshore funding sources was particularly visible through 2009. 
They were a relatively large share of global bank debt-funding in that year, but that as much 
reflected  the  decrease  in  the  number  of  highly  rated  institutions,  as  well  as  a  lack  of 
borrowing  by  other  banks  around  the  world  through  that  period,  as  it  did  a  pick-up  in 
borrowing by the Australian banks. (That is, it was as much a function of the denominator 
shrinking as the numerator growing.) The Australian banks are a much smaller share of the 
                                                 
7  Debelle G (2011), “The Australian Bond Market in 2011 and Beyond”, KangaNews Australian DCM Summit, 
Sydney, 15 March. 
8  Fabbro  D  and  M  Hack  (2011),  “The  Effects  of  Funding  Costs  and  Risk  on  Banks’  Lending  Rates”, 
RBA Bulletin, March, pp 35–41. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
global market again now given they are raising relatively less and banks in the rest of the 
world are raising relatively more. This is likely to remain the case for the foreseeable future.  
Finally,  to  link  back  to  the  arguments  I  made  earlier,  I  will  talk  briefly  about  concerns 
surrounding the extent to which Australian banks rely on foreign funding. If a liquidity issue 
were  to  arise  around  this  funding,  it  is  of  critical  importance  that  the  foreign-currency 
denominated funding is fully hedged into Australian dollars, which indeed it is.9 This means 
that the liquidity issue is in Australian dollars rather than in foreign currency.10 As I discussed 
earlier,  an  Australian  dollar  liquidity  issue  can  be  addressed  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The 
Reserve Bank can meet a temporary liquidity shortfall by lending Australian dollars against 
the stressed bank's assets denominated in Australian dollars. The vast bulk of the Australian 
banking system's assets are denominated in Australian dollars.  
This stands in comparison to the situation of a number of European banks that funded US 
dollar assets with US dollar liabilities which had been swapped out of their local currency. 
When liquidity issues arose for those European banks, the ECB was constrained in its ability 
to provide the foreign currency liquidity to address those stresses.11  
Conclusion 
The main argument I have presented here today is that it is the asset quality of a bank which 
is the primary determinant of a bank's financial strength. The asset quality affects both the 
ability of the bank to raise funding in the market and also, importantly, has a first-order effect 
on  the  ability  of  the  institution  to  obtain  liquidity  support  from  the  central  bank  during  a 
stressed  situation.  While  the  funding  structure  of  a  financial  institution  warrants  close 
scrutiny, an investor in that institution should pay the greatest scrutiny to the asset side of the 
balance sheet.  
                                                 
9  D’Arcy  P,  M  Shah  Idil  and  T  Davis  (2009),  “Foreign  Currency  Exposure  and  Hedging  in  Australia”, 
RBA Bulletin, December, pp 1–10. 
10  That said, as well as matching the currency, the hedging is generally also maturity matched. 
11  For  more  discussion  of  this  issue,  see  CGFS  (Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System)  (2010),  “The 
Functioning and Resilience of Cross-border Funding Markets”, CGFS Paper No 37. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
