Seiji Nakamura: Japan’s monetary policy and developments in economic 
activity and prices 
Speech  by  Mr  Seiji  Nakamura,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with Business Leaders, Fukushima, 25 November 2010. 
I.  
The outlook report for October 20101 
 The outline of the assessment 
A.  
The Bank of Japan discusses economic activity and prices at the Monetary Policy Meetings 
(MPMs)  held  each  month.  Semiannually,  in  April  and  October,  it  releases  the  Outlook  for 
Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  or  the  Outlook  Report  for  short,  in  which  the  Bank  makes 
public its forecasts for economic activity and prices for the next two to three years. At the 
MPMs held in July and January, three months after the release of the Outlook Reports, the 
Policy  Board  examines  possible  deviations  from  the  scenario  presented  in  the  Outlook 
Reports. 
The Bank’s recent assessment of the Japanese economy was that it still showed signs of a 
moderate recovery, but the recovery seemed to be pausing. The Outlook Report released on 
October 29, 2010 projected that, in the second half of fiscal 2010, the pace of recovery was 
likely to slow owing to factors including the slowdown in overseas economies and the ending 
of the boost from policy measures targeted at durable consumer goods, as well as the recent 
appreciation  of  the  yen.  In  fiscal  2011,  albeit  with  some  lingering  effects  of  the  yen’s 
appreciation, the economy was expected to return to a moderate recovery path, given that 
exports  were  projected  to  continue  increasing  as  the  growth  rates  of  overseas  economies 
were likely to rise again, and that firms’ sense of excessive capital stock and labor was likely 
to  be  dispelled  gradually  as  corporate  profits  improved.  In  fiscal  2012,  the  Japanese 
economy was expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential growth rate, as the 
transmission  mechanism  by  which  the  strength  in  exports  and  production  fed  through  into 
income and spending would likely operate more effectively amid the continued relatively high 
growth in overseas economies, especially emerging and commodity-exporting economies.  
Forecasts made by the nine members of the Bank’s Policy Board in October were as follows. 
The  median  of  the  forecasts  for  Japan’s  real  GDP  growth  rate  was  2.1  percent  for  fiscal 
2010, 1.8 percent for fiscal 2011, and 2.1 percent for fiscal 2012. Figures for fiscal 2010 and 
fiscal  2011  were  revised  downward  by  0.5  percentage  point  and  0.1  percentage  point, 
respectively, from the forecasts in July. 
As for prices, the consumer price index (CPI) for all items excluding fresh food was projected 
to  increase  moderately  due  partly  to  the  narrowing  of  the  negative  output  gap  as  the 
economy picked up gradually and to a moderate rise in commodity prices on the back of the 
continued  relatively  strong  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies. 
Meanwhile, attention should be paid to the possibility that the recent appreciation of the yen 
was  likely  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  domestic  prices  by  holding  down  import  prices. 
The  median  of  the  forecasts  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  was  minus 
0.4 percent for fiscal 2010, plus 0.1 percent for fiscal 2011, and plus 0.6 percent for fiscal 
2012.  
Regarding  the  above  forecasts  for  economic  activity  and  prices  presented  in  the  Bank’s 
October 2010 Outlook Report, the following risks warrant attention.  
                                                 
1   The fiscal year in Japan starts in April and ends in March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
First, if the pace of already robust growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
accelerates further as a result of strong domestic demand and the continued inflow of risk 
money  from  advanced  economies  pursuing  prolonged  monetary  easing,  this  may  push  up 
economic  activity  in  Japan  and  result  in  stronger-than-expected  growth.  However,  such 
growth  could  be  followed  by  the  unwinding  of  risk  exposure,  which  may  result  in  larger 
adjustments in financial and economic activity, thus posing a downside risk to the Japanese 
economy from a longer-term perspective.  
Second, with regard to the advanced economies of Europe and the United States, the Bank 
feels that, overall, uncertainty remains high and risks are tilted to the downside. In the United 
States,  the  pace  of  recovery  in  the  labor  market  is  likely  to  be  only  moderate,  and 
households  in  particular  remain  burdened  by  balance-sheet  adjustments.  Therefore,  it  will 
remain  difficult  for  the  self-sustaining  virtuous  circle  of  growth  in  production,  income,  and 
spending  to  operate  properly.  In  Europe,  there  are  concerns  that,  in  2011,  the  effects  of 
economic  stimulus  measures  could  wane  with  the  implementation  of  fiscal  austerity 
programs. In addition, concerns over the sovereign risk of some European countries might 
have  adverse  effects  on  economic  activity  through  a  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates  and  a 
deterioration in market sentiment. 
Third,  turning  to  the  situation  in  Japan,  if  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  overseas 
economies heightens further and the foreign exchange and stock markets become unstable, 
this might lower firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations and lead to a deterioration 
in household sentiment, and economic activity in turn might be weaker than expected.  
And  fourth, with  regard to  risks  specific  to  prices,  consumer  prices  in Japan  could deviate 
upward from the projection through higher import prices as a result of a rise in commodity 
prices caused by booming of emerging and commodity-exporting economies and excessive 
inflows of risk money into these economies.  
Let me elaborate on these risks.  
Overseas economies 
B.  
Overseas  economies  as  a  whole  have  been  on  a  moderate  recovery  trend,  with  the 
advanced  economies  continuing  to  recover  moderately  and  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, despite a slight slowdown, continuing to register relatively high growth. 
In its October 2010 World Economic Outlook, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised 
its projection for world GDP growth in 2010 to 4.8 percent, up 0.2 percentage point from the 
July  2010  forecast.  For  2011,  it  expects  growth  to  continue  at  a  relatively  high  rate  of 
4.2 percent. 
Partly  due  to  robust  domestic  demand  and  the  inflow  of  risk  money  from  other  countries, 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  particularly  China,  have  continued  to  post 
relatively high growth, becoming the main growth engine for the world economy, accounting 
for about 70 percent of global GDP growth. However, the overall growth momentum of these 
economies  has  started  to  decelerate,  due  in  part  to  the  unwinding  of  accommodative 
monetary  policies  by  authorities  in  these  economies.  The  Chinese  economy  continues  to 
show  relatively  high  growth,  with  the  year-on-year  rate  of  GDP  growth  for  the  July–
September  quarter  of  2010  marking  9.6  percent,  but  the  rate  has  slowed  from  over 
10 percent in the first half of 2010, mainly due to the introduction of government measures to 
rein in real estate transactions. Retail sales recorded high growth of more than 17 percent 
year  on  year  in  October  for  the  ninth  consecutive  month,  and  car  sales  have  also  been 
strong. Meanwhile, with the rate of increase in the CPI accelerating for the fourth consecutive 
month to 4.4 percent in October, the People’s Bank of China has raised the policy interest 
rate and the reserve requirement ratio. Reflecting partly such policy responses, the Chinese 
economy  may  decelerate  for  the  time  being  but  –  given  the  virtuous  circle  of  growth  in 
production, income, and spending – is still likely to continue registering a relatively high pace 
of growth.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The U.S. economy has been recovering moderately and is likely to continue doing so. The 
real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  July–September  quarter  of  2010  was  2.5  percent  on  an 
annualized,  seasonally  adjusted  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  confirming  this  assessment. 
Steady growth in exports and private consumption, which accounts for about 70 percent of 
GDP,  was  the  major  factor  behind  the  recovery.  There  has  been  other  good  news  with 
regard to private consumption, such as the recovery in new car sales to a level exceeding 
12 million cars on an annualized basis for the first time in 14 months. Nevertheless, activity in 
the housing market has been sluggish, and there has been little improvement in prices and 
sales  or  progress  in  inventory  adjustments.  Chairman  Ben  S.  Bernanke  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Board mentioned in his speech in late October that “now, more than 20 percent of 
borrowers  owe  more  than  their  home  is  worth  and  an  additional  33  percent  have  equity 
cushions  of  10  percent  or  less,  putting  them  at  risk  should  house  prices  decline  much 
further,”  and  that  borrowers’  situation  confirmed  the  severity  of  households’  balance-sheet 
adjustments.2  As  for  the  labor  market  situation,  the  unemployment  rate  remains  high  at 
9.6 percent. Regarding prices, the rate of increase in the personal consumption expenditure 
(PCE) deflator has been around 1 percent.  
At  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  meeting  held  on  November  3,  2010,  the  Federal 
Reserve  decided  on  further  monetary  easing,  announcing  that  it  would  purchase  another 
600 billion U.S. dollars of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of June 2011. Japan’s 
experience  suggests  that  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  economic  activity  at  a 
time of balance-sheet adjustments is limited. Therefore, close attention should be paid to the 
effects of the Federal Reserve’s recent monetary easing measures.  
European  economies  on 
recovering  moderately,  although 
performances  differ,  with  Germany  and  France  registering  robust  growth,  while  others  are 
showing  only  slow  growth.  The  moderate  recovery  trend  was  confirmed  by  the  recently 
released year-on-year real GDP growth rate of 1.9 percent for the July–September quarter of 
2010 for the euro area as a whole. As for the outlook, the euro area economy is expected to 
continue  to  grow  only  moderately  because  the  sovereign  risk  problem  with  regard  to 
countries such as Greece and Ireland continues to lurk and fiscal austerity programs will be 
implemented in the area from 2011.  
the  whole  have  been 
The Japanese economy 
C.  
The  Japanese  economy  has  continued  to  show  steady  growth,  particularly  in  private 
consumption, as evidenced by the fact that the real GDP growth rate for the July–September 
quarter  of  2010  was  3.9  percent  on  an  annualized,  seasonally  adjusted  quarter-on-quarter 
basis. Looking back, until around spring 2010, exports and production continued to increase 
against the backdrop of strong growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and 
private  consumption  had  been  recovering  partly  because  of  increased  corporate  profits. 
Economic activity in Japan subsequently strengthened temporarily until around the summer 
of 2010, due mainly to temporary factors such as the last-minute rise in demand upon the 
expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars and the boost from the 
extremely hot weather. However, from around the end of summer, the pace of recovery in 
the Japanese economy has been slowing, reflecting the ending of such temporary factors as 
well  as  a  slowdown  in  export  and  production  growth  on  the  back  of  the  deceleration  in 
overseas economies. In global financial markets, there was increased demand for the yen as 
a  safe  haven  amid  heightened  uncertainty  about  future  developments  in  overseas 
economies, especially the U.S. economy. As a result, the yen appreciated to a level close to 
80  yen  against  the  U.S.  dollar,  leading  to increased  concerns  about  downside  risks  to  the 
                                                 
2   For details, see remarks by Chairman Bernanke made at “Mortgage Foreclosures and the Future of Housing 
Finance,” a Joint Conference Sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, at Arlington, Virginia, on October 25, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Japanese  economy  through  a  deterioration  in  business  sentiment.  In  response  to  this 
situation, the Bank swiftly decided in early October 2010 to implement the “comprehensive 
monetary easing policy.” I will discuss the details of this policy later. Private banks’ lending 
rates,  in  terms  of  the  average  contracted  interest  rates  on  new  loans and  discounts,  have 
been on a declining trend, reflecting monetary easing measures implemented by the Bank to 
date.  
Wages are showing signs of improving, albeit moderately, as evidenced by a year-on-year 
increase  in  overtime  payments  and  a  rise  in  special  payments  reflecting  strong  business 
performance.  Although  firms  continue  to  regard  their  capital  stock  as  excessive,  business 
fixed  investment  is  showing  signs  of  picking  up,  partly  reflecting  replacement  investment, 
which has been restrained in recent years.  
As for the outlook, private consumption is expected to be temporarily weak until around the 
end of fiscal 2010, as the boost from policy measures targeted at durable consumer goods 
and the effects of extremely hot weather come to an end. Export growth is likely to be only 
moderate because of the temporary slowdown in overseas economic growth and the effects 
from the earlier appreciation of the yen. Production is also projected to remain weak for the 
time  being.  A  key  factor  is  when  production  in  the  car  industry,  which  has  been  sluggish 
following the sharp rise prior to the expiration of subsidies, will recover; this is expected to 
happen  in  early  fiscal  2011.  From  the  beginning  of  fiscal  2011,  as  the  growth  rates  of 
overseas  economies,  particularly  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  start  to 
increase again, it is expected that exports will regain momentum, manufacturers’ production 
will return to an increasing trend, and their profits will continue to improve. Firms’ sense of 
excessive capital stock is likely to be dispelled gradually as exports and production pick up, 
and business fixed investment is consequently expected to generally continue to pick up. As 
for  nonmanufacturing  firms,  the  effects  of  the  improvement  in  manufacturers’  business 
performance  have  started  to  spill  over  gradually,  and  therefore  corporate  profits  and 
business fixed investment in these firms are expected to pick up moderately. Supported by 
these factors, private consumption is likely to return to a moderate recovery trend.  
Challenges facing the Japanese economy 
II.  
So far, I have been talking about the outlook for domestic and overseas economies; I would 
now like to move on to discuss the challenges facing the Japanese economy. These include 
the  low  birth  rate  and population aging,  the  prolonged  period  of low economic  growth  and 
deflation, and the large fiscal deficit.  
In 1968, Japan became the second-largest economy in the world, with its GDP surpassing 
that  of  West  Germany.  After  holding  onto  second  place  for  42  years,  however,  Japan 
conceded that position to China in 2010. Looking back, in the 1960s the Japanese economy 
grew rapidly at an astounding pace, with the annual average growth rate reaching more than 
10 percent, followed by a period of stable growth with an annual average rate of 4–5 percent 
from  the  1970s  to  the  1980s.  During  that  period,  Japanese-style  management  was  widely 
acclaimed. Since the 1990s, however, the economy has been growing at a slow pace on the 
whole, with the annual average growth rate hovering just above 1 percent, while Japanese 
government  debt  has  increased  sharply.  The  significant  decline  in  the  growth  rate  in  the 
1990s was triggered by a number of factors, particularly the bursting of the bubble economy 
and the malfunctioning of the financial system, but another major factor behind it seems to be 
structural changes that have affected the Japanese economy.  
These structural changes include the lower birth rate and population aging in Japan, and – 
triggered  by  the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall  in  1989  –  the  surge  in  the  number  of  economies 
participating  in  the  global  market  economy  and  the  resulting  intensification  of  global 
competition.  Furthermore,  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  market  economy,  together  with  the 
progress in IT and the ample inflow of capital to emerging economies, led to a rapid catch-up 
in industrialization among emerging economies and an increase in their domestic demand.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
While  these  rapid  global  economic  changes  were  occurring,  Japan  needed  to  devote 
substantial  economic  resources  to  dealing  with  the  post-bubble  adjustments.  As  a  result, 
Japan was, in some respects, slow in adapting to these changes by, for example, achieving 
structural  reforms  and  capturing  demand  from  emerging  economies,  both  of  which  bring 
about forward-looking investment. Following the collapse of the bubble economy, it seemed 
for a time that some firms had been successful in riding out the strength of the yen in 1995 
and  in  ambitiously  undertaking  wide-ranging  management  reforms  and  restructuring  to 
develop global business strategies. However, the changes in the global economy have been 
progressing even faster than such efforts, and for many firms the fruits of such endeavors 
have been limited.  
In view of the situation I have described, I will now talk about three issues that Japan faces.  
The low birth rate and population aging 
A.  
In 2005, Japan’s population for the first time in the postwar period registered a decline. The 
working-age population – that is, the population aged between 15 and 64 years old – in fact 
had already peaked in 1995 at 87 million and has been declining since then, due to the low 
birth rate and population aging. In the 15 years to 2010, the working-age population declined 
by 5.88 million. During the same period, the total population increased by about 1.61 million, 
with the population aging further. According to population projections made by the National 
Institute of Population and Social Security Research in 2006, the decline in the working-age 
population  will  continue  to  outpace  that  in  the  total  population  until  the  middle  of  the 
21st century,  and  in  2055  the  working-age  population  will  have  almost  halved  from  the 
current  level  to  45.95  million  in  the  medium  variant  projection.  Unless  the  labor  force 
participation rate and/or labor productivity increase, these trends will lower economic growth 
and exert downward pressure on the growth potential.  
The  decline  in  the  working-age  population  restrains  economic  growth  not  only  from  the 
supply side but also from the demand side, by reducing the number of consumers earning 
wages.  Thus,  the  decline  in  the  working-age  population  is  likely  to  depress  domestic 
demand.  
Looking at the labor force participation rate by sex and age group, that for men aged 25 to 
59 years is more than 90 percent, decreasing to around 30 percent for men aged 65 years 
and above. The participation rate for women aged 20 to 55 years is 70 percent, but a closer 
look shows that the rate dips conspicuously to around 65 percent for women in their 30s. To 
address the continuing decline in the working-age population, it is important to raise the labor 
force participation rate by providing various measures for the overall population as well as for 
specific sex and age groups, namely the elderly of both sexes, and also women in their 30s 
who quit their job to look after their children.  
The increase in the elderly population will expand potential demand in the medical care and 
nursing care fields. Moreover, the advance in population aging shows that the elderly have 
emerged  as  a  new  consumer  group,  bringing  about  business  opportunities  for  firms. 
However,  it  is  also  often  said  that  the  spending  behavior  of  this  new  group  is  rather 
unpredictable  because  of  the  diversity  of  their  needs.  Therefore,  tapping  the  potential 
demand  of  this  consumer  group  requires  greater  efforts  and  an  appropriate  response  by 
firms.  
B.   Capturing emerging market demand 
According  to  the  IMF,  the  share  of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  countries’  GDP  in 
world  GDP  is  currently  about  50  percent.  Their  contribution  to  the  year-on-year  overall 
growth  rate,  however,  amounts  to  about  70  percent.  In  view  of  the  high  rate  of  economic 
growth, emerging countries should not be considered merely as production bases for U.S. 
and European markets but as countries with great potential demand, the pace of expansion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
of which is beyond our imagination. Given the possible decline in demand in Japan due to 
the lower birth rate and further population aging, it is vital, for the growth of the Japanese 
economy,  to  devise  measures  in  both  the  manufacturing  and  service  sectors  to  capture 
emerging market demand. The following are some key considerations in this context.  
As highlighted in the White Paper on International Economy and Trade 2010 published by 
the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Asia’s middle-income population – households 
with disposable income of 5,000 U.S. dollars or more and less than 35,000 U.S. dollars – is 
forecast to expand in the next ten years. In 2000, Asia’s middle-income population stood at 
about 200 million, but by 2010 it was estimated to have grown to almost 1 billion, exceeding 
the aggregate population of Japan, the United States, and the euro area. Furthermore, this 
middle-income  population  is  forecast  to  double  by  2020.  Combined  with  the  high-income 
population – households with disposable income of 35,000 U.S. dollars or more – the market 
is expected to be enormous, with a population of more than 2.2 billion. 
In China, durable consumer goods such as color television sets, refrigerators, and washing 
machines have become quite common in urban areas, but are still not as widespread as in 
Japan.  These  goods  are  even  less  common  in  rural  areas  of  China.  As  for  personal 
computers,  they  are  still  rare  even  in  urban  areas.  In  urban  areas  of  China,  ownership  of 
private cars is 10.9 cars per 100 households, one-eighth the level in Japan, and the gap is 
similar  to  the  difference  in  the  two  countries’  per  capita  GDP.  Thus,  it  could  be  said  that 
China is only at the dawn of motorization and the market is poised for further expansion.  
With regard to the service sector, many Japanese firms have already ventured into emerging 
countries and have won high regard for the meticulous service they provide, but the market is 
expected to grow further reflecting improvements in living standards. On the other hand, an 
increasing  number  of  Asian  tourists  have  been  visiting  the  Japanese  hot  spring  town  of 
Hakone  near  Tokyo  recently,  indicating  that  there  is  much  scope  for  the  domestic  service 
sector to capture overseas demand through the provision of various high-quality services.  
The psychological challenge 
C.  
Recently  the  term  “two  lost  decades”  can  be frequently  heard,  and  it  seems  that  this  long 
period  of  low  growth  has  shaken  confidence  in  the  future,  possibly  eroding  managers’ 
determination  to  raise  corporate  value  and  people’s  ambition  to  move  up  in  the  world.  A 
survey by the Japan Youth Research Institute conducted in 2007 on the motivation of high 
school  students  in  Japan,  the  United  States,  China,  and  South  Korea  reveals  the  inward-
looking attitude of Japanese youths. According to the survey, only 44.1 percent of Japanese 
respondents  said  they  wanted  to  move  up  in  the  world,  compared  with  66.1  percent  of 
respondents in the United States, 85.8 percent in China, and 72.3 percent in South Korea. 
Asked whether they would like a relaxed lifestyle earning an adequate salary, 42.9 percent of 
Japanese  respondents  said  they  would  very  much  like  such  a  life,  a  conspicuously  high 
figure  compared  with  the  13.8  percent  for  the  United  States,  17.8  percent  for  China,  and 
21.6 percent for South Korea. And consistent with these survey results, I have heard that at 
firms, too, the number of employees rejecting offers of promotion or overseas assignments is 
on the rise. But with economic globalization set to continue, for the Japanese economy to 
grow  it  is  necessary  to  nurture  personnel  who  can  negotiate  on  an  equal  footing  with 
ambitious overseas counterparts. 
Japan  recovered  from  the  devastation  of  World  War  II,  tackled  cases  of  environmental 
pollution, and overcame two oil crises as well as the sharp appreciation of the yen following 
the  Plaza  Accord.  More  recently,  it  went  through  the  collapse  of  the  bubble  economy  and 
financial  crises.  Each  of  these  experiences  enabled  Japan  to  tackle  the  next  challenge. 
Japan is close to the vast emerging markets of Asia and has a leading edge in areas such as 
environmental technology. Furthermore, the issue of a low birth rate and population aging is 
not limited to advanced countries; China and many other countries around the world face the 
same problem. If Japan can find a way to address this challenge, it could become a pioneer 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in this field. The government has presented its New Growth Strategy, which covers a wide 
range  of  areas.  Even  though  the  road  to  revitalizing  Japan  may  be  difficult,  it  can  be 
achieved if all economic parties – aiming to raise the potential growth rate and productivity – 
face up to this reality and take bold measures in their respective roles, free from old habits 
and vested interests.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
Since  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  autumn  2008,  the  so-called  Lehman  shock,  the 
Bank has conducted aggressive monetary easing measures. These included the lowering of 
its target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate – the policy interest rate – from around 
0.5 percent to around 0.1 percent and the continued provision of ample liquidity by increasing 
the  annual  amount  of  outright  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  from 
14.4 trillion yen to 21.6 trillion yen. As I mentioned earlier, with a view to overcoming deflation 
amid  intense  global  competition  and  returning  the  Japanese  economy  to  a  sustainable 
growth path with price stability, the Bank has introduced new measures, which I will discuss 
in  a  moment.  The  Bank  is  determined  to  continue  to  carefully  examine  the  outlook  for 
economic activity and prices and take policy actions in an appropriate manner, as necessary, 
as the central bank. 
A.  
Fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for 
economic growth 
The critical challenge facing the Japanese economy is to raise the potential economic growth 
rate and productivity. This can be achieved by exploring new areas of growth, and private 
firms, on their own initiative, should play the primary role in this regard to survive competition 
and attain growth. However, taking into account that the diminished growth potential of the 
economy  is  one  of  the  fundamental  problems  underlying  deflation  in  Japan,  the  Bank 
concluded  that  an  effective  way  to  use  its  functions  as  the  central  bank  was  to  provide 
support to strengthen Japan’s future foundations for economic growth from the financial side. 
The Bank expects that this measure will act as a catalyst and provide support for the efforts 
made by private firms and financial institutions on their own initiative.  
Based  on  this  thinking,  the  Bank  decided  in  June  2010  to  introduce  the  fund-provisioning 
measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  through  which  it 
provides long-term funds at a low interest rate to financial institutions that are making efforts 
in  terms  of  lending  and  investment  toward  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic 
growth. This measure extends loans with maturities of up to four years at a low interest rate 
equivalent to the policy interest rate to financial institutions for their lending and investment in 
a broad range of areas and types of business that will eventually lead to the strengthening of 
the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  The  first  new  loan  disbursement  was  carried  out  in 
September 2010, and loans totaling 462.5 billion yen were disbursed to 47 borrower financial 
institutions. The average amount per lending or investment project to be financed by such 
loans was 360 million yen, and the average duration of lending or investment projects was 
8.2 years. Funds were provided to a broad range of areas such as “environment and energy 
business,” “development and upgrading of social infrastructure,” “medical care, nursing care, 
and  other  health-related  business,”  and  “regional  and  urban  revitalization  business.”  The 
second new loan disbursement will be conducted in the near future, and a significant number 
of financial institutions, about 140, have applied for the measure. Some financial institutions 
have  already  started  actively  exploring  potential  demand  on  their  own  initiative,  bearing  in 
mind  their  future  utilization  of  the measure.  The  Bank  therefore  believes  that  the  measure 
has  made  a  rather  good  start,  in  that  it  has  prompted  financial  institutions  to  explore  new 
areas of growth in line with its intended purpose. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Comprehensive monetary easing policy 
B.  
Next, I will talk about the “comprehensive monetary easing policy,” which the Bank – with a 
view to further enhancing monetary easing – decided to implement on October 5. This policy 
is an extraordinary measure for a central bank to implement in that, taking into account that 
there was little room for a further decline in short-term interest rates, it aims to encourage 
declines  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  various  risk  premiums  using  a  combination  of  a 
number of policy measures.  
The first measure was a clarification of the Bank’s pursuit of the virtually zero interest rate 
policy.  
The  Bank  changed  the  target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  from  around 
0.1 percent  to  around  0  to  0.1  percent,  thereby  clearly  indicating  that  it  was  pursuing  a 
virtually zero interest rate policy. If the interest rate were set at literally zero percent, financial 
institutions would lose the incentive to invest funds in the money market, incurring the risk of 
impeding  the  flow  of  funds  in  overall  financial  markets.  Accordingly,  the  Bank  decided  to 
allow  the  overnight  call rate  to  fluctuate  in  a  range  at  or  below  0.1  percent.  For  the  same 
reason, the Federal Reserve set the target range for the federal funds rate, its policy rate, at 
0 to 0.25 percent.  
The  second  measure  was  a  clarification  of  the  Bank’s  commitment  regarding  the  time 
horizon for maintaining the virtually zero interest rate policy.  
In  terms  of  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  clearly  stated  that  it  would 
continue  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  until  it  judged,  on  the  basis  of  the 
“understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” – the so-called “understanding” – that 
price  stability  was  in  sight.3,4  This  measure  aims  to  boost  corporate  activity  and  private 
consumption  and  stabilize  the  public’s  medium-  to  long-term  inflation expectations.  On  the 
other hand, a prolonged period of extremely accommodative financial conditions entails the 
risk  of  negative  side  effects  such  as  an  asset  price  bubble.  Therefore,  maintaining  the 
virtually zero interest rate policy is subject to the condition that, upon careful examination, it 
does  not  give  rise  to  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances,  such  as  a  surge  in  asset 
prices or excessive debt.  
The  third  measure  was  the  establishment  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  (hereafter  the 
Program).  
As I mentioned earlier, in order to achieve further monetary easing through the conduct of 
monetary  policy,  it  is  necessary  to  promote  declines  in  risk-free,  longer-term  interest  rates 
and in various risk premiums rather than in short-term interest rates, which have little room to 
fall further. Therefore, the Bank decided to purchase through the Program financial assets 
amounting to about 5 trillion yen – namely, Japanese government securities and risk assets 
such  as  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs) – and provide longer-term funds amounting to 30 trillion yen at a 
fixed  rate  of  0.1  percent  through  the  fixed-rate  funds-supplying  operation  against  pooled 
collateral. The aim of the asset purchases through the Program is not to raise the prices of 
these assets by adjusting the supply and demand balance in the market. Rather, the Bank’s 
thinking behind the establishment of the Program is that the provision of funds through the 
Program will act as a catalyst in prompting a wider range of investors to purchase financial 
assets,  reduce  various  risk  premiums  on  these  assets  as  a  result  of  increased  market 
transactions, and ultimately bring about positive effects on economic activity.  
                                                 
3   The level of inflation that each Policy Board member understands, when conducting monetary policy, as being 
consistent with price stability over the medium to long term. 
4   The midpoints of most Policy Board members’ “understanding” are around 1 percent. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Bank  has  started  purchasing  assets  for  which  necessary  arrangements  have  been 
completed: on November 8, it purchased JGBs amounting to about 150 billion yen as its first 
purchase,  and  on  November  9  it  purchased  treasury  discount  bills  amounting  to  about 
150 billion yen as its second purchase. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
