Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Islamic banking products – theory, practice 
and issues 
Opening remarks by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  2nd  Foundations  of  Islamic  Finance  Series  Conference:  “Islamic  banking 
products – theory, practice and issues”, Kuala Lumpur, 8 March 2011. 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  and  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to 
deliver the opening address at this 2nd Foundations of Islamic Finance Series Conference. 
Following the success of the inaugural conference held last year in Dubai, this years event is 
a commendable collaboration between the organisers; the International Centre for Education 
in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF),  the  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  for  Islamic 
Finance (ISRA) and the University Putra Malaysia, to provide an avenue for discussions on 
various literatures in Islamic finance by eminent practitioners and scholars, with the aim to 
produce  quality  publications  for  the  industry.  The  theme  of  this  years  conference,  “Islamic 
Banking Products: Theory, Practice and Issues” is most timely as waves of innovation are 
pervasive in Islamic finance in the recent years, fostering the generation of a wide spectrum 
of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services.  As  the  next  frontier  of  development  in  Islamic 
finance  evolves  through  innovation,  we  have  to  be  mindful  that  innovation  within  an 
environment  of  constant  change  and  increasing  uncertainties  is  indeed  a  challenge.  Joint 
efforts  between  academia  and  industry  to  conduct  research,  to  explore  and  deliberate  on 
issues relating to the development of new Islamic financial products, such as the efforts that 
have  led  to  this  conference  can  therefore  provide  a  point  of  reference  for  the  industry  in 
ensuring  that  new  and  better  products  are  developed  to  match  the  diverse  and  discerning 
needs of customers, while meeting the requirements of the Shariah. 
The ability of Islamic finance, as a form of financial intermediation that provides a range of 
high quality financial products and services, reflect the innovative and dynamic nature of the 
industry  that  contributes  to  its  role  as  a  facilitator  of  economic  activity.  Together  with  the 
fundamental requirements in Islamic finance that an underlying productive economic activity 
accompanies financial transactions, a close link is formed between financial transactions and 
productive  flows.  Given  that  Islamic  financial  instruments  reflect  the  underlying  economic 
activities and that such instruments inherently have the potential to provide tangible returns 
to investors, there have been significant demands on such products. This gives rise to the 
competitiveness  of  Islamic  finance,  which  is  further  spurred  by  the  proliferation  of 
competitively priced Islamic financial products that is more evident in this recent decade. 
In  more  recent  times,  there  is  increasing  awareness  and  appreciation  amongst  the 
international  financial  community  on  the  distinct  nature  and  inbuilt  strengths  of  Islamic 
finance. The recent global financial crisis has brought about, among others, an opportunity 
for Islamic finance to strategically position itself as a stable form of financial intermediation. 
Islamic finance has now become the fastest growing segment in the global financial industry, 
as the US$1 trillion industry has shown phenomenal growth which averaged at 20 percent 
yearly.  The  Islamic  financial  system  is  no  more  peripheral  to  the  conventional  banking 
system as it has advanced from being a novelty, to become a viable and attractive alternative 
to the conventional banking system. Major banking and insurance groups have also shown 
great interest in embracing Islamic finance as part of their growth and business expansion 
plans in the recent years. 
In  Malaysia,  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  has  been  established  since  1983 
which operates in parallel with the conventional financial system. This dual banking model 
has been enshrined in the Central Banking Act 2009 following recent enhancements, thereby 
giving significance and due prominence to Islamic finance. A strong institutional infrastructure 
and effective legal, regulatory and Shariah framework form the underpinnings of our Islamic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial industry. In terms of market share, the Islamic banking system in Malaysia currently 
accounts  for  20  percent  of  our  banking  system  while  the  sukuk  market  accounts  for  more 
than  50  percent  of  the bond  market.  The  sukuk  market  in  Malaysia  is  vibrant  with  various 
innovations  taking  place.  As  witnessed  in  the  year  2010,  Malaysia  has  evolved  its  sukuk 
market  to  become  a  multi-currency  sukuk  origination  platform  with  the  issuance  of  four 
foreign  currency  sukuk  that  amounted  to  about  US$3  trillion.  This  development  positively 
contributes  to  the  global  sukuk  market  by  promoting  greater  inter-linkages  and  integration 
within  the  international  Islamic  financial  system.  Such  innovative  sukuk  products  that  are 
universally  acceptable  would  be  able  to  link  Islamic  financial  institutions  from  different 
jurisdictions,  forming  a  bridge  to  strengthen  the  relationship  of  the  international  Islamic 
financial market as well as the investment and trade links between regions.  
With the internationalisation of Islamic finance, interest in Islamic finance is indeed no longer 
limited  to  Muslim  nations  and  communities.  Increased  liberalisation  that  is  initiated  in  this 
decade has facilitated the internationalisation of Islamic finance which sees Islamic financial 
institutions  venturing  beyond  their  domestic  borders  and  capacity.  More  than  600  Islamic 
financial institutions now operate in more than 75 countries. In Malaysia, there is a greater 
foreign  institutional  presence  and  substantial  foreign  participation  in  Malaysia’s  Islamic 
financial system. Similarly, there has been an increased of foreign participants to raise and 
invest funds in Malaysia’s financial markets. The global sukuk market, growing at an average 
annual rate of about 40 percent has also been a significant platform for such investors, as it 
effectively  intermediates  funds  across  borders,  thereby  fostering  international  financial  and 
economic inter-linkages. 
As the internationalisation of Islamic finance widens the spheres within which Islamic finance 
operates in, there are growing opportunities and challenges in the business environment that 
sets the current backdrop for Islamic finance. Continuous capacity and capability measures 
will be pursued to provide an enabling environment for industry players to remain competitive 
and  innovative.  Given  that  the  recent  financial  turmoil  has  highlighted  the  importance  of 
strong liquidity risk management, an important recent development to assist in the liquidity 
management of Islamic financial institutions is the establishment of the International Islamic 
Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM).  The  IILM  has  begun  its  operations  in  Kuala 
Lumpur from early February this year, following its official launch in October 2010. The IILM 
is  tasked  to  issue  short-term  multi-currency  liquidity  instruments  that  would  facilitate  the 
cross-border  liquidity  management  between  financial  centres,  and  by  doing  so,  would 
enhance financial inter-linkages. The first issuance of liquidity instruments is expected to take 
place  later  during  the  year  and  is  very  much  anticipated  as  it  would  contribute  to  more 
efficient  management  of  financial  flows  across  borders,  thereby  leading  towards  more 
efficient internationalisation of Islamic finance. 
The Islamic finance industry is at a stage of growth in terms of products and services, which 
requires innovation to remain as the driving force behind the progress of the industry. In the 
pursuit of innovation, it is paramount that the Islamic banking and takaful industry achieve full 
Shariah  compliance  in  the  development  and  application  of  their  products  and  services.  A 
robust  Shariah  governance  framework  is  therefore  an  important  foundation  for  the  Islamic 
financial  institutions  to  ensure  that  its  objectives  and  operations  are  in  accordance  with 
Shariah  principles.  In  Malaysia,  there  have  been  recent  enhancements  to  the  Shariah 
governance that aim to further strengthen the existing Shariah governance process, decision 
making,  accountability  and  independence  of  Shariah  advisories.  Reinforcements  of  the 
Shariah compliance functions include the requirements for internal Shariah review and audit, 
supported  by  an  appropriate  risk  management  process  and  research  capability.  It  is 
envisaged that with a more robust and sound Shariah governance framework, with end-to-
end Shariah compliant control mechanism within Islamic financial institutions would promote 
greater  Shariah  observance  throughout  an  organisation  and  minimise  possibilities  of  the 
products  to  be  nullified  on  Shariah  grounds.  Effective  implementation  of  the  Shariah 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
governance framework will indeed further promote stakeholders confidence and enhance the 
integrity of the Islamic financial industry. 
It is also important to note that successful attempts in innovation are very much dependent 
on the availability of talents who have the ability and creative inclination to develop new ideas 
and  the  capacity  to  turn  such  ideas  into  achievable  results.  A  talented  workforce  is  the 
engine  to  spur  innovation  and  achieve  breakthrough  inventions.  For  the  Islamic  financial 
industry, it is recognised that human capital development initiatives form the vital groundwork 
that  we  need  to  build  and  strengthen  to  ensure  that  the  industry  remains  competitive  and 
innovative. Given that the Islamic finance industry is in its nascent development phase, more 
importance  is  thus  placed  on  human  capital  development.  The  establishment  of  various 
institutional  platforms  such  as  the  INCEIF  and  ISRA,  as  well  as  offerings  of  specialised 
Islamic finance courses by tertiary institutions have been instrumental in contributing to the 
nurturing  and  development  of  professional  talent  and  expertise  in  Islamic  finance.  It  is 
heartening  that  these  institutions  have  had  notable  achievements  since  their  inception.  An 
example  is  INCEIF,  where  as  to  date,  107  students  have  graduated  with  the  Chartered 
Islamic  Finance  Professional  qualifications,  while  an  estimated  1,000  more  are  at  different 
stages of completing the qualification.  
As  the  pool  of  talents  within  the  Islamic  finance  industry  widens  with  the  entries  of  new 
players, the competition for the best talent would also intensify as demands increase for the 
right and most suitable talent. It is therefore opportune for the education and learning service 
providers to constantly review their teaching methodology and learning contents, and to be 
updated on the skills requirements of the industry. Greater collaboration between the industry 
and  academia  is  also  an  important  aspect  to  align  the  training  and  development  with  the 
business requirements of the industry. 
Moving  forward,  more  initiatives  are  required  to  expand  the  business  horizon  and  product 
offerings  in  Islamic  finance.  Further  in-depth  research  on  Shariah  issues  relating  to  risk 
mitigation,  liquidity  management  and  hedging  would  enrich  the  research  and  development 
function to facilitate in the generation of ideas and creation of new ground-breaking Islamic 
financial products. The combined market knowledge and insights from education and training 
institutions such as INCEIF and ISRA can also provide meaningful contributions to the global 
Islamic finance industry that address both market needs and Shariah preservation. Increased 
global engagement in Shariah matters among scholars, practitioners and regulators through 
international  discussion  platforms,  together  with  the  massive  flow  of  knowledge,  ideas, 
technology  and  people  across  borders  also  cumulatively 
foster  a  greater  global 
understanding on the practices in Islamic finance. 
Innovation has fundamentally transformed the global financial landscape at a rapid pace and 
is undeniably a driver to sustain growth and to secure the competitive advantage of financial 
market participants. In the context of Islamic finance, the broadening of the frontier of product 
development can be further propelled by intensifying exploration, research and development 
initiatives  and  through  intellectual  discourse  and  engagements.  It  is  duty-bound  for  us  to 
continuously  expand  the  dimensions  of  Islamic  finance,  hence  contributing  towards 
improving  financial  stability  and  economic  prosperity  in  the  interest  of  the  local  and  global 
community.  
I am confident that this conference and the opportunities presented for deliberation on the 
research  papers  will  be  a  fruitful  one.  I  wish  all  delegates  and  participants  a  successful 
conference.  With  the  lafaz  Bismillahir  Rahmanir  Rahim,  it  is  my  pleasure  and  honour  to 
declare open the 2nd Foundations of Islamic Finance Series Conference.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
