Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Reforming the government debt market 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of Bank of Uganda, at the Bank of 
Uganda/Uganda Securities Exchange Workshop on reforming the government debt market, 
Kampala, 18 May 2011. 
 The Chairman of Uganda Securities Exchange  
Chief Executives of Financial Institutions  
Resource Persons  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  this  morning  to  officiate  at  the  opening  of  this 
extremely  important,  somewhat  technical  workshop.  I  would  like  to  welcome  all  of  you.  I 
would also like to thank the Uganda Securities Exchange for collaborating with the Bank of 
Uganda to organize the workshop.  
The aim of the workshop is to discuss a number of important reforms to the debt markets in 
Uganda; reforms which are under consideration and about which we would like to hear your 
views. The reforms are intended to contribute to making debt markets deeper, more liquid 
and more efficient. As such they will benefit borrowers, investors, financial institutions and 
the  wider  economy.  In  particular,  I would  like  this  workshop  to  agree  on  practical  steps  to 
encourage and enable broker dealers to play an active role in the debt markets.  
Over the last decade, we have achieved substantial progress in promoting the growth of the 
domestic capital markets, for both bonds and equities. Uganda is now regarded as a “frontier 
market”,  because  the  country  is  able  to  attract  portfolio  investment  from  abroad  into  its 
capital  and  money  markets. Therefore,  we  are  well  and  truly  on  the  road  to  becoming  an 
emerging market.  
Nevertheless, we must also acknowledge that our financial markets are still characterized by 
certain weaknesses. These weaknesses include the low levels of liquidity in the secondary 
market as well as a narrow investor base, which is largely confined to the commercial banks 
and a few non bank financial institutions. Participation by the general public in the securities 
markets  is  very  low.  Markets  are  not  as  fully  transparent  as  is  desirable.  The  listing  of 
Government  securities  on  the  stock  exchange  has  not  yet  been  accompanied  by  vibrant 
trading of securities.  
There are also problems with the efficiency and volatility of our securities markets. Evidence 
for this is the often erratic bidding behavior at bond market auctions, with bids which are at 
odds with prevailing secondary market rates and a normal positively sloped bond yield curve. 
In part this reflects a lack of transparency in the securities markets; for example, the closing 
prices and yields on the secondary markets are not available to all market participants. It also 
reflects the need to improve the understanding of key market issues by some participants. 
A number of proposals will be made at this workshop to address the problems I have just 
highlighted. One of the main objectives of the proposals is to strengthen the participation of 
broker dealers in the securities markets. Broker dealers can help to widen market demand 
for  debt  securities  by  engaging  in  the  retail  securities  business,  with  individuals, non  bank 
financial institutions and non financial companies. Widening market demand and promoting 
secondary market trading should also enhance the liquidity of Government securities.  
One of the possible measures to strengthen the participation of broker dealers in the debt 
markets is to allow them access to the Central Depository System for securities.  
We would like to strengthen the transparency of the securities markets, by ensuring that all 
potential market participants can access data on prices and yields on a daily basis. We will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
propose  that  data  on  the  prices,  yields  and  amounts  of  securities  traded  daily  should  be 
made available to the public. We are also intending to publish each day a pricing matrix for 
Treasury Bills and Bonds, so that investors can readily ascertain the prevailing market yield 
on a debt security of any maturity.  
The workshop will also consider changes to the methodology for assigning bond coupons. 
Currently  the  bond  coupon  is  determined  prior  to  the  auction,  with  bids  made  on  a  price 
basis.  We  will  discuss  asking  investors  to  bid  on  the  basis  of  yields,  with  the  coupon 
assigned after the results are determined, which is the normal practise in more developed 
markets. The advantage of such a change is that it will eliminate significant price discounts 
and premiums in the primary auctions, which occur when the yields demanded by the market 
differ from the pre-assigned bond coupon.  
This  workshop  is  one  of  a  number  of  ongoing  initiatives  to  promote  the  deepening  and 
diversification  of  financial  markets,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Five  Year  Financial  Markets 
Development  Plan.  In  addition,  there  is  an  active  work  programme  within  the  East  African 
Community  to  promote  the  regional  integration  of  capital  markets.  The  Bank  of  Uganda  is 
spearheading the creation of regional intermediaries that will support the efficient trading of 
Government securities within the integrated financial market framework in the East African 
Community. In implementing all these reforms which will be discussed in this workshop, the 
Bank of Uganda is very pleased to acknowledge the technical support of the Department of 
Treasury of the government of the United States of America.  
To conclude, I wish to pledge Bank of Uganda’s continued support to reforms to deepen the 
capital  markets  and  make  them  more  efficient.  I  would  now  like  to  declare  this  workshop 
officially open.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
