Øystein Olsen: A changing global economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Norwegian  School  of  Economics  and  Business  Administration  (NHH)  annual  Spring 
Conference, Oslo, 31 May 2011 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 Over the past decade, the pace of change in the global economy has picked up. Emerging 
economies1  have  assumed  a  more  prominent  role.  These  developments  have  generated 
challenges  and  opportunities,  not  only  in  emerging  economies  but  also  in  the  advanced 
economies. In my speech today, I would like to focus on three key macroeconomic trends: 
 
First, the global economy has long been characterised by substantial imbalances in 
international  trade.  Large  surpluses  in  many  emerging  economies  have  their 
counterpart  in  large  deficits  in  traditional  industrial  economies.  This  generates 
tensions. 
Second, capital markets have not been able to cope with the high level of saving in 
emerging economies. Real interest rates have been low for a long period and new 
imbalances have arisen. Sovereign debt is now high in a number of countries. 
Third, growth in emerging economies has resulted in higher demand for energy and 
commodities.  While  the  price  of  money  has  fallen,  prices  for  energy  and 
commodities  prices  have  been  pushed  up.  This  has  amplified  the  imbalances  for 
many countries, but has had a favourable impact on Norway. 
  The  last  part  of  my  speech  today  will  focus  on  the  consequences  of  these  trends  for  our 
decisions in the management of the Government Pension Fund Global. 
Global imbalances 
Let me start with the change in the world’s economic geography and the resulting gains. 
Strong  economic  growth  in  China,  India  and  several  other  emerging  economies  has  lifted 
hundreds  of  millions  of  people  out  of  poverty.  African  countries  have  also  experienced  a 
growth spurt and the number of people living in extreme poverty has fallen considerably over 
the past two decades2. This is a continuation of a long-term trend. According to figures from 
the  World  Bank,  the  share  of  people  living  on  less  than  USD  1.25  a  day  decreased  from 
close to 43 per cent in 1980 to just over 21 per cent in 2005. 
Chart: GDP index 2000 and 2010 
The  strong  growth  in  the  emerging  economies  can  perhaps  best  be  illustrated  through  a 
comparison  with  western  economies.  If  GDP  is  set  at  100  in  the  year  2000,  GDP  growth 
would have reached 112 for the euro area and 118 for the US up to last year. 
The figure for Brazil is 142 and 271 for China. If the trend continues, China will outgrow the 
US to become the largest economy in the world in the course of the next 10–20 years. 
                                                 
1  Here, the term emerging economies includes developing economies 
2  Pinkovskiy, Maxim and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2010), “African Poverty is Falling...Much Faster than You Think!”, 
NBER Working Paper 15775. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The financial crisis hastened the pace of these changes. The global economic downturn in 
the wake of the crisis was marked in many countries and regions. For the OECD area as a 
whole, GDP fell by 3.5 per cent in 2009. 
Chart: Growth in 2009 
Emerging economies, on the other hand, sustained a high level of activity despite a sharp fall 
in demand for their exports. As shown in the world map, countries in South-East Asia and 
some countries in South America and several parts of Africa continued to grow when the rest 
of the world was struggling with the aftermath of the crisis. 
To enable poor countries to grow more rapidly, international trade is vital. It allows countries 
to  specialise,  while  giving  them  access  to  goods  and  services  from  other  countries.  But 
specialisation  necessitates  readjustment.  Over  the  past  decades,  western  countries  have 
encountered  strong  competition  from  low-cost  countries,  particularly  in  manufacturing 
production.  As  a  result,  firms,  and  virtually  whole  industries,  have  closed  down  and  new 
industries  have  emerged.  Norway  has  also  had  experience  of  losing  industries  that  have 
become commercially non-viable, as when the textile and clothing industry almost completely 
disappeared in the 1970s. 
Chart: Current account 
Imbalances in world trade have built up over the past decade. Large and rising deficits in the 
US economy have been driven by high consumption and a strong appetite for credit among 
US households. Consumption has outstripped production in the US for a long period. Private 
debt  has  increased,  although  it  has  also  increased  in  Europe.  The  counterpart  to  these 
developments  is  a  high  level  of  saving  in  Asia  –  primarily  China.  Asia’s  willingness  to 
purchase US Treasury bonds has allowed the imbalances to build up further. 
The  Norwegian  economy  is  also  part  of  this  picture.  High  oil  prices  have  resulted  in 
substantial surpluses in oil-exporting countries’ current accounts, which have been invested 
in international capital markets. A balance of payments surplus provides the opportunity to 
save  and  apportion  revenues  over  time.  Trade  deficits  and  surpluses  do  not  necessarily 
reflect an imbalance, but can be a prudent adjustment. 
Chart: Exports from emerging economies in Asia 
Emerging economies in Asia now account for 16 per cent of total global exports, compared 
with 9 per cent in 2000. With substantial labour reserves and a cost level that is considerably 
lower  than  other  countries,  it  has  been  easy  for  emerging  economies  to  find  markets  for 
manufactured goods. A Chinese manufacturing worker’s hourly wage is about 1/20 of a US 
worker’s wage3. 
Even  though  there  are  considerable  gains  related  to  international  trade  and  free  capital 
movement,  there  are  also  dangers  to  be  avoided.  Over  the  past  thirty  years,  a  number  of 
countries have been hit by financial crises. The Asian crisis at the end of the 1990s showed 
that  the  combination  of  large  trade  deficits,  small  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  a  fixed 
exchange rate regime proved to be demanding. When international investors lost confidence 
in the ability of governments to defend the fixed exchange rate, the countries encountered 
difficulties.  Sharp  currency  depreciations  and  major  readjustments  followed  in  many 
countries.  Even  though  economies  in  this  region  have  fared  well  in  recent  years,  the 
experience may have left its mark. 
A  number  of  Asian  countries,  China  in  particular,  have  chosen  to  keep  their  currencies 
pegged to the US dollar. As long as the Chinese authorities are successful in keeping the 
exchange rate fairly fixed, competitiveness and a trade surplus will be maintained. However, 
                                                 
3  US Bureau of Labor Statistics. International Labor Comparisons. Manufacturing in China. 
http://www.bls.gov/fls/china.htm 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
such a policy is at the expense of deficit countries, which would have preferred to see an 
adjustment in the yuan exchange rate. China’s exchange rate policy is therefore under strong 
pressure, especially from the US. 
But China’s economic strategy is based on its own experience and the experience of others. 
First, China has chosen to focus on the export of finished manufactured goods rather than 
domestic  consumption  as  the  basis  for  growth.  So  far,  this  has  resulted  in  dynamic 
developments where growth has been kept high owing to increasing opportunities for people 
in  rural  areas  to  move  to  new  jobs  in  towns  and  cities.  A  stable  exchange  rate  has 
contributed to predictable operating parameters for a rapidly growing export industry and has 
held up competitiveness. At the same time, the focus on manufacturing has made China a 
significant  player  in  the  world  economy,  able  to  attract  international  expertise  for  further 
development of the corporate sector. 
Second, China can take advantage of the lessons learned by others during the Asian crisis, 
when  many  countries  experienced  that  small  reserves  in  a  period  of  economic  turbulence 
can be hazardous. Third, China requires substantial savings to prepare for the future needs 
of an ageing population. The export surplus combined with high domestic investment may be 
a sound savings strategy. 
Nonetheless, changes in China’s policy are no doubt on their way. An appreciation in real 
terms seems inevitable, potentially through higher domestic cost and price pressures. There 
are already clear indications of this. 
Western  economies,  however,  should  not  primarily  be  looking  to  remedy  their  own  trade 
deficits  via  China’s  exchange  rate  policy.  The  imbalances  in  the  US  and  Europe  are  the 
result of countries living beyond their means. Deficit countries must come to grips with their 
own problems. 
Capital flows and real interest rates 
As a mirror image of the trade imbalances, capital has flowed from emerging economies to 
rich countries. Normally, capital flows to the highest returns. This would imply that capital is 
transferred  from  countries  with  a  large  capital  stock  and  inadequate  savings  to  countries 
where the stock of capital is small and there are opportunities for profitable investment. In 
that case, capital should rather have flowed to emerging economies, and not the reverse, as 
we have witnessed in recent years. 
Chart: Saving and investment as a share of GDP 
Looking back on the financial crisis, the question may be raised whether international capital 
markets have been able to cope effectively with large capital flows. A large savings surplus in 
Asia  has  sought  investment  opportunities  in  rich  countries.  This  has  been  possible,  not 
because of high investment demand, but because of the sharp decline in saving in advanced 
economies. The high level of saving in Asia has been the driving force and is the reason for 
the decline in long-term real interest rates. 
Chart: US long-term interest rates 
The  effect  of  global  imbalances  on  long-term  interest  rates  set  the  stage  for  the  financial 
crisis.  In  the  US,  as  shown  in  the  chart,  interest  rates  had  shown  a  persistent  downward 
trend.  Low  interest  rates  induced  investors  to  seek  new  investment  opportunities  in  the 
search for higher returns. Expected return rises with an increase in risk. A strong appetite for 
risk combined with financial innovation resulted in an underpricing of risk in financial markets, 
while low interest rates led households, enterprises and governments to overestimate their 
own  ability  to  pay.  Combined  with  weak  regulation  and  inadequate  supervision  of  the 
financial sector, these were some of the root causes of the financial crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In 
increased. 
then  decided 
response,  governments 
As  I  mentioned,  trade  deficits  and  surpluses  are  not  in  themselves  unusual.  But  the 
imbalances eventually became so large that countries became vulnerable to turbulence. And 
when financial markets were not able to cope with the ensuing high capital flows, problems 
became severe. 
Chart: Public debt 
The financial crisis was followed by a debt crisis. Bank rescue packages transferred private 
debt  to  governments  and  central  banks.  In  addition,  tax  revenues  declined  and  social 
security  expenses 
to  pursue 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  to  counteract  falling  demand  and  rising  unemployment,  in  many 
cases in spite of entering the crisis with fiscal deficits and fairly high debt. 
A number of governments found that the need to apply economic policy measures to sustain 
the level of activity was greatest when their ability to do so was weakest. An important lesson 
of  the  crisis  is  that  fiscal  policy  must  have  a  long-term  anchor.  Governments  must  save 
during good times to accumulate funds that can be drawn on in bad times. 
Government debt in the major advanced economies is now as high, measured as a share of 
GDP, as it was immediately after the Second World War when the surge in military spending 
had been financed by borrowing. Some governments in Europe are now facing a situation 
where financial market confidence in their debt-servicing capacity has been severely dented. 
If  these  governments  are  not  able  to  meet  their  debt  obligations,  the  European  banking 
system  will  be  adversely  affected,  both  through  losses  on  government  securities and  as  a 
result of economic decline. This interdependency between government finances and banks’ 
financial strength across national borders could threaten the stability of the global economy. 
The global imbalances that were behind the financial crisis are still present. Some countries 
will  be  struggling  with  large  fiscal  deficits  for  some  considerable  time.  However,  it  is 
conceivable that the imbalances will gradually diminish. 
Emerging  economies  are  facing  a  period  of  considerable  investment  in  welfare  and 
infrastructure development. Households and firms will be able to reduce saving as welfare 
schemes  and  national  capital  markets  are  developed.  In  addition,  many  countries  with  an 
ageing population may find that an increasing number will have to draw down their wealth, 
resulting in a decrease in total saving. For European countries and the US, there is no doubt: 
deficits must be reduced and savings increased. 
Energy and commodity prices 
Let  me  move  on  to  how  the  changes  in  the  world  economy  have  influenced  commodity 
demand and commodity prices. 
Chart: Real prices for metals, food and oil 
The  price  of  oil  is  now  around  USD  115  per  barrel.  Prices  for  other  commodities  such  as 
metals  and  food  are  also  high.  A  weak  dollar,  low  interest  rates  and  an  ample  supply  of 
liquidity may have contributed to the rise in prices. We have also recently seen that prices 
are  being  pushed  up  by  political  unrest  in  North  Africa  and  the  Middle  East.  Nonetheless, 
strong  growth  in  emerging  economies  and  supply-side  conditions  have  been  the  dominant 
factors in developments since the early 2000s. 
From 2000 to 2009 emerging economies accounted for 100 per cent of the growth in global 
consumption of primary energy sources. In the same period they accounted for 80 per cent 
of  growth  in  global  consumption  of  agricultural  products  and  virtually  all  of  the  increase  in 
global metal consumption. 
While demand for energy and commodities is rising, there are supply-side constraints. With 
regard to oil, the large and easily accessible deposits were extracted first, and new finds are 
smaller and more expensive to extract. The same applies to a number of metals. Investment 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  the  energy  and  commodity  sector  has  also  been  low.  Energy  prices  have  risen  fairly 
markedly over a lengthy period, with some temporary disturbances. 
Agriculture  is  facing  some  of  the  same  challenges.  Productivity  growth  in  this  sector  has 
declined in recent years. In order to increase production, farmers have had to use less fertile 
land and the costs of food production have risen. Agricultural production has also become 
more energy-intensive and energy and food prices have become more closely linked. Energy 
now  accounts  for  a  third  of  the  cost  of  grain  production.  In  addition,  with  high  oil  prices, 
demand  has  shifted  towards  biofuels,  with  inputs  such  as  maize  and  sugar.  In  2010, 
40 per cent  of  maize  production  in  the  US  was  used  to  produce  biofuel.  A  large  share  of 
sugar production in Brazil is used for the same purpose. As we have seen in recent years, 
the  rise  in  energy  prices  is  spreading  to  food  prices4.  Prices  have  also  risen  considerably 
over the past year as a result of poor crop yields in many parts of the world following storms 
and drought. 
Our analyses of the outlook for the world economy and the Norwegian economy are based 
on the assumption that oil prices will remain at the current level. It is difficult to predict future 
prices with any assertion. Should oil prices show a marked decline, the oil fund mechanism 
will  to  a  considerable  extent  shield  the  Norwegian  economy  from  the  short-term  negative 
consequences of a fall in oil revenues. However, our petroleum wealth will be reduced. On 
the other hand, should oil prices continue to rise, the Government Pension Fund Global and 
the fiscal rule provide a sound and robust system for coping with higher revenues. 
The investment strategy for the Government Pension Fund Global 
Let  me  now  turn  to  how  the  changes  in  the  world’s  economic  geography  influence  the 
investment strategy of the Government Pension Fund Global. 
Chart: Norway’s terms of trade 
Norway has profited from globalisation, through both trade and capital markets. As a major 
commodity exporter we have benefitted from high commodity prices. At the same time, we 
have had access to cheap imports from emerging economies. Norway’s terms of trade have 
improved  throughout  the  past  decade.  Norway’s  national  income  has  risen  substantially 
throughout  the  oil  age.  Substantial  current  account  surpluses  and  the  buildup  of  the 
Government Pension Fund Global have also made Norway a significant exporter of capital. 
Chart: Market value of the Fund 
The  Fund  is  among  the  world’s  largest  funds.  Performance  fluctuates  in  step  with 
developments in global financial markets. Nevertheless, the most conspicuous feature (see 
chart)  is  not  the  fluctuations,  but  the  sharp,  virtually  continuous  rise  in  the  Fund’s  market 
value. The stable growth of recent years is due in part to large transfers from the Ministry of 
Finance  in  autumn  2008  while  equity  markets  declined.  The  krone  exchange  rate  also 
weakened  through  the  crisis,  serving  to  mitigate  the  impact  on  the  value  of  the  Fund,  as 
measured in NOK. 
Chart: Return on the Fund 
Returns over the past two years have been good. After a return of more than 25 per cent in 
2009, the return in 2010 was about 10 per cent. This must be seen in the context of weak 
performance in 2008. Following substantial losses during the financial crisis, the Fund has 
more than recouped these losses. 
Chart: Excess return on the Fund 
                                                 
4  Rising  Prices  on  the  Menu,  Finance&Development,  Mars  2011,  Vol.  48,  No.  1,  IMF  (Hebling,  T  and  
Roache S.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
regional allocation 
composition of the fixed income benchmark 
increased emphasis on absolute return 
The  figures  for  excess  return  –  the  return  on  the  Fund  in  excess  of  the  benchmark  
indices – also reflect the financial crisis. Substantial losses in the second half of 2008 have 
been  more  than  made  up  for  by  the  Fund’s  favourable  performance  since  then.  Since 
1998 the annual excess return on the Fund has been above 0.3 percentage point. 
The Fund came through the financial crisis without suffering losses. Nevertheless, during and 
following the crisis we have gained valuable experience. This experience is important as a 
basis for the management strategy of the Fund ahead. 
A key part of Norges Bank’s management task is to advise the Fund’s owner on the need for 
changes in the investment strategy. The Fund’s investment strategy is based on the Fund’s 
comparative  advantage  and  is  formulated  in  a  way  that  supports  the  mandate  and  limits 
defined by the owner. 
I would like to highlight the following issues from our strategy plan for 2011–2013: 
 
 
 
The  purpose  of  the  management  of  the  Fund  is  to  maximise  its  long-term  international 
purchasing power. The return on the Fund must be used for importing goods and services. A 
key question for the investment strategy is to what extent international purchasing power is 
exposed to foreign exchange risk and how this foreign exchange risk can best be managed. 
Norway’s neighbouring countries are its largest trading partners and may be a natural choice 
for the investment of the Fund’s capital. This will provide an exchange rate hedge for future 
imports  from  these  countries.  On  the  other  hand,  changes  in  exchange  rates  will  often  be 
counteracted  by  differences  in  price  developments  between  countries.  If  the  theory  of 
purchasing power parity is valid, we can make decisions about which countries to invest in 
independently of which countries we import from5. 
Chart: GDP and regional allocation of equities in the Fund 
Today, just over half of the Fund’s capital is invested in Europe. The proportion of European 
investments  in  the  Fund’s  portfolio  is  considerably  higher  than  would  be  implied  by  a 
market-weighted portfolio. The Fund’s holdings in European equity markets, for example, are 
twice as large as its holdings in Latin-America and Asia. As the world’s economic geography 
changes, it is natural to raise the question of whether the Fund’s investment strategy should 
be adjusted to improve the ratio of return to risk. 
In the annual report to the Storting (Norwegian parliament) on the management of the Fund, 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  pointed  to  a  number  of  factors  that  indicate  that  the  Fund’s 
overweight in Europe should be reviewed. This is in line with previous advice from Norges 
Bank6.  Capital  markets  in  emerging  economies  have  become  more  developed.  As  these 
countries account for an increasingly large share of global output and there are prospects of 
strong growth, it may be advisable to invest more of the Fund’s capital there. A more even 
distribution of the Fund’s capital across major regions would also reduce the Fund’s overall 
risk. Such changes must be introduced over time. 
The owner’s most important investment strategy decision is the share of the Fund’s capital 
that should be invested in equities. The size of the equity allocation has an impact on the 
                                                 
5  Recent  research  shows  that  the  theory  of  purchasing  power  parity  holds  true  to  a  greater  extent  than 
suggested by previous results. Cf.: Lucio Sarno (2011): Purchasing Parity in Tradable Goods, Working Paper 
for the Ministry of Finance 
6  Report No. 15 (2010–2011) to the Storting: The management of the Government Pension Fund Global in 2010 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Fund’s return and risk and has increased from zero in 1996, to 40 per cent in 1998 and to the 
current  60  per  cent  allocation  adopted  by  the  Storting  in  2007.  The  equity  allocation  was 
increased from 40 to 60 per cent in the period from June 2007 to June 2009. Norges Bank 
purchased  NOK  1  trillion  in  equities  for  the  Fund  through  the  financial  crisis,  more  than 
doubling the Fund’s total equity holdings. The owner’s adherence to the strategy through the 
period of decline in equity prices will undoubtedly prove profitable over time. 
A  maximum  of  40  per  cent  of  the  Fund  is  now  invested  in  bonds  and  other  fixed  income 
instruments, which are usually associated with lower risk but also lower expected return than 
equities. Earlier this year, Norges Bank advised the Ministry of Finance on the design of the 
benchmark index for fixed income investment. The strategic benchmark index should reflect 
the  role  fixed  income  investment  is  expected  to  play  in  the  Fund’s  portfolio.  Fixed  income 
investment  should  primarily  contribute  to  reducing  the  fluctuations  in  the  Fund’s  value.  In 
addition, the Fund should be exposed to credit premiums. 
The  financial  crisis  taught  us  that  different  types  of  fixed  income  investments  have  very 
similar qualities when market liquidity declines. There are limited gains from holding a large 
number of diverse securities. Norges Bank therefore recommends simplifying the indices by 
substantially reducing the number of fixed income instruments. 
The most commonly used benchmark indices for bonds are market-weighted. Borrowers are 
assigned  weights  according  to  the  level  of  debt  they  hold.  Increased  debt  can  reduce 
debt-servicing  capacity.  A  market-weighted  index  is  probably  not  the  best  approach  for 
diversifying  the  risk  of  loss  given  default.  Norges  Bank  has  therefore  proposed  the  use  of 
GDP weights instead of market weights for government debt in the Fund. 
Under  the  fiscal  rule,  central  government  spending  is  to  correspond  to  the  expected  real 
return on the Fund, estimated at an annual average of 4 per cent. As manager, Norge Bank 
must invest with a view to achieving a return in line with this objective. 
Estimating  the  expected  return  over  the  Fund’s  long-term  horizon  is  challenging.  Some 
models now suggest that return requirements in equity markets are fairly normal, in spite of 
low  yields7.  This  may  imply  a  real  return  of  5–6  per  cent  in  equity  markets.  With  positive 
contributions in active management, property investment and fixed income management, a 
total return of 4 per cent is not unreasonable. 
In our management of the Fund, we must do more than concentrate on relative return, or the 
difference  between  the  return  on  the  benchmark  index  and  the  return  on  the  Fund. 
Investment  strategy  advice  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  must  be  based  on  assessments  of 
absolute  returns.  For  the  property  investment  portfolio,  which  is  currently  being  built  up, 
detailed  knowledge  of  the  value  of  the  underlying  assets  is  essential  to  be  able  to  judge 
whether  an  investment  will  generate  the  desired  real  return  over  time.  Knowledge  about 
underlying  values  is  also  necessary  in  order  to  maintain  an  active  approach  to  the 
benchmark indices – and to make adjustments as required. 
Conclusion 
Today, I have focused on changes in the world’s economic geography and the challenges 
they  entail.  Large  imbalances  will  necessitate  readjustment.  The  solution  to  the  problems 
does not lie in restricting world trade. We should recall that the increase in trade and free 
capital  markets  has  primarily  resulted  in  substantial  gains.  Emerging  economies  have  in  a 
short  space  of  time  assumed  a  more  prominent  role  in  the  global  economy.  Many  people 
have been lifted out of poverty. These developments should be allowed to continue. 
                                                 
7  Bank of England: Quarterly Bulletin 1, 2011, Chart 13: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb1101.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
