V S Das: Towards making right to information act more meaningful 
Speech by Mr V S Das, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at a seminar on 
Right to Information by Moneylife Foundation, Mumbai, 3 September 2011. 
 Hon’ble  Information  Commissioner,  Shri  Shailesh  Gandhi,  Executive  Director,  Union 
Bank of India, Shri S. S. Mundra, Secretary, Bank Depositors’ Association, Shri Ashok 
Rawat,  Managing  Editor  of  Moneylife  Magazine,  Ms.  Sucheta  Dalal,  Ladies  & 
Gentlemen: 
It gives me great pleasure to participate in this seminar which is graced by the presence of 
our Central Information Commissioner, Shri Shailesh Gandhi. Shri Gandhi, as we all know, is 
one  of  the  pioneers  who  worked  relentlessly  towards  placing  the  transparency  issue  in 
governance right on top of the public agenda in our country. It is thanks to the earnest and 
passionate  efforts  of  people  like  him  that  the  Right  to  Information  movement  in  India  has 
become  part  of  the  overall  public  policy  debate  for  increased  transparency  in  public  life.  I 
extend  warm  congratulations  to  the  organizers  on  the  timely  initiative  of  organising  this 
seminar and providing an appropriate platform to discuss and deliberate the best plausible 
approach on making effective use of the Right to Information (RTI) Act to the best advantage 
of society, without needless friction between information seekers and information providers. 
As  you  are  all  aware,  the  RTI  Act  provides  a  practical  regime  of  right  to  information  for 
citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities,  in  order  to 
promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority. It rests on 
the fundamental premise of how citizens can meaningfully express their voice and articulate 
their concerns on the acts of omission and commission of public agencies. It has been said 
that  “information  is  Oxygen  for  a  democratic  society”.  Democracy  requires  an  informed 
citizenry and transparency of information which are vital to its functioning and also to contain 
corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the governed. 
This truly conforms to the growing recognition of the importance of transparency for effective 
democratic processes. As the old saying goes, “Sunshine is the strongest antiseptic”. 
The  RTI  has  empowered  Indian  citizens  who  have  found  a  powerful  tool  to  bring 
measurability and accountability at all levels of governance. This is also being facilitated by 
large-scale  use  of  the  Act  by  the  media  and  civil  right  activists  to  bring  transparency  and 
objectivity  in  the  functioning  of  various  public  offices.  However,  the  reach  of  civil  society 
organizations  and  social  activists  is  limited  owing  to  the  geographical  size  and  population 
and, perhaps, it is due to this that the impact of the Act has yet to attain its envisioned level. 
Our data reveals that the number of applications we received from the underdeveloped and 
backward  regions  of  the  country  was  far  less  in  relation  to  the  developed  regions.  Thus 
applications from the North-East (Assam: 4 and Tripura: 2) constituted barely 0.1 percent of 
the 5,087 applications received during 2010–11. If this is generally the case, there is need for 
educating people in these regions on RTI. 
I  have  been  closely  associated  with  the  implementation  of  the  RTI  Act  in  my  organization 
right  from  its  inception,  first  as  the  CPIO  and  then  as  the  Appellate  Authority  and  have 
derived great satisfaction from the assignment. I wish to narrate briefly our own experience in 
this regard and the challenges that we faced. 
 
At the outset, the tone was set by our Governor who declared that Reserve Bank of 
India  should  welcome  RTI  Act  as  an  opportunity  to  improve  our  corporate 
governance through greater transparency and accountability. The personal interest 
taken by the Governor in the implementation of the Act played an important role in 
sensitizing our staff towards the spirit of the new law.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
       We studied systems prevalent in certain other central banks with a view to adopting 
best  practices  in  systems  and  procedures.  The  law  was  new  and  its  proper 
implementation was important for the Bank’s reputation. Further, it was necessary to 
maintain consistency in our responses and ensure that the exemptions available in 
the Act were applied correctly. We, therefore, began with a centralized model with 
one CPIO who was an Executive Director and the senior most Deputy Governor as 
Appellate Authority .Later, after about four years, on gaining sufficient experience on 
what our stance should be on various types of requests, coupled with the fact that 
increased awareness of the Act had resulted in a significant rise in the number of 
applications, a partially decentralised approach in the implementation of RTI was put 
in place with effect from November, 2009.  
Accordingly,  dissemination  of  information  under  RTI  is  now  being  done  in  a 
decentralized manner by the Central Office Departments with the Heads of various 
Central  Office  Departments  and  the  Banking  Ombudsmen  designated  as  Central 
Public  Information  Officers  and  an  Executive  Director  as  the  Appellate  Authority. 
Further,  senior  officers  have  been  designated  as  Central  Assistant  Public 
Information  Officers  at  each  of  our  27  Regional  Offices  and  Central  Office 
departments. 
The  RBI  website  is  a  storehouse  of  information  on  a  plethora  of  topics.  We  have 
proactively placed a large amount of information on our website, such as circulars, 
master  circulars,  publications  and  press  releases,  as  also  a  data  base  on  Indian 
economy. The Bank has started the process of digitization of records with suitable 
software solution with scanning, storing indexing and retrieval features.  
At the instance of the Central Information Commission, Reserve Bank of India has 
formulated a Disclosure Policy under the Right to Information Act, 2005, in respect 
of  the  information  held  by  it.  The  policy,  which  contains  an  indicative  negative 
list/classes  of  information  which  the  Reserve  Bank  considers  as  exempt  from 
disclosure  under  the  provisions  of  the  Right  to  Information  Act,  2005,  has  been 
hosted  on  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  website.  We  are  probably  the  first  public 
authority  to  declare  upfront  as  to  what  information  can  be  disclosed  and  what  is 
exempt  from  disclosure.  We  believe  that  such  clear  enunciation  would  clear  all 
doubts from the minds of information seekers, and help to bring down the number of 
requests and also minimize the use of the appellate mechanism. 
Apart from placing the information, as required under Section 4(1)(b) of the Act on 
our  website,  we  are  also  placing  information  disclosed  under  the  Act,  if  it  is  of 
general interest, on our website in a Disclosure Log. 
The  number  of  applications  received  by  us  has  risen  progressively  year  on  year, 
from 796 in 2005–06 (October–June) to 5,087 in (2010–11). Our disclosure record 
has been good, with 78 percent of the requests being met in full and 5 percent in 
part.  Only  6  percent  requests  were  declined  fully  and  remaining  11  percent  were 
disposed of in other manner. During the six years of implementation of the RTI Act 
in RBI, we received over 18,000 requests. Only about 16 % of the requestors went 
in for first appeal.  
The RBI Top Management and the Central Board of Directors monitor the progress 
made  by  us  in  the  implementation  of  the  RTI  Act  through  monthly,  quarterly  and 
annual reports submitted by the concerned Division.  
Having said this, it would be pertinent to stress that being the country’s central bank, RBI is 
the  banker  to  Government  and  banks,  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the  financial  system, 
manager of currency operations, custodian of forex reserves etc., and is, therefore, privy to 
vital  and  sensitive  information,  which  cannot  be  placed  in  the  public  domain  due  to  its 
sensitivity and impact on financial stability. The disclosure of such information can hurt the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economic interest and security of the state. Other categories could be information related to 
exchange rate management, interest rates, information collected in a fiduciary capacity and 
information which could jeopardize the commercial interest of a third party. Similarly, we also 
receive and hold a lot of personal information pertaining to our employees as well as other 
stake holders, such as whistleblowers, complainants, etc., and disclosure of such personal 
information  would  not  only  compromise  the  privacy  of  the  concerned  individuals,  but  ,  in 
some extreme cases, may also endanger their security / life. 
All the same, in respect of each and every application, a view is taken after a careful study of 
the  nature  of  information  being  sought  and  the  provisions  of  the  RTI  Act.  The  RBI  has  a 
positive bias for disclosure in all cases and this has been the guiding principle all along. We 
have  been  fortunate  in  receiving  the  understanding  and  support  of  the  Information 
Commission in this respect through various rulings. 
Let me now invite the attention of the Learned Information Commissioner to certain issues. 
(i)  
As  the  first  Appellate  Authority,  I  often  refer  to  the  decisions  given  by  Central 
Information  Commissioners  on  appeals.  This  gives  considerable  comfort.  However, 
sometimes we do come across conflicting rulings on the same issue. If this matter could be 
addressed suitably by the Commission and resolved, it would be a great help to the public 
authorities and the information seekers alike, as both would know what to expect. 
Central Information Commission can consider bringing Guidance Notes on particular 
(ii)  
issues  or  disclosure  principles,  where 
Information 
Commissioners. This can be of immense help to the public in assessing the likely approach 
of the Central Information Commission, in the event of a second appeal. 
(iii)  
I appreciate the convenience provided by CIC, which hears appeals and arguments 
through video conferencing. Technology is capable of extending this convenience further. I 
suggest that the video conferencing facility of CIC be linked with those of public authorities 
directly, wherever the necessary infrastructure is available. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  flag  some  concerns  observed  in  some  of  the  RTI  applications  we 
receive. 
 
is  unanimity  among 
there 
the 
Very  often  we  receive  applications  with  a  multitude  of  queries  relating  to  different 
areas/organisations. The number of queries crossed a century in a few cases, but it 
is  quite  common  to  get  applications  having  over  20  queries.  Responding  to  such 
applications is a herculean, time-consuming task, a strain on limited resources and 
detracts the office from carrying out its assigned tasks.  
There  are  quite  a  few  individuals  who  routinely  forward  applications,  very  often 
repeating the same queries in different forms, which have already been answered. 
In one of our departments we had to have a dedicated desk to process applications 
pouring in from a certain applicant. Quite often aggrieved staff members use them 
more to settle scores than for genuinely obtaining information. 
In  a  recent  judgment,  the  Supreme  Court  has  cautioned:  Indiscriminate  and 
impractical demands or directions under the RTI Act for disclosure of all and sundry 
information (unrelated to transparency and accountability in the functioning of public 
authorities  and  eradication  of  corruption)  would  be  counter-productive  as  it  will 
adversely  affect  the  efficiency  of  the  administration  and  result  in  the  executive 
(government)  getting  bogged  down with  the  non-productive  work  of collecting  and 
furnishing information. 
The (Right to Information) Act should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to 
become a tool to obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy the 
peace, tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a 
tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Ms. Sucheta Dalal’s brief to me said that I should set the tone for the Workshop and that is 
what  I  have  attempted.  This  is  an  excellent  forum  for  users  of  RTI  and  the  providers  of 
information to interact with each other without acrimony and try to understand and appreciate 
each other’s points of view. I wish the deliberations all success. 
Thank you very much for your patient hearing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
