Manuel Sánchez: Monetary policy in time of crisis 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Universidad 
Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, NL, Mexico, 26 August 2011. 
This is a free translation of the original remarks in Spanish. 
 It is an honor for me to close the Banco de México lecture series hosted by the School of 
Economics of the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León. I have a great appreciation for this 
institution  where,  during  the  eighties,  I  was  a  professor  of  many  students  who  today  are 
excellent economists.  
The purpose of this series of lectures is to explain to students how our central bank fulfills its 
responsibilities  mandated  by  law  in  order  to  improve  Mexicans’  well-being.  The  lectures 
which today conclude highlighted the implications of our central bank’s main goal set by the 
Constitution,  which  is  to  pursue  the  stability  of  the  domestic  currency’s  purchasing  power, 
and  of  its  other  complementary  goals  of  promoting  both  the  sound  development  of  the 
financial system and the adequate functioning of the payment systems.  
This morning I would like to review the role of monetary policy in an international context and, 
based on this, frame some lessons for Mexico. The central focus of my presentation is that 
while  during  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2007–2008  monetary  policy  was  effective  in 
re-establishing  liquidity  in  the  main  advanced  economies,  current  economic  conditions  in 
those  countries  reveal  problems  whose  solutions  are  far  beyond  the  scope  of  monetary 
policy. The best option for all countries, including Mexico, is to identify the underlying factors 
that might be hindering long-term growth and tackle them without delay. My comments are 
entirely my own and do not represent those of Banco de México.  
The unusual rebound of the world economy  
After experiencing a significant contraction, the world economy has been growing since mid-
2009.  Nevertheless,  as  compared  with  other  business  cycles,  it  has  been  recovering  at  a 
weaker pace due to the lower dynamism of advanced economies that were severely affected 
by the global financial meltdown. It comes as a surprise that the United States, the epicenter 
of the crisis, has not been improving enough to offset the fall in output observed during the 
past recession and resume its long-term growth path.  
Indeed,  for  more  than  a  century,  US  GDP  has  followed  a  trend  of  annual  growth  of 
approximately  three  percent,  which  accounts  for  nearly  two  percent  in  per  capita  terms. 
However, since 2009, output has remained around nine percent below the level that would 
have  otherwise  prevailed  due  to  its  trend,  representing  the  widest  and  longest  negative 
deviation from this secular reference since the Great Depression.1
 This divergence might not 
narrow in the near future if current forecasts for the US economy materialize. For example, 
the main consensus forecasts call for an average annual US GDP growth of 2.2 percent for 
2011 and 2012, which further widens the aforementioned deviation.2
  
Explaining  this  phenomenon  has  become  an  issue  of  intense  study  and  debate,  thus 
confirming that economic problems are often very complex. In particular, some analysts have 
pointed out that the weak performance of advanced economies must be offset with measures 
                                                 
1  See Robert E. Lucas, Jr., “The U.S. Recession of 2007–201?”, Milliman Lecture, University of Washington, 
May 19, 2011. 
2  Blue Chip Economic Indicators Vol. 36, No. 8, August 10, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to  stimulate  aggregate  demand,  including  monetary  policy  measures,  either  because  the 
main  problem  is  perceived  to  be  the  lack  of  total  spending  or  because  such  measures 
provide  time  to  solve  fundamental  problems.  Next,  I  would  like  to  analyze  this  opinion  by 
focusing on the role of central banks in tackling and solving these issues.  
Central banks’ response to the liquidity crisis  
There is a broad consensus among economists that central banks can provide, through an 
adequate  monetary  policy,  a  price  stability  framework  that  allows  the  economy  to  run 
smoothly. It is also widely accepted that inflation operates as a tax on society, deteriorating 
significantly  the  long-term  growth  of  per  capita  income.  In  a  similar  fashion,  it  is  generally 
admitted  that  central  banks  cannot  foster  economic  growth  for  a  long  time  through  a 
monetary policy that jeopardizes price stability.  
In  contrast,  there  is  less  agreement  as  to  the  role  that  central  banks  with  a  price  stability 
record might play in the short term under weak economic conditions. This issue has turned 
out  to  be  of  particular  interest  because  in  recent  years  the  central  banks  of  advanced 
economies  have  implemented  unconventional  monetary  measures,  frequently  known  as 
quantitative easing (QE), to face their extremely adverse economic environment. Due to its 
importance  for  Mexico,  my  comments  will  focus  on  the  United  States,  notwithstanding  the 
fact  that  other  countries  like  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  European  Monetary  Union  have 
adopted similar actions.  
How effective have central bank policies been and what are their limitations? In the wake of 
recent experience, two periods must be identified. The first involves the liquidity crisis that 
emerged in mid-2007 and peaked with the failure of Lehman Brothers during the last months 
of 2008, when financing in many markets contracted due to the increase in counterparty risk 
perception, ending in a flight to government-backed assets.  
As professor Robert Lucas has clearly pointed out, this financial crisis was very similar to that 
during the Great Depression, in which credit froze due to the fall in bank deposits originated 
by the bankruptcy of many financial institutions. However, unlike that episode, this time, the 
Fed did not allow a contraction of highly demanded liquidity.3
  
In particular, the Fed used conventional monetary policy to reduce the fed funds interest rate 
from 5.25 percent in July 2007 to levels close to zero at the end of 2008. Since the second 
half  of  2008,  as  an  extraordinary  measure,  the  Fed  also  bought  a  significant  amount  of 
illiquid (and low-quality) assets from financial intermediaries in exchange for liquid reserves 
held by them at the central bank.  
These  operations  confirmed  that  monetary  policy  tools  are  not  exhausted  when  the  policy 
interest  rate  reaches  zero.  Under  such  circumstances,  conventional  monetary  policy  is 
ineffective  because  it  involves  operations  with  short-term  government  securities  which,  by 
paying  a  rate  close  to  zero,  become  quasi-money  and  therefore  the  central  bank  cannot 
supply liquidity effectively through open market purchases.  
The  overall  strategy  contributed  to  the  dissipation  of  financial  panic  by  the  end  of  the  first 
quarter  of  2009,  as  reflected  by  the  reduction  in  the  spread  between  the  cost  of  private 
financing and that of public financing to levels close to those prevailing prior to the crisis.4
 
                                                 
3  See Robert E. Lucas, Jr., op. cit. 
4  For example, the spread between the 3-month Libor rate and the overnight indexed swap, which reflects the 
banks’  funding  cost  as  compared  to  the  central  banks’  reference  rate,  began  to  increase  in  August  2007, 
reaching their highest mark of 364.4 basis points during the fourth quarter of 2008, and then decreasing to 
36 basis points (pre-crisis levels) by the second quarter of 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The effect in spite of the towering financial turmoil was that GDP fell significantly less than 
during the Great Depression but, unlike that time, there was no deflation.  
Although the central bank’s intervention as a lender of last resort was effective, it was not 
free of costs, as the bail-out of low-quality asset holders created incentives for excessive risk 
taking in the future, a problem known as “moral hazard”. Nevertheless, this cost might have 
been lower, at least in the short term, than that if financial panic had not been tackled.  
Economic stimulus through monetary policy?  
A  second  period  of  the  monetary  strategy  deals  with  the  continuing  and  deepening 
quantitative easing since 2009. In this stage, the Fed has been mainly seeking to boost the 
economy  through  lowering  long-term  interest  rates  by  purchasing  long-term  government 
bonds in exchange for liquid bank reserves. This measure was aimed at reducing long-term 
returns in order to stimulate both credit and investment and, therefore, aggregate demand.  
In fact, this operation could have been performed without the intervention of the monetary 
authority. Since bank reserves are equivalent to short-term debt, the US Treasury could have 
opted  for  simply  reducing  its  debt’s  average  term  to  maturity,  limiting  long-term  securities, 
and enabling a flattening of the yield curve.  
In any case, the impact of the recent monetary easing on the yield curve and, even less so, 
its influence on the economy, is not clear. Part of the inconclusive evidence is that both yield 
reductions  and  increases  have  been  considered  by  some  analysts  as  a  sign  of  monetary 
policy effectiveness; the former as a direct impact and the latter as an indirect effect due to 
higher growth expectations.5
  
As for quantitative easing, which has almost tripled the size of the Fed’s balance sheet in 
three years, the Fed faces the challenge to exit the strategy in time to prevent inflationary 
pressures  and  minimize  any  possible  negative  impact  on  the  US  economy.  On  different 
occasions, the Fed has stated how it would apply various measures to normalize monetary 
policy from its expansionary stance.6  
However, there are certain actions of a different nature identified by the monetary authority 
which seem to have similar effects on economic activity. Inflationary pressures would arise 
when an improvement in economic conditions reduces the demand for bank reserves. With 
returns on bank reserves nearing zero and higher rates on government securities during the 
improvement,  conventional  monetary  policy  would  regain  effectiveness.  In  such  a  case, 
fighting  inflation  would  require  selling  short-term  government  securities  to  reduce  bank 
reserves. The alternative measure of increasing interest rates on reserves in order to make 
them match those on short-term government securities and induce banks to keep reserves 
has the same effect.7
  
                                                 
5  For a graphic description of monetary policy’s ambiguous effect on US interest rates, see John H. Cochrane, 
“Is QE2 a Savior, Inflator or a Dud?”, available at  
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-06-02/is-qe2-a-savior-inflator-or-a-dud-business-class.html.  Some  doubts 
about the monetary stimulus on the economy are mentioned in Frederic S. Mishkin “Monetary Policy Strategy: 
Lessons from the Crisis”, NBER Working Paper No. 16755, February 2011. 
 6  See  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  “Statement  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services”,  U.S.  House  of 
Representatives, July 13, 2011. 
7  This  argument 
is 
fully  described 
in  Robert  J.  Barro, 
“Thoughts  on  QE2”,  available  at 
http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2010/11/qe2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Other economic policy options  
In addition to possibly implementing a new stage of quantitative easing, many analysts have 
mentioned  the  need  for  adopting  other  measures  to  offset  the  weak  performance  of 
advanced  economies.  The  first  policy  consists  of  new  fiscal  stimulus  programs  aimed  at 
raising public expenditure and reducing taxes. In view of the unsustainable path of public-
debt-to-GDP  ratio  projected  for  the  United  States  and  other  advanced  economies,  the 
supporters of this alternative combine stimulus with a long-term fiscal consolidation program 
that would begin in a few years.  
Although  it  might  seem  appealing,  this  initiative  faces  a  lack  of  credibility  on  future  fiscal 
adjustment  because  today’s  authorities  do  not  want  to  deal  with  the costs  associated  with 
any current austerity measures. In fact, the fiscal adjustment needed to begin stabilizing the 
public debt would probably have a negative impact on such economies in the short term.  
A  second  option  is,  unfortunately,  the  return  to  the  old  idea  that  having  higher  inflation  is 
beneficial either to boost the economy’s nominal GDP or to handle the “liquidity trap” or to 
dilute high public debt levels. This proposal has multiple drawbacks, the most notable being 
ignoring  past  lessons.  A  monetary  policy  aimed  at  creating  more  inflation  could  enhance 
nominal GDP but not necessarily real GDP if, for instance, inflation is perfectly anticipated. 
Also, as I mentioned, QE has ruled out the scenario in which monetary policy ends when the 
policy interest rate reaches zero. On the other hand, the inflationary dilution of debt, apart 
from  being  extremely  unfair,  deteriorates  the  credibility  of  government  commitments  and 
raises the financing cost of government debt. In any case, central bank capacity to control 
inflation may be weakened.  
A third and more reasonable option is to identify and correct the fundamental factors that are 
behind low economic growth. One possibility is that some economic policies might be having 
the  unintended  consequences  of  limiting  the  necessary  adjustments  needed  to  resume  a 
more  vigorous  economic  recovery;  for  example,  the  fall  in  real  estate  prices  towards  new 
equilibrium or the recognition of low-quality mortgage loans by financial institutions. Another 
possibility  is  that  greater  government  intervention  and  uncertainty  on  future  economic 
policies could be leading to an adverse business environment.  
Some lessons for Mexico  
The  relatively  limited  effect  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  Mexico  –  due  mainly  to  the 
minimum  exposure  of  financial  intermediaries  to  toxic  foreign  assets  –  allowed  banks  to 
avoid losses, financial markets to avoid interruption of their operations and, thus precluded 
the need for Banco de México to consider expanding its balance sheet for liquidity purposes. 
Additionally, the ongoing process of convergence to the inflation target limited the reduction 
in interest rates implemented, and taking the adoption of unconventional monetary policies in 
Mexico off the table.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  limited  countercyclical  fiscal  policy  that  affected  only  moderately 
public debt during the crisis gave certainty to the economy. In retrospect, these actions seem 
to have been adequate as they allowed the economy to absorb the impact of the external 
shock without compromising the government’s future decisions.  
The experience from industrialized nations reveals that the emergency measures to supply 
liquidity were necessary during the crisis although it would certainly have been preferable to 
have had better financial rules and supervision to prevent such a crisis. Also, the impact that 
an extraordinarily lax monetary policy could be having on output is still unclear, and the exit 
strategies will probably be complex. On another front, an expansionary fiscal policy that puts 
the  stability  of  public  debt  at  risk  in  the  future  requires  significant  correction,  which  will 
generate a possible adverse effect on economic activity.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Final comments  
During  the  global  crisis,  monetary  policy  expanded  to  supply  the  required  liquidity  and 
maintain  the  functioning  of  markets.  In  terms  of  “moral  hazard”,  the  costs  generated  by 
central banks’ intervention are probably lower than those that would have emerged with no 
intervention, at least in the short term. Nevertheless, the favorable impact that quantitative 
easing  has  had  on  those  economies  is  less  clear.  The  costs  are  unknown  because  the 
growth  of  central  bank  balance  sheets  has  been  unprecedented  and  their  adjustment  to 
prevent future inflationary pressures might be difficult.  
The  option  of  higher  inflation  proposed  by  some  analysts  minimizes  significant  costs,  and 
that  of  further  fiscal  stimulus  seems  limited  given  the  need  to  consolidate  the  weak  public 
finances  of  advanced  economies.  The  alternative  that  seems  more  promising  is  that  of 
identifying the possible fundamental causes of lower economic growth in order to eradicate 
them and foster a return to the secular growth path.  
Finally,  Mexico  will  continue  to  make  progress  as  long  as  it  focuses  on  a  clear,  long-term 
vision that does not give preference to short-lived benefits which could have excessive costs 
in the future, and implements policies aimed at promoting long-term economic growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
