Andreas Dombret: Reform of the global financial system 
Opening lecture by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Generation Forum, Eltville, 16 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The reform of the global financial system will be in the limelight during the next two days of 
lectures and debates. I was asked to kick off the discussion by presenting you, in brief, the 
Bundesbank’s point of view about the ongoing regulatory reform process. What has already 
been achieved, and what key issues still need to be tackled? 
Regulatory reform – what has been achieved? 
2. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  been  keeping  us  extremely  busy  for  some  4  years  now. 
Looking back, there is little doubt that an inadequate regulatory framework was one of the 
most  important  causes  of  this  crisis.  Thus,  it  is  imperative  to  learn  the  right  lessons  and 
minimise the likelihood of future crises by closing the regulatory loopholes and mending the 
weaknesses that have come to the surface. 
Significant progress has already been made in this regard. Therefore, I will restrict myself to 
mentioning only two key measures. 
Firstly, the new capital and liquidity standards for the banking sector, commonly known as 
Basel III, were finally endorsed by the G20 at their meeting last November in Seoul. Capital 
requirements will rise considerably in terms of both quantity and quality. Moreover, the first-
time  introduction  of  global  liquidity  standards  will  bolster  banks’  liquidity  cushions,  thereby 
addressing  the  possibility  of  contagion  via  the  money  markets  and  excessive  maturity 
transformation. All in all, the new rules will significantly strengthen the resilience of financial 
institutions. 
Secondly, and related to Basel III, substantial progress has also been made in tackling the 
problem  of  how  to  deal  with  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  called  SIFIs  for 
short.  As  you  all  know,  the  striking  feature  of  SIFIs  is  that  their  insolvency  is  regarded  as 
virtually  intolerable  –  because  they  are  particularly  large,  complex  or  interconnected.  Or 
because  they  perform  specific  functions  that  cannot  be  readily  assumed  by  other  market 
participants.  
Back at the Seoul Summit last year, the G20 accepted a comprehensive framework on how 
to address the SIFI problem put forward to them by the Financial Stability Board. Work on 
specifying  the  framework’s  individual  recommendations  is  currently  being  pursued  as  a 
matter of urgency. The final framework will be spelled out in detail by the next G20 Summit, 
which will take place in Cannes in November of this year.  
What remains to be done? 
3. 
Notwithstanding  the  progress  already  made,  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  in  making  the 
international  financial  system  watertight.  In  my  following  remarks,  I  would  like  to  point  out 
three aspects of regulatory reform that will accompany us in the coming months.  
Firstly, it is indispensable to finalise, and then implement without delay, the FSB framework 
for dealing with SIFIs. Secondly, we have to introduce internationally compatible restructuring 
and resolution regimes for financial institutions to allow them to exit the market in an orderly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fashion  without  causing  a  breakdown  of  the  system.  And  finally,  we  must  identify  the 
so-called shadow banking system and expose it to supervision. 
Let me now briefly discuss these three areas in more detail.  
financial 
including 
Dealing with SIFIs 
institutions  of  domestic  relevance, 
3.1 
As already  mentioned,  the FSB is  currently finalising its recommendations for dealing with 
SIFIs. One difficulty here lies in accurately identifying SIFIs based on criteria such as size, 
interconnectedness,  substitutability  and  complexity.  I  would  like  to  promote  a  rather 
pragmatic approach towards solving this problem: We should start with only those institutions 
that are indisputably of global systemic relevance. I expect this to be a group of some 25 to 
30  banks  –  not  more  and  not  less.  The  composition  of  this  group  will  surely  change  over 
time. 
As experience is gained, we might later extend the framework in an appropriate manner to 
other  SIFIs, 
financial  market 
infrastructures, insurance companies and other non-bank financial institutions. 
Central to the FSB concept are systemic capital surcharges for SIFIs that go well beyond the 
requirements mandatory under Basel III. Such capital add-ons do more than merely improve 
the resilience of a SIFI, in other words reduce its probability of failure. They surely are also a 
suitable  instrument  with  which  to  put  a  price  tag  on  the  implicit  guarantee  that  SIFIs  are 
deemed  to  enjoy.  Formal  decisions  have  yet  to  be  taken  as  to  the  exact  application 
modalities of the SIFI surcharge, especially its size. Nevertheless, I expect that at the end of 
the day the amount of additional capital required from a SIFI will be related to its systemic 
importance and will in all likelihood lie somewhere between two and three percent. 
What  is  also  still  being  discussed  is  the  choice  of  capital  instruments  acceptable  for  the 
surcharge. Common equity surely appears to be the natural choice for the additional charge. 
But I think other instruments with full loss absorbing capacity deserve careful consideration. 
For instance, contingent capital – in other words debt that converts into equity once certain 
stress triggers are hit – affords loss absorbency when needed.  
We have to bear in mind that contingent capital is still largely uncharted territory. It might be 
necessary to conduct further research and gather practical experience with these untried and 
untested  instruments,  especially  the  market  implications  of  contingent  capital  and  the 
associated net financial stability implications. Nevertheless, contingent capital, when properly 
designed, is likely to represent a major step forward in providing additional loss absorbency. 
Let’s all realise that contingent capital was part of the Basel III communiqué.1 Therefore, the 
Bundesbank continues to be in favour of including contingent capital in the SIFI package. 
Introducing restructuring and resolution regimes 
3.2 
Closely related to SIFIs is my second issue, namely the need for appropriate restructuring 
and resolution regimes for the financial sector. Let’s all realise that we will never fully prevent 
individual institutions from going bankrupt. Failure is part and parcel of a market economy. 
But if financial institutions fail they must not be allowed to drag down the entire system with 
them.  Unfortunately,  in  many  countries  general  insolvency  laws  have  proven  inadequate 
during  the  crisis.  Hence  there  is  clearly  a  need  for  special  mechanisms  that  allow  for  an 
orderly restructuring and resolution of financial institutions. A strong resolution regime makes 
failure a credible option and thus reduces moral hazard.  
                                                 
1  See  also  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  Group  of  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision 
announces higher global minimum capital standards, 12 September 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In this regard, significant progress has already been made on a national level. For instance, 
in Germany the so-called Restructuring Act came into effect at the beginning of this year. Its 
elements include a significant extension of supervisory powers, especially the possibility of 
transferring financial assets of a distressed bank to a private bank or to a public bridge bank. 
Remaining  parts  can  then  be  wound  up  during  insolvency  proceedings,  if  necessary.  To 
reduce  the  financial  burden  of  the  public  sector  in  future  crises,  the  Act  provides  for  a 
restructuring fund that is to be financed through a levy from the banking sector. 
Despite all its positive features the German Restructuring Act represents largely uncharted 
legal  territory  and  has  certain  limits  once  banks  with  significant  cross  border  business  are 
involved.  This  is  another  reason  why  we  need  internationally  harmonised  resolution 
mechanisms.  
While  progress  on  a  national  level  has  been  remarkable  in  many  countries,  obstacles  to 
effective cross-border resolution remain. Thus, one of our main tasks in the coming months 
will be to establish and ensure mutual compatibility between different national restructuring 
and resolution mechanisms. Yet we should bear in mind that an orderly resolution of financial 
institutions which are truly active on a global level may be possible only to a certain degree. 
At the European level at least, the proposed European Commission legislation, which is due 
before this summer, looks to represent a major step forward.  
Let’s not overlook the shadow banking system 
3.3 
The third regulatory challenge I want to address is the necessity to extend our reform efforts 
beyond the banking system.  
The stricter rules imposed on banks via Basel III and the rules for SIFIs entail the realistic 
danger that activities will be shifted to less regulated areas. Therefore, it is imperative for us 
to  better  illuminate  the  fringes  of  the  financial  system.  In  other  words,  we  must  closely 
monitor and regulate what is commonly referred to as the shadow banking system.  
Whether a market participant is classified as belonging to the shadow banking system should 
depend not so much on its institutional type but on its activities. At the behest of the G20, the 
FSB is currently exploring ways and means of monitoring and regulating the shadow banking 
system. It has recently defined the term shadow banking as “credit intermediation involving 
entities  and  activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system”.2  This  rather  broad  definition 
involves  non-banks  such  as  special  purpose  vehicles  and  money  market  funds,  but  also 
hedge funds.  
The FSB will present a set of recommendations to the G20 in autumn of this year. What is 
already  obvious  today  is  the  need  to  significantly  enhance  transparency  by  imposing 
appropriate  registration  requirements  as  well  as  reporting  obligations  on  all  parts  of  the 
financial system.  
Yet  better  monitoring  will  not  be  enough.  To  reduce  systemic  risk,  better  regulation  of  the 
shadow  banking  system  will  be  necessary  too.  This  could  be  done  either  directly,  by 
regulating the activities and actors of the shadow banking system themselves. Or indirectly, 
by regulating banks’ interactions with the shadow banking system. 
Need for international cooperation 
4 
Let me close by emphasising once more the urgent need for international cooperation. More 
than 4 years after the outbreak of the crisis, we are now at a crossroads. Our cooperation in 
                                                 
2  See FSB, Shadow Banking: Scoping the Issues, A Background Note of the Financial Stability Board, 12 April 
2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  coming  months  will  decide  whether  the  new  rules  for  the  financial  system  will  be 
internationally compatible or bring about an uneven level playing field, leading to regulatory 
arbitrage. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  it  is  the  globally  consistent  implementation  and  transposition  of  the 
adopted key reforms into national law that counts. While heterogeneous national structures 
make  it  imperative  to  maintain  a  certain  degree  of  flexibility  when  reforming  financial 
regulation, we must ensure that individual countries do not game the system to the benefit of 
their own financial institutions.  
Financial  centres,  when  vying  for  a  good  position  among  themselves,  must  under  no 
circumstances be permitted to engage in activities at the expense of financial stability, not 
least  given  the  ever  closer  interconnectedness  in  the  global  financial  system.  Individual 
countries  should  not  seek  advantages  by  watering  down,  or  by  reluctantly  implementing 
internationally  agreed  reforms.  To  avoid  such  beggar-thy-neighbour  policies,  transparency, 
peer  pressure  and  a  close  monitoring  of  progress  in  implementing  agreed  standards  and 
measures will be essential. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To sum up:  
A  number  of  crucial  reform  measures  designed  to  secure  financial  stability  have  already 
been approved or are under way. Yet important tasks still lie ahead. Above all, we need  
• 
• 
to find a solution for the SIFI problem;  
to  ensure  that  all  financial  institutions  can  be  resolved  without  dragging  down  the 
whole system; and  
to identify the shadow banking system and expose it to supervision.  
• 
In  doing  all  this,  we  must  strike  the  right  balance  between  paying  sufficient  attention  to 
peculiarities of national financial systems and ensuring an international level playing field. 
Thank you for your attention!  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
