Brian P Sack: The SOMA portfolio at $2.654 trillion 
Remarks by Mr Brian P Sack, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, before the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, 20 July 2011. 
 Thank you for inviting me here tonight to give these remarks. These events organized by the 
Money  Marketeers  provide  an  excellent  venue  to  talk  about  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
involvement in financial markets, given the focus and expertise of your group. As you know, 
the  Federal  Reserve  recently  completed  its  second  round  of  large-scale  asset  purchases, 
known inside the Fed as LSAP2 and to everyone else in the world as QE2. With the program 
now in the books, I thought it would be a good time to look back and assess the experience 
with LSAP2. Specifically, I will discuss the effectiveness of the program relative to its stated 
objectives, and I will describe some the operational challenges that we faced in implementing 
it.  Lastly,  I  will  touch  on  several  issues  related  to  the  potential  evolution  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet going forward. As always, my comments do not necessarily reflect 
the  views  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  any  other  members  of  the 
Federal Reserve System.  
LSAP2 and the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
Let me start with a few facts. The FOMC decided at its November 2010 meeting to expand 
the amount of domestic securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio 
by $600 billion by purchasing longer-term Treasury securities through the end of June 2011. 
Those  purchases  were  in  addition  to  ones  already  being  made  to  reinvest  the  principal 
payments  from  SOMA  holdings  of  agency  debt  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities 
(MBS) into longer-term Treasury securities. The purchase program was implemented by the 
Open Market Trading Desk (Desk) at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  
To be sure, it was a busy period for the Desk. Over the life of the program, we conducted 
140 outright purchase operations to meet the directive set out by the FOMC. That meant that 
we were active on nearly every day possible over that period. In those operations, the Desk 
bought $767 billion of Treasury securities, which included the $600 billion expansion of the 
portfolio  and  $167  billion  of  reinvestments.  Our  operations  ranged  in  size  from  just  over 
$1 billion to around $9 billion, with an average size of about $5.5 billion. 
Those  operations  brought  the  amount  of  domestic  assets  held  in  the  SOMA  portfolio  to 
$2.654 trillion. The current directive from the FOMC instructs the Desk to continue to reinvest 
the principal payments on all domestic assets held in SOMA into Treasury securities. Thus, 
the amount of assets held in the SOMA will remain at that level until the FOMC decides to 
change the directive. 
Of  course,  the  portfolio  at  these  levels  is  unusually  large.  In  the  absence  of  the  asset 
purchase programs, the size of the SOMA portfolio would be around $1 trillion, as required to 
meet currency demand and other factors. Thus, the Federal Reserve has about $1.6 trillion 
of additional assets in the portfolio as a result of its asset purchase programs. 
The SOMA portfolio also has different characteristics than it would have had in the absence 
of the asset purchase programs. Most notably, the overall duration of the SOMA portfolio at 
the  end  of  June  was  over  4½  years,  compared  to  its  historical  range  of  between  two  and 
three years. 
Together,  the  larger  amount  and  longer  tenor  of  our  securities  holdings  result  in  a 
considerable amount of duration risk in the SOMA portfolio, meaning that the market value of 
the  portfolio  is  sensitive  to  movements  in  interest  rates.  One  measure  of  this  risk  that  is 
familiar  to  market  participants  is  the  concept  of  “10-year  equivalents,”  or  the  amount  of  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
10-year notes that would produce the same degree of overall interest rate risk. At this time, 
we  have  about  $1.5  trillion  of  ten-year  equivalents  in  the  SOMA  portfolio,  which  is  about 
$1 trillion above the amount that we would have under our traditional portfolio approach. The 
majority  of  this  additional  risk  came  from  the  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet,  but  the 
extension of its average duration also contributed significantly.1 
Transferring this additional duration risk to the Federal Reserve’s portfolio, and hence out of 
the  portfolios  of  market  participants,  was  one  channel  through  which  the  asset  purchase 
program  was  intended  to  have  its  effect  on  financial  conditions.  This  “portfolio  balance” 
channel  has  been  discussed  by  Chairman  Bernanke  on  several  occasions.2  This  view 
associates the amount of policy stimulus with the stock of assets, or more precisely with the 
amount of duration risk, that the Federal Reserve takes onto its balance sheet.  
Policy achievements of LSAP2 
The purpose of the asset purchase program was to help the Federal Reserve achieve the 
economic objectives of full employment and stable prices that it was given by Congress. I 
believe that the program delivered what could have been expected from it. In particular, let 
me highlight its success along two dimensions. 
First,  the  LSAP2  program  made  broad  financial  conditions  more  accommodative.  This 
conclusion can be drawn from the behavior of financial markets from late August 2010 to the 
program’s  implementation  date  in  November  2010  –  a  period  during  which  market 
participants moved from seeing such a program as a remote possibility to expecting it with 
near  certainty.3  Asset  price  movements  over  this  period  included  a  decline  in  real  interest 
rates, a narrowing of risks spreads, an increase in equity prices, and a decline in the dollar  
– exactly the pattern that one would expect to be generated from additional monetary policy 
accommodation.  These  changes  likely  supported  economic  growth  and  the  creation  of 
employment relative to what would have been realized in the absence of the program.4 
Second,  the  LSAP2  program  appears  to  have  raised  inflation  expectations  from  unusually 
low levels and reduced the threat of deflation. The downside risks to inflation had become 
quite threatening by last summer. Breakeven inflation rates had moved to levels that were 
well below those consistent with the FOMC’s mandate, even for forward measures covering 
periods beginning several years ahead. In addition, the pricing of deflation risk, as computed 
by  looking  at  Treasury  inflation-protected  securities  with  different  amounts  of  accrued 
inflation, reflecting fairly substantial odds of deflation over the next several years.5 Since that 
                                                 
1  Estimates  of  the  contribution  of  additional  risk  coming  from  the  increased  size  of  the  portfolio  range  from 
60 percent  to  80 percent,  while  estimates  of  the  impact  of  its  longer  duration  range  from  20 percent  to 
40 percent. 
2  See,  for  example,  Chairman  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2010),  “The  Economic  Outlook  and  Monetary  Policy”, 
remarks  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming, 
August 27. 
3  One would expect market prices to incorporate nearly all of the effects of the programs in advance rather than 
during the actual implementation of the program. Thus, the period before the November implementation is the 
most relevant period for assessing the program’s effects. 
4  For  example,  see  Chung  et  al  (2011),  “Have  We  Underestimated  the  Likelihood  and  Severity  of  Zero 
Lower Bound Events” and Vice Chairman Janet Yellen (2011), “The Federal Reserve’s Asset Purchase 
Program”, remarks at the Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Denver, Colorado, January 8. 
5  TIPS are designed with a floor of zero on the cumulative inflation adjustment that they can realize over the life 
of the security. Thus, the prices of securities that are similar to each other in most  ways but have different 
amounts of accrued inflation can be used to derive a measure of the value of this floor, which can then be 
translated into the probability of deflation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
time,  though,  breakeven  inflation  rates  have  risen  back  to  levels  more  consistent  with  the 
FOMC’s mandate, and the perceived risk of deflation has diminished notably.  
One criticism that has been directed at the LSAP2 program is that it was unable to restore 
vigorous  growth  to  the  economy.  I  think  this  is  a  reasonable  observation  but  not  a  strong 
criticism.  It  is  true  that  the  support  to  growth  provided  by  the  asset  purchases  appears  to 
have been countered by other factors that have continued to weigh on growth. However, the 
LSAP2  program  was  never  described  as  such  a  potent  policy  tool  that  it  could  ensure  a 
return to robust growth and rapid progress toward full employment in all circumstances.6 
Despite its limits, the expansion of the balance sheet was seen by the FOMC as the best 
policy  tool  available  at  the  time,  given  the  constraint  on  traditional  monetary  policy  easing 
from  the  zero  bound  on  interest  rates.  The  willingness  of  the  FOMC  to  use  this  tool  is 
indicative  of  a  central  bank  that  takes  its  dual  mandate  seriously  and  does  what  it  can  to 
deliver on it. The disappointing pace of recovery that has been realized since then suggests 
that the additional policy accommodation provided by the LSAP2 program was appropriate. 
Operational success of LSAP2 
Let me now switch from the policy objectives of the LSAP2 program to its implementation by 
the Desk. The FOMC set the broad parameters of the asset purchase program based in part 
on input from the Desk on our capacity to conduct operations and the market’s capacity to 
absorb them. In particular, we wanted to complete the asset purchases in a timely manner, 
but we also wanted to ensure that the pace of purchases was not so rapid as to disrupt the 
functioning and liquidity of the Treasury market. In the end, I believe the program struck a 
good balance between these two considerations. I would like to recognize the staff on the 
Desk for their valuable input to the operational design of the program, as well as the effective 
implementation of the program over the last eight months. 
Our presence in the market was sizable. Over the course of the program, our purchases ran 
at about the same pace as the total net Treasury supply coming to the market. Moreover, 
with  the  completion  of  the  program,  the  SOMA  portfolio  holds  about  18 percent  of  the 
outstanding  stock  of  Treasury  securities.  Our  share  of  the  market  is  even  higher  at 
intermediate maturities, where our purchases were concentrated.  
Part  of  the  challenge  to  the  Desk  was  to  structure  our  operations  in  a  manner  that  would 
allow  the  market  to  absorb  such  a  large  volume  of  purchases.  Several  features  of  the 
program’s  design  may  have  helped  to  promote  robust  participation  by  market  participants, 
including the decisions to relax the 35 percent limit on SOMA holdings of individual issues 
and  to  include  recently  issued  securities  in  the  range  of  eligible  issues  in  nearly  every 
operation. These features allowed our counterparties to offer us a wide range of securities at 
each operation. In the end, dealers participated aggressively, with an average offer-to-cover 
ratio of over 3.5. Moreover, we managed to execute these purchases at prices that were, on 
average, at or very near the indicative quotes on these securities that we collect as a pricing 
reference. 
In  addition  to  focusing  on  the  performance  of  our  operations,  we  have  also  monitored 
measures  of  liquidity  in  the  Treasury  market.  The  market  seems  to  be  functioning  well 
despite our sizable presence. Measures such as bid-ask spreads, quote depth, and trading 
volumes have held relatively steady at favorable levels over the life of the program. Indeed, 
there  are  no  signs  that  trading  activity  has  been  notably  impaired  for  Treasury  coupon 
                                                 
6 
In  my  own  remarks  before  the  program  began,  I  referred  to  asset  purchases  as  an  “imperfect  policy  tool” 
because  of  the  limits  on  their  effectiveness.  See  Brian  Sack  (2010),  “Managing  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
Balance Sheet”, remarks at the 2010 CFA Institute Fixed Income Management Conference, Newport Beach, 
California, October 4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
securities, even in those issues for which our holdings are particularly high.7 Moreover, the 
market  has  not  encountered  any  meaningful  problems  with  delivery  and  settlement  of 
Treasury securities.8 
Lastly, I should note that the market seems to have adjusted fairly well so far to the end of 
the  purchase  program.  The  pace  of  the  Desk’s  purchases  fell  back  sharply  at  the  end  of 
June, as we moved from expanding the portfolio to simply reinvesting principal payments. In 
particular,  our  purchases  slowed  from  an  average  pace  of  about  $100  billion  per  month 
through June to an anticipated pace of about $15 billion per month going forward. We do not 
expect this adjustment to our purchases to produce significant upward pressure on interest 
rates  or  a  tightening  of  broader  financial  conditions,  given  our  view  that  the  effects  of  the 
program arise primarily from the stock of our holdings rather than the flow of our purchases. 
While there has been considerable volatility in Treasury yields over the past several weeks, 
we  attribute  those  movements  primarily  to  incoming  economic  data  and  to  broader  risk 
events. However, we will continue to watch the markets and assess their adjustment to the 
end of the purchase program.  
Future evolution of the SOMA portfolio 
While I am sure you are happy to hear more about our actions to date, I realize that you may 
be  even  more  interested  in  the  evolution  of  the  SOMA  portfolio  going  forward.  Just  to  be 
clear, I will not be saying anything about the likelihood of prospective policy actions beyond 
what  has  been  conveyed  in  FOMC  communications.  However,  I  would  like  to make  a  few 
points about the portfolio under those prospective actions. 
As noted earlier, the current directive from the FOMC is to reinvest principal payments on the 
securities we hold in order to maintain the level of domestic assets in the SOMA portfolio. 
This  approach  can  be  interpreted  as  keeping  monetary  policy  on  hold.  Indeed,  one  can 
generally think of the stance of monetary policy in terms of two tools – the level of the federal 
funds rate, and the amount and type of assets held on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. 
The FOMC has decided to keep both of these tools basically unchanged for now. 
Given  the  considerable  amount  of  uncertainty  about  the  course  of  the  economy,  market 
participants  have  observed  that  the  next  policy  action  by  the  FOMC  could  be  in  either 
direction. 
to  seek  additional  policy 
accommodation,  it  has  several  policy  options  open  to  it  that  would  involve  the  SOMA 
portfolio, as noted by Chairman Bernanke in his testimony last week. One option is to expand 
the  balance  sheet  further  through  additional  asset  purchases,  with  the  just-completed 
purchase  program  presenting  one  possible  approach.  Another  option  involves  shifting  the 
composition of the SOMA portfolio rather than expanding its size. As noted earlier, a sizable 
portion  of  the  additional  risk  that  the  SOMA  portfolio  has  assumed  to  date  came  from  a 
lengthening of its maturity, suggesting that the composition of the portfolio can be used as an 
important variable for affecting the degree of policy stimulus. Lastly, the Chairman mentioned 
that the FOMC could give guidance on the likely path of its asset holdings, as the effect on 
If  economic  developments 
the  FOMC 
lead 
                                                 
7  Liquidity in Treasury bills has worsened to some degree. However, our holdings in that sector are minimal, 
and hence the deterioration likely reflects other factors, including the decline in the supply of Treasury bills. 
8  The Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasuries have removed a large amount of Treasury collateral from the 
market,  which  may  have  contributed  to  downward  pressure  on  general  collateral  Treasury  repo  rates. 
However,  repo  rates  do  not  appear  unusual  relative  to  other  short-term  interest  rates,  and  most  market 
participants  point to  declines  in the supply  of Treasury bills, rather than  the coupon securities that the Fed 
purchased,  as  the  primary  driver.  In  terms  of  shortages  in  the  supply  of  individual  Treasury  securities,  our 
securities lending program appears to have generally relieved any such shortages that have resulted from our 
holdings. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial  conditions  presumably  depends  on  the  period  of  time  for  which  the  assets  are 
expected to be held. 
Alternatively, economic developments could instead lead to a policy change in the direction 
of  normalization.  The  FOMC  minutes  released  last  week  provided  valuable  information  on 
the  sequence  of  steps  that  might  be  followed  in  that  case.  The  minutes  indicated  that  the 
removal of policy accommodation was expected to begin with a decision to stop reinvesting 
some or all of the principal payments on assets held in the SOMA. If all asset classes in the 
SOMA were allowed to run off, the portfolio would decline by about $250 billion per year on 
average over the first several years. 
Under the interpretation of the policy stance noted earlier, this shrinkage of the balance sheet 
would  amount  to  a  tightening  of  policy.9  However,  one  should  realize  that  this  step 
represents a relatively gradual and limited policy tightening. Indeed, using the mapping that 
has been discussed by Chairman Bernanke, this path for the balance sheet would, in terms 
of its effects on the economy, be roughly equivalent to raising the federal funds rate by just 
over 25 basis point per year over the course of several years. 
The minutes also described asset sales as part of the strategy, indicating that this step would 
likely occur relatively late in the normalization process. From the perspective of the balance 
sheet and the stance of monetary policy, sales accomplish the same thing as redemptions, 
as they also shrink the balance sheet over time. The minutes indicated that such sales are 
likely  to  be  gradual  and  predictable,  which  makes  them  even  more  similar  in  nature  to 
redemptions. 
Together, the combination of asset redemptions and asset sales, once underway, should put 
the  size  of  the  portfolio  on  a  path  to  a  more  normal  level  over  several  years.  Thus,  they 
represent  an  important  part  of  the  normalization  of  the  policy  stance.  However,  if  the 
approach follows the gradual and predictable path described by the minutes, one can think of 
this adjustment as a relatively passive part of the policy tightening. In these circumstances, 
adjustments  to  the  federal  funds  rate  would  generally  be  the  active  policy  instrument, 
responding as needed to economic developments.10 
The sequence of policy steps described in the minutes indicates how the size of the SOMA 
portfolio is likely to be normalized. However, simply reducing the size of the portfolio would 
still leave its duration at historically elevated levels. The FOMC might decide it was happy 
with this outcome, or it could decide at some stage to renormalize the duration of the portfolio 
as well. Depending on the precise timing of the steps that will occur in the exit sequence, 
there will likely be opportunities to do so. For example, there is a good chance that the Desk 
will still be selling MBS at the time when the SOMA portfolio gets back to its normal size.11 In 
such  circumstances,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  have  to  then  engage  in  sizable  Treasury 
purchases to offset the ongoing sales of MBS and to expand the SOMA portfolio as needed 
to meet currency demand and other factors. This period of Treasury purchases would allow 
the FOMC to rebuild its Treasury portfolio with the maturity structure that it sees as optimal. 
                                                 
9  This  view  was  expressed  by  Chairman  Bernanke  in  the  press  conference  following  the  April 2011  FOMC 
meeting. 
10  Of course, the minutes also noted that the path of sales could also be adjusted up or down in response to 
material changes in the economic outlook or financial conditions. 
11  In this scenario, the Treasury portfolio, through redemptions of maturing assets, would have fallen below the 
levels  that  will  be  required  once  the  SOMA  portfolio  has  been  fully  normalized.  This  outcome  would  be 
intended to get the overall size of the balance sheet down more quickly, with a view that Treasury redemptions 
are an effective tool for doing so relative to more rapid sales of MBS. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Prospects for SOMA income 
The path of the balance sheet that is realized, along with the evolution of the term structure 
of  interest  rates,  will  determine  the  stream  of  income  that  will  be  realized  from  the  SOMA 
portfolio.12 It is important to note that this income is not the objective of the asset purchase 
programs.  The  income  from  the  SOMA  portfolio  is  instead  a  byproduct  of  policy  decisions 
taken by the FOMC to promote its economic mandate of full employment and price stability. 
However, because there seems to be considerable interest in the income produced by the 
portfolio, let me touch on it briefly. 
Given the uncertainty about how the balance sheet and interest rates may evolve, there is a 
wide  range  of  outcomes  for  the  income  stream  from  the  SOMA  portfolio.13  At  this  point,  if 
interest  rates  and  the  balance  sheet  were  to  unfold  in  the  manner  that  appears  to  be 
expected by market participants, the asset purchase programs should produce a substantial 
amount of cumulative income. The SOMA Annual Report for 2010 presents some projections 
for the portfolio income under an illustrative set of assumptions for the evolution of interest 
rates and the balance sheet.14 Under that projection, the portfolio produces about $500 billion 
of cumulative income over the period from 2009 to 2018, which is about $90 billion in excess 
of what we project would have been realized in the absence of asset purchases. 
Of  course,  the  realized  stream  of  income  could  differ  substantially  from  these  projections, 
depending  on  how  interest  rates  and  the  balance  sheet  evolve.  In  any  event,  it  is  worth 
repeating that the realized income is much less important than the economic outcomes that 
are achieved from the programs.  
Conclusion 
I hope these comments have provided you with some insights into how the SOMA portfolio 
has been managed to date and some perspectives on its evolution going forward. In general, 
the Federal Reserve will continue to have a meaningful presence in the Treasury market and 
in the agency debt and agency MBS markets for a number of years. However, with effective 
communications  about  potential  balance  sheet  actions  and  careful  implementation  of  any 
such actions by the Desk, the markets should be able to adjust to the evolution of the SOMA 
portfolio without considerable problems.  
Thank you. 
                                                 
12  All SOMA  income is remitted to Treasury  after paying for  the operating  expenses and  capital needs  of the 
Federal Reserve. 
13  Of course, the Federal Reserve is being compensated for assuming this risk in the same manner  as other 
market participants, because the assets were obtained at market prices that embed premiums for the various 
risks  involved.  Our  presence  in  the  market  likely  reduced  these  risk  premiums,  but  they  appear  to  have 
remained positive on average for the assets purchased. 
14  See  “Domestic  Open  Market  Operations  During  2010”,  a  report  by  the  Markets  Group  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, March 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
