Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Managing the challenges of industry 
globalization 
Keynote address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank  of  Bahrain,  at  the  18th  World  Islamic  Banking  Conference,  Manama,  22  November 
2011. 
 the 
to  Accelerate 
Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: “Salaam Alaikum” 
It is a pleasure to welcome you once more to the World Islamic Banking Conference. Over 
the years the Conference has become firmly established as a landmark event not only in the 
calendar of Bahrain, but also in that of the global Islamic financial services industry. I would 
like  to  congratulate  the  organisers  for  once  again  having  assembled  such  a  strong  list  of 
speakers at this year’s event. 
A special word of thanks is due to the many distinguished speakers who will be appearing 
during the Conference. Their contributions are vital to its success. No less important are the 
contributions  made  by  the  sponsors,  who  have  again  been  generous  in  their  support. 
Collectively, your contributions are the reasons for the great success of the WIBC. 
The  topic  of  this  year’s  Inaugural  Session  is  that  of  Managing  the  Challenges  of  Industry 
Globalization:  Strengthening  Regulatory  Frameworks 
International 
Development of Islamic Finance. This is an immensely important topic. As I have pointed out 
in  several  speeches  since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  began  over  three  years  ago,  it  is 
essential for the future development of the Islamic financial industry that it learns from the 
mistakes  of  interest  based  finance.  This  includes  making  sure  that  it  is  based  on  secure 
regulatory foundations. 
In the past 30 years we have seen the growth of a truly global financial system. Financial 
markets and institutions no longer stop at national borders. For example, the amount lent by 
banks  cross-border  in  1983  was  $703  billion.  By  2008,  the  year  that  the  financial  crisis 
became global, that figure had risen to $20 trillion. The trends in the banking market were 
followed by trends in other sectors of the financial industry. 
A globalised financial system delivered many benefits. Capital was free to flow where it could 
obtain  the  best  investment  returns.  In  many  parts  of  the  world,  foreign  capital  was 
responsible for creating new businesses and factories that raised rates of economic growth 
and provided employment to millions of people. As a result, the process of capital allocation 
that the global financial system made possible was responsible for lifting countless millions of 
people out of poverty. 
It is important for critics of the global financial system to remember this achievement. It is far 
from  insignificant.  At  the  same  time,  however,  as  we  now  know,  there  were  costs  to  this 
achievement.  A  globalised  financial  system  also  provided  the  perfect  mechanism  for  the 
transmission of contagion from one part of the world to another. 
In the early 1980s, problems in Latin America brought the largest banks in the world to the 
brink  of  collapse.  In  the  late  1990s,  the  Asian  countries  suffered  financial  crises  as  global 
capital  flows  reversed  direction.  In  2007,  problems  in  the  mortgage  market  in  the  United 
States almost caused the collapse of the global financial system and gave rise to the first 
global economic downturn since the Second World War. 
There have been many attempts to explain the reasons for the Global Financial Crisis. Most 
of them agree on the same basic conclusions. First, that excessive rates of saving in some 
countries were offset by excessive rates of consumption in others. This created the so-called 
“global imbalances” that resulted in a flood of capital pouring into the advanced economies, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
setting off a search for yield. This in turn encouraged financial engineering and the creation 
of CDOs and other structured instruments. 
Secondly,  these  great  flows  of  global  capital  passed  through  a  financial  system  that  was 
inadequately  regulated.  Financial  markets  and  institutions  might  have  become  global,  but 
regulation had not kept up. Despite the best efforts of international standard setting bodies 
like the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, nationally-based regulators struggled to 
ensure proper oversight of global banking groups. In many cases, these groups had grown 
larger than the economies of the countries that were responsible for licensing and regulating 
them. 
Thirdly,  institutions  that  were  inadequately  regulated  were  also  inadequately  managed. 
Boards of Directors and senior management simply could not know enough about what was 
going on in large, diverse, and globally active financial groups to understand the full extent of 
the  risks  that  they  were  running.  Too  often,  a  firm’s  risk  management  and  internal  control 
systems were not up to the job of ensuring that these large diversified firms could be properly 
managed and controlled. 
Fixing the problems highlighted by the Global Financial Crisis will take time. There has been 
more progress on some of these issues than on others. Global imbalances, for example, are 
still large, and will remain so as long as the United States continues to run large deficits. 
There are some signs that the shareholders of large global banks, as well as their regulators, 
are putting pressure on them to downsize and simplify their operations. Some banks have 
reduced the scale of their overseas activities after the crisis. Law makers in Britain and the 
United  States  have  been  looking  at  ways  of  separating  the  deposit-taking  and  lending 
activities of banks from their other operations. And regulators are pressing banks to come up 
with so-called “living wills” – to plan for the possibility that the bank might fail. 
The greatest progress has, however, been made in writing new regulations. At the end of last 
year the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision published its new Capital Framework for 
internationally active banks, known as Basel III. 
Basel  III  tries  to  do  several  things,  but  its  main  aim  is  to  ensure  that  banks  have  bigger 
capital and liquidity buffers, so that they will be less highly leveraged than in the past. When 
a bank could operate at a leverage ratio of $1 of equity to every $40 of assets, it was clearly 
too  highly  leveraged.  It  meant  that  losses  of  as  little  as  two  percent  on  the  bank’s  asset 
portfolio could wipe out its entire capital. The Basel Committee has, rightly in my view, set 
out to make sure that in future banks will not be able to operate with so little capital relative to 
their assets. 
How relevant are these developments to the Islamic financial industry? 
Islamic finance has been a relative-newcomer to the globalization trend. The industry itself is 
still  comparatively  young,  having  hardly  existed  30  years  ago.  Since  then  it  has  recorded 
impressive rates of growth, but even today’s $1 trillion industry is still relatively small on a 
global scale. 
Even  so,  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  has  given  the  Islamic  financial  industry  a  great 
opportunity.  The  obvious  flaws  in  conventional  finance  have  created  great  interest  in  the 
Islamic financial model. This should provide the basis for the industry to sustain a period of 
strong growth for the rest of this decade. The growth opportunities are especially strong as 
Islamic finance has its largest presence in rapidly growing economies that have been least 
affected by the Global Financial Crisis. They should continue to register high rates of growth 
in the years ahead. 
If Islamic finance is to make the most of these opportunities, it still needs to learn from the 
mistakes of interest-based finance. 
As Islamic financial institutions expand, they need to make sure that their management and 
control functions keep pace with their growth. As the Global Financial Crisis shows, there is a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
need  for  firms,  especially  those  that  become  internationally  active,  to  make  sure  that  risk 
management,  control  systems,  and  IT  are  capable  of  providing  an  accurate  picture  of  a 
financial institution’s overall risk profile. 
Boards of Directors and senior managers also need to ensure that they have the knowledge, 
expertise,  and  professional  skills  to  manage  businesses  that  are  growing  in  complexity. 
Building  high  quality  human  capital  is  an  essential  building  block  for  the  expansion  of  the 
Islamic financial industry. 
Finally,  the  regulatory  framework  needs  to  keep  pace  with  an  expanding  industry.  The 
Islamic financial industry is fortunate in that it has several well-established standard setting 
bodies,  including  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board,  the  International  Islamic  Financial 
Market, and the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions. Over 
the  years,  these  standard  setting  bodies  have  demonstrated  their  ability  to  adapt 
international standards to the needs of the Islamic financial industry. 
These  bodies  now  need  to  take  the  lead  in  adapting  the  new  international  standards, 
including Basel III, to the specific circumstances of Islamic finance. Ensuring that firms have 
strong capital and liquidity buffers should not be seen as an optional extra for the industry, 
but as an essential foundation for its next stage of growth. The industry will be stronger if it 
strengthens its foundations, just as the foundations of interest-based finance are now being 
strengthened. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
