Mario Draghi: Hearing before the Plenary of the European Parliament on 
the occasion of the adoption of the Resolution on the ECB’s 2010 Annual 
Report 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a 
hearing before the Plenary of the European Parliament on the occasion of the adoption of the 
Resolution on the ECB’s 2010 Annual Report, Brussels, 1 December 2011. 
 President, 
Honourable members of the European Parliament,  
I am delighted to be making my first appearance here as President of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) and I am honoured to present to you the ECB Annual Report for 2010. 
Je  souhaite  tout  d’abord  rendre  ici  hommage  à  mon  prédécesseur.  Tout  au  long  de  son 
mandat,  Jean-Claude  Trichet  a  su  entretenir  un  dialogue  fructueux  et  constructif  avec  le 
Parlement européen. Dialogue que j’entends poursuivre avec tout autant de vigueur.  
Die EZB ist sich ihrer großen Verantwortung als Hüterin der Geldwertstabilität bewusst. Die 
Unabhängigkeit der EZB ist und bleibt unverhandelbar.  
Impegno, forte senso di responsabilità e corretta attuazione delle politiche sono condizioni 
essenziali della partecipazione all’Unione Economica e Monetaria. 
Monetary policy decisions in 2010 and 2011 
Today’s session is an opportunity for us to take a wider perspective on ECB policies. In that 
way, I will also touch on a number of the broader themes of the Resolution of the European 
Parliament.  
Let me begin with a few words on the main monetary policy decisions we have taken and the 
challenges we have faced during 2010 and 2011.  
As you know, the ECB’s monetary policy is constantly guided by the goal of maintaining price 
stability in the euro area over the medium term. And when I say this, I mean price stability in 
either  direction.  This  applies  to  both  the  setting  of  official  interest  rates  and  the 
implementation of non-standard measures.  
This autumn, tensions in financial markets have intensified again with very adverse effects 
on  financing  conditions  and  confidence.  Downside  risks  to  the  economic  outlook  have 
increased. The weaker degree of activity is moderating price, cost and wage pressures. It is 
in  this  context  that  the  ECB  decided  to  reduce  its  key  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points  in 
early November 2011. 
Dysfunctional  government  bond  markets  in  several  euro  area  countries  hamper  the  single 
monetary policy because the way this policy is transmitted to the real economy depends also 
on  the  conditions  of  the  bond  markets  in  the  various  countries.  An  impaired  transmission 
mechanism for monetary policy has a damaging impact on the availability and price of credit 
to firms and households.  
This is the very important monetary policy reason for the ECB’s non-standard measures. But 
of  course,  such  interventions  can  only  be  limited.  Governments  must  –  individually  and 
collectively – restore their credibility vis-à-vis financial markets.  
Tensions in sovereign bond markets have been accompanied by stress in the banking sector 
given  the  financial  interlinkages  between  governments  and  banks.  The  ECB  has  taken 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
several measures in 2010 and 2011 to ensure that banks continue to have access to funding 
sources. This has enabled them to continue lending to firms and households.  
Most  importantly,  the  ECB  has  extended  its  policy  of  fully  allotting  liquidity  demanded  by 
banks  at  fixed  rates  against  collateral.  The  maximum  maturity  of  these  liquidity-providing 
operations was first extended to six months and later to 12 and 13 months. A new Covered 
Bond Purchase Programme has recently been initiated, with a size of 40 billion euros.  
In  addition,  liquidity  in  US  dollars  has  been  offered  to  banks  for  three-month  periods. 
Yesterday, in a globally coordinated action with the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan, the 
Bank of England, the Bank of Canada and the Swiss National Bank, we have agreed to lower 
the  price  on  US  dollar  provision  in  other  constituencies  including  the  euro  area.  We  have 
furthermore agreed, as a contingency measure, to establish temporary bilateral liquidity swap 
arrangements so that liquidity can be provided in each jurisdiction in any of the currencies, 
should market conditions so warrant.  
As  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  meets  on  Thursday  next  week,  we  are  now  in  the 
pre-decision period, and nothing that I say should in any way be interpreted in terms of future 
monetary policy decisions. But as far as the current situation is concerned, there is not much 
more to say beyond what I have said in recent statements.  
We are aware of the continuing difficulties for banks due to the stress on sovereign bonds, 
the tightness of funding markets and scarcity of eligible collateral in some financial segments. 
We  are  also  aware  of  the  problems  of  maturity  mismatches  on  balance  sheets,  the 
challenges of raising levels of capital and the cyclical risks related to the downturn. 
Challenges for Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  overall  functioning  of  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union. 
Looking back at 2010 and 2011, notable progress has been achieved in reinforcing economic 
governance – though I recognise that this may not be evident in times of crisis. 
The  European  Parliament  has  contributed  decisively  to  that  progress,  and  the  ECB 
commends that work. The “six pack”, the European Semester, the Euro Plus Pact: all these 
initiatives have set the stage for closer coordination and more intensive scrutiny of economic 
policies in the EU, particularly in the euro area.  
Yet we are at a difficult stage at present. We have set up these new mechanisms, but their 
positive  effects  on  the  credibility  of  government  fiscal  policies  are  not  yet  visible.  And  the 
government changes that have taken place in some of the more exposed countries have not 
yet had much of an effect on the continuing fragility of financial markets.  
Fundamental questions are being raised and they call for an answer. At the heart of these 
questions are not only the credibility of governments’ policies and the actual delivery of the 
promised reforms, but also the overall design of our common fiscal governance.  
I am confident the new surveillance framework will restore confidence over time. I am also 
quite sure that countries overall are on the right track. But a credible signal is needed to give 
ultimate assurance over the short term. 
What  I  believe  our  economic  and  monetary  union  needs  is  a  new  fiscal  compact  –  a 
fundamental restatement of the fiscal rules together with the mutual fiscal commitments that 
euro area governments have made. 
Just as we effectively have a compact that describes the essence of monetary policy – an 
independent  central  bank  with  a  single  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  – so  a  fiscal 
compact would enshrine the essence of fiscal rules and the government commitments taken 
so far, and ensure that the latter become fully credible, individually and collectively.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We might be asked whether a new fiscal compact would be enough to stabilise markets and 
how a credible longer-term vision can be helpful in the short term. Our answer is that it is 
definitely the most important element to start restoring credibility.  
Other  elements  might  follow,  but  the  sequencing  matters.  And  it  is  first  and  foremost 
important  to  get  a  commonly  shared  fiscal  compact  right. Confidence  works  backwards:  if 
there is an anchor in the long term, it is easier to maintain trust in the short term. After all, 
investors  are  themselves  often  taking  decisions  with  a  long  time  horizon,  especially  with 
regard to government bonds.  
A new fiscal compact would be the most important signal from euro area governments for 
embarking  on  a  path  of  comprehensive  deepening  of  economic  integration.  It  would  also 
present a clear trajectory for the future evolution of the euro area, thus framing expectations. 
On the precise legal process that brings about a move towards a genuine economic union, 
we should keep our options open. Far-reaching Treaty changes should not be discarded, but 
faster processes are also conceivable.  
Whatever  the  approach,  companies,  markets  and  the  citizens  of  Europe  expect  policy-
makers to act decisively to resolve the crisis. It is time to adapt the euro area design with a 
set  of  institutions,  rules  and  processes  that  is  commensurate  with  the  requirements  of 
monetary union.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
