Ignazio Visco: Conference in memory of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa 
Introductory remarks of Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Bank of Italy 
conference in honour of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Rome, 16 December 2011. 
 I  am  very  grateful  to  all  of  you  for  being  here  today  for  this  conference  in  memory  of 
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. I am glad that we have been able to bring together so many of 
his  colleagues  and  friends  who  down  through  the  years  had  the  fortune  to  appreciate  his 
intellectual and human qualities. And I am especially glad that we are gathering here at the 
Bank  of  Italy,  the  institution  where  he  spent  a  good  part  of  his  professional  life  and  the 
environment  in  which  he  first  built  an  international  reputation.  An  institution  that,  like  the 
others he worked in, he helped to forge and to which he always remained deeply attached. 
For many of us Tommaso was more than a colleague; he was also a friend and a mentor. 
You could always count on his advice, his ability to anticipate and find concrete solutions to 
problems. Conversation with him was always enlightening; you benefited from having your 
ideas  challenged,  you  sharpened  your  reasoning,  you  learned,  from  his  example,  how  to 
deliver  results.  In  the  year  since  his  untimely  death  I  have  often  missed  his  wisdom  and 
acumen, his lucid vision of the road ahead, and I have often found myself trying to guess 
what his advice would have been at a time when we face so many difficult challenges in Italy, 
his native country, and Europe, the ideal to which he devoted much of his life. 
Tommaso was devoted to his country and was always conscious of its great potential. But 
his  innate  optimism  did  not  blind  him  to  its  serious  weaknesses  or  to  the  troubles that  lay 
ahead.  He  considered  Italy  a  country  suffering  from  a  grave  illness:  twenty-five  years  of 
healthy  growth  after  the  Second  World  War  had  been  followed  by  two  decades  of  growth 
achieved  with  “toxic  stimuli”:  “a  combination  of  inflation  and  currency  devaluation,  deficit-
financed public expenditure, accumulation of debt and impoverishment of capital”.1 The result 
was  a  country  at  once  heavily  indebted  and  under-capitalized,  growing  too  slowly,  where 
social  inequalities  were  bound  to  increase.  With  his  writings,  speeches  and  actions,  as 
Minister for the Economy he sought to instil a sense of urgency in an often hostile political 
environment:  it  was  vital  to  act  immediately  and  simultaneously  for  stability,  growth  and 
social equity. A sense of urgency, I must say, much vindicated by recent events.  
The underlying problem, in his view, was that Italy had lost the ambition to excel. As he put it 
so vividly, “Italy is like a cyclist who is capable of extraordinary sprints to catch up with the 
group, but incapable of taking the lead or breaking away. It seems that only the anguish of 
lagging behind and the nightmare of being excluded enable us to summon up the energy and 
the will to do our best.”2  
Well, once again we are at a point where it is imperative to demonstrate our determination to 
react to an emergency; but it is also time to take, as Tommaso used to say, a longer-term 
view  of  the  problems  of  the  Italian  economy  and  to  tackle  the  structural  impediments  to 
sustained growth. 
With regard to Europe too, in his last years Tommaso saw his fears materialize, with alarm 
and some bitterness. Although he is rightly considered one of the architects of the euro, he 
sensed from the very start that the single currency was an unfinished project. He was among 
the first to warn of the dangers of a “currency without a State”. He was deeply dissatisfied 
                                                 
1  T.  Padoa-Schioppa  (2007),  “Intervento  del  Ministro  dell’Economia  e  delle  Finanze  all’Assemblea 
dell’Associazione Bancaria Italiana”. 
2  Corriere della Sera, 16 May 2005. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
with the political inertia that had followed the introduction of the single currency. He clearly 
perceived the risks posed by inadequate governance in the macroeconomic field, in financial 
regulation and supervision, and by a union that “failed to satisfy, even for the functions that 
have  been  attributed  to  it,  the  cardinal  principles  of  western  constitutionalism  (balance  of 
powers; the democratic vote; the majority principle)”.3 He pleaded unflaggingly for a closer 
political Union.  
Tommaso  was  not  an  academic  economist.  He  had  a  special  gift  for  using  insights  from 
theoretical  economics  to  challenge  received  ideas  and  established  practices.  At  the  same 
time, he challenged academic economists to go beyond simplistic behavioural assumptions 
and to take the role of institutions fully into account. 
Institutions  and  their  design  indeed  constituted  a  leitmotif  in  his  thinking,  whether  in 
connection  with  central  banking,  market  infrastructures,  European  integration  or  global 
monetary  arrangements.  He  always  stressed  the  need  to  clearly  identify  the  nature  and 
scope of the public good that needed to be provided in order to design the most suitable set 
of rules and institutional framework case by case. At the same time, he had a dynamic view 
of issues and institutions: only by looking at underlying economic trends could one predict 
which new demands would drive the evolution of institutions in the future.  
Thus, for example, a fundamental insight of his – from early on in his career as an economist 
and, let me add, as a political scientist – was that growing economic and financial integration 
and  interdependence,  both  in  Europe  and  at  the  global  level,  would  inevitably  require  a 
profound rethinking not only of how to allocate policy-making responsibilities but of the very 
concept  of  national  sovereignty.  He  certainly  did  not  underestimate  the  difficulty  of  this 
process or the resistance it would meet. 
Like  Jean  Monnet,  Tommaso  was  fond  of  quoting  the  words  of  the  Swiss  philosopher 
Henri-Frédéric Amiel: “Experience starts over with every individual. Only institutions become 
wiser, as they accumulate the collective experience.” We can only add that institutions lucky 
enough  to  have  had  public  servants  as  clear-minded  and  far-sighted  as  Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa really have had a chance to become wiser.  
To  conclude,  Tommaso’s  example  is  a constant  source  of  inspiration,  a  model  of  the  kind 
described in one of his favourite quotes from Machiavelli: 
“A wise man ought always to follow the paths beaten by great men, and to imitate those who 
have been supreme, so that if his ability does not equal theirs, at least it will savour of it. Let 
him  act  like  the  clever  archers  who,  designing  to  hit  the  mark  which  yet  appears  too  far 
distant,  and  knowing  the  limits  to  which  the  strength  of  their  bow  attains,  take  aim  much 
higher than the mark, not to reach by their strength or arrow to so great a height, but to be 
able  with  the  aid  of  so  high  an  aim  to  hit  the  mark  they  wish  to  reach.”  [Machiavelli,  The 
Prince, translated by W. K. Marriott (1908), Chapter 6] 
We  have  decided  to  commemorate  Tommaso  by  taking  his  ideas  as  a  starting  point  to 
discuss some of the burning economic issues of today’s real world, an approach, I believe, 
he would have appreciated. We have prepared four background notes, one for each session 
of  the  conference,  to  summarize  his  thoughts  and  legacy  on  each  of  the  four  themes  that 
were  at  the  centre  of  his  work:  monetary  policy  and  payment  systems,  financial  system 
regulation  and  supervision,  the  process  of  European  integration,  and  the  reform  of  the 
international monetary system. I think that the notes give ample testimony of the depth and 
vitality of his contribution. 
                                                 
3  Corriere della Sera, 3 May 1998. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Before  the  panel  discussions,  however,  we  will  have  the  pleasure  of  being  addressed  by 
Italy’s  Prime  Minister,  Professor  Mario  Monti,  whom  I  thank  warmly  for  confirming  his 
acceptance of our invitation in spite of his many pressing engagements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
