Andreas Dombret: Local currency bond markets and international capital 
flows 
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the third international workshop on developing local currency bond 
markets in  emerging  market economies and developing countries, co-hosted with  the  World 
Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund, Frankfurt am Main, 17–18 November 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Although the topic “Developing local currency bond markets in emerging market economies 
and  developing  countries”  rarely  makes  the  headlines,  it  has  rightly  met  with  growing  and 
broader  political  support  in  recent  years.  This  is  a  reflection  of  the  great  significance  that 
domestic bond markets in this region have for national and global financial stability. For this 
reason, we are very pleased that this topic has been one of the main agenda items during 
the French G20 presidency in 2011.  
What is more, this lends greater continuity to the G20 process and to the discussion of the 
G20 topics. Besides ensuring that summit decisions are implemented, this also gives these 
decisions greater public credibility.  
This applies, in particular, to the establishment or expansion of financial markets, which will 
take decades rather than just a few years. Since the Asian crisis, many EMEs – supported by 
numerous global, regional or national institutions – have been successful in their efforts to 
deepen their local bond markets. Nonetheless, further challenges lie ahead.  
At the global level, the G7 finance ministers and central bank governors agreed in 2007 that 
developing  local  currency  bond  markets  (LCBMs)  deserved  more  political  support.  The 
Bundesbank backed this process in close cooperation with the Federal Ministry of Finance 
and played a major part in drawing up the G8 action plan, which was endorsed in May 2007. 
Since then, the Bundesbank has, with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank 
Group, co-hosted three international workshops dealing with ways to implement the G8, and 
now the G20, recommendations. And in the years ahead we will continue to play an active 
role in this initiative in very fruitful and constructive cooperation with all of you.  
The  significance  attributed  to  LCBMs  for  national  and  global  financial  stability  is  also 
reflected in the fact that, as part of the G20 process, this topic was – inter alia – dealt with by 
the  International  Monetary  System  (IMS)  working  group.  A  report  on  their  findings  was 
submitted to the G20 finance ministers and central bank governors; this topic was also on the 
agenda of the heads of state or government at the Cannes Summit 2011. In this context the 
main focus has been put on the relationship between developed LCBMs and the volatility of 
international capital flows, which is also the theme of today’s workshop.  
Against this background, I would like to focus on the following points:  
 
Objectives of the initiative and the contribution by the LCBMs to increasing financial 
stability  
State of development of LCBMs 
Main challenges ahead  
 Objectives of the initiative  
The  main  objective  of  the  initiative  was  and  is  to  strengthen  national  and  global  financial 
stability. It is important to stress this. The development of LCBMs enhances the resilience of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the national financial systems and, therefore, global financial stability. In addition, a number 
of  developing  countries  have  set  themselves  the  task  of  attracting  long-term  global 
investment capital to finance infrastructure investment and, in this way, to boost growth. But 
very rightly, the G20 action plan points out that  
“Future  activities  should  …  bolster  the  role  that  LCBMs  can  play  in  improving 
domestic and global financial stability and strengthening the ability of economies 
to  manage  capital  flows,  thereby  contributing  to  international  monetary  stability 
more generally.” 
Merely stating that developing these markets can have a stabilising effect does not tell us 
how to get there, nor what form the relevant process might take. In my view, there is a clear 
need to step up research and expand the necessary data base. Useful though it may be to 
acquire data by conducting surveys at intervals of five, seven or ten years, this process is 
inadequate and hardly acceptable.  
Yet we must be just as frank when considering the risks entailed in developing local bond 
markets.  After  all,  they  are  an  important  playing  field  for  short-term  portfolio  inflows  and 
outflows. Indeed, this is true of the present capital inflows to the EMEs: short-term portfolio 
investment represents no less than 50% of capital inflows.  
As far as potential contributions by LCBMs to financial stability are concerned, I would like to 
mention  just  a  few  which  have  proven  important,  not  least  in  the  context  of  the  current 
financial crisis.  
 
Deeper LCBMs reduce the vulnerability of the relevant EMEs to fluctuating interest 
rates  and  exchange  rates.  The  main  reason  for  this  is  that  LCBMs  help  reduce 
currency and maturity mismatches, which trigger and amplify crises. Thus, they help 
check contagion and prevent spillovers to the real economy.  
LCBMs  make  the  financial  system  more  diversified,  and  make  it  easier  for 
enterprises  to  access  finance  on  international  credit  markets  in  times  of  tension. 
What is more, they play a part in ensuring that savings are not invested solely or 
primarily in equity markets, which could promote herd behaviour.  
LCBMs facilitate the smooth market-based financing of investment needs.  
First studies, which require substantiation, back up the assumption that developed 
LCBMs  also  help  dampen  the  volatility  of  international  capital  flows,  a  finding  of 
major significance in the light, in particular, of this year’s G20 discussion.  
They broaden the spectrum of investments for international investors and facilitate 
their global search for diversification. 
According  to  some  commentators,  LCBMs  actually  contribute  to  rebalancing  by 
keeping savings at home. These savings not only boost domestic investment and 
consumption, they also increase the country’s propensity to import.  
    This  is  only  an  abbreviated  list  of  the  potential  advantages  identified  during  the  financial 
crisis,  although  some  of  them  are  as  yet  no  more  than  a  scientific  working  hypothesis. 
Analyses  of  this  kind  always  beg  the  question  of  their  practical  implications  for  any 
amendments  to  concepts  for  technical  assistance  that  may  be  necessary  or  changes  to 
priorities. This workshop can bring us an important step forward by also helping to formulate 
key questions for further research.  
Some key questions concern technical assistance itself, however, and are related more to 
the structure and state of development of the relevant countries than the question of financial 
stability  itself.  The  focus  of  the  workshop  is  quite  rightly  on  discussing  and  developing  a 
diagnostic  framework,  the  aim  being  to  categorise  countries  by  their  state  of  development 
and financial structure and to determine what TA measures promise the greatest success in 
which countries.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although  many  institutions  are  working  on  these  issues,  permit  me  to  make  particular 
mention of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). The EBRD is 
incorporating into this workshop major elements of its local bond initiative, which has been 
well received worldwide.  
To develop a framework that defines uniform principles for all countries is a real challenge, 
yet it is crucial as a means of heightening the efficient deployment of TA resources.  
The question of what obstacles lie on the path to deeper LCBMs is not just about regulatory 
roadblocks or market infrastructure – which are among the usual suspects when evaluating 
such things. No, it is important to see local bond markets not only in isolation but also within 
the  overall  context  of  the  financial  system.  For  example,  a  financial  system  with  a 
decentralised  banking  sector  might  fully  meet  the  financial  needs  of  a  decentralised 
economic structure and do so with minimum transaction and opportunity costs. Given such 
interdependence, it would make no sense to develop bond markets that go against market 
economy incentives. A diagnostic framework needs to be placed in this broad context if it is 
ultimately to produce the desired results.  
State of development  
LCBMs have developed rapidly in recent years. The domestic debt outstanding in emerging 
market economies amounts to US$9.2 trillion (end of March 2011). It has more than doubled 
since March 2006, and this dynamic growth has not been much influenced by the financial 
crisis. LCBMs have significantly more potential. Just for illustration: while the EMEs have a 
share of around 34% of world GDP, the weight of debt securities is only 9½%. Moreover, this 
development must not blind us to the fact that important challenges lie ahead and – to put it 
in a nutshell – that they lie in the very areas that bring to bear the advantages of LCBMs, 
which I have just mentioned. I would like to raise just a few here:  
 
Above all, let me say that in many countries corporate bond markets either do not 
exist or are under-developed. However, only if there is sufficient liquidity on these 
markets  can  they  serve  as  a  spare  tyre  when  other  sources  of  funding  dry  up. 
Sovereign  bonds  account  for  two-thirds  of  bond  markets;  corporates  for  only 
one-eighth.  
There is also a great deal of concentration in EM regions, with two-thirds accounted 
for by EM Asia and only around 8% by EM Europe.  
Moreover, outstanding local currency bonds of EMEs are concentrated on just a few 
countries. Five countries (China, Brazil, South Korea, India and Mexico) account for 
around  three-quarters  of  overall  market  volume.  Of  those,  China  is  the  biggest 
market with more than one-third.  
But  –  and  this  is  a  next  point  –  strong  growth  momentum  is  not  always  pre-
dominantly  driven  by  market  forces.  For  instance,  in  order  to  sterilise  the  liquidity 
effects of its foreign exchange market intervention, the People’s Bank of China also 
issues  short-term  paper  on  LCBMs.  Statistically,  these  short-term  notes  count  as 
local  bonds.  Nevertheless,  these  markets  offer  a  platform  through  which  both 
monetary and fiscal management can be facilitated in times of crisis.  
   Main challenges ahead 
These arguments regarding the state of development lead us to other major challenges.  
First, if one main objective of this initiative is to strengthen the liquidity of those markets, the 
financial  crisis  in  particular  has  shown  that  there  is  a  lack  of  liquidity  in  times  of  tensions 
because withdrawals of liquidity by foreign investors are not sufficiently replaced by domestic 
investment in this country group.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
A  second  aspect  that  calls  for  clarification  and  is  important  not  only  for  LCBMs  when 
assessing financial stability is that liquidity was often withdrawn without any great distinctions 
being made in terms of fundamentals and macroeconomic stability, meaning that open and 
developed  markets  can  also  jeopardise  countries  that  are  highly  stability-oriented.  We 
therefore also need to be mindful of the extent to which LCBMs not only increase the stability 
of  the  international  monetary  system  but  also  contribute  to  changing  the  global  financial 
transmission mechanism.  
Broadening the data base remains one of the top priorities. Closing data gaps should be a 
very targeted and cost-effective process. For example, data that have been available only in 
the form of irregular surveys should be translated into regular, more timely and internationally 
consistent  statistics.  The  broader  support  of  the  G20  can  give  these  data  initiatives  a 
significant  impulse,  in  particular  in  EMEs.  But  before  raising  new  statistics,  we  should  first 
and  foremost  check  whether  existing  tools  can  be  used  to  filter  out  data  of  relevance  to 
LCBMs.  The  Bundesbank’s  flexible  multi-dimensional  approach  for  providing  user  targeted 
data on German securities holdings statistics, which currently covers comprehensive micro-
data for more than a million different securities, is just one example.  
Although the budget constraints for EMEs expand as they become more integrated into the 
global  savings  markets  through  more  developed  domestic  bond  markets,  there  is  no 
alternative to a credible fiscal consolidation strategy. Moreover, it is especially important to 
prevent a high concentration of sovereign bonds from building up at banks, and to examine 
whether and to what extent a concentration of this kind may even actually be encouraged by 
regulation in some EMEs.  
In  sum  and  without  any  doubt,  LCBMs  can  significantly  help  to  manage  the  volatility  of 
international capital flows.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
