Subir Gokarn: An assessment of recent macroeconomic developments 
Keynote address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to the 
Opening Plenary session of Confederation of Indian Industry’s CFO Summit 2011, Mumbai, 
3 December 2011. 
Inputs and feedback from colleagues on the Financial Markets Committee are gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  share  my  thoughts  at  the  Annual  CII  CFO  Summit.  In  recent 
weeks, the macroeconomic environment has become particularly turbulent. Global conditions 
have contributed to a significant rebalancing of portfolios as a result of rapidly changing risk 
perceptions  and  appetites.  This  has  led  to  increased  instability  and  volatility  in  financial 
markets, particularly currency markets. On the domestic front, growth is decelerating while 
inflation  remains  high,  with  upside  pressures  persisting  from  the  sharp  depreciation  in  the 
rupee.  While  overall  macroeconomic  conditions  may  cause  concern,  we  need  to  take  an 
integrated and forward-looking view of positive and negative indicators and future risks while 
thinking about appropriate policy responses. This is what I propose to do during the course of 
this talk. 
The global scenario 
Let me first speak about the global scenario. Over the past two years, the performance of the 
major  advanced  economies  has  raised  significant  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  the 
global  recovery.  By  contrast,  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  have  generally  shown 
reasonable growth, suggesting that their domestic drivers and increasing linkages with each 
other  have  provided  some  offset  to  the  slower  growth  in  advanced  economies.  However, 
periodically, either sovereign debt pressures in Europe or growth volatility in the US, have 
heightened  those  concerns.  The  European  debt  problem  has  unquestionably  been  the 
dominant  global  factor  over  the  past  few  months,  which,  in  turn,  has  been  a  source  of 
volatility in asset and currency markets all over the world. As prospects of enduring solutions 
to  the  problem  have  ebbed  and  flowed,  so  have  asset  prices  and  exchange  rates.  After 
several weeks of anticipation, matters appear to be coming to a head. The prospects of a 
solution  critically  hinge  on 
for  December  9th,  where 
arrangements that will help stabilize global markets are expected to be announced. 
the  Euro  summit  scheduled 
Impact on India and policy responses 
The impact of this recent global instability on India has been enormous. India is a structurally 
current  account  deficit  economy.  This  deficit  is,  in  turn,  financed  by  capital  inflows,  which 
over  the  past  several  years,  had  been  large  and  stable  enough  to  more  than  offset  the 
current account deficit. For a few months during the 2008–09 financial crisis, the position was 
reversed and, when that happened, the Rupee behaved much like it did over the past several 
weeks (Chart 1). Between July 2008 and February 2009, the Rupee depreciated by nearly 17 
per cent. Essentially, when capital stops coming in, the current account drives the exchange 
rate and, naturally, the pressure is to depreciate in the face of the deficit. With the kind of 
volatility we have seen in global capital flows over this period, virtually all EME currencies 
faced  pressure  to  depreciate.  However,  the  eventual  magnitude  of  change  reflected 
differences between countries in current account conditions as well as policy responses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For  the  past  few  years,  the  exchange  rate  regime  in  India  has  been  what  might  be  best 
described  as  a  “bounded  float”.  There  are  virtually  no  restrictions  on  Foreign  Direct 
Investment (FDI), except for limits on specific sectors, and portfolio investment in equities. 
However, there are restrictions on debt inflows, driven by considerations of external stability. 
These  limits  relate  to  quantity,  tenor  and  pricing.  Short-term  debt  is  the  least  preferred, 
because it is seen as most vulnerable to sudden reversals, while long-term debt, despite risk 
concerns, is seen as contributing to the resource flow into infrastructure, so is viewed more 
favourably.  These  controls  on  debt  might  be  viewed  as  “structural”  or  “strategic”  capital 
controls;  they  are  altered  relatively  infrequently  in  response  to  changing  macroeconomic 
conditions and not with a view to impacting the daily movement of the exchange rate. 
While we do not target the level of exchange rate, nor do we have a fixed band for nominal or 
real exchange rates to guide interventions, the capital account management framework helps 
in the bounded float. If volatility increases, appropriate tools, including those in the realm of 
capital account management are used. Within these overall boundaries, the exchange rate is 
determined by daily variations in demand and supply. In the recent episode of depreciation, 
as I indicated earlier, a sharp fall in capital inflows led to a drying up of supply, while demand 
on  account  of  the  current  account  deficit  continued  unabated,  leading  to  the  outcome  we 
saw. 
There has been a long-standing debate on the merits and de-merits of this exchange rate 
policy, which has returned to centre-stage in the wake of recent developments. Time does 
not  permit  me  to  go  into  it  here,  but  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  the  different  policy 
responses we saw across EMEs to the volatility in capital inflows were largely the outcome of 
their exchange rate policy framework. Countries  that orient their exchange rate regimes to 
export competitiveness typically have current account surpluses. This is a characteristic of 
the Asian EMEs and, in this sense, India is a significant exception to the Asian rule. These 
surpluses  are  reflected  in  a  build-up  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  may  be  further 
enhanced  by  large  inflows  of  capital  and  the  further  accumulation  of  reserves  to  prevent 
currency  appreciation,  which  undermines  competitiveness  in  the  short  run.  In  the  current 
global context, when capital inflows stop, reserves built up from current account surpluses 
provide the capacity to manage exchange rates in the face of external pressure. 
India has large reserves, of course, over $300 billion, but because we have a current account 
deficit, the reserves are essentially counterbalanced against our external liability position. In 
an extreme scenario, if there is a large outflow of capital, the adequacy of reserves will be 
judged by the economy’s ability to finance the current account deficit and, over and above 
that, meet short-term claims without any disruption or loss of confidence. In light of this, the 
value and use of reserves in the Indian context must be viewed somewhat differently than in 
the context of a structurally current account surplus economy. Reserves essentially provide 
comfort to external counterparties that we have the capacity to meet our obligations. 
While  the  recent  sharp  depreciation  has  in  certain  quarters  led  to  an  assessment  of 
“helplessness” in dealing with the kind of global turbulence we are seeing today, our strategic 
behavior should not be misconstrued as an inability to lean against the wind. Consider the 
following alternatives. Not using reserves to prevent currency depreciation poses the risk that 
the exchange rate will spiral out of control, reinforced by self-fulfilling expectations. On the 
other  hand,  using  them  up  in  large  quantities  to  prevent  depreciation  may  result  in  a 
deterioration  of  confidence  in  the  economy’s  ability  to  meet  even  its  short-term  external 
obligations. Since both outcomes are undesirable, the appropriate policy response is to find a 
balance that avoids either. 
That balance can be found in precisely the structural capital controls that I referred to earlier. 
Resisting currency depreciation is best done by increasing the supply of foreign currency by 
expanding market participation. This, in essence, has been our response. We increased the 
limit on investment in government and corporate debt instruments by foreign investors. We 
raised the ceilings on interest rates payable on non-resident deposits. The all-in-cost ceiling 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
for  External  Commercial  Borrowings  has  been  enhanced.  All  these  channels  will  help  to 
expand the inflow of foreign exchange. These capital control measures have been supported 
by  a  series  of  administrative  measures,  which  are  aimed  at  curbing  the  capacity  (or 
temptation)  of  market  participants  to  take  positions  against  the  Rupee,  which  may  further 
aggravate  the  pressures  to  depreciate.  For  example,  entities  that  borrow  abroad  were 
liberally allowed to retain those funds overseas, which in this environment, would fetch them 
some windfall gains. They are now required to bring the proportion of those funds to be used 
for domestic expenditure into the country immediately. 
In  sum,  within  the  broad  parameters  of  our  “bounded  float”  approach  to  exchange  rate 
management, we do have the instruments and the capacity to enhance supplies of foreign 
exchange into the market and, as has been demonstrated by these recent actions, will use 
them  as  appropriate.  Within  this  overall  framework,  let  me  address  the  issue  of  direct 
intervention. As we have said, our policy approach does not involve strong intervention in the 
currency market to achieve a specific rate target. The risks of doing this have already been 
pointed  out.  However,  in  excessively  volatile  market  conditions,  “smoothing”  interventions 
that help to keep markets orderly and prevent large jumps that can induce further spirals, are 
entirely justified and have been carried out. 
To sum up my thoughts on this issue, let me re-emphasize that our broad objective. It is to 
ensure that we find a balance between the short-term risk of the Rupee spiralling downwards 
and  the  medium-term  risk  of  a  loss  of  confidence  in  our  ability  to  meet  our  external 
obligations. We do have the instruments to do this in the form of strategic capital controls, 
which  can  be  used  to  enhance  the  supply  of  foreign  exchange.  These  will  be  used  as 
appropriate,  with  the  goal  of  ensuring  that  the  availability  of  foreign  exchange  does  not 
become a de-stabilizing constraint. 
However, we must accept the likelihood of global turbulence persisting for some time, with 
the consequent impact on asset price and currency volatility. This is a risky environment and 
everybody would be well advised to mitigate their risks to the extent possible. Over time, the 
hedging  options  for  various  stakeholders,  including  banks,  corporates  and  small  exporters 
have increased. Accordingly these stakeholders are advised to be vigilant and well-prepared 
with appropriate risk mitigation strategies, even while central bank acts to smooth excessive 
volatility. 
But, beyond this, if we do see the short-term risk of a downward spiral escalating, we will not 
hesitate  to  use  all  available  instruments.  Notwithstanding  our  preference  for  a  strategic 
approach  to  manage  our  external  exposures,  we  would  like  to  reiterate  that  to  safeguard 
macroeconomic  stability,  use  of  intervention  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  sharp  and  large 
movements in the exchange rate would remains an instrument in our armoury. 
The domestic scenario 
Liquidity 
Let me first address the immediate concern about Rupee liquidity, which, in some ways, is 
related to the external situation. For several weeks now, the tightness of domestic liquidity 
conditions  has  been  highlighted  by  the  fact  that  borrowing  under  the  Liquidity  Adjustment 
Facility  (LAF)  have  been  significantly  above  our  comfort  threshold  of  one  per  cent  of  Net 
Demand  and  Time  Liabilities  (NDTL).  Recent  developments  in  our  liquidity  management 
approach have involved making a distinction between the monetary stance and the liquidity 
stance  (Chart  2).  In  December  2010,  we  exploited  this  distinction  by  carrying  out  Open 
Market  Operations  (OMOs)  to  inject  liquidity  into  the  system,  despite  maintaining  an  anti-
inflationary monetary stance. 
We appear to be in a somewhat similar situation now. Some of the tightness is attributable to 
the smoothing interventions that were carried out in the foreign exchange market. But, that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
apart, given the overall conditions and the additional pressure, even if transitory, that will be 
exerted  by  the  advance  tax  payments  in  mid-December,  domestic  liquidity  conditions  are 
expected to remain stretched for some time. 
Here again, the broad objective is to ensure that these conditions do not hamper the smooth 
functioning  of  financial  markets  and  disrupt  flows  to  the  real  economy.  We  have  been 
injecting  liquidity  into  the  market  through  LAF  and  OMOs  and  will  continue  to  do  so  as 
conditions warrant. Of course, we must guard against the risk of excessive accommodation, 
since this will conflict with our current monetary policy stance. But, having made a distinction 
between the two, we will try and ensure that liquidity remains adequate without threatening 
the  inflationary  situation.  In  short,  the  endeavour  will  be  to  keep  it  within  the  parameters 
consistent with our comfort levels for a liquidity deficit. 
We do have a range of instruments to help us achieve this objective. Currently, the banking 
system as a whole holds government securities to the tune of 29 per cent of NDTL, which is 
five per cent above the statutory requirement of 24 per cent. This reflects a relatively large 
capacity  for  liquidity  infusions,  about  2,74,000  crores,  as  and  when  the  need  arises.  It  is 
called the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for a good reason. OMOs are our first preference 
for  liquidity  injection,  since  they  are  tactical  in  nature  and  do  not  require  a  change  in  any 
policy stance, real or perceived. Further, although , OMOs are currently being used to make 
those  infusions,  the  LAF  window  is  always  available  to  the  system  to  the  extent  of  this 
surplus  capacity.  In  addition,  the  recently  established  Marginal  Standing  Facility  (MSF) 
allows banks to use a further one per cent of their SLR holdings, which, given the interest 
rate structure, they will only do in situations of extreme stress. In recent weeks, there has 
been no recourse to this window, which could mean that the there isn’t too much stress in the 
system. In a sense, this window serves as an early warning indicator and we watch it very 
closely. 
Beyond this set of instruments, there are others, like the SLR itself and, ultimately, the CRR. 
But, in thinking about these instruments, we must keep in mind that they straddle the divide 
between liquidity and monetary management, which, at the current juncture, we are intent on 
maintaining.  To  summarize  the  broad  objective  on  this  front,  it  is  to  ensure  that  domestic 
liquidity conditions do not de-stabilize financial markets or flows to the real sector, within the 
overall confines of the current monetary policy stance. Importantly, we must realize that large 
fiscal deficits cannot be accommodated fully by OMOs. Fiscal consolidation is a high priority. 
Inadequate  progress  on  this  front  will  weaken  monetary  control  and  impact  medium  term 
inflation expectations. 
Growth and inflation dynamics 
Finally, let me say a few words on domestic growth and inflation dynamics, which take us 
from  the  immediate  to  somewhat  further  into  the  future.  Here,  I  am  treading  on  familiar 
ground, since it is just about a month since our last quarterly policy review. Of course, some 
things have changed since then, most notably, the extent of depreciation of the Rupee since 
that  announcement.  In  and  of  itself,  this  clearly  heightens  inflation  risks.  These  risks  are 
perhaps aggravated by the fact that, amidst all the global turbulence, crude oil prices have 
remained  quite  firm.  While  the  relative  stability  of  oil  prices  in  dollar  terms  would  have 
provided a strong favourable base effect for domestic inflation beginning in December, this 
will be offset somewhat by the depreciation of the Rupee. However, our projections suggest 
that  the  impact  will  not  change  the  anticipated  downward  trajectory  of  inflation.  If  a 
sustainable  solution  to  the  European  sovereign  debt  problem  emerges  over  the  next  few 
weeks, global portfolio rebalancing could reverse the movement in the Rupee, which in turn 
will  help  moderate  the  inflation  risk.  Importantly,  apart  from  oil,  prices  of  some  other 
commodities have shown some signs of softening, which is obviously positive for the inflation 
outlook.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On  the  growth  front,  the  recently  published  estimates  for  Q2  of  2011–12  substantiate  the 
general  expectation  of  a  moderation  in  growth  during  the  current  year.  Some  of  this  is 
attributable to the cumulative impact of interest rate hikes. In this sense, it is an expected 
outcome  of  monetary  policy  actions,  which,  as  is  well-known,  work  to  curb  inflation  by 
moderating demand. Typically, a growth deceleration precedes an inflation deceleration, so 
the  pattern  playing  out  now  is  consistent  with  the  expectation  that  inflation  will  begin  to 
moderate over the next few months. This has been the basis of our projections and guidance 
on  future  policy  actions.  Of  course,  there  have  been  other  factors  that  have  impacted 
aggregate  demand,  especially  the  investment  component.  However,  just  as  with  the 
exchange  rate  and  inflation,  there  are  growth  risks  as  well.  Persistent  global  turbulence  is 
always going to adversely impact the investment climate, which may be further aggravated 
by  domestic  conditions.  Apart  from  interest  rates,  investment  activity,  which  is  critical  to 
sustaining high growth with low inflation, is also sensitive to a number of other factors. Policy 
actions, both on the fiscal and regulatory fronts, that can favourably impact the investment 
climate will be critical to mitigating the risks to growth. These run the gamut from tax reform 
to land acquisition to skill development. A number of initiatives on each of these fronts are 
visible, but quick resolution and implementation is the key. 
An important risk factor that we have been consistently highlighting is food. Although data 
from the most recent weeks points to a steady decline in food inflation, the likelihood is that 
food prices will remain a persistent source of inflationary pressure unless there are significant 
improvements  in  productivity,  both  at  the  cultivation  stage  and  in  the  distribution  process. 
Many forces need to be brought into play quickly to achieve this – infrastructure, technology 
and extension services, reform of market institutions and re-alignment of price incentives and 
financial services that can support them. 
However, to come back to the growth and inflation view over the next year, in a scenario in 
which global turbulence reduces, we should see inflation moderating, which would then help 
the growth cycle reverse. Even in this scenario, reforms that improve the investment climate 
are  critical.  If  global  uncertainty  persists,  making  us  even  more  dependent  on  domestic 
drivers to sustain growth, these reforms become absolutely essential. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by summarizing the main points that I wanted to make in this address. First, 
in  dealing  with  global  turbulence  and  its  short-term  impact  on  India,  we  need  to  balance 
between  the  risk  of  a  rupee  spiral  and  that  of  a  loss  of  confidence.  Our  capital  account 
management  framework  gives  us  the  capacity  to  do  this  and  we  will  continue  to  use  that 
capacity as appropriate. We have to recognize that volatility may be with us for a while and 
we  have  to  deal  with  it.  However,  if  the  risk  of  a  spiral  escalates,  reflected  in  sharp 
movements in the exchange rate, we will take swift action as and when necessary. 
Second,  domestic  liquidity  may  be  showing  signs  of  stress.  Here  again,  we  have  the 
instruments and the willingness to use them, in the context of our distinction between liquidity 
management and monetary policy. 
Third,  while  there  are  many  challenges  to  managing  the  growth-inflation  dynamics,  both 
external and domestic, they are manageable. Moderating growth will help ease inflationary 
pressures, which in turn will help growth stabilize. Of course, accelerating growth over the 
longer term without provoking inflation requires many structural changes, on which the policy 
establishment must put the highest priority. 
Let me end by thanking the organizers once again for inviting me to speak at this event and 
for accommodating my scheduling constraints through the use of this video recording. I trust 
that  my  remarks  have  served  as  a  useful  input  to  your  discussions.  My  best  wishes  for  a 
productive day. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
