Karolina Ekholm: International dependence and monetary policy 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry of Southern Sweden, Malmö, 14 October 2011. 
 The views expressed in this  speech are  my own and are  not necessarily shared  by the other  members of the 
Executive Board of the Riksbank. I would like to thank Magnus Wiberg for all his help with writing this speech. 
Sweden is a small, open economy with extensive foreign trade and a financial market that is 
well  integrated  with  international  markets.  This  makes  the  Swedish  economy  highly 
dependent on international economic developments. So, what does the fact that we appear 
to be facing a slowdown in economic activity abroad mean to the Swedish economy? The 
recovery of the US economy is sluggish and the problems relating to weak public finances in 
the  euro  area  have  increased  uncertainty  about  developments  in  Europe.  How  does  this 
affect Swedish monetary policy? Today, I intend to present my views on these issues on the 
basis of the stance I took at the latest monetary policy meeting in September. 
My views can be summed up in the following four points: 
 
to 
As a result of the weak public finances in the United States and several countries in 
Europe  many  other  countries  are  expected 
launch  extensive  austerity 
programmes  and  this  can  be  expected  to  slow  down  growth  in  the  period  ahead. 
Growth will also slow down due to the recent financial turmoil. 
A  lower  rate  of  growth  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  will  slow  down  growth  in 
Sweden too, as these regions constitute such important export markets for Swedish 
companies.  This  is  one  reason  why  monetary  policy  in  Sweden  was  made  more 
expansionary September. 
We  can  expect  monetary  policy  to  remain  expansionary  in  the  United  States,  the 
euro area and the United Kingdom as it may be necessary to compensate for the 
fact  that  several  countries  will  need  to  implement  fiscal  policy  tightening  in  a 
relatively weak economic climate. 
In my view, expectations that monetary policy will continue to be expansionary in the 
United  States,  the  euro  area  and  the  United  Kingdom  have  also  had  an 
expansionary  effect  on  Swedish  monetary  policy.  When  the  repo  rate  was  set  in 
September,  I  supported  the  decision  to  leave  the  repo  rate  unchanged  and 
advocated  a  larger  downward  adjustment  of  the  repo  rate  path  than  the  majority. 
One of the important factors behind this stance was my view that Swedish interest 
rates  cannot  deviate  too  much  from  foreign  rates  without  affecting  the  exchange 
rate, and the exchange rate is of great importance to inflation. 
   Slowdown in economic activity abroad 
During  the  summer  the  financial  markets  have  been  characterised  by  considerable 
turbulence as a result of the sovereign debt problems in the euro area and the United States. 
In the euro area, it is above all the state of central government finances in Greece that has 
been in focus in the media, but other euro countries such as Portugal, Ireland Italy and Spain 
have also suffered debt problems. 
The situation in the euro area has made the situation in parts of the European banking sector 
increasingly  strained.  For  example,  a  number  of  banks,  above  all  those  that  are  highly 
exposed to the countries with weak public finances, have suffered a shortage of liquidity and 
are finding it difficult to borrow money. There is concern that a collapse of these banks would 
lead to contagion effects in the international banking system. Uncertainty about the situation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in parts of the banking system has led credit rating agencies to reduce the credit rating of a 
number of banks. 
GDP growth in the United States was weak already during the first six months of 2011. The 
increases in corporate investment and in employment have been low – far too low to reduce 
unemployment  by  more  than  a  percentage  point  or  so.  Household  consumption  has  also 
been weak. This is because a high level of debt in combination with falling asset prices has 
reduced the net wealth of the households and they are now trying to counter this by reducing 
their debts. The continued weak development of the US housing market is also a factor that 
is holding back an improvement in the net wealth of the households. 
As in parts of Europe, the United States is experiencing a major budget deficit and a growing 
national  debt.  In  May  this  year,  the  US  national  debt  reached  the  so-called  debt  ceiling, 
which limits how much the United States is allowed to borrow. This meant there was a risk 
that government grants and everything from salaries for government employees to interest 
payments on the national debt could not be paid. As the United States is the largest borrower 
in the world this led to a lot of unease on the financial markets. Reaching agreement on how 
to  deal  with  this  was  made  more  difficult  due  to  the  political  divisions  between  the 
Republicans  and  the  Democrats.  An  agreement  to  raise  the  debt  ceiling  and  reduce  the 
federal deficit was actually reached at the end of June, but the strongly politicised process 
prior to the agreement and the fact that it was reached so late has created doubt about the 
United States’ ability to handle its national debt. 
The  increasing  concern  about  economic  problems  around  the  world  is  dampening  the 
prospects for global growth. At the same time, the pressure that that is being put on the euro 
countries  with  weak  public  finances  means  that  more  countries  in  the  euro  area  can  be 
expected to tighten fiscal policy even further than was previously assumed. This applies not 
only  to  relatively  small  economies  like  Greece,  Portugal  and  Ireland  but  also  to  larger 
economies such as Spain and Italy, and perhaps France too. We can expect the tightening 
measures  to  have  a  restraining  effect  on  growth  over  the  next  few  years.1  In  a  situation 
where  it  seems  that  growth  is  anyway  slowing  down  this  is  of  course  unfortunate. 
Nevertheless, 
increase 
confidence on the financial markets. 
However, not everything is gloomy in the global economy. It is expected that growth in Asia 
and Latin America will remain high, even though it may be dampened by the slowdown in the 
United States and Europe. It is difficult to assess exactly how much the emerging economies 
in  Asia  and  Latin  America  will  be  affected  by  the  slowdown  in  the  western  world.  This 
depends in part on to what extent they manage to reduce their dependence on exports to 
maintain a high rate of growth. A major challenge for many of these countries is to move from 
primarily export-driven growth to growth driven more by domestic consumption. 
tightening  measures  are  necessary 
to  reduce  concern  and 
How does this affect the Swedish economy? 
How do these economic developments affect resource utilisation and inflation in a small open 
economy like Sweden? Their impact will be through two main channels: through trade links 
with the rest of the world, that is via imports and exports of goods and services, and through 
the  globally-integrated  financial  markets.  Let  me  begin  by  discussing  the  role  of  the  trade 
channel. 
                                                 
1  According to the theory of expansionary fiscal contractions, an extensive budget consolidation programme can 
have a positive effect on growth. This can happen if the households expect a permanently lower level of public 
expenditure  in  the  future  and  thus  also  a  lower  level  of  taxation.  In  such  a  situation,  budget  consolidation 
would  lead  to  an  increase  in  private  consumption  and  production.  How  applicable  this  hypothesis  is  to  the 
current situation in the United States and Europe is being widely discussed by economists at the moment. My 
assessment is that it is more likely that the expected cutbacks will have a negative impact on growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Trade links 
When  a  slowdown  hits  major  economies  like  the  United  States  and  Europe  it  leads  to  a 
reduction in world trade as a whole.  
Figure 1 shows that world trade has developed relatively weakly in 2011, which has had a 
negative effect on Swedish exports. 
Figure 1 
Development of world trade  
Index, 2000=100 
 
Note.  The  index  series  is  calculated  on  the  basis  of  global  import  and  export 
volumes. 
Source: CBP Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
A fall in demand on large markets has both direct and indirect effects on Swedish exports. 
Let’s  look,  for  example,  at  the  trade  links  between  Sweden  and  the  United  States.  A 
slowdown in the US economy spreads directly to Sweden in the form of reduced demand for 
Swedish exports. There is also an indirect effect in the sense that a slowdown in the United 
States leads to a reduced demand for goods and services from, for example, Asia. Countries 
in  Asia  in  turn  import  intermediate  goods  from,  for  example,  Sweden.  Sweden  is  thus 
exposed  not  only  to  the  direct  effect  but  also  to  indirect  so-called  third  country  effects 
because the downturn in the United States affects Asia and other parts of the world. 
When we at the Riksbank produces forecasts for Swedish exports we take into account both 
direct and indirect effects. The forecasts are based on growth on the Swedish export market 
and take into account the growth in imports in the recipient countries as well as how much 
Sweden exports to the respective countries. The latest forecast for Swedish exports and the 
growth of the Swedish export market is shown in Figure 2. 
Swedish exports grew rapidly in 2010 and during the early part of this year, but already in the 
July Monetary Policy Report it was stated that growth was expected to enter a calmer phase. 
Since  then,  demand  abroad  has  weakened  which,  in  combination  with  the  recent 
international  financial  turbulence,  led  us  in  September  to  believe  that  exports  would  grow 
even more slowly than previously calculated. This is because Swedish exports consist to a 
large  extent  of  investment  goods  and  in  times  of  unrest  companies  in  Sweden  as  well  as 
abroad often choose to postpone their investments, which has a negative impact on Swedish 
exports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure 2 
Swedish exports and the Swedish export market 
Annual percentage change 
20 
15 
10 
5
0
-5
-10
-15
Swedish exports 
Swedish export market 
80
85
-20
Note. The dots represent the Riksbank’s forecast for the whole year. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
05
90
00
10
95
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
  The composition of Swedish exports is changing 
The forecast for the growth of the export market is calculated on the basis of current trading 
patterns (see Figure 2). At present, the predominant component of Swedish exports relates 
to trade with Germany and our Scandinavian neighbours. Together these countries account 
for approximately one third of Swedish exports (see Figure 3). 
Figure 3 
Swedish exports per recipient country 
Percentage of total Swedish exports 
USA
UK
Germany
Scandinavia
BRIC
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
 Source: Statistics Sweden 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The United Kingdom and the United States are also important export markets for Sweden. 
They  each  account  for  7  to  8 per cent  of  Swedish  exports.  However,  their  importance  has 
declined  over  time.  Statistics  from  Statistics  Sweden  for  the  first  half  of  2011  show  that 
Swedish  exports  to  China,  India  and  Russia  are  together  now  as  large  as  exports  to  the 
United  States.  If  Brazil  is  included  in  this  group  of  countries  then  exports  to  the  so-called 
BRIC countries exceed exports to the United States and also those to the United Kingdom. 
The rate of increase in trade with the BRIC countries has been high recently. While exports 
to  the  BRIC  countries  have  increased  by  150 per cent  since  2002,  exports  to  the  United 
States have fallen by 17 per cent in the same period.2 
This  change  in  the  relative  significance  of  different  export  markets  at  the  macro  level  is 
confirmed by micro data. In the company interviews conducted by the Riksbank, the Swedish 
export companies report that sales are falling in parts of Europe compared with China and 
Brazil.3 
Increased intra-regional trade in Asia 
The  increased  importance  of  the  BRIC  countries  to  Swedish  exports  is  a  natural 
consequence  of  the  fact  that  these  countries  now  constitute  a  larger  part  of  the  global 
economy. The extent to which the slowdown in Europe and the United States spreads to the 
emerging economies in the United States and Europe will be a major factor in determining 
the  course  of  development  in  the  period  ahead.  One  factor  that  indicates  growth  could 
continue to be high in these countries is that intra-regional trade has increased in Asia and 
the  continent  is  therefore  less  exposed  to  negative  direct  and  indirect  trade  effects  from 
countries outside Asia. This is illustrated in Figures 4 and 5, which show how exports from 
China and India have developed per trading partner. 
Figure 4 
Chinese exports 
Percentage of total Chinese exports, ASEAN includes India 
Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China 
                                                  
2  This applies to the value of exports in nominal terms. 
3  The Riksbank’s company interviews, September 2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Figure 5 
Indian exports 
Percentage of total Indian exports, ASEAN includes China 
Source: Ministry of Commerce and Industry, India 
 As  the  figures  show,  an  increasing  proportion  of  China’s  and  India’s  exports  are  going  to 
countries in the rest of Asia and exports to the United States have declined in importance. 
China and India are thus somewhat less sensitive than previously to weaker demand in the 
European Union and the United States. However, it is clear that the European Union is still 
the  most  important  export  market  for  these  countries,  which  means  that  weak  economic 
development in Europe will have significant consequences for growth prospects in China and 
India  too.  So,  even  if  increased  trade  with  the  more  rapidly  growing  markets  in  the  BRIC 
countries may boost Sweden’s export industry somewhat, we can also expect negative third-
country effects from a slowdown in the United States and the euro area. 
Financial channels 
However,  it  is  not  only  through  trade  that  Sweden  is  affected  by  weaker  economic 
development  abroad.  We  are  also  affected  through  the  financial  markets.  These  markets 
have become increasingly interlinked, which is illustrated not least by the recent turbulence 
on the stock market. 
As Figure 6 shows, share prices on the various stock markets are highly correlated. Share 
prices  have  fallen  on  the  stock  markets  of  the  world  recently.  However,  the  fall  has  been 
particularly substantial on Stockholmsbörsen, which has fallen by 21 per cent since the turn 
of the year, while the Dow jones index and S&P 500 index have fallen by 1 and 4 per cent 
respectively. The Swedish households’ holdings in shares in companies listed on Swedish 
market places have increased by over 475 per cent since the early 1990s.4 This means that 
the fall in share prices entails a reduction in wealth, which has a certain restraining effect on 
Swedish household consumption. This in turn has an impact on growth and employment as 
household  consumption,  adjusted  for  its  import  content,  constitutes  around  35 per cent  of 
GDP in Sweden. For Swedish companies, falling share prices in Sweden and abroad thus 
                                                 
4  This relates to an increase from over SEK 100 billion to over SEK 577 billion (Statistics Sweden, 2011). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
have negative effects on both domestic and foreign sales. Falling share prices also make it 
more difficult to fund investments by issuing new shares, which reduces capacity utilisation. 
Figure 6 
Share indexes and Swedish consumer confidence in the economy 
The stock market index January 2006=100 
Sweden (OMXS)
Euro Area (EuroStoxx)
USA (S&P 500)
Emerging Markets (MSCI)
Consumer Confidence
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
40
05
07
06
04
 
Note. The left axis is the stock market index and the right axis the value of the 
households’ confidence indicator. 
Sources: Reuters Ecowin and the National Institute of Economic Research 
08
10
09
11
-30
Households’ and companies’ expectations of the future 
It  is  assumed  that  movements  on  the  stock  markets  reflect  the  market  participants’ 
expectations  regarding  profits  in  the  future.  The  development  of  the  stock  exchange  is 
therefore related to the prevailing economic climate and to the households’ and companies’ 
expectations regarding the development of the economy. Research indicates that a fall on 
the stock market affects household confidence relatively quickly, that is already after two to 
four weeks.5 The indicator of Swedish consumer confidence in the economy published by the 
National Institute for Economic Research tends to fall when the Stockholm stock exchange 
falls (see Figure 6). There may therefore be good reasons for believing that the recent falls 
on the stock markets of the world are one of the reasons why the Swedish households have 
become more cautious and are expected to increasing their saving. Financial turbulence has 
also led the companies to lower their expectations regarding the period ahead and to begin 
to  postpone  investments.  All  in  all  this  has  a  dampening  effect  on  economic  activity  in 
Sweden. 
High sovereign debts abroad affect Sweden 
As we have noted, the level of debt is high in the euro area and the United States. Following 
many years of budget deficit, what were in many cases already weak public finances were 
further undermined in connection with the financial crisis of 2008–2009. In 2009, the average 
budget deficit in the euro area amounted to 6.4 per cent of GDP. This figure fell to 6 per cent 
                                                 
5  See for example Jansen and Nahuis, 2003; Kremer and Westerman, 2004; and Beckmann, Belke and Kuhl, 
2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in 2010 and is expected to be 4.4 per cent in 2011. The average sovereign debt in the euro 
area increased from 79.7 per cent of GDP in 2009 to 85.8 per cent in 2010, and is expected 
to increase to 88.6 per cent in 2011. 
Budget deficit and sovereign debt in the euro area 
Table 1 
(Percentage of GDP) 
 Budget deficit 
2009 
2010 
2011 
6.4 
6 
4.4 
Source: IMF Fiscal Monitor 
Sovereign 
debt 
79.7 
85.8 
88.6 
The budget deficit in the United States is expected to reach 10.8 per cent of GDP this year, 
while the United States’ gross debt currently exceeds 100 per cent of GDP. In the summer, 
this  situation,  in  combination  with  what  appeared  to  be  a  political  inability  to  deal  with  the 
problem  of  public  finances,  led  the  credit  rating  agency  Standard  &  Poor’s  to  reduce  the 
credit rating of the United States for the first time in 70 years. 
The  main  reason  for  the  increase  in  the  level  of  debt  is  that  GDP  growth  decreased  and 
unemployment  increased  in  connection  with  the  crisis  in  2008–2009.  Public  finances  are 
automatically  weakened  when  GDP  growth  is  low  in  developed  countries  as  tax  revenues 
then decrease and expenditure for transfers increases. Some countries, such as the United 
States and Ireland, also implemented extensive and costly government measures to support 
the financial sector. 
If countries with large deficits fail to manage their sovereign debt problems in a credible way 
there is a risk that they will find it difficult to borrow on the capital markets. They may then be 
forced  to  make  faster  and  more  extensive  cuts than  is  economically  desirable in  the  short 
term. However, the consolidation of public finances is necessary and may lay the foundations 
for better economic development in the longer term. 
Normally,  fiscal  policy  tightening  leads  to  a  slowdown  in  economic  activity.  In  some  cases 
tightening measures  may  actually  stimulate  activity  if  they  lead  the  households  to  become 
more optimistic about the development of their net incomes.6 However, this does not seem to 
be  the  case  normally.  According  to  an  IMF  study,  fiscal  policy  tightening  (in  the  form  of  a 
combination of reduced public expenditure and higher taxes) equivalent to 1 per cent of GDP 
leads  GDP  to  fall  by  0.5 per cent  two  years  ahead,  and  unemployment  to  increase  by 
0.3 percentage points.7 The budget consolidation programme carried out in Sweden in the 
1990s could be regarded as an example of stimulating fiscal policy tightening as the Swedish 
                                                 
6  According  to  the  theory  of  Ricardian  equivalence,  or  the  theory  of  the  stimulating  effects  of  fiscal  policy 
tightening, it is assumed that people understand that a budget deficit must sooner or later be funded by higher 
taxes or lower public expenditure. They are thus expected to react to increased budget deficits by increasing 
their own savings. This means that consumption  will not increase as much and that an expansionary fiscal 
policy will have little or no effect (see for example Barro and Redlick, 2011). 
IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2010. 
7 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy  recovered  relatively  quickly  following  the  crisis  of  the  1990s.  However,  Michael 
Bergman  of  Copenhagen  University  has  shown  that  budget  consolidation  in  Sweden 
between 1994 and 1997 actually had a negative impact on GDP and consumption and also 
led to an increase in unemployment.8 Given this it is reasonable to expect that cuts in the 
euro  area  and  the  United  States  will  lead  to  reduced  demand  on  export  markets  that  are 
important to Sweden, and to lower resource utilisation. 
Risk of an impact on the exchange rate 
The  fact  that  countries  with  weak  public  finances  may  be  forced  to  implement  fiscal 
tightening in what appears to be a weak economic climate has consequences for monetary 
policy.  We  can  expect  more  central  banks  abroad  to  conduct  an  expansionary  monetary 
policy in order to counteract the dampening effect of fiscal tightening on demand. However, 
as policy rates in many countries are already close to zero there is limited scope for further 
policy-rate  cuts.  Many  central  banks  are  instead  expected  to  leave  their  policy  rates 
unchanged  for  some  time  to  come.  Low  policy  rates  can  also  be  combined  with 
unconventional measures designed to push down long-term interest rates.9 
If the market expects the policy rate in Sweden to be significantly higher than policy rates 
abroad, this can lead to an increase in the demand for assets in kronor as a higher Swedish 
rate,  all  else  being  equal,  increases  the  return  on  investments  in  Swedish  currency.  This 
normally  contributes  to  a  strengthening  of  the  krona  exchange  rate  in  the  short  term.  A 
stronger krona slows down any increase in import prices. For the Riksbank, which conducts 
an inflation targeting policy, this could be positive if inflation was high in the initial position. 
However, as underlying inflation is currently low, I have argued that a strengthening of the 
krona would, if anything, have a negative effect. Moreover, a stronger krona has a negative 
effect  on  net  exports  as  it  means  that  goods  and  services  produced  in  Sweden  become 
relatively more expensive. This in turn has a negative effect on GDP growth and resource 
utilisation. 
As  I  see  it  there  are  two  reasons  why  recent  developments  abroad  contributed  to  the 
decision to leave the repo rate unchanged and to revise the repo rate path downwards at the 
latest monetary policy meeting. The first is that weaker growth abroad has a negative impact 
on growth in Sweden too and this needs to be countered by providing a stronger monetary 
policy  stimulus.  The  second  is  that  expectations  that  monetary  policy  will  remain 
expansionary in large economies like the Unites States and the euro area, for a longer period 
than  was  previously  assumed,  also  have  an  effect  on  Swedish  monetary  policy.  Swedish 
interest  rates  cannot  deviate  too  much  from  foreign  interest  rates  without  this  having  an 
effect on the exchange rate. The exchange rate is of great importance to both inflation and 
resource utilisation and thus influences what constitutes a well-balanced monetary policy. 
What then will be the overall effect for Sweden? 
We were able to note in September that the demand for Swedish exports was growing more 
slowly  than  previously  expected  due  to  the  weaker  development  of  the  export  markets  of 
importance  to  Sweden.  This  weaker  development  is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  market 
turbulence  resulting  from  the  uncertainty  about  weak  public  finances  in  Europe  and  the 
United States is forcing some countries to launch extensive austerity programmes.  
                                                 
8  Bergman, 2010. 
9  Central  banks  can  conduct  quantitative  easing,  which  entails  buying  assets  with  the  aim  of  reducing  long 
interest rates. They can also carry out a twist, as recently announced by the Federal Reserve, which entails 
selling securities with short maturities and buying securities with long securities in order to push down longer 
interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Falls  on  stock  markets  in  Sweden  and  around  the  world  have  also  reduced  the  financial 
wealth of the households. When wealth declines in Sweden and abroad, households reduce 
their consumption in order to compensate for the reduction in wealth, which also contributes 
to a fall in demand. In addition, the financial turbulence during the summer also increased 
pessimism  among  the  households  and  companies.  This  pessimism  has  in  itself  had  a 
dampening effect on consumption and investment.  
The necessary consolidation of public finances in parts of the euro area and in the United 
States  also  means  that  we  can  expect  monetary  policy  to  continue  to  be  expansionary  in 
these parts of the world. In my view, this in itself has an effect on Swedish monetary policy. I 
believe  that  Swedish  interest  rates  cannot  deviate  too  much  from  foreign  interest  rates 
without the exchange rate being affected, and the exchange rate is of major importance in 
determining the ultimate level of inflation. A central bank that conducts inflation targeting is 
therefore, in my view, dependent on the monetary policy that is pursued internationally. This 
applies particularly to a small, open economy like the Swedish economy. 
However,  as  always  in  situations  where  there  is  great  uncertainty  it  is  difficult  to  make 
forecasts about the future at the moment. Today I have presented how I reasoned ahead of 
the  repo  rate  decision  that  we  made  in  September.  Since  then  there  has  been  a  lot  of 
manoeuvring around the management of the European sovereign debt crisis. However, I still 
have to decide how this will affect my stance at our next monetary policy meeting, which will 
be held at the end of this month. 
References 
Barro,  R.J.  and  Redlick,  C.J.  2011.  “Macroeconomic  Effects  from  Government  Purchases 
and Taxes”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (1): 51–102. 
Beckmann,  J.,  Belke,  A.  and  Kuhl,  M.  2011.  “Global  Integration  of  Central  and  Eastern 
European  Financial  Markets  –  The Role  of  Economic  Sentiments”,  Review  of  International 
Economics, 19 (1): 137–157. 
Bergman, M. 2010. “Har finanspolitik omvända effekter under omfattande budgetsaneringar? 
Den  svenska  budgetsaneringen  1994–1997”,  Report  to  the  Swedish  Fiscal  Policy  Council, 
2010/2. 
IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2010. 
Jansen, W. and Nahuis, N. 2003. “The Stock Market and Consumer Confidence: European 
Evidence”, Economic Letters, 79(1): 89–98. 
Kremer, M. and Westerman, T. 2004. “Consumer Confidence and Stock Prices in the Euro 
Area:  Is  There  a  Relationship  –  and  Does  it  Matter”,  Paper  presented  at  the  27th  CIRET 
conference. 
Statistics Sweden. Aktieägande i bolag noterade på svensk marknadsplats, 2011. 
The Riksbank’s company interviews, September 2011. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
