Muhammad Al-Jasser: Saudi Arabia’s economic developments in 
2010/11 
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Dr  Muhammad  Al-Jasser,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian 
Monetary Agency (SAMA), to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, on the occasion of 
presenting the Forty-Seventh Annual Report of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, Riyadh, 
12 December 2011. 
 Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,  
It is of great pleasure that the meeting with you is renewed while you enjoy, thanks to Allah, 
good  health.  Our  country  is  continuing,  under  your  wise  leadership,  the  march  of 
development and prosperity in an extraordinary solidarity between leadership and citizens. I 
am pleased to submit the forty-seventh annual report of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, 
which deals with economic developments in 2010 and the first quarter of 2011. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
The global economy is still suffering from the weakness caused by the global financial crisis 
and  the  resulting  problems  of  sovereign  debts  of  a  number  of  states  in  the  industrialized 
world. 
However,  our  domestic  economy,  thanks  to  Allah,  has  avoided  the  pitfalls  of  public  and 
private debt which had strained the economies of many industrialized countries. Therefore, 
our national economy in 2010 continued its growth for the eleventh year in a row, growing by 
4.1 percent, and the non-oil sector by 4.9 percent. The Kingdom achieved a surplus in its 
budget amounting to 5.2 percent of GDP, and recorded a surplus in the balance of payments 
for the twelfth year in a row which stood at Rls 250.3 billion. The inflation rate rose slightly 
from 5.1 percent in 2009 to 5.3 percent in 2010, and stood at 5.2 percent in October 2011. It 
is noteworthy that the inflation in recent years resulted from a rise in food prices and rents. 
The  pace  of  growth  in  the  national  economy  is  expected  to  accelerate  during  the  current 
year. 
Several factors contributed to such growth in GDP, including increased government spending 
to unprecedented levels, a large part of which was devoted to various development projects, 
and an increase in domestic banks’ finance to both the public and private sectors. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
In continuation of your care to fulfill the needs of the citizens and provide the requirements of 
a decent life, you issued a number of royal decrees, which will, Allah willing, contribute to 
enhancement of the citizens’ standard of living. You ordered the establishment of the Ministry 
of Housing and approved the building of 500,000 housing units in all regions of the Kingdom 
over  the  coming  five  years  with  allocations  of  Rls  250  billion.  The  limit  of  housing  loans 
extended  by  the  Real  Estate  Development  Fund  was  increased  from  Rls  300,000  to 
Rls 500,000  which  will  hopefully  provide  more  houses  for  citizens  and  constrain  the 
inflationary pressures stemming from the increase in house rents. 
You also ordered setting a minimum wage of Rls 3,000 for all Saudi government employees, 
allocated  a  monthly  amount  of  Rls  2,000  for  job  seekers,  and  raised  capital  of  the  Saudi 
Credit  and  Saving  Bank  by  Rls  30  billion.  The  number  of  family  members  covered  by  the 
social  security  was  increased  from  8  to  15  with  an  allocation  of  Rls  one  billion  for  that 
purpose.  The  government  subsidies  for  charity  associations  rose  by  50  percent  to 
Rls 450 million  annually,  and  needy  families’  sons  and  daughters  were  supported  to  join 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
facilitating 
through  allotting 
them  a  portion  of  seats, 
their  admission 
universities 
requirements, and exempting them from some tuition fees. This package of honorable royal 
decrees will enhance the standard of living of the least-income segment of population and 
promote its ability of saving and, thereby, raise its future productivity and income, and reduce 
poverty, to which you always attach considerable attention. 
In the health care arena, you ordered supporting the Ministry of Health with Rls 16 billion in 
order to carry out the expansion of a number of hospitals and health centers. You increased 
the  maximum  limit  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance’s  financing  program  of  private  hospitals  from 
Rls 50 million to Rls 200 million. This would hopefully enhance health care services in the 
Kingdom. 
Under  your  wise  leadership  and  continuous  guidance,  the  Supreme  Economic  Council 
continued  to  accomplish  a  number  of  development  steps  aimed  at  restructuring  and 
reorganizing  the  economy  and  streamlining  regulations  and  legislation  in  order  to  promote 
the rise of the level and competitiveness of the economy, achieve the optimum operation of 
the  production  factors  and  provide  an  attractive  environment  for  domestic  and  foreign 
investment. As a result, the investment environment has improved. According to the “Doing 
Business  Report  2012”  issued  by  the  World  Bank,  the  Kingdom  ranked  twelfth  among 
183 world countries in terms of ease of business performance. 
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund noted that the Kingdom  was well 
posed to encounter the global financial crisis. However, the sound supervisory and regulatory 
frameworks  significantly contributed to  strengthening  the  capacity  of  the  financial  sector  to 
withstand the crisis. The Board stressed that the sound economic management of oil wealth 
provided the necessary financial resources to confront the global financial crisis in addition to 
reducing  the  public  debt  from  104  percent  of  GDP  in  1999  to  7  percent  in  2011  and 
strengthening the position of net foreign assets of SAMA. 
The IMF Executive Board also commended the strength of the Kingdom’s banking system, 
which is well-capitalized and has high liquidity levels. It has noted that the banking system 
has  showed  an  ability  to  encounter  a  set  of  regional  and  global  shocks.  The  Board  has 
welcomed  the  results  of  stress  tests  made  by  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program 
Mission which showed a rise in the levels of liquidity and capital held by the Saudi banking 
system, representing preventive reserves that impart more confidence to the banking system 
ability to withstand shocks. The Board members praised the monetary policy of the Kingdom 
which aims to enhance the strength of the banking system and price stability. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
Despite  the  remarkable  achievements  fulfilled  at  all  levels,  there  are  still  some  challenges 
that you spare no effort to follow up and strive to overcome, such as: 
First: Creating more decent work opportunities for the sons and daughters of this country. 
Despite  the  good  achievements  in  employment  of  citizens,  estimates  show  that  the 
unemployment rate among Saudis is still unsatisfactory. Taking into account the composition 
of the population in the Kingdom, which is mainly dominated by young people, it is imperative 
to face this issue, exert more efforts and overcome the difficulties encountering the process 
of  creation  and  Saudization  of  jobs,  including  continued  improvement  of  education  and 
training  outputs  in  line  with  the  requirements  of  the  labor  market,  determination  of 
Saudization rates by activities and increasing them gradually. It is also important to achieve 
flexibility in the labor market to stimulate production and innovation and preserve the rights of 
workers and employers. 
Second: Diversification of income sources and reducing reliance on oil as a major source of 
income. Despite the increasing role of the non-oil sector in the national economy, particularly 
the role of the private sector, the oil sector is still the main driver of the national economy, 
where most of the country’s revenues and receipts of the balance of payments are coming 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
from.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  to  work  hard  in  order  to  diversify  sources  of 
income to ensure the sustainability of economic development in the long run and reduce the 
risks associated with relying on a single source of income. 
Third: Reduction of high domestic consumption of oil and gas, as figures indicate an annual 
average increase in domestic consumption of 7.3 percent over the past five years, which is 
high by any measure and not commensurate with the rate of growth in population and GDP. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  increase  in  domestic  consumption  of  oil,  in  addition  to  being  a 
drainage of resources that God has bestowed upon us, it limits the quantities available for 
export in the future. Thus, it is necessary to consider the reasons of the increase in domestic 
consumption of oil and gas to rationalize their consumption. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques: 
As we are on the threshold of a new gracious budget, I pray for the Almighty Allah to 
preserve you as the leader of the march of this blessed and generous country. May 
Almighty Allah lead your steps to success.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
