K C Chakrabarty: Empowering deposit insurance entities to face 
challenges posed by an emerging financial landscape – global and 
Indian experience 
Valedictory address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the International Conference on “Role of deposit insurance in bank resolution framework – 
lessons from the financial crisis”, Jodhpur, 15 November 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Dr A Raravikar in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Mr.  Hiroyuki  Obata,  Deputy  Governor,  DICJ,  Japan,  Mr.  Carlos  Isoard,  Secretary 
General,  IADI,  Switzerland,  Mr.  Jerzy  Pruski,  President,  BGF,  Poland,  Mr.  Fred  S.  Carns, 
Director,  FDIC,  USA,  Mr.  G.  Gopalakrishna,  Executive  Director,  RBI,  distinguished 
delegates, ladies and gentlemen. At the outset, on behalf of RBI, I extend a hearty welcome 
to all of you to India and especially to this fascinating state of Rajasthan. We thank IADI for 
agreeing to hold this conference jointly with DICGC. As you are aware, DICGC entered its 
Golden Jubilee year on January 1, 2011. This event is being hosted as a part of the Golden 
Jubilee celebrations of DICGC and, hence, holds a special significance for us. 
Global financial crisis and deposit insurance 
Recent global financial crisis has revealed that financial systems around the world 
2. 
rely  on  safety  nets  to  reduce  the  adverse  impact  of  financial  crisis  as  also  to  prevent  the 
re-occurrence of the crisis. During the global crisis, uncertainty triggered panic reactions and 
collapse of banks. Under these circumstances, deposit insurance emerged as an important 
part  of  financial  safety  net  in  arresting  panic  reaction.  Governments  across  the  globe  took 
measures  such  as  raising  the  deposit  insurance  coverage  limits,  providing  blanket 
guarantees, etc. These measures restored the public confidence in banking systems. Thus, 
the  importance  of  deposit  insurance  as  a  tool  for  preventing  and  mitigating  the  impact  of 
financial crises as also for the smooth running of financial systems and maintaining financial 
stability has been fully appreciated. 
3. 
The global financial crisis, thus, evoked rethinking on the role of deposit insurance 
systems  and  broader  safety  net  issues.  It  is  now  widely  felt  that  the  important  safety  nets 
such  as  deposit  insurance  systems  should  play  a  more  pro-active  role  in  regulatory 
frameworks for early identification of bank failures and their effective resolution. In order to 
enable the deposit insurance systems to play their roles more effectively, a need has been 
felt for redesigning the deposit insurance systems with, inter-alia, an increased role in bank 
resolutions. When individual institutions fail, rather than let depositors be rescued solely by 
insurance  cover,  which  is  anyway  not  comprehensive  for  larger  depositors,  it  is  more 
effective  to  involve  the  insurer  in  the  process  right  from  the  beginning.  This  will  give 
depositors, as a stakeholder group, a voice in the process, allowing them to better protect 
their interests, while simultaneously increasing the capacity of the insurance scheme. 
4. 
In the light of the above, I am happy to note that this Conference has been held on 
the  theme  “Role  of  Deposit  Insurance  in  Bank  Resolution  Framework  –  Lessons  from  the 
Crisis” which is very relevant, appropriate and timely. The experts from a number of countries 
have made presentations on significant sub-themes viz., critical elements in bank resolution 
framework,  country  experiences,  regulators’  responses  and  international  best  practices. 
Various  aspects  have  been  covered  in  this  Conference  such  as  elements  of  insolvency 
framework, cross-border insolvency framework, role of deposit insurance in bank resolution, 
country  experiences,  crisis  framework,  regulatory  reform  (Basel  III),  deposit  insurers’ 
response to financial crisis, review of global practices with respect to resolution framework, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
key attributes for bank resolution and core principles for effective deposit insurance systems 
and  challenges  to  assessment  of  safety  net  framework.  Several  thoughts,  views  and 
experiences  have  been  shared  and  discussed  in  this  conference  by  the  experts  and 
delegates, along with prescriptions for policy makers. I would like to summarise these. 
Key deliberations at the conference 
5. 
In this conference, global regulatory reforms were overviewed and their impact on 
Asia, especially on Asian banks, was analysed. There is a need to create a buffer of capital, 
improve  liquidity  risk  management  of  banks,  reduce  their  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale 
funding, promote resilience through incentives for banks to fund activities with more stable 
sources of funding, perform the micro and macro stress testing, and create stronger capital 
base.  The  relationship  between  macro-prudential  policy  framework  and  deposit  insurance 
was discussed. The issues covered a macro-prudential perspective by deposit insurers, their 
specific  role  in  financial  stability,  funding  arrangements,  deposit  insurance  premium, 
coverage,  and  cross-border  coordination  of  deposit  insurance.  USA  (FDIC)’s  experience 
revealed  the  need  to  restore  discipline  in  the  marketplace,  allowing  the  failure  of  large 
financial  entities  if  they  become  nonviable,  necessity  of  cross-border  cooperation  for  their 
orderly liquidation, strong capital base by banks and enforcing objective capital standards by 
supervisors.  Other  country  experiences  showed  the  need  for  strengthening  the  legal  and 
operative  tools  of  deposit  insurers,  making  banking  resolution  simulation  exercises,  and 
regular monitoring of systemic institutions. 
6. 
According to some other presentations, deposit insurance should be the responsible 
resolution  agency  with  financial  accountability  and  core  competencies.  There  should  be 
contingency  planning,  collaboration  of  authorities,  ex-post  funding  scheme,  consumer 
awareness,  recovery  and  resolution  plans,  faster  payouts,  and  regulatory  reforms.  Deposit 
insurer  needs  to  have  independence,  quick  responding  ability,  access  to  financial  data, 
adequate  funding,  and  legal  protection.  Key  attributes  of  resolution  regime  were  identified 
that  would  help  the  deposit  insurers  to  meet  their  objectives.  Concern  was  expressed  on 
weakening  of  deposit  insurance  systems  due  to  supervisory  and  regulatory  lacunae,  slow 
implementation  of  new  measures,  and  apprehensions  about  increased  moral  hazards  by 
governments. 
7. 
FSB’s  work  on  resolution  stressed  the  need  for  deposit  insurers  to  be  well 
connected to all aspects of the resolution framework including Information, tools, contingency 
planning etc. In the context of cross-border insolvency, there should be a multi-prong policy 
approach  comprising  increasing  loss  absorbency,  strengthening  the  resolution  regimes, 
market  infrastructures  and  supervision.  Discussions  also  hovered  around  addressing 
systemic risks, changing role and future directions for deposit insurers, their design features 
and organizational issues with implications for expanded resolution role. Finally, role of core 
principals was elaborated, along with assessment challenges. 
8. 
The  deliberations  and  discussions  in  this  conference  have  been  fruitful  and  have 
certainly provided food for thought for the policymakers. I  will now give you a snapshot of 
India’s deposit insurance system, flag the issues in the context of the required further reforms 
and look at the way forward for the global deposit insurance systems. 
India’s deposit insurance system 
9. 
In a country like India where there is a significant extent of financial exclusion and 
small  depositors  are  worried  about  safety  of  their  funds,  deposit  insurance  is  critical  for 
financial  inclusion  and  plays  a  role  of  a  catalyst  therein.  Deposit  insurance  also  protects 
small  depositors  from  strategic  errors  by  management  and  wider  systemic  shocks.  At  the 
same  time,  other  elements  of  financial  safety  net  framework  including  financial  regulation/ 
supervision also work towards promoting financial inclusion. It is surprising that in India, there 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is inadequate awareness of the facility of deposit insurance. One reason for this could be that 
in India banks are perceived to be either too-big-to-fail or impossible to fail on account of the 
Government or RBI backing. While this may be true for the public sector banks, it certainly 
does not hold good in the case of private sector banks, foreign banks operating in India and 
the large number of cooperative banks. 
10. 
Let me give you a broad overview of the deposit insurance system in India. India’s 
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) was set up way back in 1962 
as per the provisions of an Act of Parliament, i.e., DICGC Act, 1961. It is the second oldest 
ongoing  deposit  insurance  agency  in  the  world.  DICGC  is  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of 
India’s central bank, viz., Reserve Bank of India. It is virtually a Pay-Box System as its role is 
limited to settlement of claims as per extant rules and regulations. Table 1 below would give 
you an idea of the magnitude of claim settlement operations of DICGC. DICGC’s Mission is 
“To  contribute  to  financial  stability  by  securing  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system 
through provision of deposit insurance, particularly for the benefit of the small depositors”. Its 
Vision  is  “To  be  recognized  as  one  of  the  most  efficient  and  effective  deposit  insurance 
providers,  responsive  to  the  needs  of  its  stakeholders”.  All  commercial  banks  and  eligible 
co-operative  banks  are  covered  under  deposit  insurance.  The  number  of  banks  registered 
with DICGC as on March 31, 2011 stood at 2,217. The insurance coverage is INR 0.1 million 
per  depositor  (about  US$  2,240).  About  93  per  cent  of  deposit  accounts  by  number  and 
35 per  cent  of  deposits  by  value  are  covered  under  insurance  (Table  2).  This  coverage 
stands at 1.6 times India’s per capita GDP as on March 31, 2011. The insurance premium is 
charged at a flat rate. It may be mentioned that the banking sector in India remained largely 
buffered from the recent global financial crisis and as such, post-global financial crisis, there 
is no change in the insurance coverage and the rate of premium. 
   
11. 
I would like to inform you that an Assessment Team comprising representatives of 
IADI  and  IMF  visited  DICGC  in  end-September  2010  to  undertake  a  field  test  of  the  Draft 
Assessment Methodology for the  Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems. 
According to the Report of the team, DICGC is compliant or largely compliant with about half 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of  the  eighteen  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Deposit  Insurance  Systems.  In  its  “paybox” 
function, the DICGC is fully or largely compliant on all core principles. However, weaknesses 
in the overall insolvency framework that are outside the control of the DICGC makes overall 
compliance with many core principles limited. 
On the eve of the Golden Jubilee, DICGC has initiated measures to enhance public 
12. 
awareness  on  deposit 
through  printing  of  brochures  and  posters  and 
communication  to  the  insured  banks  to  spread  awareness  by  displaying  information  about 
DICGC in all bank branches. The Corporation is also trying to roll out depositor-centric tools 
such  as  Integrated  Claims  Management  System  (ICMS)  for  capturing  more  accurate  and 
up-to-date information on deposits that would aid in faster settlement of claims. 
insurance 
Reforms in deposit insurance system 
13. 
I now turn to the reforms required to be made in India’s deposit insurance system 
and  flag  the  issues  therein.  First,  the  recent  crisis  has  shown  that  deposit  insurers  should 
play a proactive role in regulatory frameworks for early identification of bank failures and their 
effective resolution with the aim of protecting their funds and maintaining public confidence. 
Therefore, it is necessary to broaden the mandate of DICGC from pay-box (to pay the claims 
of depositors to the extent and in the manner stipulated in the law) to attending all aspects of 
bank resolution, not only as part of the liquidation process, but in monitoring of banks, prompt 
corrective action and finding and implementing the least cost method of resolution of troubled 
banks. This would lead to faster settlement to depositors, lower costs and higher speed of 
resolution with associated benefits for the stability of the financial system. The ultimate way 
out  is  to  put  in  place  a  clearly  defined  bank  solvency  regime  and  a  properly  designed 
resolution process. Second, RBI should have powers to resolve a bank before insolvency. A 
special bank resolution legislation is needed to expand resolution powers. Also, a legislation 
is needed for appointment of temporary administrator. Third, for depositors of failed banks to 
maintain confidence in banking system, it is essential to provide depositors quick access to 
their  funds.  Therefore,  DICGC  needs  to  look  into  ways  to  expedite  reimbursement  to 
depositors. This requires technology upgradation, including the adoption of CBS by all urban 
co-operative banks (UCBs) and an effective interface between the DICGC and banks’ Core 
Banking Solutions (CBS) to access depositor databases. Moreover, deposit insurers should 
be informed sufficiently in advance of the conditions under which a reimbursement may be 
required  and  be  provided  with  access  to  depositor  information  in  advance.  Fourth,  it  is 
necessary  to  increase  the  coverage  limit  that  has  remained  unchanged  at  INR  0.1  million 
since  1993.  The  increase  in  deposit  insurance  coverage  has  also  been  alluded  to  in  the 
recent Damodaran Committee report on Customer Service. Fourth, due to the dual nature of 
control over co-operative banks and low level of technology deployed in these banks, there 
are  delays  in  receiving  information  regarding  depositors.  Also,  there  are  delays  in 
appointment  of  liquidators.  DICGC,  currently,  has  little  powers  over  liquidators  to  expedite 
the  collection  of  information.  The  process  can  be  expedited  if  liquidators  provide  the 
information  within  a  shorter  time-frame.  Therefore,  it  will  be  beneficial  to  grant  DICGC  the 
power  to  appoint  and  monitor  liquidators.  Fifth,  for  maintaining  depositor  confidence,  the 
deposit  insurer  should  have  sufficient  funds  available  to  fulfill  its  mandate.  The  financial 
position  of  DICGC  needs  to  be  strengthened  with  appropriate  arrangements  for  back-up 
funding. About half of the premium income of DICGC, which is its main source of funds, is 
paid as income tax to Government. Since DICGC is a non-profit organisation serving social 
obligations of protection of small depositors, it should be exempted from payment of tax, as 
is  done  globally.  The  tax  exemption  would  enable  DICGC  to  build  up  its  fund  base  and 
thereby  provide  higher  coverage  to  depositors  and  even  pass  on  the  benefits  to  insured 
banks  by  reducing  the  rate  of  premium,  after  the  desired  reserve  ratio  is  attained.  Sixth, 
global crisis has shown that deposit insurer does need assistance from Government/Central 
Bank in case of any systemic crisis and the required amount is unpredictable. The back-up 
funding to DICGC from RBI is a small amount (INR 50 million). Therefore, it would be ideal if 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
availability  of  back-up  support  can  be  made  unlimited  and  with  a  quick  approval  process. 
Seventh, DICGC has been having a flat rate premium system. This could be replaced by a 
risk-based  differential  premium  system.  The  latter  would  reduce  moral  hazard  and  bring 
greater fairness in the premium assessment process. 
14. 
For redesigning India’s deposit insurance system by making many of the requisite 
reforms as discussed above, it would be necessary to make thorough changes in the DICGC 
Act. A Working Group on Reforms in Deposit Insurance, including Amendments to DICGC 
Act has been set up by us which would be looking into these aspects. 
Global deposit insurance systems: policy issues and the road ahead 
The session on “Critical Elements in Bank Resolution Framework” presented, apart 
15. 
from elements on insolvency framework, the cross border insolvency framework and role of 
deposit insurance in bank resolution. For prevention/insulation of an economy from financial 
crisis,  deposit  insurance  systems  across  the  globe  need  to  be  a  more  integral  part  of  the 
overall  safety  net  framework.  In  this  context,  there  is  a  need  to  broaden  the  mandate  of 
deposit  insurers  for  effective  resolution  of  banks  of  all  sizes,  as  also  to  initiate  preventive 
action and risk minimization. It is also necessary to give powers to deposit insurers to fulfill 
their  mandates.  An  effective  bank  resolution  process  with  participation  of  deposit  insurers 
would  facilitate  the  ability  of  deposit  insurers  to  meet  their  obligations,  minimize  resolution 
costs  as  well  as  disruption  in  markets,  maximize  recoveries  on  assets,  reinforce  discipline 
through  legal  actions  and  set  up  flexible  mechanisms  such  as  those  facilitating  bank 
acquisitions. 
16. 
It  is  imperative  to  create  an  enabling  national  legal  architecture  for  effective  and 
timely functioning of the failure resolution framework, which would permit orderly liquidation 
of  banks  and  timely  payout  and  transfer  of  insured  deposits.  Deposit  insurer  should  have 
effective resolution tools designed to help preserve critical bank functions, achieve transfer of 
accounts  or  assets/businesses  and/or  maintain  continuity  of  banking  services.  It  would  be 
necessary to establish such resolution procedures which will allow flexibility for resolution at 
a  lesser  cost  than  otherwise  likely  during  depositor  reimbursement  due  to  liquidation.  It  is 
essential  to  equip  the  deposit  insurer  with  the  powers  to  provide  for  transfer  of  insured 
deposits  to  stronger  banks.  Resolution  procedures  should  clearly  ensure  that  banks’ 
shareholders take first losses. Deposit insurers should share in the proceeds of recoveries. 
17. 
A  framework  needs  to  be  in  place  for  close  co-ordination  and  information  sharing 
(on  routine  basis  as  also  regarding  banks  in  financial  difficulty)  among  the  deposit  insurer 
and other financial system safety-net participants. Such information should be accurate and 
timely. Regarding cross border issues, while ensuring confidentiality, all relevant information 
should  be  exchanged  between  deposit  insurers  in  different  jurisdictions  and  possibly 
between  deposit  insurers  and  other  foreign  safety-net  participants,  when  appropriate. 
Depositors  in  the  jurisdictions  affected  by  cross  border  banking  arrangements  should  be 
provided with information on deposit insurance system legally responsible for reimbursement 
and the limits and scope of coverage. Where a deposit insurer perceives a real risk that it 
may  be  required  to  protect  depositors  in  another  jurisdiction,  it  should  have  contingency 
planning that allows for cross-border arrangements or agreements. 
18. 
With increasing global financial integration, consistency in the basic principles that 
guide deposit insurance is essential to maintaining a level playing field internationally. In this 
context, information exchange among deposit insurers gains importance. Today, there are a 
large  and  growing  number  of  cross  border  financial  institutions  functioning  across  multiple 
deposit  insurance  jurisdictions.  There  is  a  need  for  clarity  regarding  the  obligation  of  each 
deposit  insurer  in  respect  of  each  cross-border  institution.  While  the  “Core  Principles  for 
Effective Deposit Insurance Systems” state that the deposit insurance already provided by 
the home country system should be recognised in the determination of levies or premium, 
there is a need for a firm and shared understanding on this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Sessions on country/regional experiences by US, Europe, Asia and Latin America 
19. 
show  that  there  is  a  large  diversity  in  the  deposit  insurance  systems,  legal  frameworks, 
efficiency, mandates, economic and banking environments in these economies. My view is 
that  diversity  does  not  mean  adversity.  The  deposit  insurance  systems  across  the  globe 
should  make  earnest  efforts  to  comply  with  IADI’s  Core  Principles  on  Effective  Deposit 
Insurance  Systems’.  Core  Principles  outline  the  guiding  framework  for  deposit  insurance 
systems  and  incorporate  inherent  flexibility.  Compliance  to  them  does  not  forbid  countries 
from  making  their  own  tailor-made  systems.  The  presentations  and  discussions  in  this 
conference  on  cross-country  experiences  would  certainly  help  all  of  you  to  utilise  this 
knowledge in attaining your goals. 
20. 
The  Session  on  Regulators’  Response  covered  the  Crisis  Framework,  Basel  III  – 
Global  Perspective  and  Challenges  to  Implementation,  and  Deposit  Insurers’  Response  to 
Financial Crisis. The regulator’s policies/actions should always be such that they facilitate the 
deposit insurer’s job, which will ultimately help in preventing/curing the crisis as also attain 
financial stability and inclusion. Well-crafted regulatory reforms will always make the financial 
systems  immune,  adaptable  and  complementary  to  deposit  insurers’  aims  and  operations. 
Close and continuous co-ordination between the two is a sine qua non. As regards deposit 
insurer’s response to financial crisis, I would like to say that a deposit insurer, in collaboration 
with the regulator, should develop an advanced sensory system for early detection of crisis 
and excellent contingency planning with adequate funds on demand so as to nip the crisis in 
the bud and safeguard depositors’ interests. The adequacy of deposit insurance funds and 
the  financial  strength  of  deposit  insurers  to  meet  their  obligations  during  financial  crises 
requires specific attention in the light of the global events of the recent past. 
21. 
The  Session  on  Bank  Resolution  Framework  –  International  best  practices  has 
covered  global  practices  with  respect  to  bank  resolution, key  attributes  for  bank  resolution 
and Core Principles. These best international practices would act as good benchmarks for 
you. You would know what is best and where do you stand and then accordingly how far you 
have to march ahead and in which direction. 
Conclusion 
22. 
I conclude with an appeal to all of you to work upon your deposit insurance systems 
to  make  them  ideal  by  creating  an  environment  comprising  good  bank  regulation  and 
supervision,  sound  governance  of  safety  net  agencies,  strong  legal  framework  and  strong 
accounting  and  disclosure  regimes.  Avoid  moral  hazards,  have  a  specified  mandate  and 
necessary powers, build up sound governance, have appropriate interaction with other safety 
net  participants,  make  banks’  membership  compulsory,  build  up  strong  and  quick  funding 
mechanisms, create public awareness and make the resolution process effective. 
23. 
I  am  sure  that  this  conference  has  given  you  valuable  inputs  and  the  knowledge 
gained through the discussions on crucial aspects in this conference will be utilized by all the 
delegates for attaining the best outcomes in their countries so as to make their safety nets 
and deposit insurance systems ideal and insulating their economies from any financial and 
systemic disturbances in future. My best wishes for all your endeavors. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
