Choongsoo Kim: Increasing volatility in global capital flows – central 
banks’ policy response 
Speech by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the 19th Central Banking 
Seminar, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 30 November 2011. 
 Greetings 
I  bid  a  warm  welcome  to  central  bankers  one  and  all  participating  in  the  Central  Banking 
Seminar in 2011. I also would like to express my gratitude to Dr. Hyun Song Shin, Professor 
of Economics at Princeton University, who is so generously setting aside his precious time to 
favor us with a special lecture.  
The Central Banking Seminar, which is being held for the 19th time this year, has contributed 
greatly  as  a  forum  for  the  sharing  of  wide-ranging  experiences  and  know-how,  and  the 
building  up of  human  networks  linking  the  working-level  staff  of  leading  central banks.  We 
look forward to a lively discussion on “Increasing Volatility in Global Capital Flows: Central Banks’ 
Policy Responses” among the 22 experts from 19 countries gathered here for this seminar. 
Concerning  this  topic,  as  you  are  well  aware,  every  country  is  now  striving  to  set  up  an 
effective  framework  of  macro  prudential  policy  and  discussions  are  well  under  way  on 
establishing the related global jurisdiction. 
Since  the  Asian  financial  crisis  did  not  spread  to  the  core  of  the  global  financial  system 
during the 1990s, the mooted establishment of a “New International Financial Architecture” 
did not bear fruit.1 However, I believe that this global crisis will spur on a major advance for 
the  global  economy  through  the  crafting  of  optimal  policy  options  to  tackle  the  challenge 
represented by financial crises.  
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  challenges  the  global 
economy  is  facing  from  the  increasing  volatility  of  capital  flows  among  countries  and  what 
should be central banks’ policy responses. 
Challenges relating to capital flow volatility 
Beset by the euro zone sovereign debt crisis and the aftershocks of the global financial crisis, 
the world economy is now shrouded in darkness as it traverses a long and deep trough. We 
have no means of seeing where it may come to an end nor yet of knowing what awaits us up 
ahead.  
The  fact  that  these  adversities  that  go  by  the  name  of  uncertainty  are  not  being  so  easily 
countered  tells  us  that  the  post-crisis  world  economy  may  have  to  attain  a  new  economic 
paradigm rather than returning to the pre-crisis status quo. 
Efforts  to  attain  a  new paradigm  are  being  driven  forward mainly  by  the  governments  and 
central banks of major countries by way of various frameworks for international cooperation 
such as the G20. 
The first challenge ahead is from the imbalances in the real economy that we term “global 
imbalances”. These are the outcome of the combination of macroeconomic policy failure in 
major  advanced  countries  and  the savings  gluts  of  emerging  market  countries.  Historically 
                                                 
1  Robert Wade, “From Global Imbalances to Global Reorganisations”, Cambridge Journal of Economics 2009, 
33, 539–562 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
speaking,  most  financial  crises  have  been  largely  attributable  to  similar  imbalances  in  the 
real  sector.  To  put  it  differently,  we  should  be  aware  that  in  all  financial  crises,  there  are 
underlying  real  sector  crises.  Unless  we  understand  this  correctly,  we  may  end  up  with 
unintended consequences of having killed the messenger as the first way to deal with the 
crisis. There is a broad consensus that, if these global imbalances persist for a long time, the 
situation  will  develop  into  a  global  crisis  or  at  least  provide  fertile  soil  for  it.  Opinions, 
however, differ as to the train of causation. 
On the one hand, long-lasting monetary policy accommodativeness and sustained exchange 
rate  imbalances  are  cited  as  the  root  cause  of  the  global  imbalances.  Others  single  out 
structural  problems  which  will  not  be  easily  resolved  any  day  soon,  including  the  financial 
development  gap  between  advanced  countries  and  emerging  market  countries.  Under  the 
current  international  financial  system,  global  imbalances  are  highly  likely  to  persist2  and, 
unless  fresh  and  powerful  proposal  for  their  solution  are  soon  put  forward,  the  world 
economy may run the risk of lurching once again into a crisis of the global system. Therefore, 
it is very important to form a strong and sustainable adjustment mechanism to resolve these 
global imbalances. 
The next challenge ahead is that, in the course of the transmission of the imbalances in the 
real  economy  to  the  financial  sector,  there  is  the  growing  likelihood  of  systemic  risk  being 
spread  by  a  shock  suffered  by  a  single  financial  institution  or  market  as  financial 
interconnectedness is much greater than in the past. With the rapid deleveraging of financial 
institutions  following  the  sub-prime  crisis  leading  to  fire  sales  of  assets  and  the  foreign 
exchange  market  turmoil,  the  US  financial  markets  collapsed  in  a  chain  and  innocent  by-
standers including Korea, despite their sound fundamentals, experienced severe hardships 
due to abrupt capital outflows. Consequently, an international consensus has been reached 
that  policy  responses  in  mitigation  are  needed,  in  the  case  of  emerging  market  countries, 
whose capital flow volatility is greater than that of advanced countries. 
For the advanced countries, net flow volatility is slight because capital outflows and inflows 
are mutually offsetting, despite the high volatility of certain types of capital flows. This is not 
the case for emerging countries for whom surges in capital flows are largely unidirectional 
with massive capital outflows taking place at the time of a crisis and capital inflows building 
up again after a crisis.3 
Policy efforts to mitigate capital flow volatility are directed internationally toward expanding 
and  tightening  up  global  financial  safety  nets  (GFSN)  in  forms  such  as  currency  swaps 
between  central  banks,  expansion  of  the  resources  for  financial  support  by  international 
organizations,  and  the  strengthening  of  regional  financial  cooperation.  At  an  individual 
country level, they focus on strengthening policy responses to capital flows. A wide range of 
policy instruments are being tried out in many emerging market countries in the wake of the 
global financial crisis. 
Measures in response and future tasks 
As I pointed out earlier, due to the heightened volatility of emerging market country capital 
flows, their central banks are hard put to come up with appropriate policy responses. Since 
the overriding priority in policy responses should be placed upon ensuring domestic financial 
stability,  it  is  absolutely  vital  to  keep  inflation  expectations  low  and  stable.  To  this  end, 
                                                 
2  Serven, Luis and Ha Nguyen (2010), “Global Imbalances before and after the Global Crisis”, Policy Research 
Working Paper 5354, World Bank 
IMF, World Economic Outlook CH4. (2011.4) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
3 
2 
 emerging  market  countries  should  implement  sound  macroeconomic  policy  as  a  matter  of 
urgency.4 
At the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meeting held in Paris in October, 
agreement was reached on coherent conclusions to guide the management of capital flows 
and on supporting the development and deepening of their bond markets to help emerging 
market countries cope effectively with capital flows.5 Major points on which agreement has 
been  reached  include  that  while  macro-prudential  policy  autonomy  is  widely  recognized, 
capital  controls6  should  be  implemented  only  temporarily;  that  emerging  market  countries’ 
capital flow management measures and key-currency countries’ domestic policies (monetary 
policies)  should  be  subject  to  the  IMF’s  surveillance;  and  that  it  is  important  to  call  for 
emerging  market  countries  to  carry  out  gradual  capital  liberalization  while  recognizing  the 
autonomy of their capital flow management measures.  
Our  historical  experience  tells  us  that  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  solution  to  problems 
associated  with  volatile  capital  flows.  Country-specific  circumstances  and  management 
capacities have to be taken into account to come up with a varied policy mix involving foreign 
exchange rate adjustment, market intervention, monetary and fiscal policies and capital flow 
controls.7 
In  the  medium  and  long  term,  economies  should  consider  following  a  three  pronged 
approach  consistent  with  individual  local  circumstances:  firstly  1)  capacity-building  to  cope 
with volatile capital flows, secondly 2) strengthening macro-prudential regulation, and thirdly 
3) enhancing international financial cooperation.8 
1) 
With growing economic integration, the effects of individual economies’ conditions on other 
economies  are  growing,  and  the  importance  of  each  economy’s  stability  has  increased 
further as a result. With a view to stability, sound macro-economic policies are the first line of 
defense in reducing economies’ vulnerability to external shocks. Events that might trigger a 
crisis should be forestalled preemptively by avoiding a build-up of short-term external debts 
and  maintaining  an  appropriate  level  of  foreign  reserves.  What  is  more,  financial  sector 
capacity building is important, by for example, expanding the basis for the foreign exchange 
market over the medium and long-term, so that surges in capital flows can be absorbed.  
2) 
Sharp surges in capital flows are analyzed as brining about the deepening of systemic risks 
in addition to the changes they cause in monetary policy transmission channels. To minimize 
their  adverse  side  effects,  it  might  be  helpful  to  look  into  non-macroeconomic  options  for 
moderating  capital  flow  volumes.  The  imposition  of  regulations  by  an  individual  economy, 
including a Tobin tax, needs to be undertaken with caution, as it can give rise to regulatory 
arbitrage  and  reduce  international  confidence.  Properly-designed  and  well-implemented 
prudential  policies  may  play  an  effective  role  in  alleviating  capital  flow  pro-cyclicality  and 
minimizing the policy side effects. 
Individual countries’ capacity building to cope with volatile capital flows 
Strengthening macro-prudential regulation 
                                                 
4  Jaime Caruana, “Capital flows to the emerging market economies: a perspective on policy challenges”, the 
46th SEACEN Governors’ Meeting (‘11.2.24~25) Keynote Speech 
5  Press  Release  from  Korea  Ministry  of  Strategy  and  Finance,  “G20  Finance  Ministers’  and  Central  Bank 
Governors’ Meeting, October 2011, Paris” 
6  Although  there  is  no  clear  definition  of  capital  controls,  the  OECD’s  “Code  of  Liberalization  of  Capital 
Movements” uses discrimination between residents and non-residents in explaining capital controls. 
7  Jonathan D. Ostry et al, “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls”, 2010 IMF Staff Position Note 10/04 
8  The Bank of Korea, “Managing Capital Flows in the EMEAP Region” (2011.7) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Let me briefly introduce a new macro-prudential measure the Korean government introduced 
this August, a Macro-prudential Stability Levy. The main purpose of this measure is to control 
the  high  volatility  in  the  capital  market  caused  by  increases  in  banks’  non-core  liabilities. 
Actually  the  idea  of  introducing  such  an  instrument  was  originated  by  the  seminar  paper 
written  by  Professor  Hyun  Song  Shin,  who  emphasized  the  importance  of  controlling  the 
excessive  volatility  in  the  banking  sector  due  to  increases  in  non-core  liabilities  of  the 
banking system. That was the way to deal with the pro-cyclical nature of the changes in the 
liquidity.  
After Korea thought of the necessity of introducing such a macro-prudential measure the first 
thing we did was to send government and central bank officials to international organizations 
including the IMF and the OECD for consultation, to ensure that the measure is in line with 
global norms. Although it is still premature for us to assess its effectiveness, we believe it will 
contribute  to  stabilizing  the  capital  market  through  reducing  highly  volatile  and  excessive 
capital  movements.  The  levy  is  distinguished  from  the  so-called  capital  control  measures 
represented by the Tobin tax, in that it does not make any discrimination between residents 
and non-residents. The OECD has been analyzing the effects of this measure for the past 
several  months,  and  I  do  hope  they  will  come  up  with  a  conclusion  to  make  it  a  globally 
accepted instrument.  
3) 
Given  the  current  environment  of  financial  globalization  and  strengthened  financial 
interconnectedness,  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  any  individual  country  to  achieve  the 
expected  policy  effect  on  its  own,  and  international  financial  cooperation  is  therefore 
indispensable. In light of international policy coordination, we need to bear in mind that, if an 
individual  country  pursues  domestic  economic  policies  without  considering  negative 
externalities, it is highly likely that the country will fall into a prisoner’s dilemma trap and that 
the world economy will reach a sub-optimal multi-local equilibrium. 
Enhancing international financial cooperation 
Concluding remarks 
Historically,  an  economic  crisis  has  generally  led  to  a  crisis  in  economics.  Before  the 
outbreak of the recent global financial crisis, neither economists nor economic agencies had 
a  full  understanding  of  housing  market  speculation  and  they  were  unable  to  arrive  at  a 
correct  prediction  of  the  outcomes  resulting  from  banks’  behavior  and  their  competitive 
structure. 
Although central banks are not free of such criticism, the greatest change since the recent 
crisis  is  that  their  role  and  position  have  been  heightened  as  they  have  been  actively 
involved as lenders of last resort in overcoming the crisis. On the other hand, however, the 
possibility has also increased that central banks will face a paradox of credibility due to the 
conflict  between  their  policy  goals  of  achieving  both  financial  system  stability  and  price 
stability.  In  this  regard,  central  banks,  as  the  guardians  of  the  financial  system,  are  called 
upon by society to undertake the task of analyzing and examining macro-prudential policies 
and  regulations.  In  line  with  this  trend,  the  Bank  of  Korea  was  given  responsibility  for 
financial  stability  under  revised  legislation  this  August,  so  that  it  is  now  better  placed  to 
exercise its financial stability function more actively.  
Hopefully, this seminar will provide an opportunity for central banks from around the world in 
the light of their particular economic situation to come up with wide-ranging ideas on how to 
cope most effectively with capital flow volatility.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
