Anselmo Teng: China and Macao – continued financial industry growth 
Address by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at a banquet 
hosted  by  the  Macao  Financial  Sector  in  Commemoration  of  the  62nd  Anniversary  of  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  and  the  12th  Anniversary  of  the  Establishment  of  the  Macao 
Special Administrative Region, Macao, 6 December 2011.  
 The Honourable Mr. Chui Sai On, Chief Executive of the MSAR,  
The Honourable Mr. Ho Hau Wah, Vice-Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese 
People’s Political Consultative Conference,  
The  Honourable  Ms.  Gao  Yan,  Deputy  Director,  Liaison  Office  of  the  Central  People’s 
Government,  
The Honourable Mr. Hu Zhengue, Special Envoy, Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs,  
The Honourable Mr. Ye Yixin, Chairman of the Macao Association of Banks,  
Honourable Guests,  
Dear Friends of the Financial Sector,  
Good Evening!  
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Standing  Committee  for  the  invitation.  With  great 
pleasure and excitement, I participate in this party in commemorating the 62nd Anniversary 
of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  the  12th  Anniversary  of  the  Establishment  of  the 
Macao Special Administrative Region.  
The  financial  sector  of  Macao  has  weathered  the  tests  arising  from  international  financial 
market  crises  since  the  return  of  Macao  to  its  Motherland.  Although  the  challenges  have 
been overcome thus far, upheavals are still prevailent in the international financial markets. 
There  are  uncertainties.  It  is  worth  our  while  to  advise  you,  ladies  and  gentlemen  that, 
according  to  relevant  financial  data,  the  Macao  financial  sector  has  been  maintaining  its 
stability and viability. This is in fact the result of the coherent spirit of our practitioners when 
they work shoulder to shoulder in the endeavour of self-enhancement.  
As  per  the  end  of  October,  aggregate  assets  of  the  Macao  banking  sector  amounted  to 
MOP637.7  billion,  total  deposits  were  valued  at  MOP408.1  billion,  loans  stood  at 
MOP313.5 billion,  both  registered  remarkable  growth  year-on-year.  Our  practitioners  have 
adopted a prudent attitude in business operation as usual; capital adequacy ratio reached at 
14.3% in the 3rd quarter while non-performing loan ratio was only 0.34%. In positive pursuit 
of  developing  more  financial  services  by  our  practitioners,  the  banking  sector  was  able  to 
score an aggregate profit of MOP4.17 billion for the first three quarters, which was again a 
positive  year-on-year  growth.  At  the  moment,  the  banks  operating  in  Macao  have  good 
quality assets, ample liquidity, adequate capital and fine profit-making capability.  
In our insurance business, the total premium receipts for the first three quarters amounted to 
MOP3.2  billion,  which  was  a  13.5%  increase  year-on-year.  The  overall  operation  of  the 
insurance  industry  has  been  steady,  the  aggregate  asset  value,  including  value  of  assets 
guaranteeing  technical  reserves  has  registered  marked  increase.  It  reflects  the  stable 
financial status of the industry, which carries much weight in sustainable development.  
In  tandem  with  the  perfection  and  enhancement  of  the  financial  industry,  it  carries  more 
weight in the overall GDP, reaching 8.5%. The continued growth of our financial industry will 
further promote appropriate diversification of the economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  mid-October,  AMCM  organized  a  delegation  of  the  financial  sector  to  visit  Beijing  and 
Shanghai. Making use of this opportunity, I am pleased to advise our financial practitioners 
that initial result has been achieved.  
At  the  moment,  this  Authority  is  following  up  the  matter  closely  and  discusses  with  the 
relevant departments with a view to realizing the widening of the scope of RMB business and 
seeking  more  investment  channels  for  the  MSAR  fiscal  reserves.  Simultaneously,  in 
promoting  Macao  to  be  the  RMB  settlement  platform  for  trade  between  the  Mainland  and 
Portuguese speaking countries, preparatory work has been rolled out with the policy support 
of the Central Government.  
Under the auspices of the Central Government and relevant departments and the direction 
and  support  of  the  Liaison  Office  and  the  MSAR  Government,  we  believe  all  policies  and 
arrangements beneficial to the overall economic development of the MSAR will be realized. 
The financial sector will continue to serve its pivotal function in servicing the economy and 
promote overall economic growth. As the regulator, we shall not only continue to maintain the 
order and normal functioning of the market, and will also support, as usual, our practitioners 
in their development and uphold the lawful rights of our financial consumers.  
In  commemorating  the  anniversary  of  our  Motherland  and  the  MSAR,  we  gather  together 
delightfully. Before I end the speech, let me express, on behalf of the Board of Directors of 
the Monetary Authority of Macao, our heartfelt wishes for the prosperity and strength of our 
Motherland  and  happiness  of  all  her  people,  the  prosperity  and  stability  of  the  MSAR,  the 
continued growth of our financial industry in a steady manner, your health and plain sailing at 
work.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
