Subir Gokarn: Food inflation – this time it’s different  
Text  of  the  Kale  Memorial  Lecture  by  Dr  Subir  Gokarn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of India, at the Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, Pune, 9 December 2011. 
 Inputs  from  Bhupal  Singh  and  G.V.  Nadhanael  are  gratefully  acknowledged  as  well  as  the  inputs  on  climate 
change from Indrajit Roy. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Prof.  Parchure  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this  year’s  Kale  Memorial 
Lecture.  The  lecture  has  been  instituted  to  honour  Rao  Saheb  R.  R.  Kale,  who  was 
instrumental  in  setting  up  this  great  institution,  the  Gokhale  Institute  of  Economics  and 
Politics.  Despite  his  professional  achievements  as  a  lawyer,  he  was  apparently  a  rather 
modest  and  humble  person.  Given  his  financial  contribution  to  the  establishment  of  the 
institution, it would have seemed perfectly appropriate for it to have been named after him. 
But,  he  demurred  and  it  was  named  after  Gopalkrishna  Gokhale,  a  somewhat  more 
recognizable  name  for  readers  of  Indian  history.  While  Rao  Saheb  Kale’s  name  may  not 
adorn  the  institution,  the  attributes  that  he  is  given  credit  for  are  the  foundations  for  any 
activity to be sustainable and effective. I feel very honoured and privileged to be delivering 
this lecture in his memory. 
I am also very pleased to be speaking at the Gokhale Institute itself. Many of my colleagues 
over  the  years  are  alumni  of  the  Institute  and  I  always  enjoyed  my  interactions  and 
collaborations  with  them  and  appreciated  and  valued  their  understanding  and  insights. 
Besides,  the  Institute  has  a  Reserve  Bank  of India  Chair,  which  we are  very  glad  to  have 
Prof.  Parchure  occupying  at  a  time  when  we  are  strategically  increasing  our  level  of 
engagement and two-way knowledge transfer with the Chair Professors across the country. 
Turning to the topic of today’s lecture, the title is admittedly borrowed from a recent book, the 
very influential historical work on financial crisis by Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff1. 
Besides being a very catchy title, which is always very tempting to borrow, I felt that there 
was some similarity between the historical dynamic described in the book and the situation 
we are facing with food inflation in India today. Crises recur because there are just enough 
differences between the circumstances that cause them for people to be able to deny their 
inevitability. However, the underlying drivers of virtually every crisis are essentially similar. In 
the  story  of  financial  crises  that  the  book  tells,  unsustainable  build-ups  of  exposures, 
underestimation  of  risks  and  an  erosion  or  inadequacy  of  regulatory  capacity  are  the 
common elements of all crises. 
When  I  joined  the  RBI,  food  inflation  had  been  a  headline  issue  for  almost  two  years, 
beginning  late  2007  and  consolidating  very  sharply  in  the  first  half  of  2008.  There  was 
definitely a global dimension to this during that period, but what was striking was that even 
after global food inflation moderated, Indian food inflation persisted. The weak monsoon of 
2009 was, of course, blamed and we all believed that softening was only one good monsoon 
away. Well, 2010 was a good monsoon but, as it turned out, there was little respite in food 
inflation. Let’s wait for 2011, we thought. 2011 was also a relatively good monsoon year, but 
in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  monsoon,  there  wasn’t  much  respite.  Fortunately  for 
policymakers, data from recent weeks suggests a softening in food inflation, but the level is 
still rather high. 
During the two years I have been with the RBI, persistent food inflation has been one of the 
critical  challenges  to  monetary  policy  formulation.  There  is  a  view,  entirely  legitimate,  that 
                                                 
1   Carmen M. Reinhart & Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2008. “This Time is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight Centuries 
of Financial Crises,” NBER Working Papers 13882, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
monetary policy has no role in dealing with food inflation. Policy actions should, instead, be 
triggered  by  some  measure  of  core  inflation.  However,  this  argument  weakens  somewhat 
when we move from a scenario where food inflation episodes are transitory, or short-lived, to 
one  in  which  they  are  persistent,  as  has  been  the  case  in  recent  years.  In  the  face  of 
persistent food inflation, just as with any persistent supply shock, the appropriate response is 
seen to be to use monetary policy to prevent the spill-over from the shock into more broad-
based or generalized inflationary pressures. In other words, in order to keep inflation under 
check, relative prices across categories of commodities have to change in favour of the ones 
facing the supply shock. 
I want to get away from the monetary policy perspective for now and focus on the issue of 
relative prices. When we bring these into the discussion, we immediately enter the realm of 
microeconomics,  i.e.,  the  basic  forces  of  demand  and  supply.  From  this  perspective,  the 
simple question “why are food prices rising so persistently” gets a simple answer “because 
demand  persistently  exceeds  supply”.  The  next  simple  question  “how  do  we  bring  food 
inflation down?” again gets the simple answer “by increasing supply as quickly as possible”. 
In the context of the title of my address, let me emphasize the point that the food inflation per 
se is not a new phenomenon for India. On Slide 1, beginning in the early 1950s, we can see 
a relatively large number of episodes in which food prices spiked. In some of these episodes, 
the spikes were significantly sharper than in others and many of them, particularly during the 
more recent decades, were relatively short-lived. Of course, the most vivid ones were the two 
that followed closely in the late 1960s and the early 1970s. We have apparently had nothing 
comparable  since  then  in  terms  of  the  peak  rates  of  inflation.  In  the  most  recent  episode, 
however, the pattern is somewhat different; there is a clear indication of a prolonged upward 
trend beginning sometime in 2003 and showing persistence, albeit with a brief interruption. 
This is, of course, very noisy data. We have tried to systematize it to be able to draw some 
more substantial inferences. In Slide 2, specific episodes during the six decades have been 
identified on the criterion that the average food inflation rate during each episode was 10 per 
cent or higher. The slide displays the average and peak rates during these episodes. The 
episodes  during  the  late  1960s  and  early  1970s  clearly  stand  out,  while  the  more  recent 
episodes are relatively more moderate in terms of both average and peak rates. However, 
the most recent episode does suggest something of a hardening. 
But, this is as far as magnitudes go. A more worrying attribute of food inflation is persistence. 
Slide 3 displays an extremely significant pattern, which is really the foundation for the title of 
this lecture. We had two episodes of high persistence in the early 1970s and the late1970s-
early 1980s, during which food inflation was on the average above the 10 per cent mark for 
35 months and 32 months, respectively. Since then, as the graph clearly indicates, episodes 
were relatively short-lived, with the longest one lasting 27 months in the early 1990s. Even in 
the severe drought conditions of 1987, the high food inflation episode lasted only 18 months. 
But,  strikingly,  the  most  recent  one,  which  runs  from  September  2008  until  October  2011, 
was  38  months  long  and,  in  a  sense,  still  running.  Further,  if  we  are  to  overlook  the  brief 
interruption that was visible in Slide 1, the last two episodes could be counted as one even 
more prolonged stretch. 
10. Is this kind of persistence a return to the conditions that prevailed before the 1980s? Are 
we now entering a phase in our economic development in which food supply constraints can 
once  again  threaten  growth  and  macroeconomic  stability?  To  answer  these  questions,  we 
need to look at what drove food inflation in the past and whether the same forces are at work 
now. 
We try to do this in the next three slides. All three graphs provide, for different periods, the 
contribution of different categories of food items to overall food inflation. Slide 4 shows the 
picture for the 1960s and 1970s, Slide 5 for the 1980s and 1990s and Slide 6 for the first 
decade  of  the  2000s.  A  number  of  important  inferences  can  be  drawn  from  this  historical 
comparison.  In  the  1960s  and  1970s,  as  seen  in  Slide  4,  the  main  contributions  to  food 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflation in the years that have been selected for display came from cereals and sugar. In the 
graph for the three-year period 1972–1975, which was one of the prolonged episodes that 
were identified in the earlier discussion, what is striking is that these two categories vied with 
each other to drive food inflation. While sugar was the dominant contributor in the first year, 
cereals took on that role in the next two years. Between the two, they accounted for a very 
high proportion of total food inflation. 
In the next two decades, the picture did not change dramatically, although other categories of 
food clearly began to contribute more significantly. In the decade of the 1980s, in the years 
selected for display in Slide 5, sugar was the predominant contributor and cereals played a 
relatively modest role. In 1981–82, however, proteins (which include pulses, milk and eggs, 
meat  and  fish)  made  an  appearance,  as  did  fruits  and  vegetables.  In  the  1990s,  the 
contribution  of  sugar  subsided,  while  that  of  cereals  made  a  comeback,  supported  to  an 
extent  by  fruits  and  vegetables  and  proteins.  Overall,  though,  if  we  were  to  characterize 
these four decades in terms of the drivers of food inflation, it would be reasonable to argue 
that it was dominated by cereals and sugar, with a supporting role being played by proteins 
and fruits and vegetables in the second half of the period. 
Let  us  now  look  at  the  contributions  to  food  inflation  over  the  past  decade.  In  the  years 
selected  for  display,  cereals  and  sugar  have  clearly  receded  into  the  background,  while 
proteins and fruits and vegetables have begun to play a more important role. In the earlier 
part of the decade, proteins and fruits and vegetables swapped roles, much like cereals and 
sugar did in the previous decades. However, in the last four years, which roughly correspond 
to the most recent episode of persistent high inflation, the contributions of proteins and fruits 
and vegetables, in both absolute and relative terms, have clearly been the dominant drivers 
of food inflation. Cereals and sugar have made some contributions, but they have been of a 
one-off nature, not sustaining over the entire period. 
Let  me  place  this  significant  shift  in  the  drivers  of  food  inflation,  which  was  clearly 
accentuated in the most recent episode, in the context of the notion of “this time it’s different”. 
There  are  obvious  similarities  between  the  earlier  prolonged  episodes  –  early  1970s  and 
early 1980s – and the most recent one. In both these, two major food categories both saw 
sharp increases in their prices, presumably because of a combination of steadily increasing 
demand and a sharp fall in supply, usually because of an inadequate monsoon. In the most 
recent  episode,  2009  was  a  bad  monsoon  year  and  this  many  have  been  the  trigger  for 
prices  of  pulses  to  rise  sharply,  adding  their  own  burden  to  the  steady  pressure  from 
demand. In the following year, fruits and vegetables added their contribution, reinforcing and 
prolonging  the  inflation  trajectory,  despite  2010  being  a  decent  monsoon  year.  While  the 
contribution from proteins has gone down somewhat in 2011–12, the pressure from fruits and 
vegetables have sustained. 
Given  the  significance  of  proteins  and  fruits  and  vegetables  in  food  inflation  in  the  recent 
episode, let us look at the contribution of some major items in the protein category. Slides 7 
and 8 show the contributions of the major protein items – pulses, milk and eggs, meat and 
fish – over a five-year period. In Slide 7, we see the sharp increase in the prices of pulses in 
the first year, but this did not persist for very long. However, milk was a significant contributor 
throughout the period, as is seen on Slide 8. In the later part of the period, eggs, meat and 
fish gained in significance, more or less matching the contribution of milk. The contribution 
from pulses virtually disappeared in these years. Beyond proteins, fruits and vegetables were 
a significant, though somewhat volatile contributor. 
In the context of the title of this lecture, the similarity between this latest episode of high food 
inflation  and  earlier  ones  of  comparable  duration  clearly  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  needed  two 
major  categories  of  food  to  drive  these  high  rates  of  inflation.  The  difference  lies  in  what 
those items were. It is also significant that between the relatively prolonged episodes, there 
were a series of relatively shorter ones, typically also with lower peak rates of inflation. This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
pattern has important policy implications, which I will come to in the concluding part of the 
lecture. 
Let  us  now  explore  the  drivers  of  the  recent  pattern  of  food  inflation.  When  prices  of 
individual commodities increase, it is always because of a gap between demand and supply. 
In the current scenario, I believe that both demand and supply forces are contributing to the 
persistence and possibly even the widening of that gap. 
To  examine  the  demand  side  of  the  equation,  let  me  first  provide  a  backdrop  in  Slide  9. 
Generally speaking, as households grow  more affluent, the proportion of their income that 
they spend on food declines. This is a universal pattern and India is no different. Over the 
decade and a half depicted in the slide, both urban and rural consumers show a decline in 
their  relative  Monthly  Per  Capita  Expenditure  (MPCE)  on  food.  For  now,  the  main 
observation is that, while there may be a decline in food expenditures in relative terms, what 
matters for demand is the absolute levels of consumption. 
One way to depict this is by an Engel Curve, which shows the relationship between income 
and expenditure on a particular commodity. Slides 10 and 11 show the Engel Curves for four 
food categories. Three of them are from the set that I have been talking about throughout the 
lecture, while the fourth captures expenditure on processed foods and beverages. There are 
a number of ways to interpret an Engel Curve, but a simple one in which relative changes in 
demand can be measured is in terms of the income elasticity. This essentially measures how 
much consumption increases for every unit increase in income (proxied here by total MPCE). 
The  steeper  the  curve,  the  higher  is  the  elasticity.  Let  me  illustrate  this  with  a  simple 
comparison. 
In the graphs displayed in Slide 10, the ratio of expenditure on cereals by the top income 
decile to that by the bottom decile is about 1.8. For proteins, it is about 4.5. By this simple 
calculation, as household incomes increase, the incremental expenditure on proteins is more 
than  double  that  on  cereals.  The  same  story  goes  for  fruits  and  vegetables  and,  quite 
obviously,  for  processed  foods  and  beverages.  Rural  households,  for  whom  the  Engel 
Curves  are  displayed  on  Slide  11,  reveal  a  similar  slope  for  cereals  but  an  even  steeper 
slope for proteins as compared with their urban counterparts. 
Although these curves are drawn from cross-sectional data, which reflect a point in time, they 
can  clearly  be  used  to  make  inferences  about  consumer  behaviour  over  time.  The  simple 
conclusion  from  these  patterns  is  that,  as  households  move  up  the  income  ladder,  their 
expenditure on food shifts relatively towards proteins, fruits and vegetables and so on, which 
exacerbates demand pressures2. 
Nobody  would  dispute  this  simple  assertion.  People  eat  better  (as  reflected  in  a  more 
diversified  and  balanced  diet)  as  they  grow  richer.  But,  even  if  the  demand  side  of  the 
equation  is  inevitable,  that  it  translates  into  a  persistent  pressure  on  prices  is  not.  One 
common  and  consistent  feature  of  economic  development  is  that  it  has  been  able  to 
accommodate  these  changes  in  diets  by  increasing  the  supply  of  the  food  items  involved. 
This is where we seem to have a problem. 
Let us look at the supply side of the picture, using pulses and milk as examples, though I 
believe that they do illustrate the broader issue. Slide 12 displays the trend in productivity of 
pulses  in  India  over  a  long  period  of  time.  It  increased  steadily  until  about  the  mid-1990s, 
when it crossed the 600 kg/hectare. After that, for the last decade and a half, it has oscillated 
around this mark, but not shown any tendency for sustained increase. From an aggregate 
                                                 
2   Micro‐level  price  dynamics  of  the  major  dietary  sources  of  protein  in  India,  based  on  demand-supply 
fundamentals  is  discussed  in  Subir  Gokarn  (2011),  “The  price  of  protein,”  Macroeconomics  and  Finance  in 
Emerging Market Economies, Volume 4, Issue 2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
supply perspective, this means that the only way to increase production is by increasing the 
area under cultivation, causing land available for other crops to decline. 
Are there any opportunities to increase production by way of higher productivity, which is the 
best way to do it? Slide 13 displays the variation in productivity in pulses across states. Of 
course,  this  depiction  does  not  distinguish  between  different  kinds  of  pulses,  which  is  an 
important issue. But, at the aggregate level, the pattern suggests that there are several large 
states, in which pulses may constitute an important part of the typical diet, whose productivity 
is significantly below the national average. If overall productivity is to be improved, a strategy 
which  focuses  on  the  specific  bottlenecks  in  these  states  is  probably  the  best  way  to  go 
about it. 
I  have  not  gone  down  to  the  next  level  of  disaggregation,  looking  at  productivity  patterns 
across different kinds of pulses. Some of the inter-state variation is because the crop mix is 
different across states. The distinction is important because of strong inter-regional variations 
in  preferences.  Specifically,  consumers  in  the  western  and  southern  regions  have  a 
preference for tur (or arhar) dal, while chana and urad are more popular in the north. Masur 
comes into the mix in the east. Because of the relative lack of substitutability between these 
varieties,  strategies  to  increase  productivity  need  to  take  into  account  the  supply-demand 
imbalances in each of these items. A large increase in a pulse variety that is not universally 
consumed will not be of much help in addressing the demand-supply imbalance. 
Going back briefly to Slides 7 and 8, in which the relative contribution of pulses to inflation 
was displayed, one reason why it has been muted at the aggregate level is that not all pulses 
face the same demand-supply imbalance. For example,  chana, which is a significant  Rabi 
crop  in  the  northern  region,  has  been  relatively  stable  in  its  yields  and  this  in  turn  has 
resulted  in  relatively  stable  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  tur,  which  is  grown  largely  in  the 
southern half of the country, has shown much  more  volatility in productivity and has, as a 
result, shown much sharper increases in prices over the past few years. 
Let me come to the situation in milk. As we saw in Slides 7 and 8, in contrast to pulses, milk 
has been a significant contributor to food inflation throughout the period under consideration. 
And, of course, unlike pulses, milk is a homogeneous product. With the kind of demographic 
pattern  the  country  has,  as  well  as  the  growing  demand  for  processed  food  products,  in 
which milk has a significant role, demand for milk has been growing and will continue to grow 
rapidly.  However,  as  Slide  14  shows,  the  growth  rate  of  milk  yields  has  declined  quite 
significantly  during  the  past  decade.  Again,  this  means  that  the  only  way  in  which  milk 
production can be increased is by increasing the size of the cattle herd. The investment and 
maintenance expenditures involved will come at the expense of other things. There may be 
lessons to be drawn from the experience of the previous decade, during which productivity 
increased quite significantly. 
Productivity gains can be a significant contributor to moderating food inflation. However, for 
given  levels  of  productivity,  it  is  the  cost  of  major  inputs  that  determines  the  prices  of  the 
products. What is driving costs of production? In discussing this, although I have been talking 
about proteins and fruits and vegetables all along, I will use paddy as an illustration, for two 
reasons. 
The first reason is that paddy is cultivated across a wide range of states and its cost structure 
therefore reflects national trends. The relative share of different inputs in the cost of paddy 
cultivation is shown on Slide 15. In terms of cost share, the dominant input clearly is labour. 
It’s contribution varies across states, but it is by far the largest component of costs in all the 
states displayed. Consequently, the cost of production across the country will depend on how 
the wages of agricultural labour have been moving. 
The  movement  in  this  critical  variable  is  shown  in  Slide  16.  The  longer  bars  reflect  the 
increase  in nominal  wages  of  rural  unskilled  workers  over  the  past  year.  The  shorter  bars 
reflect the change in the Consumer Price Index for this category of workers. In virtually all the 
states, the rise in nominal wages far outstrips the increase in consumer prices. Labour costs 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
are  clearly  rising  sharply,  which  for  commodities  like  food  usually  mean  a  high  degree  of 
pass-through  into  the  selling  price.  The  broader  point  here  is  that,  if  wages  are  rising  at 
current  rates,  for  whatever  reason,  they  will  exert  strong  pressure  on  the  prices  of  all 
agricultural  commodities  for  which  wage  costs  are  a  dominant  component  of  the  cost 
structure. 
I must point out that, from a larger development perspective, rising wage costs are actually a 
good  thing.  After  all,  a  primary  objective  of  development  is  to  raise  standards  of  living 
through  higher  incomes.  However,  the  sustainability  of  the  process  depends  entirely  on 
whether wage increases are the consequence of productivity increases. Wages rising faster 
than productivity can only result in rising prices, if producers cannot substitute other inputs 
for  labour.  The  cost  structure  for  paddy  reflects  the  criticality  of  labour.  There  may  be 
substitution possibilities for other crops, but these depend on many factors, such as the scale 
of  cultivation,  the  quality  of  infrastructure  services  and  so on.  In  many  commodities,  rising 
wages combined with stagnant productivity are a recipe for persistent price increases. 
The  second  reason  why  I  used  paddy  as  an  example  here  is  to  highlight  an  important 
relationship  between  price  dynamics  and  stocks.  As  is  well  known,  the  government  holds 
substantial stocks of rice and wheat. While they are meant to be released into the market in 
situations of shortage, thus ensuring availability at reasonable prices, there is some evidence 
to suggest that their mere presence acts as a dampener on price volatility. Slide 17 shows 
the relationship between cereal price movements and their stock levels over the past decade 
and a half. The relationship is very clear and contemporaneous. As stocks decline, the rate 
of increase in cereal prices accelerates. Conversely, periods in which stocks have been high 
show relatively low rates of price increase. 
There has been much public discussion on the rather inefficient way in which the stocks are 
being  maintained  and  some  concerns  expressed  about  their  ability  to  actually  meet  food 
security requirements should the need arise. That is an important debate but I don’t want to 
get into it here. From the perspective of price stabilization, evidence from cereals supports 
the case that a credible level of stocks can actually dampen price volatility. Of course, not 
every  commodity  is  amenable  to  stocking,  particularly  over  long  periods  of  time.  So,  this 
particular strategy might not be applicable to the commodities that we have been focussing 
on  in  this  discussion.  But,  perhaps  the  lesson  from  the  experience  with  cereals  is  that, 
wherever  and  however  possible,  the  ability  to  counter  supply  disruptions  with  short  notice 
infusions into the market may be a useful tool to have. 
I want to address one final issue on the supply side before I conclude. This has to do with the 
performance of the monsoon over a long period of time. We are used to thinking of “normal” 
or “deficient” monsoons in terms of a deviation from a benchmark labelled the “Long Period 
Average”  (LPA).  The  LPA  for  a  specific  decade  is  the  average  of  the  rainfall  over  the 
50 years before that decade. It is, therefore, updated every ten years, after the completion of 
a  decade,  which  then  gets  added  into  the  average.  However,  if  the  benchmark  itself  is 
changing, the notions of normality and deficiency do not fully capture the absolute amount of 
rainfall in any given year. A normal monsoon in one year may actually deliver less rainfall 
than a normal monsoon in another. 
Slide 18 displays the LPA for the South-west monsoon across the country. It clearly shows a 
declining trend. This means that normal monsoons are actually delivering less water than in 
the past. This may not be of great significance for regions that are subject to heavy rainfall, 
but  in  parts  of  the  country,  particularly  in  the  central  regions,  this  kind  of  decline  may  be 
contributing  to  water  scarcity  and,  consequently,  keeping  productivity  stagnant.  Notably, 
pulses  comprise  a  significant  crop  in  these  regions.  In  short,  to  add  to  all  the  other 
hindrances to productivity growth, long-term water availability will also potentially play a role. 
Let me now wrap up the lecture by highlighting two key points made in the lecture and then 
drawing  out  some  policy  implications.  First,  we  seem  to  be  currently  in  a  situation  that 
resembles the food inflation episodes of the early and late 1970s in terms of magnitude and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
duration.  In  all  three  comparable  episodes,  including  the  most  recent  one,  two  important 
categories  of  food  made  significant  contributions  to  inflationary  pressures  and  their 
persistence. However, the key difference between the earlier episodes and the recent one is 
the  pair  of  commodities  involved.  Earlier,  it  was  cereals  and  sugar,  now  it  is  proteins  and 
fruits and vegetables. 
Second, when prices are rising because demand is growing strongly while supply stagnates 
or fails to keep up, there is no alternative to curbing food inflation than raising supply rapidly. 
The  current  pressure  on  the  prices  of  proteins  and  fruits  and  vegetables  is  clearly  the 
outcome of this combination of circumstances. However, raising productivity quickly is itself a 
serious challenge, given the pressures emanating from both labour costs and, over longer 
horizon, what appears to be a structural reduction in the absolute amount of rainfall. 
I draw three policy implications from this analysis. First, the transition from an environment of 
persistent food inflation up until the 1970s to a series of more short-lived and less intense 
episodes in the 1980s and 1990s was the direct result of a set of policy interventions, which 
we collectively labelled the “Green Revolution”. These interventions, which combined price 
incentives, input subsidies, technological inputs and infrastructure investments, particularly in 
irrigation and, very importantly, buffer stocks, helped to raise and stabilize the productivity of 
cereal cultivation, as well as some other crops. Over the years, cereals stopped contributing 
significantly to food inflation and, perhaps, this led to the belief that the food inflation problem 
had been solved for good. 
However, as we all, or should all, know, the story of development is a continuously evolving 
one.  Demands,  for  food  as  well  as  other  products  and  services,  change  as  consumers 
become  more  prosperous.  Sustaining  the  development  momentum  involves  creating  the 
capacity  in  the  economy  to  respond  to  these  changing  demands.  Throughout  history, 
increasing affluence has been associated with changing food habits. The transition from  a 
cereal-dominated diet to a more balanced one with a greater appetite for proteins and fruits 
and vegetables is something that all countries have seen and we are no exception. It is in full 
swing  today  and  the  absence  of  a  strong  supply  response  means  that  many  aspiring 
consumers will actually be denied the opportunity to make that transition. 
Second, while the broad objectives of a supply enhancement policy remain the same, i.e., 
increasing  and  stabilizing  production,  predominantly  through  productivity  increases,  the 
elements  of  the  strategy  need  to  fit  the  requirements  of  both  the  commodities  themselves 
and be consistent with the overall economic and institutional environment. A mere replication 
of the kinds of interventions we saw in the 1960s and 1970s may not turn out to be effective, 
because the nature of the commodities is so different. Also, in hindsight, these interventions 
imposed  a  significant  fiscal  cost,  something  which  is  rather  difficult  to  absorb  in  today’s 
circumstances. In short, an effective strategy must be compatible with both the nature of the 
commodities  and  the  state  of  the  economy.  I  have  no  doubt  that  such  a  strategy  can  be 
devised from existing knowledge and the right kinds of resources being brought together. Co-
ordination will be the key. 
Third,  coming  back  to  the  monetary  policy  context,  the  implications  of  persistent  supply 
pressures on the economy, whether they are from food, energy, labour or any other critical 
input,  are  clearly  not  very  good  for  maintaining  the  balance  between  fast  growth  and  low 
inflation. A permanent supply shock leads to lower growth and higher inflation, which could 
further fuel inflationary pressures through expectations. In this situation, central banks have 
to  choose  between  the  risk  of  inflation  spiralling  through  expectations  and  the  burden  of 
slowing growth even further by anti-inflation policy measures. In other words, while transitory 
episodes  of  food  inflation  do  not  warrant  a  monetary  policy  response,  there  are  strong 
justifications for acting in the face of more persistent ones, if the objective is to keep overall 
inflation in check. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
In  short,  quickly  increasing  the  productivity  of  proteins  and  fruits  and  vegetables  is  the 
highest priority, both from the perspective of development and standards of living and from 
the viewpoint of monetary policy. 
Let me conclude by thanking the Gokhale Institute and Prof. Parchure once again for inviting 
me  to  deliver  the  Kale  Memorial  Lecture  for  2011.  My  best  wishes  for  the  future  to  the 
students graduating today. 
 
 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
