Duvvuri Subbarao: The challenge of food inflation 
Presidential address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
25th  Annual  Conference  of  the  Indian  Society  of  Agricultural  Marketing,  Hyderabad, 
22 November 2011. 
 1. 
First of all, my thanks to the Indian Society of Agricultural Marketing, particularly to 
Prof.  Radhakrishna,  the  President,  and  Prof.  Satyanarayana,  Secretary  of  the  Society  for 
inviting me to address this conference. Speaking to a gathering of distinguished agricultural 
economists is an opportunity to which I attach a lot of value. Whenever I am invited to speak, 
I struggle to determine a topic that is relevant to the organizers, and is also within the domain 
of the Reserve Bank. In this instance though, I did not have any problem since there is a vast 
subject area that is of mutual interest to the Reserve Bank and to agricultural economists, 
particularly  economists  with  sub-specialization  in  agricultural  marketing.  For  today,  I  have 
chosen to speak on the challenge of food inflation. 
The context 
I. 
2. 
Persistent  and  elevated  food  inflation  over  the  last  few  years  has  emerged  as  a 
major policy concern, especially as it can potentially threaten our collective aspiration for a 
“higher,  inclusive  and  sustainable”  growth.  Intriguingly,  we  are  experiencing  high  food 
inflation  in  the  face  of  record  production  of  food  grains,  robust  buffer  stocks  and  growing 
resilience of agriculture to monsoon uncertainties. Evidently, the dynamics of food inflation 
have  changed  significantly,  and  understanding  them  is  obviously  important  for  a  policy 
response. 
3. 
A  related  question  that  has  engaged  economists  has  been  the  role,  if  any,  of  the 
central bank in combating food inflation. Opinion on this has spanned the entire spectrum. At 
one end is the view that monetary policy should be the “first line of defence” no matter what 
the drivers of inflation. At the other end is the view that monetary policy is an inappropriate 
instrumentality to address supply pressures, and that the central bank should adopt a “hands 
off”  approach.  Real  world,  as  we  know,  is  too  complex  for  such  binary  text  book 
prescriptions;  management  of  food  inflation  has  always  been  a  complex  challenge  for  the 
Reserve Bank, both by way of policy action and its communication.  
4. 
What I propose to do in this address is to first highlight the trends in food inflation 
over  the  past  60  years.  Having  thus  set  the  context,  I  will  turn  to  factors  driving  structural 
food inflation, which should give us a perspective of the underlying dynamics and the nature 
of  the  challenge.  I  will  then  move  on  to  indicating  the  policy  measures  for  addressing  the 
challenge  of  food  inflation  on  a  durable  basis.  I  will,  in  the  end,  address  an  issue  more 
directly  relevant  to  the  Reserve  Bank  –  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  the  face  of  supply 
shocks. 
Trends in food inflation over last six decades 
II. 
An assessment of the inflation trends over last six decades indicates that India has 
5. 
encountered successive bouts of high food inflation, but the underlying drivers have changed 
over time; the influence of monsoon has declined and some new sources of price pressures 
have emerged. What is particularly notable is that during the 2000s, average food inflation 
fell significantly (Chart-1). In contrast, since 2008–09 (i.e. about last three and half years), 
average food inflation has been higher than the average food inflation in each of the past six 
decades. This cannot all be attributed to poor monsoon. Sure, rainfall was deficient in 2009, 
but so was it in 2002 and 2004. But, in the earlier years, food inflation remained modest, at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
less than three per cent over three successive years during 2002–05 whereas it shot up to 
double digits in 2009.What has changed in recent years to cause sustained price pressures? 
This is the big question we need to answer to find a durable solution to food inflation.  
 Factors driving food price pressures 
III. 
6. 
What are the factors driving food inflation? I would emphasize the following: (i) shift 
in dietary habits towards protein foods; (ii) pressure stemming from inclusive growth policies; 
(iii)  large  increases  in  MSPs  of  foodgrains;  (iv)  shocks  from  global  food  inflation;  and 
(v) financialisation of commodities. Let me take them up one by one.  
(i) 
Shift in dietary habits towards protein foods 
7. 
A distinct feature of recent food price inflation has been the sustained price pressure 
in  protein  rich  items  (pulses,  milk,  fish,  meat  and  eggs).  Inflation  in  protein  rich  items  has 
generally  exceeded  both  headline  (WPI)  inflation  and  inflation  in  primary  food  articles 
(Chart-2).  
8. 
As  one  would  expect,  the  share  of  food  in  total  expenditure  has  declined  over 
successive  rounds  of  NSSO  surveys  alongside  increases  in  per  capita  income,  consistent 
with Engel’s Law (Chart-3).  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 9. 
We  need  to  turn  to  the  lesser  known  Bennet’s  Law  for  an  explanation  of  food 
inflation. Bennet’s Law suggests that as incomes increase, the proportion of starchy staples 
in  the  food  basket  declines  relative  to  the  share  of  more  expensive  sources  of  calories. 
Recent NSSO data showing a significant increase in the share of protein rich items in total 
food expenditure, both in rural and urban areas, confirm this hypothesis (Chart-4). Though 
protein inflation, reflecting changing dietary habits, was evident earlier as well, the pace of 
increase has been sharperin recent years reflecting, in part, accelerated increases in nominal 
wages.  
10. 
Even  in  the  face  of  such  structural  changes  in  dietary  habits,  inflation  is  not 
inevitable. The reason structural changes have triggered inflation in India is that the supply 
response  in  respect  of  most  protein  items  has  not  been  adequate.  With  the  exception  of 
pulses,  other  protein  rich  items  are  not  crop  products.  This  is  an  important  point  since  it 
explains the growing disconnect between the performance of agriculture and the trajectory of 
food inflation.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Pressure on food inflation stemming from inclusive growth 
(ii) 
11. 
Unlike the growth-inflation tradeoff, the possible tradeoff between inclusive growth 
and  inflation  has  not  received  much  attention.  The  need  for  making  growth  inclusive  is 
incontestable,  but  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  policies  aimed  at  inclusion  can  stoke 
inflationary pressures, at any rate in the short-term. I could mention two examples here: first, 
the significant increase in rural wages triggered by the MGNREGS, and second, inflationary 
implications of the proposed Food Security Bill.  
The MGNREGS, guaranteeing at least one hundred days of wage employment to 
12. 
rural labour, in implementation since February 2006, has pushed up rural wages, in line with 
the expected outcomes of the scheme. The indexation of the wage rate to CPI-AL since the 
beginning  of  2011  has  exacerbated  the  wage-price  inflation  spiral.  NSSO  survey  data 
(61st Round  and  66th  Round)  suggest  that  nominal  wages  of  workers,  in  both  rural  and 
urban areas, increased much faster in the second half of the 2000s than in the first half. In 
most  states,  wageshave  increased  faster  than  CPI-RL  inflation,  pushing  up  real  wages 
(Chart-5).  
 13. 
Consistent  with  the  characteristic  of  a  low  income  country,  increase  in  wages  in 
India has quickly translated to increase in per capita expenditure. Average nominal per capita 
expenditure increased sharply in the second half of the decade (2005–10) compared to the 
first half (2000–05), rising from 3.6 per cent per annum to 10.5 per cent in rural areas, and 
5.3 per cent per annum to 10.9 per cent in urban areas. The MGNREGS has evidently set 
the  floor  for  the  rural  wage  level,  making  wage  push  inflation  more  visible  and  prominent. 
Admittedly, increase in wages need not be inflationary provided it reflects higher productivity, 
but that is not currently the case, a point to which I will return later. 
14. 
The  National  Food  Security  Bill,  2011  is  another  potential  source  of  pressure  on 
inflation, and its inflationary impact will depend on the extent to which it will raise demand for 
food grains relative to the normal increase in supply. The proposed bill targets two categories 
of households – priority households and general households – under which 75 per cent of 
the  rural  population  (with  at  least  46  per  cent  of  the  population  belonging  to  priority 
households)  and  50  per  cent  of  the  urban  population  (with  at  least  28  per  cent  of  the 
population belonging to priority households) will become entitled to subsidized food grains. 
The  price  restrictions  are  quite  exacting  and  failure  by  the  government  to  meet  the 
obligations entails payment of a food security allowance to the beneficiary. 
15. 
Estimates suggest that 68 per cent of the country’s 1.2 billion population will get a 
legal entitlement for food grains after the bill is enacted, significantly raising the annual grain 
procurement  demand  even  as  the  available  marketed  surplus  would  not  increase 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
correspondingly. This will create demand pressures, which will inevitably spillover to market 
prices of food grains. Furthermore, the higher food subsidy burden on the budget will raise 
the fiscal deficit, exacerbating macro level inflationary pressures. 
Large increases in MSPs of food grains 
(iii) 
16. 
Recent  years  have  witnessed  a  significant  increase  in  minimum  support  prices 
(MSP)  of  several  agricultural  commodities,  pushing  up  food  inflation.  This  is  particularly 
evident  from  the  neatly  anchored  co-movement  of  market  prices  and  MSPs  for  rice  and 
wheat  (Chart-6).  The  Commission  for  Agricultural  Costs  and  Prices  (CACP)  has  typically 
followed a cost plus pricing formula for determining the MSP, and in an environment of rising 
wages and increasing input costs, rising MSPs have accentuated inflation pressures. 
17. 
substantial in recent years, as the following table shows.  
Compared  with  the  past,  hikes  in  MSPs  for  wheat  and  rice  have  been  more 
 18. 
above is consistent with the rising input costs as evidenced by figures below. 
Given the cost plus formula for the determination of MSPs, the increase in MSPs as 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 19. 
It is a fair presumption that MGNREGS has considerably affected labour costs while 
also  tightening  availability  of  agricultural  labour  during  peak  seasons.  Given  that  Indian 
agriculture is labour intensive, sustained wage pressures can keep food price inflation high 
even in years of record food production as was the case in 2010–11. 
Shocks from global food inflation 
(iv) 
20. 
Given India’s growing integration with the world economy, global food prices affect 
our domestic prices even if there is no trade. Global food price pressures have been quite 
acute in recent years reflecting growing demand and a weak supply response. Demand side 
pressures have stemmed from growing population and rising incomes. Supply side pressure 
have been triggered by a host of factors – increasing urbanization, diversion of land for bio-
fuel production, inadequate investment in research and technology, spikes in costs of inputs 
such  as  diesel  and  fertilizer  and  disturbances  arising  from  climate  change.  The  impact  of 
these factors underpinning high food prices was amplified further by country specific policy 
interventions,  particularly  export  bans  on  specific  commodities  by  certain  countries.  Import 
barriers  in  some  countries  to  protect  domestic  producers  and  large  subsidies  to  farm 
production in several advanced economies have also influenced the supply response of farm 
output to distorted price signals.  
21. 
According  to  an  assessment  by  OECD-FAO,  global  food  inflation  situation  will 
remain grim over the next ten years. It is important to note that prices of food items actually 
declined in real terms over several decades from early 1960s to early 2000 (Chart-7). This 
trend  began  to  be  reversed,  gradually  during  2003–06,  and  rapidly  thereafter  up  until  the 
2008 global financial crisis. After some moderation in 2009, food prices have again edged 
up,  tending  closer  to  pre-crisis  peaks.  The  OECD-FAO  Agricultural  Outlook  2011–20 
indicates that prices may be higher in real terms over the five years 2015–20, relative to the 
levels prevailing during the five year period 1998–2003 by 40 per cent in case of rice, 27 per 
cent for wheat, 48 per cent for maize and 36 per cent for oil seeds. What the above global 
outlook  clearly  suggests  is  that  we  will  not  get  any  comfort  from  the  global  situation  in 
managing our food inflation. 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Even in a situation of low global prices, India does not enjoy the import option given 
22. 
the  huge  size  of  our  consumption.  Global  food  markets  are  notoriously  thin,  and  even  the 
mere  signal  of  a  large  consumer  like  India  entering  the  market  can  spike  up  prices. 
Moreover, in some commodities such as wheat and sugar, Indian prices have been higher 
than global prices (Chart-8) suggesting that even if imports could improve domestic supply, 
they would not soften inflationary pressures.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
Financialisation of commodities – a new source of price pressure 
(v) 
23. 
Some analysts contend that speculation in commodity futures has been a key driver 
of  global  food  inflation  in  recent  years.  In  general,  there  has  been  a  marked  increase  in 
financial  investment  in  commodity  markets,  relative  to  both  global  GDP  and  physical 
commodity  production.  Do  activities  in  commodity  futures  market  reflect  genuine  needs  of 
hedging?  Does  speculation  systematically  influence  the  commodity  prices  and  lead  to 
increased price volatility? These are questions that are as yet largely unsettled in academic 
and policy discussions. At any rate, the financialisation channel is often perceived to have 
magnified the impact on prices of the disequilibrium between demand and supply, thereby 
weakening the role of fundamentals in the price formation process.  
24. 
In  India,  prices  of  several  commodities  which  are  not  traded  on  the  commodities 
exchange, such as fruit and milk, have significantly increased in the recent period. Moreover, 
certain commodities that were banned for trading in 2007, such as rice, wheat, tur and urad 
also exhibited price increases subsequently. Even after the ban imposed on trading of sugar 
in  2009,  sugar  prices  had  increased  considerably.  Evidence  of  any  relationship  between 
futures market activities in commodities and their spot prices is ambiguous. Nonetheless, this 
needs close monitoring and certainly further research.  
IV. 
25. 
may respond to the challenge of food inflation. 
Addressing the challenge of food inflation 
Having discussed the sources of food price pressures, let me now turn to how we 
Raise agricultural productivity 
(i) 
26. 
The Green Revolution, entailing adoption of high yielding variety (HYV) seeds in the 
mid  1960s  and  the  use  of  the  fertilizer-pesticides-irrigation  package,  resulted  in  quantum 
jumps in productivity (i.e. output per acre), especially of rice and wheat. By the early 1980s, 
productivity  across all major crops had peaked, but the  momentum  had slowed thereafter. 
Consequently, per-capita availability of food grains, especially of rice and wheat, has started 
declining (Chart-9). A comparison of crop yields across G-20 countries shows the extent to 
which India has lagged behind others (Chart 10). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  27. 
Even our best productivity achievements in terms of yields of major crops are way 
behind  world  numbers.  During  2010–11,  Punjab,  with  the  highest  yield  in  rice,  produced 
3.8 tonnes  per  hectare  as  against  the  world  average  of  4.3  tonnes  per  hectare.  Yield  of 
oilseeds in Tamil Nadu, the highest in India, at 2.1 tonnes per hectare is lower than the US 
average of 2.7 tonnes per hectare. There are wide variations in productivity levels of crops 
across  states.  Unlike  food  grains  where  the  Green  Revolution  improved  the  food  security 
situation, we are still not self-sufficient in pulses and edible oilseeds. The demand for other 
farm products like fruits and vegetables has also been rising significantly faster than supply, 
putting pressure on food inflation.  
The growth of agriculture and allied sector was most impressive during the 6th Five 
28. 
Year  Plan  period  (1980  to  1985)  when  it  peaked  at  5.8  per  cent.  The  annual  average 
agricultural growth rate moderated thereafter as shown in the following table.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
How do we respond to declining growth and moderating productivity improvements? 
29. 
The  overall  policy  framework  for  agriculture,  driven  primarily  by  remunerative  prices  and 
subsidized provision of inputs, needs to change; the focus would have to shift to productivity 
and  selective  policy  stimulus  to  items  where  the  supply  response  has  been  weak.  Public 
expenditure needs to reorient towards building capital infrastructure for agriculture which in 
turn  would  “crowd-in”  private  investment  and  help  realize  the  full  potential  of  agriculture 
growth. There has been no major technological breakthrough in agriculture since the Green 
Revolution of the mid-60s. There have been achievements in some specific crops such as 
cotton,  basmati  rice  and  maize,  but  that  needs  to  be  broad  based.  The  Green  Revolution 
also needs to penetrate the eastern region, where the yields have generally remained low.  
30. 
Management  of  climatic  concerns  is  becoming  increasingly  important  given  the 
continuing dependence on rainfed farming, frequent floodsin eastern India, frost, particularly 
in  north-western  India,  and  heat  waves  and  cyclones  on  the  east  coast.  These  climatic 
changes are likely to significantly increase volatility in agricultural production. Recent large 
increases in prices of some items like onion, sugar, vegetables and cotton are, at least in 
part, a result of seasonal weather related factors, both domestic and external. 
Rethink price policy interventions 
(ii) 
31. 
Paradoxically,  in  India,  we  subsidize  both  agricultural  inputs  and  outputs,  and  we 
subsidize both producers and consumers. There is a case for revisiting the subsidy regime 
for  a  number  of  reasons,  including  the  pressure  it  exerts  on  food  inflation.  Subsidies  on 
inputs (fertilizer, electricity, irrigation) to incentivize production and subsidies on output for the 
PDS  system,  entail  a  large  fiscal  burden  (Chart-11).  Over  and  above  the  input  subsidies, 
remunerative MSPs and procurement for the public distribution system (PDS) at prices linked 
to MSP further distort the price situation. There is a moral hazard here like in any subsidy. A 
farming  sector  that  depends  excessively  on  input  subsidies  and  cost  plus  MSPs  to  raise 
production does not have much of an incentive to raise productivity. If the amount spent on 
subsidies could be diverted to augment capital formation in agriculture and creation of rural 
infrastructure, higher productivity would raise the income of farmers while lowering the prices 
for the consumers.  
MSPs pose a major policy dilemma. Remunerative prices are necessary to engineer 
32. 
the desired supply response, but higher MSPs also lead to higher inflation. A segment of the 
population could be protected against inflation through the subsidized PDS, but depending 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
on the difference between the PDS price and the MSPs at which procurement is made, and 
the quantity supplied through PDS, food subsidies could swell.  
33. 
The  share  of  agriculture  in  GDP  has  declined  significantly  (to  about  15  %),  but  a 
large section of the labour force (about 53 %) still depends on agriculture for its livelihood. If 
the  per-capita  income  of  those  who  depend  on  agriculture  has  to  increase,  productivity  of 
agriculture has to increase (so that even without higher food prices, per capita income could 
increase) and the percentage of labour force depending on agriculture has to decline (which 
would require creation of employment opportunities in non-farm activities).  
Improve supply chain management 
(iii) 
34. 
The supply chain through which farm products move to reach the final consumers is 
a  major  source  of  price  pressures.  Two  initiatives,  currently  under  debate,  that  could 
potentially  improve  the  situation  are:  (a)  revamping  the  PDS  to  check  leakage  of  food 
subsidies, and (b) allowing entry of FDI into multi-brand retailing. 
Let  us  take  the  PDS  first.  The  Government’s  food  management  policy  has  been 
35. 
largely  driven  by  two  goals:  (a)  maintaining  buffer  stocks  to  deal  with  food  shortages  and 
thereby  ensuring  food  security;  and  (b)  providing  food  at  subsidized  prices  to  the  poor 
through the PDS. The food stocks at any point of time, thus, reflect the end result of additions 
through procurement and depletions through release for PDS.  
36. 
Management  of  food  stocks  is  riven  by  a  debate  between  two  opposing  points  of 
view. One view is that food stocks should play a market stabilization role such that whenever 
market  prices  rise  significantly,  reflecting  particularly  supply  chain  manipulation,  stocks 
should be released into the market to soften prices. The opposing view is that use of food 
stocks to intervene in the market dilutes the role of competitive market forces, and that the 
Government should instead focus on easing supply chain rigidities.  
37. 
Given  the  enormous  administrative  costs  of  the  PDS  and  its  perceived  leakages, 
several  alternatives  have  been  suggested,  although  none  of  them  is  without  its  specific 
problems. By far the most straightforward is direct cash transfers, but its implementation is 
conditional on universal financial inclusion. Besides, since cash is fungible, the objective of 
distributing  food  at  subsidized  prices  can  potentially  be  compromised.  Distribution  of  food 
grains  with  utilization  linked  to  UID  is  another  option,  but  that  again  is  conditional  on 
universal  UID  coverage.  In  the  event  of  a  switch  over  to  cash  transfers,  the  supply  chain 
could become even more important in rural areas, since by manipulating supply and prices, 
food dealers could extract a share of the cash transferred to the beneficiaries.  
38. 
There  are  also  several  proposals  on  the  table  for  improving  supply  chain 
management. Given that protein food inflation stems especially from perishable items such 
as  milk,  eggs,  meat,  fish,  vegetables  and  fruits,  the  case  for  a  better  supply  chain 
management  becomes  stronger.  The  most  actively  discussed  option  is  allowing  FDI  into 
multi-brand  retail.  The  Government’s  discussion  paper  on  the  subject  argues  that  super 
market-chains could lower costs and increase efficiency because of scale economics. They 
will also lead to better safety and quality standards.  
39. 
Evidence  from  cross-country  experience  on  the  benefits  of  multi-brand  FDI  on 
inflation is ambiguous. Several questions persist. Will the supermarket chains, focusing as 
they  do  on  urban  consumption  centres  for  scale  of  economy  reasons,  leave  the  rural 
population behind? Also, if there are such clear scale economies and cost advantages, why 
aren’t domestic investors jumping in to exploit the potential? 
40. 
Another  issue  in  supply  chain  management  is  reform  of  some  restrictive  statutes 
and regulations. Even as production of vegetables and fruits has increased in recent years, 
around 40 per cent of it goes waste between the farm gate and the market for want of cold 
chain  and  transport  infrastructure.  Implementation  of  the  model  Agriculture  Produce 
Marketing  Committee  (APMC)  Act  2003,  which  provides  for  direct  marketing,  contract 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
farming and setting up of markets in private and cooperative sectors is a possible option to 
address this problem. 
Manage competition for land from non-farm activities 
(iv) 
41. 
Land  is  the  single  most  important  input  for  agriculture.  Besides  being  a  key 
determinant of socio-economic status, it provides collateral for credit and for security in the 
event of natural hazard or contingencies. The supply of land, as we know, is fixed. Over the 
years, there has been a significant change in the pattern of land use. Net sown area, which 
increased at a rate of 18 per cent during 1951–71, has either declined or remained stagnant 
since then. Increased cropping intensity over the years, however, has led to an increase in 
gross cropped area, though at a slowing pace in recent decades. As a result, there has been 
no significant increase in the share of net cropped area in total geographical area since the 
1970s.  
42. 
A notable aspect of the changing land use pattern is that the share of cultivable land 
not  used  for  agricultural  purposes  has  increased  from  a  low  of  2.8  per  cent  of  the  total 
geographical  areas  in  1950–51  to  7.5  per  cent  in  2004–05.  This  may  be  indicative  of 
increased diversion of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes, such as urbanization, 
housing, industrialization, and infrastructure. It is a fair presumption that such diversion would 
have  further  gained  pace  since  2004–05.  Land  acquisition  for  industrial  and  other 
commercial uses is an issue that has been headline news in recent years; clearly, it is an 
emotive  issue  involving  difficult  tradeoffs.  No  matter  how  the  tradeoffs  are  resolved,  the 
reality of increasing demand for land from fast growing and more productive sectors cannot 
be ignored. The possibility of declining arable land available for cultivation underscores the 
importance of increasing productivity if we are to contain food inflationary pressures. 
43. 
There are several other problems. First, land holding in India is highly fragmented, 
with marginal holdings (of one hectare or less) accounting for as high as 62 per cent of all 
operational  holdings.  The  small  farm  size  in  a  labour  surplus  agrarian  sector  leads  to 
intensive use of land, but in the absence of supporting infrastructure and capacity to access 
modern  technology  and  inputs,  productivity  remains  low.  Second,  rainfed  agriculture 
constitutes  as  much  as  55  per  cent  of  the  cropped  area  and  45  per  cent  of  the  total 
agricultural  output.  More  than  70  per  cent  of  pulses  and  oilseeds  production  as  well  as  a 
substantial  part  of  horticulture  and  animal  husbandry  produce  is  from  rainfed  farming, 
underscoring  significant  continuing  monsoon  dependence.  Third,  water  is  going  to  be  as 
precious as land in the long-run, and costs of irrigation will increase significantly, not only in 
terms of the actual cost of access to the irrigation facility, but also by way of costs arising 
from competing demand from non-agriculture sectors for the limited supply of water. Fourth, 
dry land farming would have to receive greater attention, but there will be greater competition 
even for dry lands from urbanization and infrastructure.  
Monetary policy and inflation 
V. 
Now let me turn to a question that is more directly relevant to the Reserve Bank – 
44. 
what is the role of a central bank in combating food inflation? As I said earlier, the answer to 
this question spans the entire spectrum. 
45. 
That monetary policy should respond if there is inflation, meaning there is sustained 
increase in the general price level, is beyond question. But high food prices often result from 
adverse supply shocks or large increases in input costs. The conventional wisdom is that if 
inflation expectations are well anchored, monetary policy need not react to supply shocks. 
This premise is based on the assumption that the supply shocks are purely temporary. This 
assumption does not always hold. In the real world, oftentimes supply shocks are structural 
and lead to a permanent trend upward shift in prices.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So, the challenge for a central bank is to determine if the supply shock is temporary 
46. 
or permanent. If it is permanent, then the change in relative prices caused by it can result in 
higher general inflation, in the first round by the higher input costs, and in the second round 
through  the  impact  on  inflation  expectation  and  wage  bargaining.  In  other  words,  when 
supply shocks impact the trend or the core component of inflation, monetary policy should 
respond. 
47. 
The question of responding to a supply shock gets more complex in the context of 
the  growth  inflation  trade-off.  Unlike  demand  shocks,  supply  shocks  have  asymmetric 
implications for inflation and growth. In the case of a negative demand shock, such as wealth 
loss caused by say, a crash in asset prices, the impact on output and prices is generally in 
the same direction. The policy response in such a situation is unambiguous. In the event of a 
negative supply shock, such as lower farm output resulting from monsoon failure, however, 
while  headline  inflation  goes  up,  output  may  come  down.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  a  negative 
supply shock, monetary policy confronts the dilemma of stabilising output versus containing 
inflation.  
48. 
Oftentimes, this is a delicate balancing act. If the supply shock is transitory, then the 
preferred  policy  response  could  be  to  accommodate  the  price  pressures,  recognizing  the 
limitations of monetary policy in directly dealing with supply induced price pressures. If on the 
other hand, the supply shock persists, or due to strong demand conditions, the supply shock 
transmits  to  other  components  of  general  inflation,  then  monetary  policy  has  to  respond. 
Thus,  in  case  of  the  former,  monetary  accommodation  prevents  further  disruption  to  the 
growth  momentum.  In  the  latter  case,  however,  ant-inflationary  monetary  response  may 
involve some sacrifice of growth.  
food  grains;  (iv)  shocks 
Conclusion 
49. 
Let me now conclude. The thrust of my address has been to emphasize the several 
factors  that  are  driving  food  inflation:  (i)  shift  in  dietary  habits  towards  protein  foods; 
(ii) pressure  stemming  from  inclusive  growth  policies;  (iii)  large  increases  in  the  minimum 
support  prices  (MSP)  of 
inflation;  and 
(v) financialization of commodities. 
50. 
Inflation  is  a  regressive  tax  and  hurts  the  poor  the  most.  The  impact  can  be 
particularly severe in a country like India with a population of 1.2 billion, a per capita income 
of less than $1500 and a large share of food in the total consumption basket. 
51. 
As  discussed  earlier,  the  direct  role  of  monetary  policy  in  combating  food  price 
pressures is limited, but in the face of sustained high food inflation, monetary action may still 
be warranted to anchor inflation expectations. A lasting solution to food price pressures lies 
in  a  supply  response  that  raises  agricultural  production  and  productivity,  improves  supply 
chain  management  and  sets  the  right  incentive  framework  for  both  producers  and 
consumers. The outlook on food inflation in the short to medium term will be determined by 
the speed and quality of such a supply response by the Government. 
from  global 
food 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
