Jean-Claude Trichet: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and 
Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Berlin, 6 October 2011. 
 in 
tensions 
to  be  moderate.  Ongoing 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  here  in  Berlin.  Let  me  take  the  opportunity  to  warmly  thank  President 
Weidmann  for  his  invitation  and  kind  hospitality.  I  would  also  like  to  express  our  special 
gratitude  to  the  staff  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  for  the  excellent  organisation  of  our 
meeting.  Let  me  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council, 
which  was  also  attended  by  the  President  of  the  Eurogroup,  Prime  Minister  Juncker,  and 
Commissioner Rehn. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Inflation has remained elevated and incoming 
information has confirmed our view that inflation is likely to stay above 2% over the months 
ahead  but  to  decline  thereafter.  At  the  same  time,  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary 
expansion  continues 
financial  markets  and 
unfavourable  effects  on  financing  conditions  are  likely  to  dampen  the  pace  of  economic 
growth in the euro area in the second half of this year. The economic outlook remains subject 
to particularly high uncertainty and intensified downside risks. At the same time, short-term 
interest rates remain low. It remains essential for monetary policy to maintain price stability 
over the medium term, thereby ensuring a firm anchoring of inflation expectations in the euro 
area  in  line  with  our  aim  of  maintaining  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium term. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make its contribution 
towards  supporting  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  A  very  thorough 
analysis of all incoming data and developments over the period ahead is warranted.  
The  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  conduct  two  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(LTROs), one with a maturity of approximately  12 months in October and the other with a 
maturity of approximately 13 months in December. The operations will be conducted as fixed 
rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment.  The  rate  in  both  operations  will  be  fixed  at  the 
average rate of the main refinancing operations (MROs) over the life of the respective LTRO, 
and interest will be paid when each operation matures. These operations will be conducted in 
addition to the regular and special-term refinancing operations, which remain unaffected.  
The  Governing  Council  has  also  decided  to  continue  conducting  its  MROs  as  fixed  rate 
tender procedures with full allotment for as long as necessary, and at least until the end of 
the sixth maintenance period of 2012 on 10 July 2012. This procedure will also remain in use 
for the Eurosystem’s special-term refinancing operations with a maturity of one maintenance 
period, which will continue to be conducted for as long as needed, and at least until the end 
of the sixth maintenance period (i.e. around the end of the second quarter) of 2012. The fixed 
rate in these special-term refinancing operations will be the same as the MRO rate prevailing 
at the time. 
In  addition,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  conduct  the  three-month  LTROs  to  be 
allotted on 25 January, 29 February, 28 March, 25 April, 30 May and 27 June 2012 as fixed 
rate tender procedures with full allotment. The rates in these three-month operations will be 
fixed at the average rate of the MROs over the life of the respective LTRO. 
Furthermore, the Governing Council has decided to launch a new covered bond  purchase 
programme (CBPP2). The programme will have the following modalities: 
The purchases will be for an intended amount of EUR 40 billion.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The purchases will have the capacity to be conducted in the primary and secondary 
markets and will be carried out by means of direct purchases. 
The  purchases  will  start  in  November  2011  and  are  expected  to  be  fully 
implemented by the end of October 2012. 
Further details on the modalities of CBPP2 will be announced after the Governing Council 
meeting of 3 November 2011. 
The provision of liquidity and the allotment modes for refinancing operations will continue to 
ensure that euro area banks are not constrained on the liquidity side. All the non-standard 
measures  taken  during  the  period  of  acute  financial  market  tensions  are,  by  construction, 
temporary in nature. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area,  after  slowing  in  the  second  quarter  of  2011  to  0.2% 
quarter on quarter, is now expected to be very moderate in the second half of this year. In 
particular, a number of factors seem to be dampening the underlying growth momentum in 
the euro area, including a moderation in the pace of global demand, falling consumer and 
business confidence, and unfavourable effects on financing conditions resulting from ongoing 
tensions in a number of euro area sovereign debt markets. At the same time, we continue to 
expect euro area economic activity to benefit from continued positive growth in the emerging 
market  economies  as  well  as  from  the  low  short-term  interest  rates  and  the  various 
measures taken to support the functioning of the financial sector. 
In the Governing Council’s assessment, the risks to the economic outlook for the euro area 
remain on the downside in an environment of  particularly high uncertainty. Downside risks 
notably relate to the ongoing tensions in some segments of the financial markets in the euro 
area and at the global level, as well as to the potential for these pressures to further spill over 
into the euro area real economy. They also relate to the still high energy prices, protectionist 
pressures and the possibility of a disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  3.0%  in 
September 2011, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, after 2.5% in August. Inflation rates 
have been at elevated levels since the end of last year, mainly driven by higher energy and 
other  commodity  prices.  Looking  ahead,  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  stay  clearly  above  2% 
over  the  coming  months  but  to  decline  thereafter.  This  pattern  reflects  the  expectation  of 
relatively stable wage growth developments in the context of moderate economic growth.  
The  Governing  Council  continues  to  view  the  risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price 
developments as broadly balanced. On the upside, the main risks relate to the possibility of 
increases in indirect taxes and administered prices, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation 
in the coming years. The main downside risks relate to the impact of weaker than expected 
growth in the euro area and globally.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 was 2.8% in August 2011, 
up from 2.1% in July. The annual growth rate of loans to the private sector, adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation,  was  2.8%  in  August,  after  2.6%  in  July.  A  number  of  factors, 
possibly related to the intensification of tensions in some financial markets, could have had 
an  upward  effect  on  the  components  of  M3.  In  particular,  sizeable  inflows  into  overnight 
deposits and money market fund shares/units, as well as a substantial inflow into repurchase 
agreements,  appear  to  have  driven  monetary  developments  in  August.  The  inflow  into 
repurchase agreements mainly reflected secured lending in the interbank market, which was 
increasingly settled via central counterparties that are allocated to the money-holding sector. 
Overall, M3 growth was driven in particular by the increase in the annual growth rate of M1 
from 1.0% in July to 1.7% in August and the increase in the annual growth rate of marketable 
instruments.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On the counterpart side, the annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations and to 
households in August, both adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, remained unchanged 
from July, at 2.2% and 2.7% respectively. Taking the appropriate medium-term perspective, 
trends in broad money and loan growth have broadly stabilised over recent months. Overall, 
the underlying pace of monetary expansion thus remains moderate. 
The  situation  of  the  banking  sector  calls  for  particular  attention,  taking  into  account  the 
interplay  between  sovereign  risk  issues  and  banks’  funding  needs.  As  we  have  done  on 
previous  occasions,  the  Governing  Council  urges  banks  to  do  all  that  is  necessary  to 
reinforce their balance sheets, to retain earnings, to ensure moderation in remuneration, and 
to turn to the market to strengthen further their capital bases. Where necessary, they should 
take  full  advantage  of  government  support  measures,  which  should  be  made  totally 
operational,  including  the  possibility  in  future  for  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility 
(EFSF) to lend to governments in order to recapitalise banks.  
To sum up, based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council 
decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Inflation has remained elevated and 
incoming information has confirmed our view that inflation is likely to stay above 2% over the 
months  ahead  but  to  decline  thereafter.  A  cross-check  with  the  information  from  our 
monetary analysis confirms that the underlying pace of monetary expansion continues to be 
moderate.  Ongoing  tensions  in  financial  markets  and  unfavourable  effects  on  financing 
conditions are likely to dampen the pace of economic growth in the euro area in the second 
half of this year. The economic outlook remains subject to particularly high uncertainty and 
intensified downside risks. At the same time, short-term interest rates remain low. It remains 
essential  for  monetary  policy  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
ensuring  a  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Such anchoring is 
a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  its  contribution  towards  supporting  economic 
growth and job creation in the euro area. A very thorough analysis of all incoming data and 
developments over the period ahead is warranted. 
Turning to fiscal policies, with financial market uncertainty remaining high, all governments 
need to take decisive and frontloaded action to bolster public confidence in the sustainability 
of  government  finances.  All  euro  area  governments  need  to  show  their  inflexible 
determination  to  fully  honour  their  own  individual  sovereign  signature  as  a  key  element  in 
ensuring  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Countries  under  joint  EU-IMF 
adjustment  programmes  as  well  as  those  particularly  vulnerable  to  financial  market 
conditions  need 
fiscal 
consolidation and the strengthening of domestic fiscal frameworks, and they need to stand 
ready to take any additional measures that may become necessary owing to the evolution of 
their situation.  
Fiscal consolidation and structural reforms must go hand in hand to strengthen confidence, 
growth  prospects  and  job  creation.  The  Governing  Council  therefore  urges  all  euro  area 
governments to decisively and swiftly implement substantial and comprehensive structural 
reforms. This will help these countries to strengthen competitiveness, increase the flexibility 
of  their  economies  and  enhance  their  longer-term  growth  potential.  In  this  respect,  labour 
market reforms are key, with a focus on the removal of rigidities and the implementation of 
measures  which  enhance  wage  flexibility.  In  particular,  we  should  see  the  elimination  of 
automatic  wage  indexation  clauses  and  a  strengthening  of  firm-level  agreements.  More 
generally,  in  these  demanding  times,  moderation  is  of  the  essence  in  terms  of  both  profit 
margins  and  wages.  These  measures  should  be  accompanied  by  structural  reforms  that 
increase competition in product markets, particularly in services – including the liberalisation 
of  closed  professions  –  and,  where  appropriate,  the  privatisation  of  services  currently 
provided  by  the  public  sector,  thereby  facilitating  productivity  growth  and  supporting 
competitiveness. At the same time, the Governing Council urges all euro area governments 
to fully implement all aspects of the decisions they took on 21 July 2011. 
implement  all  announced  measures 
to  unambiguously 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Let  me  close  with  some  personal  remarks.  This  is  my  last  press  conference  following  a 
meeting of the Governing Council. I remember my first press conference, eight years ago, as 
if it were yesterday. I want to tell you that it has been a great pleasure to have this regular 
dialogue  with  the  press,  with  all  of  you.  We  have,  together,  each  of  us  with  our  different 
responsibilities,  analysed  the  European  and  global  situation  throughout  these  years.  We 
were never in calm waters. But for more than four years now, we have been experiencing 
turbulent waters, storms, unexpected hurricanes. In demanding times, regular, real-time and 
transparent communication is more important than ever. The channels of national, European 
and  global  communication  which  you  are  responsible  for  are  crucial  for  the  appropriate 
functioning  of  markets,  for  the  correct  understanding  of  economists  and  economic  agents, 
and  for  the  information  of  the  people  of  Europe,  our  fellow  citizens,  to  whom,  as  an 
independent  institution,  we  are  accountable.  Eight  years  ago  the  concept  of  a  press 
conference  immediately  after  the  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  was  still  considered  a 
bold innovation. Today it is part of the global state of the art. And the Vice-President and I 
also have to thank you for that. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
