Andreas Dombret: Rules and tools for capturing systemic risk 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the SVP Global’s European Symposium on “Perspectives on the European 
Distressed and Credit Markets”, London, 4 October 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
This symposium could hardly be more topical. Following on from this morning’s contributions 
on  the  subject  “Perspectives  of  the  European  Distressed  and  Credit  Markets”,  I’m  very 
pleased to have the opportunity to look beyond the credit markets and add a new dimension 
to the debate, namely that of regulation. 
The financial and economic crisis rocked the very foundations of the global financial system 
and ruthlessly exposed the weaknesses in international financial supervision. In areas where 
there are a large number of road accidents, the authorities put up additional safety barriers, 
bring in speed limits or divert the traffic. On top of that, each car has to have a regular MOT. 
After the major crash that was the financial crisis, many people fear that regulatory reform 
will lead to an unfettered spiral of regulation. I disagree.  
As  a  central  banker,  I  would  assess  the  impact  of  this  reform  package  by  whether  we 
succeed  in  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  Ideally,  the  result  of  this 
process  should  be  enduring  and  should  not  trigger  any  negative  side-effects,  eg  on 
competition.  But  there  is  a  long  and  arduous  road  ahead.  And  it  will  entail  costs  for  the 
banking industry. 
2. 
The international reform agenda: what have we already achieved? 
As an example of what we’ve already achieved, take the key points of the reform framework 
already  adopted  at  international  level:  “Basel  III”,  a  far-reaching  new  global  regulatory 
standard for bank capital adequacy and liquidity that was endorsed by the G20 at the end of 
2010. Its objective, in brief, is to better equip banks for weathering future stress situations. 
The European Commission recently published a legislative proposal to translate the Basel III 
rules into EU law, which will affect over 8,000 banks. The Commission cited the IMF’s loss 
estimates in its justification for this move. According to these estimates, crisis-related losses 
between 2007 and 2010 incurred by European banks alone were close to €1 trillion, or 8% of 
EU GDP.1 Given this situation, we must not postpone the global implementation of Basel III; 
that would send out the wrong message. The Bundesbank welcomes the fact that Europe is 
playing a pioneering role in this area. The other G20 countries would be wise to avoid delays 
to  or  departures  from  the  agreed Basel  III implementation  plan.  In  the  interests  of  stability 
and competitiveness, ensuring that the Basel III rules come into force at the same time in all 
countries is just as vital as ensuring that they are implemented consistently at a global level. 
In Europe, Basel III will apply to all credit institutions. Going back to the traffic analogy, all 
road users have to follow the highway code. The fact that another cornerstone of the reform 
agenda  affects  the  large,  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  or  SIFIs,  is  therefore 
                                                 
1   European Commission,  press release:  Commission  wants stronger and more responsible banks in  Europe, 
20 July 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
very  important.  They  are  the  heavy  goods  vehicles  –  or  even  the  super  trucks  –  of  the 
banking world; their size means that any accident they are involved in can cause gridlock on 
the roads. These SIFIs will have to obey stricter rules in future; one of the most important is 
that  SIFIs  will  have  to  meet  higher  capital  requirements  than  all  other  market  participants. 
Some say that the regulatory reforms are forcing small banks to pay for the mistakes of the 
big banks. I disagree. 
Many  countries  felt  impelled  to  rescue  some  of  these  institutions  with  huge  sums  of 
taxpayers’ money in order to avoid a systemic collapse. The problem of banks that are “too 
big to fail” and the moral hazard that this entails are to be remedied by establishing a specific 
supervisory  framework  for  SIFIs.  We  should not  forget  that,  just  as  cars  primarily  serve  to 
transport people, the financial sector also has to serve the real economy.  
In July 2011 both the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability 
Board, or FSB, published a consultative document2 which is an important step forward. The 
member  states  have  agreed  on  a  methodology  for  assessing  the  systemic  importance  of 
banks. In addition, special capital surcharges above the minimum capital requirements will 
be imposed on SIFIs. The more systemically important a bank is, the higher its SIFI capital 
surcharge  will  be.  After  evaluating  the  more  than  40  commentaries  to  the  consultative 
document it is clear now that the Basel Committee has done a very good job. Aside from a 
few  adjustments  and  updates  to  the  underlying  data,  which  are  already  underway,  the 
document is ready to be submitted to the G20 for approval at their summit this November. 
The agenda for financial reform also regards a consistent implementation and surveillance of 
international  standards  as  crucial  to  its  success.3  FSB  peer  reviews  are  one  means  of 
achieving this. FSB members are to ensure that standards are implemented as strictly and 
consistently as possible following the principle “leading by example”, ideally triggering a “race 
to the top”. 
One example of this kind of peer review are the remuneration standards. No one, not even 
the  managers  themselves,  would  dispute  that  misaligned  remuneration  systems  for  bank 
managers  at  least  played  a  role  in  worsening  the  financial  crisis.4  The  G20  countries 
therefore  adopted  the  FSB  Principles  for  Sound  Compensation  Practices  as  early  as 
September  2009  and,  on  this  basis,  specific  implementation  standards.5  The  Basel 
Committee has since incorporated the disclosure requirements specified in these standards 
into  Pillar  3.6  Germany  was  one  of  the  first  countries  to  implement  the  standards.  The 
Regulation Governing Remuneration at Institutions, or Instituts-Vergütungsverordnung, came 
into  force  in  Germany  on  13  October  2010.  This  regulation  takes  account  of  both  the 
international regulations and the subsequent EU provisions. 
                                                 
2   BCBS:  Global  systemically  important  banks:  Assessment  methodology  and  additional  loss  absorbency 
requirement, July 2011. 
3   See FSB, Framework for Strengthening Adherence to International Standards, January 2010. 
4   This  is  confirmed  by  one  source  from  the  banking  industry  itself:  IIF,  Compensation  in  Financial  Services: 
Industry Progress and the Agenda for Change, March 2009. 
5   FSB, FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices, April 2009; FSB, Principles for Sound Compensation 
Practices – Implementation Standards, September 2009. At EU level, provisions governing remuneration were 
incorporated  into  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  III  and  corresponding  guidelines  on  compensation 
requirements. 
6   BCBS: Pillar 3 disclosure requirements for remuneration, July 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3. 
What progress have we made on … 
3.1 
... restructuring and resolution regimes for SIFIs? 
However,  the  international  supervisory  community  still  has  much  to  do  in  the  field  of 
restructuring and resolution procedures for SIFIs. In a free market economy, we cannot and 
should not ever fully rule out the possibility of a specific financial institution collapsing. The 
insolvency procedures in individual countries have during the crisis proved to be insufficient  
– particularly for cross-border institutions. We must make it possible for SIFIs to undergo an 
orderly  exit  from  the  market  without  the  use  of  taxpayers’  money.  Only  credible  resolution 
mechanisms  can  eliminate  the  market’s  rescue  expectations  –  which  means  that  having 
systemic importance must not be tantamount to being “too big to fail”.  
The more than 60 sometimes opposing commentaries in the FSB’s public consultation7 on 
this issue have been carefully reviewed. The resulting “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution 
Regimes  for  Financial  Institutions”  will  very  likely  be  ready  for  endorsement  by  the  G20 
leaders in Cannes. Yet, the G20 countries must take account of the fact that the European 
Commission is currently working on a legislative proposal8 on the same issue. In my view, we 
need to strive for international consistency between the G20- and the European framework. 
Germany  was  quick  off  the  mark  in  creating  possibilities  for  winding  up  SIFIs.  The 
Restructuring Act, or Restrukturierungsgesetz, which recently came into force in Germany, 
provides for all banks – regardless of their size – to be either restructured or wound up in an 
orderly procedure. In addition, the whole of the banking sector has to pay a bank levy which 
feeds into a Restructuring Fund so that the sector shares in the costs of overcoming future 
financial crises. It is estimated that the bank levy will channel around €1 billion per year into 
the  Restructuring  Fund,  and  the  levy  rate  to  be  paid  by  each  institution  depends  on  its 
systemic importance – an aspect which I expressly welcome. 
However,  it  is  vital  that  we  do  not  overburden  financial  institutions.  I  am  therefore 
unenthusiastic  about  the  plans  to  introduce  a  financial  transaction  tax.  Much  as  I  get  the 
moral  arguments  for  such  a  tax,  setting  the  wrong  incentives  often  means  that  the  harm 
caused  in  practice  outweighs  the  intended  benefits  –  particularly  when  measures  are  not 
introduced internationally, which encourages business to migrate. We need to have a level 
playing field across the globe, especially within the EU. 
3.2 
… the shadow banking system? 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  how  would  a  traffic  authority  react  if  there  was  a  sudden  spate  of 
accidents involving vehicles that weren’t – and still aren’t – obliged to have an MOT purely 
because they aren’t technically defined as cars? This is more or less what happened with the 
shadow  banking  system  in  the  financial  sector.  First,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  bank-like 
transactions  outside  of  the  banking  sector  should  not  be  regarded  as  a  bad  thing  per  se. 
There  can  be  advantages  to  certain  activities  being  carried  out  by  specialist  enterprises 
rather than banks. The shadow banking system should not be considered the “villain of the 
piece”, and I would not wish to support this standpoint. 
                                                 
7   FSB,  Effective  resolution  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  –  Recommendations  and  Timelines, 
Consultative Document, July 2011. 
8   EU press release of 6 January 2011, Commission seeks views on possible EU framework to deal with future 
bank failures. The Commission announced that it intended to make the legislative proposal before the summer 
of 2011; it is now expected to be published this autumn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The crux of the matter is to ensure that financial supervisors have sufficient information to 
promptly  identify  risks  to  financial  stability  originating  from  the  shadow  banking  system. 
Containing risks emanating from the shadow banking system might well require regulatory 
changes. In particular, we need to avoid regulatory arbitrage at all costs, since we can expect 
activities and risks to be shifted away from the banking system in response to stricter bank 
regulation. I would therefore like to stress my support for greater transparency. Of course, I’m 
aware that reporting obligations engender costs. But, as every economist knows, there’s no 
such thing as a free lunch. And I believe that the objective of financial stability justifies the 
costs  that  such  obligations  entail.  The  relevant  authorities  should  therefore  be  entitled  to 
impose reporting obligations on market participants – and this means all players that could 
be a source of systemic risk. 
So  which  participants  are  we  talking  about  here?  The  FSB  defines  the  shadow  banking 
system as “credit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking 
system”. These can be non-bank entities, such as special purpose vehicles or money market 
funds. Hedge funds can also constitute links in a chain of intermediation outside the banking 
sector – after all, they collect funds and invest them in bonds and other credit instruments, 
including derivatives. But the FSB’s definition of the shadow banking system isn’t confined to 
participants; it also includes activities, such as securitisation. 
Work towards addressing the issue of shadow banking is progressing well; this autumn, the 
FSB will submit recommendations to the G20 in a report focusing primarily on closing gaps 
and  loopholes  in  transparency  and  regulation;  these  recommendations  will  have  to  be 
fleshed  out  next  year.  Again,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  oversight  and  possible 
subsequent regulation of the shadow banking system is primarily about the systemic risk that 
can arise in the shadow banking system. 
4. 
What still needs to be done? 
There  is  another  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  financial  crisis:  The  pre-crisis  supervisory 
approach of focusing mainly on individual institutions proved insufficient. It has to go hand in 
hand  with  macroprudential  oversight,  which  aims  to  identify  systemic  risk  and  regulatory 
loopholes at an early stage so that countermeasures can be taken swiftly. To achieve this, 
we need, in particular, to improve the underlying information and data – as the situation in 
the shadow banking system illustrates. 
In  keeping  with  the  international  standards  that  are  currently  being  elaborated,  Germany’s 
governing  coalition  proposed  expanding  the  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  German 
financial system at its central bank. I understand that work is underway to draw up legislation 
based on this proposal – a development which I very much support. 
Central banks are especially suited to the macroprudential aspects of financial supervision 
because they already have a duty to maintain a constant overview of market developments. 
As  I’ve  already  mentioned,  central  banks  are  also  aware  of  the  side  effects  of  regulatory 
initiatives.  For  example,  central  bank  experts  analysed  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  the 
transition to Basel III in detail before it was adopted.9 An extended study on the implications 
of the planned SIFI capital surcharges provisionally concluded that they can be expected to 
have  only  a  relatively  small  negative  impact  on  economic  growth  beyond  the  planned 
implementation period. 
                                                 
9   Macroeconomic Assessment Group (FSB / BCBS), Final Report, Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the 
transition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements, Bank for International Settlements (December 2010) at 
http://www.bis.org/publ/othp12.htm. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  my  view,  it  is  generally  important  to  look  beyond  the  traditional  confines  of  supervision 
when  addressing  these  issues.  This  applies,  for  example,  to  the  question  of  how  recent 
international regulatory initiatives are affecting the refinancing conditions of domestic banks. 
It is not only the credit rating agencies’ assessments which suggest that factors specific to 
individual institutions – such as their capital, balance sheet structure and business models – 
are the primary influence on banks’ individual financing costs. Such factors tend to outweigh 
the effects not only of the macroeconomic setting, for example, but also of the costs caused 
by regulation. All in all, the large number of regulatory proposals, as well as their complexity 
and  the  rather  unfinished  nature  of  some  initiatives,  make  it  difficult  to  assess  the  overall 
picture. Ultimately, however, the competitive situation and bank-specific factors are likely to 
be the decisive factors affecting banks’ refinancing conditions. 
5. 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Central banks and financial supervisory authorities face a difficult balancing act. On the one 
hand,  in  view  of  the  objective  of  safeguarding  stability,  the  institutional  and  regulatory 
framework has to be tightened and harmonised internationally. On the other, the new rules 
must not overburden market participants, and the effects of regulation, including its impact on 
competition, must be evaluated from a macro perspective. 
However,  the  supervisory  rules  can  only  set  the  framework  in  which  financial  transactions 
take  place.  Market  participants  themselves  must  do  their  part  to  strengthen  the  financial 
system – by improving risk management, for example. 
I would propose that we central bankers and financial supervisors work through our agenda 
item  by  item  and  you,  as  representatives  of  large  institutional  investors,  work  through  the 
tasks  that  you  have  to  address.  Since  we  drive  on  the  same  roads,  so  to  speak,  I  look 
forward to continuing this dialogue with you. A good dialogue is the best way of avoiding any 
more collisions in future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
