Peter Praet: The (changing) role of central banks in financial stability 
policies 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  14th  Annual  Internal  Banking  Conference,  organised  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Chicago and the European Central Bank, Chicago, 10 November 2011. 
 More than four years have passed since the onset of the financial crisis. Over these years, 
central banking functions have been stretched to the limits. 
Recent  developments  demonstrate  how  fragile  our  financial  system  remains,  not  only 
because of debt legacy but more worrisome because of its mere design. 
The  public  debt  crisis  in  a  number  of  advanced  economies  is  also  raising  fundamental 
questions about the role of public debt instruments in our financial system. 
Looking backwards, one can say that disciplining mechanisms in debt markets have clearly 
failed,  often  as  a  result  of  mutually  reinforcing market  and  government  failures.  Too  much 
debt  in  the public sector  is  the  symptom  of  both  ineffective  public  governance  and  market 
discipline.  Budget  rules,  such  as  the  no-bail-out  provision  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  didn’t 
contain the accumulation of debt. In the banking sector, the disciplining role of sight-deposits 
has  proven  to  be  time-inconsistent  in  the  presence  of  the  negative  externalities  that  the 
failure of a large institution would create. Although the role of monetary policy in the build up 
of the crisis is still debated, it does influence in an important way the price of leverage.1 
Lack of attention and preparedness to tail-events has been particularly striking. While central 
banks have always paid attention to the possibility of extreme events in payments and post-
trade infrastructures, too little efforts have been devoted to the prevention of the conditions 
under which emergency liquidity assistance would be provided to the financial sector. Other 
authorities were concerned, such as supervisors at the micro-level and ministries of finance. 
The necessity of constructive “ambiguity” was also invoked to keep a low profile. 
Achieving  and  preserving  financial  stability  has  now  become  a  key  policy  objective  in  our 
societies.  Building  up  separate  macroprudential  policy  functions  is  considered  one  of  the 
main elements of the wide ranging policy reforms in pursuit of this objective. The idea is to 
entrust  the  authority  in  charge  of  macroprudential  policy  with  the  task  of  monitoring, 
identifying and mitigating systemic risks as they emerge. Macroprudential policy, by taking a 
system-wide  perspective,  thereby  complements  microprudential  policy  which  is  mainly 
oriented  towards  ensuring  the  health  of  individual  institutions  or  markets.  But  the  way  to 
organise  the  macroprudential  function  is  still  work  in  progress  in  particular  on  the  role  of 
central banks. There are different views on how to design such a framework and how they 
should  relate  to  central  banks,  their  governance  structures  and  their  monetary  policy 
strategies.2 This is essentially related not only to the difficulty to define financial stability in an 
operational way (contrary to price stability), but also to the number of authorities concerned 
(central  banks,  bank  supervisors,  insurance  supervisors,  market  supervisors,  competition 
authorities,  consumer  protection  authorities,  Ministries  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Justice, 
                                                 
1  See Adrain, T. and H.S. Shin (2011), “Financial intermediaries and monetary economics”, in: B. M. Friedman 
and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, Elsevier. 
2  See Nier, E., J. Osinkski, L.I. Jacome and P. Madrid (2011), “Institutional models for macroprudential policy”, 
IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/18, November and also Eichengreen, B. et al. (2011): “Rethinking central 
banking”, Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
is 
in 
likely 
light  of 
important 
to  become 
resolution  authorities)  and  to  the  variety  of  possible  tools  often  assigned  to  several 
objectives.  
Central  banks  should  undoubtedly  assume  important  roles  in  macroprudential  policies. 
Central banks bring in essential expertise in analysing financial systems from an aggregate 
perspective. They also have proper incentives to mitigate systemic risk ex ante since central 
banks typically have to deal with the fallout from financial crises. Last but not least, involving 
central  banks  in  macroprudential  policy  should  foster  effective  coordination  between 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  policies  in  a  manner  that  preserves  their  autonomy. 
Policy  coordination 
the  strong  mutual 
interdependencies  between  the  financial  and  the  real  sectors  and  thereby  between  both 
policy functions. I will come back to policy coordination later on. 
A wide range of different approaches exist to institutionalise central banks’ role in the new 
financial  stability  frameworks.  The  different  approaches  taken  largely  respond  to  country-
specific circumstances. A “one size fits all” approach simply doesn’t exist. This is also in the 
European Union where individual countries have adopted different approaches. 
At  the  level  of  the  European  Union  as  a  whole,  a  new  financial  supervisory  architecture 
became  operational  at  the  beginning  of  2011.  It  includes  three  new  European  supervisory 
authorities (ESAs) for banking, insurance and securities markets – which aim to strengthen 
micro-prudential supervision – and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) responsible 
for  macroprudential  oversight.  The  ECB  ensures  the  Secretariat  function  for  the  ESRB  
– without prejudice to the principle of central bank independence –, and is also in charge of 
providing  analytical,  statistical,  administrative  and  logistical  support  to  this  new  EU  body. 
Moreover,  central  bankers  hold  the  majority  in  the  ESRB’s  decision-making  body,  the 
General Board.3 The main tasks of the ESRB are to monitor and assess systemic risk and to 
issue warnings and, where necessary, recommendations to the relevant policy-makers which 
are not legally binding but depend on the principle of “comply or explain”. 
However, the ECB’s contribution to achieving and maintaining financial stability does not rely 
exclusively on its responsibilities for an effective functioning of the ESRB. Obviously, the way 
the ECB conducts monetary policy also impacts on financial stability. Some people call for 
vast changes in central banks’ institutional setup and their monetary policy strategies with a 
view  to  pursue  price  stability  and  financial  stability  as  coequal  objectives.  In  my  view,  by 
contrast, major changes in the institutional and strategic framework of monetary policy are 
not necessary. But business as usual in central banking will not do it either.  
Business as usual would imply adhering to what has become known as the “Jackson Hole 
consensus”. According to this pre-crisis consensus view, central banks should only respond 
to  asset  prices  and  financial  imbalances  to  the  extent  that  they  affect  the  shorter  term 
inflation forecast.4 If financial imbalances still emerged, central banks should follow a “mop 
up” or “cleaning” strategy after the burst of the bubble. Maintaining price stability is simply the 
best central banks could do to contribute to financial stability.  
                                                 
3  The General Board consists of the following members with voting rights: the President and the Vice-President 
of the European Central Bank (ECB); the Governors of the national central banks of the Member States; one 
member  of  the  European  Commission;  the  Chairperson  of  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA);  the 
Chairperson of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA); the Chairperson of the 
European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA);  the  Chair  and  the  two  Vice-Chairs  of  the  Advisory 
Scientific Committee (ASC) of the ESRB; the Chair of the Advisory Technical Committee (ATC) of the ESRB; 
and  the  following  members  without  voting  rights:  one  high-level  representative  per  Member  State  of  the 
competent national supervisory authorities (the respective high-level representatives shall rotate depending on 
the item discussed, unless the national supervisory authorities of a particular member State have agreed on a 
common representative), and the President of the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC) of the Ecofin, 
which is the only representative of finance ministries. 
4  See, for example, Bernanke and Gertler (1995) and the response by Cecchetti et al (2000). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  previous  mainly  microprudential  orientation  of 
This view implied a strict separation between monetary policy and financial stability policy. 
Central  banks  had  been  well  aware  of  the  importance  of  financial  stability  for  the  smooth 
conduct of monetary policy and of their varied responsibilities in ensuring financial stability on 
the other hand. Yet, the importance of the possible implications of financial imbalances were 
underestimated  and  not  systematically  integrated  in  the  analytical  apparatus  supporting 
monetary policy. This flaw in the intellectual underpinning misled central banks to downplay 
their  financial  stability  functions  and  supported  the  general  view  that  monetary  and 
microprudential policy can be conducted separately, with monetary policy instruments geared 
towards achieving macroeconomic stability, and financial regulation and supervision aimed at 
preserving financial stability in the spirit of Tinbergen’s policy assignment rule.5 
However,  it  has  become  clear  by  now  that  this  strictly  dichotomous  view  is  flawed  since 
monetary policy and financial stability policy are intrinsically linked to each other, given the 
powerful  interactions  between  financial  and  economic  conditions.  As  the  recent  crisis 
forcefully  demonstrated, 
financial 
regulation and supervision proved unable to curb the tendency of the ever more complex and 
opaque financial system to generate excessive amounts of systemic risk. The unravelling of 
the  associated  financial  imbalances  brought  about  the  biggest  financial  and  economic 
disaster since WWII which, in turn, severely impacted on the conduct of monetary policy. As 
the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanisms  were  affected,  central  banks  had  to  take 
unconventional measures. 
The  crisis  also  taught  us  that  “cleaning”  rather  than  “leaning”  against  financial  imbalances 
can  simply  become  too  costly  to  be  ignored  ex  ante.  In  addition,  we  also  learned  not  to 
underestimate the moral hazard associated with the asymmetry in the previous consensus 
view of monetary policy. 
In the light of the obvious breakdown of the Jackson Hole consensus, the view has become 
more popular that under certain circumstances, central banks may be well advised to actively 
lean against the emergence of financial imbalances in order to mitigate systemic risk and the 
associated longer term risks to price stability and economic welfare.6 
At  the  ECB,  we  have  always  emphasised  one  tool  which  helps  us  maintain  a  medium  to 
long-run orientation: the “monetary analysis”. The monetary analysis is one element of the 
ECB’s  two-pillar  framework  –  in  addition  to  the  economic  analysis  –  for  the  regular 
assessment of risks to price stability. But we have always foreseen that monitoring monetary 
and  credit  developments  is  also  part  of  an  overall  framework  for  addressing  asset  price 
misalignments. The analysis of low-frequency trends in money and credit developments has 
always been associated with the emergence of imbalances, because it allows us to assess 
risks to price stability well beyond the typical shorter term forecast horizons.  
This notwithstanding, for what concerns the monetary policy strategy, significant efforts are 
still to be undertaken in building up an appropriate analytical framework linking the various 
sources of systemic risk to economic outcomes over long policy horizons. This may robustify 
the ECB’s two-pillar monetary policy strategy to better cope with risks of highly uncertain, low 
probability but very costly events such as financial crises.  
A better understanding of the transmission channels that exist between the financial and the 
real sectors is therefore of the essence. While some headway has been made in studying 
non-conventional transmissions channels such as the risk-taking channel, other issues still 
                                                 
5  See F. S. Mishkin (2010): “Monetary policy strategy: Lessons from the crisis”, Paper presented at the ECB 
Central Banking Conference, “Monetary policy revisited: Lessons from the crisis”, Frankfurt, November 18–19. 
6  See, for example, Borio, C. (2011): “Central banking post-crisis: What compass for unchartered waters?”, BIS 
Working Paper No. 353, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
insurance  against  adverse  macroeconomic  and/or 
remain  work  in  progress.7  For  example  what  is  the  influence  of  interest  rates  on  risk 
tolerance?  What  is  the  interrelation  between  funding  and  market  liquidity?  What  are  the 
determinants of the leverage cycle, and which role is played by financial innovation? Given 
the  complexity  of  the  issues  involved  one  has  to  admit  that  the  development  of  an 
operational  framework  linking  monetary  policy  to  the  various  forms  of  systemic  risk  is 
extremely complicated and poses severe intellectual challenges.  
Financial  stability  risks  may  also  arise  from  excessive  monetary  policy  activism  geared 
toward  buying 
financial  stability 
conditions. For instance, central banks might threaten future economic and financial stability 
if they keep policy rates too low for too long in the aftermath of a crisis.8 In the context of the 
present crisis, the risk of missing the right time to exit from unconventional monetary policy 
measures offers a case in point. 
In  the  light  of  these  insights,  it  should  be  clear  that  monetary  policy  cannot  do  it  alone. 
Financial  stability  should  mainly  be  pursued  by  microprudential  and  macroprudential 
policies.9 
Also, in order to achieve price and financial stability a pairing of appropriate policies by all 
relevant  authorities  is  indispensable.  One  avenue  might  be  to  give  an  agent  the  specific 
mandate to assess the financial stability impact of regulatory and tax changes when relevant. 
However,  policy  coordination  is  in  general  not  easy.  Coordination  might  be  impaired  by 
problems of time inconsistency when the objective functions of the authorities involved may 
differ.  For  instance,  governments  may  succumb  to  the  temptation  to  respond  to  electoral 
pressures or lobbying activities from the financial industry. A macroprudential authority might 
also  be  endowed  with  too  much  discretion  in  its  instrument  setting.  These  potential  policy 
failures  may  therefore  favour  a  more  rules-based  approach  towards  the  macroprudential 
policy. This applies both to policy tools addressing the time dimension of financial stability 
(like  counter-cyclical  capital  requirements  or  loan-to-value  ratios)  and  tools  relating  to  the 
cross-section  dimension  (like  surcharges  for  SIFIs,  leverage  ratios,  bank  merger  and 
acquisition  policy,  limits  to  business  organisation,  etc.).  As  the  financial  system  is  highly 
adaptive one has to be aware that only controlling the time dimension of financial stability is 
not  sufficient.  For  example,  similar  rates  of  asset  price  inflation  in  the  real  estate  markets 
may not imply similar risks to financial stability even when occurring at similar points in the 
financial cycle. A proper assessment of systemic risk always requires a thorough analysis of 
borrower and lender fragilities as well as of the whole intermediation process.  
Policy coordination is also particularly challenging in a currency union when credit cycles (eg. 
real  estate  cycle)  are  not  synchronized.  Moreover,  monetary  integration  in  the  European 
Monetary  Union  has  advanced  at  a  much  higher  pace  than  the  integration  of  financial 
stability  and  fiscal  policies.  An  important  step  forward  was  allowing  the  ESRB  to  make 
country-specific  recommendations  but  a  further  strengthening  of  its  powers  might  still  be 
needed. 
                                                 
7  For  a  recent  overview  see  Adrain,  T.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2011),  “Financial  intermediaries  and  monetary 
economics”, in: B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, Elsevier. 
8  See, for instance, Maddaloni, A. and Jose-Luis Peydro (2011), “Bank risk-taking, securitisation, supervision, 
and  low  interest  rates:  Evidence  from  the  Euro-area  and  the  U.S.  lending  standards”,  Review  of  Financial 
Studies, Vol. 24, No. 6. 
In fact, such a division of labour receives support from latest research conducted within the Macroprudential 
Research (MaRS) network of the European System of Central Banks. Under most circumstances it turns out 
that  financial  imbalances  are  better  addressed  by  macroprudential  policy  measures  (e.g.,  counter-cyclical 
loan-to-value ratios) rather than by a monetary policy “leaning against the wind”. See Beau, D., L. Clerc, and 
B.  Mojon  (2011):  “Macro-prudential  policy  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy”,  Banque  De  France, 
Occasional Papers No. 8, and Lambertini, L., C. Mendicino, and M. T. Punzi (2011): “Leaning against boom-
bust cycles in credit and housing prices”, Banco de Portugal, Working Paper 8/11. 
9 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
To  conclude,  challenges  are  immense  both  on  the  technical  side  as  well  as  on  the 
governance side to safeguard financial stability. In essence, the task consists in reinforcing 
disciplining  mechanisms  in  private  and  public  debt  markets.  There  is  a  need  to  act  in  a 
number  of  areas.  Central  banks  have  an  important  role  to  play  as  coordinator/  facilitator/ 
initiator. They also have the proper incentives to do so in order not to overburden monetary 
policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
