Norman T L Chan: Excessive leverage – root cause of financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the  Economic  Summit  2012  “Roadmap  to  Hong  Kong  Success”,  Hong  Kong,  9  December 
2011. 
 1. 
Following  the  outbreak  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  in  2008,  it  is  now  generally 
recognised that serious imbalances in the global economy have been built up over the past 
10–20 years. There are many different theories on how these imbalances came about and 
on  their  contributions  to  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  A  commonly  held  theory  in  western 
countries attributes the global imbalances and the financial crisis in the US and Europe to the 
so-called  “savings  glut”  in  the  Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs),  especially  China.  In 
other  words,  the  problems  and  miseries  being  experienced  in  the  US  and  Europe  arose 
because the EMEs not only over-exported, over-saved and under-spent, but also have been 
lending  moneys  at  very  low  rates  to  the  industrial  economies  and  have  financed  the 
consumer booms and fuelled the credit and asset bubbles there. I do not subscribe to this 
view. However, given the complexity of the global financial system, it is very hard to try to 
come up with a grand theory that can fully explain what has gone so badly wrong that it has 
resulted in the worst Global Financial Crisis since the World War II. Having said that, I would 
still  venture  to  identify  the  root  cause  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  In  so  doing,  it  is 
inevitable that one has to simplify and generalise matters considerably so as to draw some 
conclusions. 
2. 
In  my  view,  regardless  of  the  causes  of  the  global  imbalances,  both  the  Global 
Financial Crisis in 2008 and the current European sovereign debt crisis have been driven by 
excessive  leverage  in  private  and  public  sectors  alike  in  the  major  industrial  economies, 
resulting in dangerously high levels of debts. In 1980, the average debt level of the 18 major 
industrial  economies  was  at  165%  of  GDP.  In  2010,  the  ratio  rose  drastically  to  320%  of 
GDP.  In  the  US,  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  remained  stable  at  150%  from  mid-1950s  to  early 
1980s, but the ratio rose sharply and steadily to slightly under 300% in 2010.  
3. 
Why  did  households,  companies  and  governments  borrow  so  much  more  than 
before  in  the  past  decade  or  two?  Some  put  the  blame  on  financial  innovation,  such  as 
securitisation, which made it much easier to obtain finance or gearing. Some suggest that 
declining  real  interest  rates  in  the  US  and  other  major  economies  since  the  1990s  have 
increased the ease and affordability of debts and leverage. Some others believed that the 
Great Moderation beginning in the mid-1980s has nurtured a euphoric view that economic 
prosperity, job security, income growth and continued rise in asset prices could be taken for 
granted.  This  has  encouraged  both  individuals  and  companies  to  take  greater  risks  to 
enhance financial returns. Besides, companies have an incentive to rely more on debt than 
equity because many countries permit the deduction of interest expenses from tax liabilities. 
These are all causes of the problem of over-leveraging. 
4. 
But there is another cause of this over-leveraging problem that I would like to draw 
to your attention – it is market failure. By this I mean the market had been sending out wrong 
signals  to  the  borrowers,  be  they  households,  companies  or  governments,  that  increased 
indebtedness was nothing to worry about. A prime example is the experience of Greece. In 
the 1990s, the Greek Government had to pay on average 1,550 basis points above German 
bunds  for  10-year  funding  from  the  capital  market.  However,  after  Greece  joined  the 
Eurozone,  the  market  supplied  funds  to  Greece  at  interest  rates  very  close  to  the  triple-A 
rated Germany. In 2005, 10-year Greek sovereign bonds were traded at only about 20 basis 
points  above  German  bunds.  Because  of  this  extended  period  of  serious  market  failure, 
Greek nationals and their government were under the wrong impression that they would be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
able to roll over their debts perpetually. Of course, we now know that such an illusion could 
lead to catastrophic consequences. 
5. 
The  ever  increasing  leverage  in  the  US  and  Europe  eventually  came  to  an  end 
following  the  burst  of  the  US  housing  and  credit  bubbles  in  2007,  triggering  the  Global 
Financial Crisis. In response, the US and other major industrial countries introduced a series 
of extraordinary measures from late 2008, which successfully stabilised and prevented the 
collapse  of  the  global  financial  system.  However,  these  extraordinary  measures,  including 
quantitative easing policies, do not seem to be very effective in stimulating economic growth 
and creating jobs. In the US, for example, the sharp fall in housing prices has significantly 
damaged  household  balance  sheets.  Such  kind  of  balance-sheet  driven  recession  has 
substantially  impaired  the  responsiveness  of  the  economy  to  monetary  stimulus,  as 
consumption  and  credit  growth  will  remain  sluggish  until  household  balance  sheets  are 
repaired. I believe that US households still have some way to go in repairing their balance 
sheets through de-leveraging, before they regain confidence in consumption and investment. 
At  the  same  time,  the  US  fiscal  conditions  have  deteriorated  since  2008  and  this  has 
restricted  the  headroom  for  the  government  to  launch  further  fiscal  packages  to  stimulate 
growth and create jobs. The situation in Europe is in no better than the US. The sovereign 
debt  problems  of  the  Eurozone  have  already  spread  to  Spain  and  Italy,  and  have  even 
threatened  the  stability  of  the  debt  markets  in  the  core  countries  of  the  Eurozone.  It  now 
appears that the rescue package announced by the European Union in late October is no 
longer sufficient, and hence the market is expecting the European Union Summit tonight to 
introduce stronger and more effective solutions to resolve the European debt problems. The 
situation remains highly unstable and the market is showing little confidence in the European 
leaders’ resolve and ability to bring an end to the debt crisis. The situation is very worrying. 
6. 
Once a country gets into the habit of spending beyond its means, relying on debts to 
finance its expenses and rolling over old debts with new ones, it is a matter of time that the 
country  would  run  into  trouble.  The  only  way  out  is  to  reduce  debt  and  endure  the 
excruciating  pain  of  de-leveraging.  While  leveraging  or  borrowing  normally  produces 
intoxicating  feel-good  effects,  such  as  job  and  income  growth,  buoyant  consumption  and 
investment,  strong  credit  demand,  asset  value  appreciation  and  business  boom,  de-
leveraging  has  exactly 
the  opposite  effect,  creating  very  unpleasant  and  painful 
consequences. The injection of ample liquidity into the banking system by central banks to 
suppress interest rates is certainly helpful in alleviating the pain of those debtors who can 
refinance their loans with lower interest rates and thus reduce their interest and repayment 
burden.  However,  many  households  in  the  US  are  denied  access  to  cheaper  and  falling 
mortgage rates because they are in negative equity and cannot afford to refinance. Lower 
interest rates are thus of little help to them. Moreover, pushing interest rates to close to zero 
also  deprives  prudent savers  of  the  interest  income  that  they  can  earn  from  their savings. 
Many savers, including pensioners, have to cut back spending because of the sharp fall in 
their recurrent interest income. This will offset the impetus to consumption and investment 
provided by the near-zero interest rates. 
7. 
Some academics believe that the effectiveness of the quantitative easing policy in 
the US is also undermined by the fact that the US property market has not yet bottomed out 
and  US  households  need  to  continue  to  de-leverage.  Many  policy  measures  introduced  in 
the US recently aim to reduce the pain of households in a falling property market and slow 
down  the  process  of  foreclosures.  Even  though  property  prices  have  already  fallen 
significantly, more than 50% in some places according to anecdotal reports, potential buyers 
still prefer to wait as they fear that prices may fall further once the huge stock of foreclosed 
properties are put back to the market or when interest rates return to more normal levels. In 
other words, while measures to slow the downward adjustment of the property market are 
well-intentioned  and  have  their  political  merits,  they  could prolong  the time  needed  for  the 
market to reach a new equilibrium or find the so-called clearing price. In my view, this may 
delay a true recovery of the property market and create a negative drag on the repair of US 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
households’ balance sheets, making the recovery of consumer confidence farther and farther 
away. 
8. 
(a) 
Finally I would like to share with you a few policy lessons learnt from the latest crisis: 
Households,  companies  and  governments  alike  must  avoid  excessive  leverage  or 
borrowing.  This  may  be  easier  said  than  done  as  leveraging  can  bring  transient 
prosperity  and  euphoria  to  everyone.  To  avoid  committing  such  mistakes  and  the 
pains of de-leveraging in the future, we must stay alert and discipline ourselves not 
to over-spend; 
Beware of wrong signals resulting from market failures, which may induce borrowers 
to wrongly believe that access to low-cost funds will never be cut off and prosperity 
and affluence funded by borrowing is legitimate and sustainable; 
Strengthen market regulation to reduce the risk of market failures. Major reforms to 
be  introduced  include  enhancing  the  policy  functions  for  maintaining  financial 
stability;  implementing  appropriate  counter-cyclical  regulatory  measures  when 
necessary;  strengthening  bank  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  (Basel  III);  and 
increasing the regulation of credit rating agencies. Most of these reforms are still at 
various  stages  of  implementation  and  may  not  be  ready  remedies  for  the  current 
debt crisis in the US and Europe; 
Understand  and  accept  that  there  is  no  clever  or  easy  way  out  of  the  trap  of 
excessive  leverage.  While  innovative  financial  derivatives  may  facilitate  borrowing 
and leverage, or even conceal them, no financial engineering can reduce debt and 
achieve  de-leveraging  without  the  required  reduction  in  public  spending  and  the 
economic and social pains that the de-leveraging process generates. 
While  the  government  should  step  in  to  help  if  the  financial  system  or  the  whole 
economy  gets  into  trouble,  this  is  feasible  only  if  the  government  has  the  fiscal 
headroom to foot the bill. If the government itself is already heavily indebted or has 
incurred a huge amount of debts after bailing out the private sector or introducing 
measures to stimulate the economy, the market may start to doubt the sustainability 
of  its  fiscal  position.  A  case  in  point  is  Ireland,  where  the  government  incurred  a 
huge amount of liabilities by bailing out the banking system, calling into question the 
government’s fiscal sustainability and triggering the sovereign debt crisis.  
The crises unfolding in the US and Europe are not new to Asia. This region had its 
share of suffering during the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997/1998. In Hong Kong we 
went through almost seven years of painful economic adjustment after the burst of 
the  property  bubble  in  late  1997.  Our  economy  shrank  by  8.7%  in  five  quarters. 
Unemployment  increased  fourfold  from  2.1%  to  8.5%.  Property  prices dropped  by 
70% in six  years while  the general price level fell by 15% in five  years. The hard 
lesson we learned from our experience is to face the reality, take the pain in stride 
and  do  whatever  it  takes  to  restructure  the  economy,  to  increase  productivity  and 
improve competitiveness. If this can be done, it should be possible to return to the 
track of sustainable economic growth. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  5
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 