Anand Sinha: Legislative reforms – strengthening the banking sector 
Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Financial 
Planning  Congress’11,  organised  by  the  Financial  Planning  Standards  Board  of  India, 
Mumbai, 18 December 2011.  
 Inputs  provided  by  P  R  Ravi  Mohan,  G  S  Hegde,  Subrat  Das  and  Smt  Sadhana  Varma  are  gratefully 
acknowledged.  
Justice  (Retd.)  Shri  B.N.  Srikrishna,  Chairman,  Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms 
Commission (FSLRC), Shri Swarup and Shri Malegam (members of FSLRC), Shri Yogesh 
Agarwal,  Chairman,  Pension  Fund  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority  (PFRDA),  Shri 
Mudholkar and Shri Chikermane, and other delegates. It is an honour and privilege for me to 
address you today, on some of the key issues with regard to “Reforms in the Banking Sector” 
and I thank Financial Planning Standards Board of India for this opportunity. This Financial 
Planning  Congress  comes  at  a  very  opportune  time  when  the  far  reaching  exercise  of 
rewriting financial laws is being undertaken by the FSLRC and I commend the organisers for 
their efforts in putting together this Congress. 
Introduction 
I. 
Empirical  research  shows  that  better  developed  financial  systems  accelerate  economic 
growth and shrink income inequality by disproportionately increasing the earnings of lower 
income  families1  i.e.  enabling  growth  with  equity,  which  is  so  vital  for  our  country.  A  well 
developed  financial  system  will  require  sound  legislative  framework  because,  legislation  is 
the foundation on which institutional frameworks stand. To be effective, legislation not only 
needs  to  be  unambiguous  and  fair  but  also  should  be  robust  enough  to  address  all  the 
existing concerns while, at the same time, being flexible enough to accommodate the new 
needs on account of evolving environment. 
Role of legislation in the context of economic development in general and the financial sector 
in  particular,  is  an  interesting  area  of  study.  It  has  been  argued  that  strong  legal  systems 
foster development of sophisticated financial markets and intermediaries2, which enhances 
the  economy’s  ability  to  manage  risk  and  eventually  lead  to  economic  growth.  Measures 
such as robust contract enforcement and disclosure discipline go a long way in strengthening 
the financial systems. 
Every  legislation  has  a  time  dimension  and  its  relevance  has  to  be  seen  vis-à-vis  this 
dimension. With the changing environment, practices and processes change, necessitating a 
review  of  extant  legislations.  This  holds  all  the  more  true  for  an  area  like  financial  system 
where changes are rapid and frequent. The dynamic nature of legislation was well articulated 
when  Aristotle  said  “Even  when  laws  have  been  written  down,  they  ought  not  always  to 
remain unaltered”.  
India  is  said  to  be  one  the  most  over-legislated  countries.  We  have  numerous  Acts  and 
regulations,  some  of  which  date  back  decades.  As  times  have  changed  quite  significantly 
since they were enacted, there is an emphatic need to update and fine tune them so as to 
enhance  their  relevance  for  the  rapidly  changing  financial  landscape.  It  is  a  welcome  step 
                                                 
1   Levine, Ross. 
2   Levine, Ross; Law, Finance and Economic Growth; Journal of Financial Intermediation 8 (1999). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 that FSLRC has been constituted to look into and revise the existing financial legislation. In 
this context, the role of this Congress is very important in facilitating deliberations. 
Financial sector policies comprise a set of policies, such as: 
– 
Prudential policies to ensure safety and soundness of the financial system (financial 
stability) 
Regulatory and Supervisory policies 
Depositor and Consumer protection policies 
Financial Inclusion policies 
Other  policies  for  ensuring  adequate  supply  of  credit  to  economically  important 
sectors i.e. SMEs, Infrastructure, etc. and 
Market structure and Competition 
– 
Prudential  policies  comprise  macro  prudential  and  micro  prudential  policies  aimed  at 
ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  Collectively,  both  macro  and 
micro  prudential  policies  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  which  would  facilitate 
efficient allocation of resources to the real economy. While financial stability is a necessary 
condition  to  ensure  other  objectives  of  financial  sector  policies  as  well  as  for  growth  and 
macroeconomic  stability,  it  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  to  attain  these  objectives.  Other 
financial sector policies will have to be implemented for balancing numerous considerations 
such as growth imperatives, flow of credit to disadvantaged and preferred sectors, consumer 
protection, financial inclusion and equity, etc. At times, it becomes extremely challenging to 
balance  these  considerations  and,  if  adequate  care  is  not  taken  in  designing  and 
implementing the other financial sector policies, financial stability may be adversely affected. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  that  a  set  of  sound  financial  sector  policies  (including  prudential 
policies)  backed  by  sound  legislation  must  be  adopted  to  deliver  the  various  objectives  – 
growth with equity in the backdrop of financial stability. 
II. Recent amendments carried to various financial sector laws 
Before  I  delve  into  some  of  the  key  issues  requiring  legislative  review,  I  list  some  of  the 
enactments  and  amendments  that  have  been  made  to  the  various  Acts  during  the  last 
decade to highlight the dynamic nature of legislation. 
i. 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 was amended in 2006 to provide legality to certain 
OTC derivative transactions and also to give explicit regulatory powers to Reserve 
Bank over derivatives and money market instruments. 
The  Banking  Regulation  Act,  1949  was  amended  in  2007  for  removing  the  lower 
limit  prescribed  in  maintenance  of  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  by  banks  and 
conferring wide powers on RBI in stipulating the SLR requirements for banks and to 
control liquidity in the market.  
The  State  Bank  of  India  Act,  1955  was  amended  in  2007  for  enabling  transfer  of 
ownership  from  RBI  to  Government  of  India  and  again  in  2010  to  provide  for 
enhancement of capital, issue of preference shares, raise capital by public issue or 
preferential  allotment  or  private  placement  or  rights  issue;  and  to  issue  bonus 
shares to the existing shareholders, etc. 
The  State  Bank  of  India  (Subsidiary  Banks)  Act,  1959  was  amended  in  2007  to 
facilitate enhancement of capital, raise resources from the market and raise capital 
through rights issue. 
The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970 and 
1980  were  amended  in  2006  to  enable  nationalised  banks  to  issue  preference 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
shares in accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank and to raise 
capital  by  preferential  allotment  or  private  placement  or  public  issue,  with  the 
approval of the Reserve Bank. 
The  Negotiable  Instruments  Act,  1881  was  amended  in  2002  to  introduce  the 
concepts of “electronic cheque” and “cheque truncation” by expanding the definition 
of “cheque”. 
The  Securities  Contracts  (Regulation)  Amendment  Act,  2007  was  passed  with  a 
view  to  providing  a  legal  framework  for  enabling  listing  and  trading  of  securitised 
debt instruments, including mortgage backed debt. 
The Government Securities Act, 2006 was enacted to consolidate and amend the 
laws  relating  to  Government  securities  and  its  management  by  the  RBI.  The  Act 
simplifies the procedure for settlement of claims of legal representatives, provides 
for  admissibility  of  computerised  information  as  evidence,  contains  provisions  for 
effectively  dealing  with  misuse  of  Statutory  General  Ledger  (SGL)  accounts  and 
facilitates pledging and hypothecation of Government securities.  
The  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Act,  2007  was  enacted  empowering  the 
Reserve  Bank  to  regulate  and  supervise  payment  and  settlement  systems  of  the 
country and provides a legal basis for multilateral netting and settlement finality.  
The Prevention of Money- Laundering Act, 2002 was enacted as a follow up to UN 
General  Assembly  resolution  in  1998,  calling  for  adoption  of  national  anti-money 
laundering  legislations  and  programmes  by  member  states.  The  Act  provides  for 
preventing  money  laundering  and  connected  activities,  enables  confiscation  of 
proceeds  of  crime,  setting  up  of  agencies  and  mechanisms  for  co-ordinating 
measures for combating money laundering, etc.  
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act (FCRA), 2010 was enacted by repealing 
the  erstwhile  Foreign  Contribution  Regulation  Act,  1976  mainly  to  rectify  several 
deficiencies found in the previous Act. The new Act covers the electronic media and 
organizations, other than political parties, apart from entities in the prohibited list in 
FCRA, 1976. 
The  Credit  Information  Companies  (Regulation)  Act,  2005  empowers  the  Reserve 
Bank to regulate the Credit Information Companies (CIC)  and to facilitate efficient 
distribution of credit and matters concerned or incidental to it.  
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
III. 
The road ahead: legislative reforms in the banking sector 
Multiple acts – need for consolidation 
Banks are regulated and supervised under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Public Sector 
Banks viz., State Bank of India, State Bank of India subsidiary banks and Nationalized Banks 
which are constituted under different statutes are governed by their respective statutes and 
by  some  of  the  provisions  of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act.  The  provisions  relating  to  the 
ownership and management of banking companies as contained in the Banking Regulation 
Act are not applicable to the public sector banks. Co-operative Banks are constituted by the 
respective State Co-operative Societies Acts or by the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act 
and  the  provisions  of  Banking  Regulation  Act  are  made  applicable  to  them  with  certain 
modifications. 
Since the origins of the banks have been historically different, they continue to be governed 
by the respective statutes as well as other general laws. Each of the statutes was crafted in a 
contemporaneous setting, reflecting the needs and concerns of the time. Therefore, almost 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
all  the  statutes  were  amended  from  time  to  time  to  reflect  changes  in  circumstances  and 
context prevailing at that time. 
There is a strong case for reviewing these legislations and recasting them for a number of 
reasons. First, prudential regulations are ownership neutral. However, the fact that different 
banks are governed by different laws has resulted in an uneven playing field which needs to 
be  addressed.  For  example,  while  amendments  were  carried  out  to  enable  SBI,  SBI 
subsidiary  banks  and  nationalised  banks  to  issue  preference  shares,  though  at  different 
points of time, banks in private sector cannot issue preference shares as the amendments to 
the BR Act is still to be carried out. Similarly, while bilateral netting in the event of liquidation 
is  admissible  for  private  sector  banks  governed  by  the  Companies  Act  and  the  normal 
bankruptcy laws, the position in this regard for public sector banks, SBI and its subsidiaries is 
not clear in law, as liquidation, if at all, of such banks would be as per the Notification to be 
issued  by  the  Government  in  this  regard.  Second,  a  single,  harmonized  and  uniform 
legislation applicable to all banks will provide transparency, comprehensiveness and clarity 
and provide ease of regulation and supervision to the Reserve Bank. Third, there is also a 
need to sort out the conflicts and overlaps between the primary laws governing the banking 
sector and other applicable laws. For example, the Competition Act, 2002 (as amended by 
the  Competition  (Amendment)  Act,  2007)  is  in  conflict  with  the  provisions  of  the  Banking 
Regulation  Act,  SBI  Act  and  other  statutes  dealing  with  the  amalgamation  of  banks. 
Consolidation of banking sector laws and laying down of common regulatory framework for 
commercial banks are issues requiring serious consideration. 
Management of banks 
Management  of  banking  institutions  by  fit  and  proper  persons  plays  an  important  role  in 
securing the safety of banks. While RBI has power, under certain circumstances, to remove 
the managerial and other persons from the banks and appoint additional directors, etc., these 
powers  may  not  be  effective  in  handling  a  situation  where  supersession  of  the  Board  is 
warranted. RBI, currently, does not have the power to supersede the Board of Directors of a 
banking  company.  In  the  Banking  Laws  Amendment  Bill,  2011  amendments  are  being 
proposed for conferring such a power on RBI, for being used with appropriate safeguards. 
With  respect  to  public  sector  banks,  by  way  of  amendments,  similar  powers  have  been 
vested in the Central Government, which has the majority shareholding in those banks. 
The  shareholding  pattern  also  plays  a  vital  role  with  respect  to  the  management  of  banks 
and, therefore, it is necessary that shareholders having sizeable holding should also be fit 
and proper. RBI has, by way of regulatory prescriptions, implemented an acknowledgement 
procedure.  In  the  2011  Bill,  statutory  provisions  are  being  proposed  for  obtaining  prior 
permission of RBI for acquiring 5% or more of the equity shares or voting rights in a banking 
company.  At  present,  a  deadlock  situation  arises  if  a  group  of  persons  acquires  sizeable 
equity or voting rights in a bank without following the acknowledgement procedure. There is 
no statutory power for directing disgorgement of shares and as such, if any such acquisition 
takes place, it may result only in contravention in provisions of BR Act. The main object of 
preventing the management of a bank from being captured by persons who are not fit and 
proper for holding such sizeable interest will not be achieved. RBI should, therefore, have the 
power to direct, by order, at any time that persons who are not fit and proper to hold such 
equity or voting power in contravention of these provisions, shall not have voting power. The 
2011 Bill proposes to confer such power on RBI. This will help prevent unscrupulous persons 
from exercising control over banks. 
Deposit collection activity 
Currently, collection of deposits from members/shareholders is not treated as acceptance of 
public deposits. This is a matter of serious concern, particularly, with respect to Co-operative 
Societies.  Deposits  are  accepted  by  enrolling  members  on  tap  and  by  collecting  nominal 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
amounts from them, exposing such depositors to serious risks. Banking Regulation Act does 
not apply to such co-operative societies and they are outside the regulatory purview of the 
Reserve Bank. It is necessary to plug this important loophole. Unless deposits are received 
from members who have voting rights, the deposits have to be treated as public deposits and 
the exemption from the provisions of Banking Regulation Act should not be made applicable. 
Every entity that accepts deposits from persons having no voting rights has to be treated as 
deposit  accepting  entity  and  should  be  regulated  as  such  by  RBI.  RBI  should  have  the 
discretion to determine the level and intensity of regulation and supervision depending upon 
the risk to the system from such entities. 
Financial conglomerates 
In India, banks are entitled to carry on certain financial activities under the bank subsidiary 
model. Some banks have formed subsidiaries to carry on securities and insurance business. 
The  performance  of the  subsidiaries  affects  the  balance  sheet  of  the bank.  On  account  of 
varied  activities  carried  on  by  the  entities  in  the  group  which  fall  within  the  regulatory 
jurisdiction of multiple regulators, the risk to the system as a whole posed by such financial 
conglomerates is difficult to assess. These raise systemic issues and RBI as the regulator of 
banks  needs  to  be  empowered  to  obtain  information,  with  respect  to  each  of  the  entities 
functioning under the umbrella of a bank. The 2011 Bill proposes to confer such powers on 
RBI  to  get  information  with  respect  to  such  entities.  This  ought  to  be  pursued  in  the  new 
legislative framework also. 
Non-operative bank holding company 
The traditional theories of economies of scale and scope support bigger entities. In India, we 
need  bigger  banks  to  finance  our  very  large  infrastructure  needs  and  also  large  industrial 
projects.  Thus,  while  there  are  advantages  in  growing  big  and  handling  multiple  activities, 
nobody knows where exactly the tipping point is, when the bigness of size starts becoming a 
disadvantage.  The  crisis  has  highlighted  the  downside  of  having  “Too  Big  to  Fail”  entities. 
Very  big  and  complex  entities  pose  supervisory  issues  to  the  regulators  and  pose  serious 
systemic  risks.  So  we  need  to  ensure  that  structures  are  not  complex  and  that  there  are 
effective resolution mechanisms to ensure orderly winding up of these systemically important 
entities, in case of crisis. 
It has been suggested that a non-operative bank holding company structure may be useful to 
deal with financial conglomerates as this greatly mitigates the risks spilling over from other 
entities in the Group. While the functional regulator of each subsidiary of the non-operative 
holding company may regulate and supervise the business of the subsidiary concerned, the 
non-operative holding company needs to be regulated on the lines of a bank and needs to be 
placed under the regulatory and supervisory control of RBI. Appropriate legislative measures 
are necessary for operationalising this model. 
Apart  from  the  regulatory  issues  in  the  above  model,  there  are  other  challenges  to  be 
addressed.  One  of  them  is  related  to  placing  public  sector  banks  under  such  holding 
companies. Another is the impact of taxation on the transfer of shares of the subsidiaries to 
the  holding  company.  Unless  adequate  tax  relief  is  granted,  it  will  be  difficult  for  existing 
banks to come under the holding company structure. 
Stamp duty issues 
In India, there are certain issues with respect to stamp duty on documents. One of the major 
hurdles facing the development of the securitisation market is the stamp duty structure. It can 
add  up  to  a  substantial  cost  as  there  are  differentiated  duty  structures  in  different  states. 
While  some  states  have  recognised  the  special  nature  of  securitization  transactions  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
reduced the stamp duties, other states still operate at stamp duties as high as 5% to 12% for 
transfer of secured receivables.  
Concerns  about  stamp  duties  have  also  been  raised  in  the  context  of  the  proposed 
subsidiarisation  of  foreign  banks.  The  broader  objective  of  proposed  subsidiarisation  of 
foreign  banks  is  to  promote  financial  stability  in  India  and  this  requires  harmonisation  and 
simplification of stamp duty structure across the country. 
Minimum capital requirements 
The  minimum  capital  prescribed  in  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  for  banks  is  too  low  and 
Reserve Bank is prescribing the minimum capital requirement in case of private sector banks 
from  time  to  time  (currently  banks  should  have  a  minimum  networth  of  Rs.  300  crores). 
Minimum capital requirements prescribed under the “Ownership and Governance” guidelines 
and  that  prescribed/  being  prescribed  for  new  banks  in  private  sector  are  way  above  the 
current provisions of the Act. It would, therefore, be more appropriate to empower Reserve 
Bank  to  stipulate  the  capital  requirements  and  other  quantitative  parameters  from  time  to 
time, instead of prescribing quantitative limits in the respective Acts. 
Migration to IFRS 
As part of the efforts to ensure convergence of the Indian Accounting Standards (IAS) with 
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the  formats of financial statements 
will  undergo  changes  consequent  to  the  introduction  of  IFRS.  Further,  whenever  banks 
introduce  new  types  of  capital  instruments,  etc.  these  will  have  to  be  appropriately 
incorporated in the format. Therefore, Reserve Bank should be empowered to prescribe the 
format of the balance sheet, profit and loss account, etc. given in Third Schedule of the B. R. 
Act. 
Bilateral netting issues 
Various banks had requested RBI to allow bilateral netting of counterparty credit exposure, in 
respect  of  interest  rate  and  foreign  exchange  derivatives,  and  gold.  The  legal  position 
regarding bilateral netting is not unambiguously clear in case of banks established by special 
statutes  [like  SBI  Act,  Banking  Companies  (Acquisition  and  Transfer  of  Undertakings)  Act, 
etc.]. Amendments to a large number of enactments particularly in a synchronised manner 
may be practically difficult. Enacting a single legislation which covers all aspects of banks’ 
functioning,  while  possibly  providing  differential 
for  corporate 
governance issues on account of ownership differences may make the legislative framework 
more efficient.  
framework 
legislative 
Bank resolution 
The significance of effective resolution mechanism for promoting financial stability as well as 
consumer  protection  cannot  be  underestimated.  The  legal  framework  should  address  the 
resolution  mechanism  from  a  practical  point  of  view  and  must  have  at  least  the  following 
characteristics: 
 
 
 
 
 
Early intervention before insolvency  
Speed of intervention/resolution  
Ability to transfer or merge operations  
Effective write-down of shareholders’ rights  
Protection of on-going business  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  addition  to  banks,  the  resolution  mechanism  should  address  resolution  of  other 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFIs)  also.  Post  crisis,  globally,  there  have 
been  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  resolution  framework  of  Financial  Market  Infrastructures 
(FMIs)  and  other  entities  in  the  financial  sector.  The  resolution  mechanism  should  also 
include a framework for resolution of NBFCs and entities operating payment systems. Swift 
and simple procedure for quick resolution, particularly, that of systemically important entities 
– global and domestic, is necessary. Under the evolving international framework it would be 
required  of  jurisdictions,  to  have  adequate  resolution  framework  as  per  international 
standards. The key attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes were adopted by the Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  Plenary  and  endorsed  by  G-20  leaders  at  the  Cannes  Summit  and 
these  are  an  essential  component  of  the  package  of  policies  to  reduce  the  risks  of  moral 
hazard  and  the  potential  for  systemic  disruption  associated  with  Systemically  Important 
Financial Institutions (SIFIs). This will require legislative changes and administrative actions.  
The  powers  of  RBI  for  effective  resolution  of  regulated  entities  from  this  perspective  need 
enhancement. 
Mergers 
Voluntary mergers and transfers help consolidation in financial sector and pave the way for 
stronger  financial  institutions  to  rescue  the  weaker  ones.  Such  voluntary  measures,  while 
saving the constituents of weaker institutions, provide business opportunity to the stronger 
ones  to  spread  their  presence  in  different  geographies.  The  BR  Act  empowers  RBI  to 
sanction  a  scheme  for  voluntary  amalgamation  of  banking  companies.  However,  such  a 
power is not available with respect to cooperative banks. Considering the challenges faced in 
quick  resolution  of  failed  cooperative  banks,  certain  enabling  provisions  in  the  BR  Act 
facilitating  RBI  to  sanction  a  scheme  for  takeover  of  banking  assets  and  liabilities  of  a 
cooperative  bank  by  commercial  banks  would  be  desirable.  Partial  merger  of  certain 
businesses or assets and liabilities of banks also may need to be examined. 
One  of  the  issues  that  could  complicate  the  resolution  of  banks  through  mergers  and 
transfers  due  to  the  sensitivity  of  the  process  is  the  applicability  of  competition  law.  An 
enterprise proposing to enter into a combination via a merger or an amalgamation is required 
to notify the Competition Commission, and the Commission has been allowed up to 210 days 
to decide on it before the default clause kicks in. The 2011 Bill tries to address this issue. 
Consumer protection and globally compatible secrecy laws 
For  speedy  redressal  of  consumer  grievances,  RBI  has  framed  the  Banking  Ombudsman 
Scheme by statutory directions under the BR Act. The Scheme is working satisfactorily. 
Secrecy of customer information is a principle of common law which is practiced in India also 
by banks, and recognized by courts. Statutory basis for this has to be provided, by clearly 
setting  forth  the  exceptions  relevant  to  the  present  requirement  of  preventing  money 
laundering  and  cross  border  financing  of  undesirable  activities.  The  law  should  strike  a 
balance between the privacy rights of the customer and the need to share crucial information 
with law enforcement agencies and other regulators, both domestic and foreign. In matters of 
crime and proceeds of crime, the larger public interest would outweigh the private interests of 
individuals. Appropriate amendments may have to be carried out in the BR Act to provide a 
statutory  backing  for  the  banking  secrecy  laws  and  the  limits  on  the  privacy  of  customers 
should be laid down. 
Protection  is  required  in  the  law  to  the  regulators  with  respect  to  the  information  collected 
from the regulated entities including its assessment and analysis made by the regulators or 
supervisors and the correspondence related to such information. 
In larger public interest, the law should enable sharing of information with other regulators, 
both domestic and overseas, for mutual benefit. The recent crisis has demonstrated the need 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
for  such  cooperation.  The  absence  of  specific  protection  to  the  information  held  by  the 
regulators  whether  collected  from  the  regulated  entities  or  from  other  regulators  impedes 
sharing of information. Our laws have to be globally compatible and specific exemption from 
disclosure  needs  to  be  provided  in  this  regard.  Disclosure  of  sensitive  information  could 
compromise the effectiveness of regulation and supervision. Further, unless the secrecy laws 
in our jurisdiction are compatible with global standards, it will not be possible to receive from, 
or  share  information  with,  overseas  regulators.  Appropriate  provisions  may  have  to  be 
inserted in the RBI Act and the BR Act in this regard. 
Conclusion 
IV. 
Financial  sector  is  a  very  important  segment  of  the  economy  and  has  direct  bearing  on 
growth  and  prosperity.  Strong  financial  systems  need  strong  legal  systems  which  provide 
unambiguous and fair legislation. The financial system in India including banking, insurance, 
capital,  taxation,  etc.  has  many  regulators,  each  having  a  separate  mandate.  This  blend 
raises  pertinent  concerns.  First,  financial  system  is  still  characterised  by  considerable 
fragmentation  of  legislation,  regulation  and  enforcement.  Second,  policy  related  frictions 
might arise from the diversity of different legislations and the overlapping of the regulatory 
jurisdictions. Third, there might be a risk of legal arbitrage among financial jurisdictions. 
A need has been continuously felt to rewrite and streamline the financial sector laws, rules 
and regulations and to bring them in harmony with the requirements of India’s fast growing 
financial  sector.  The  current  legislations  were  drafted  in  the  contemporaneous  setting  and 
have had to be amended from time to time to incorporate changes in the milieu. Enacting 
new  law  or  amending  old  law  is  a  continuous  process  to  remain  aligned  to  changing 
circumstances. In the emerging scenario, the task of preventing financial risks has become 
more  important  and  challenging.  Amid  global  economic  worries,  this  is  an  enormous  task 
which, on completion, would immensely benefit the financial sector in India and economy at 
large. A sound legal framework may help deter imprudent risk-taking by financial institutions 
and reduce systemic risks. Revision of banking sector laws should also be motivated by the 
recognition  that  the  banking  sector  has  been  and  remains  a  critical  factor  not  only  for 
accelerating India’s growth but also for making it inclusive. Harmonising of financial sector 
legislations, rules and regulations has, therefore, become imperative. I have tried to give my 
views  from  regulatory  and  financial  stability  perspective.  I  hope  you  all  will  benefit  from 
today’s discussions. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
