Barry Whiteside: The changing nature of financial markets surveillance 
Opening address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the APEC 
Financial  Regulators  Training 
(FTRI)  Market  Supervision  Seminar,  Nadi, 
5 December 2011. 
Initiative 
 Salutations 
Distinguished Guests,  
Participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
BULA VINAKA AND A WARM WELCOME TO YOU ALL.  
I would like to especially welcome those who have travelled to Fiji from abroad! I understand 
we  have  some  participants  from  as  far  away  as  Tanzania,  India,  China,  northern  and 
southern Asia, as well as our friends from the Pacific Islands. 
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to Nadi for the APEC Financial Regulators 
Market Supervision Seminar. We are indeed honoured to help host this important week-long 
regional training initiative for securities regulators. It is also extremely pleasing to see such a 
great mix of participants from right across our Asia-Pacific region. 
I  thank  the  organizers,  the  ADB  and  the  APEC  Financial  Regulators  Training  Initiative 
Secretariat,  for  inviting  me  to  give  the  opening  address  to  what  ought  to  be  a  stimulating 
seminar.  The  topics  for  your  deliberation  are  impressive  and  will  no  doubt  bring  unique 
insights  into  the  changing  nature  of  financial  markets  surveillance.  Do  try  not  to  let  the 
surroundings distract you from this purpose! 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  timing  of  this  seminar  is  pertinent,  given  the  economic  and 
financial  environment  with  which  we  are  all  confronted  at  the  moment.  Set  against  the 
backdrop  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  increased  insider  trading,  and  the  structural 
problems facing the crisis-hit EU economies, the importance of constructing and harmonising 
preventative market surveillance rules and disseminating this in regional training is critical for 
us all.  
trading  and 
trading.  Cross-border 
Addressing the pressing need for market surveillance training in emerging economies 
Please  allow  me,  this  morning,  to  briefly  share  with  you  why  market  supervision  initiatives 
such as this are of paramount importance to developing nations, like Fiji.  
Over  the  years,  the  Asia-Pacific  region  has  witnessed  vast  changes  in  the  nature  of 
securities 
increased 
exponentially and so has the complexity of products offered.  
History,  however,  has  proven  that  financial  innovation  in  an  ineffectively  regulated 
environment  provides  an  avenue  for  market  manipulation,  and  precedes  excessive  risk-
taking and market failures.  
It has therefore become critically important that macro-prudential surveillance is continuously 
updated  in  line  with  the  evolving  nature  of  the  securities  market,  in  order  to  safeguard  its 
integrity and efficiency. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  will  all  agree  that  we  are  living  in  a  time  where  the  world  is 
becoming rapidly smaller due to technological change. The speed at which information and 
the  volume  of 
trade  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
money can move across borders continues to be enhanced, even in our smaller economies 
here in the Pacific. 
Therefore,  collaboration  between  the  securities  regulators  of  our  countries,  sharing  of 
information and knowledge and just learning from one another, has to form a vital part of our 
market surveillance. 
Intervention  and  institutional  oversight  by  the  designated  securities  regulators  in  our 
respective  countries  is  a  necessity  for  the  sustainability  and  efficient  operation  of  our 
securities markets.  
In  Fiji,  this  responsibility  falls  on  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji.  We  have  the  mandate  of 
maintaining a stable, sound and internationally reputable financial system, which from 2009 
included the securities market. 
While  our  financial  institutions  and  banking  supervision  framework  and  expertise  have 
progressed alongside global banking sector developments, the expertise required to deliver 
effective supervision in our securities market is not as mature. This, in the main, has to do 
with  the  developmental  pace  and  conditions  of  our  securities  market.  As  a  result,  market 
surveillance has been reactive rather than preventive.  
I believe that I speak not only for Fiji, but for many of our smaller fellow nations as well, in 
saying that the technical topics which will be addressed over the next five days will further 
develop  our  supervisory  expertise  and  help  harmonise  our  surveillance  standards  with  the 
more developed economies. 
Managing and containing risks is key to our market surveillance. The increasing complexity 
of  investment  products  and  the  potential  threat  of  people  “beating  the  system”,  and  its 
ramifications  on  market  stability,  provide  ample  rationale  for  financial  institutions  and 
supervisory bodies to accord greater attention to risk-management practices.  
For supervisors, an appropriate risk-based supervision framework is essential to enable us to 
keep up with the dramatic changes in the risk profile structure of the product market and risks 
assessment of financial institutions. 
Focus areas of the seminar 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  next  few  days  will  provide  exciting  learning  and  networking 
opportunities for all participants and we are fortunate that we have with us presenters and 
speakers who are highly qualified and well experienced in their respective organisations. 
You  will  be  identifying  and  discussing  the  latest  developments  in  the  regulation  of  market 
intermediaries within the Asia-Pacific region. A critical part of any seminar is the sharing of 
your own experiences, views and ideas. I urge you to discuss the issues widely and utilise 
the tremendous experience of your resource people who have taken time out to be here.  
It is important that we keep abreast of changes that are always occurring in our markets. For 
developing economies, like most of ours, the changes will bring their own sets of challenges 
and,  as  securities  regulators,  we  need  to  ensure  that  we  address  these  challenges  while 
taking advantage of the benefits they offer.  
Technology  is  playing  a  vital  role  in  every  aspect  of  financial  activity  globally  and  has 
transformed the securities industry. Even in our region we are witnessing secondary market 
trading moving to electronic platforms.  
Fiji  witnessed  this  with  our  very  own  South  Pacific  Stock  Exchange  just  last  year.  Broker-
dealers  are  now  using  powerful  computer  systems  and  sophisticated  applications  to 
electronically send and receive market data, research reports and company information.  
For  most  markets  and  market  professionals,  the  internet  has  enhanced  communications 
networks. With all these benefits for the market players, we market supervisors are left with a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
definite need to upgrade our market surveillance techniques. I am pleased to note that the 
use of technology to aid in the supervision of market intermediaries will be a topic covered in 
this seminar. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the globalisation of securities markets has had a significant impact on 
the nature and level of trading, as well as the provision of related services.  
As  the  desire  and  capacity  for  cross-border  trading  and  cross-border  services  have 
increased, so has the need to ensure that involved parties are acting properly in performing 
their duties. Proper surveillance of cross-border market professionals and regulated firms is 
critical to the maintenance of the integrity of securities markets. Participants should also look 
forward to learning about, and sharing, various supervisory tools for cross-border supervision 
in the next few days. 
In line with the developments in securities markets, the nature of the products offered by the 
market,  as  well  as  recent  failures  of  related  industries,  it  is  important  for  regulators  to  be 
mindful of real-time risks as well as perceived risks associated with the industry, its products 
and its players. I am pleased that the organizers have included risk-based supervision in the 
seminar program. We need to be always forward-scanning for likely risks in our own markets 
to enable us to effectively minimize or eliminate their negative effects. 
In terms of market conduct, when investors have confidence in the integrity of our markets, 
the economic benefits can be significant and are generally well recognised. Conversely, the 
economic  damage  caused  by  market  misconduct,  such  as  insider  trading  and  market 
manipulation,  can  also  be  significant.  While  it  is  commonly  accepted  that  such  adverse 
activity  can  result  in  a  private  loss  for  investors,  the  public  cost,  which  is  the  harm  to  the 
integrity of the market and to its perception, can lead to changes in broader market behavior 
and  pricing.  These  can  have  an  adverse  flow  on  effect  on  the  economy  at  large.  The 
detection of such misconduct in the stock market will also be addressed in this seminar. 
Closing 
Ladies and gentlemen you have an exciting week ahead.  
In  closing,  I  urge  all  the  participants  to  make  the  best  use  of  this  learning  and  networking 
opportunity to be able to exploit new supervision concepts that can be tailor-made to your 
very own jurisdiction. Please share your own experiences and open yourselves to the views 
and experiences of your colleagues around you. As regulators, we definitely are a stronger 
force if we work together. 
I wish to particularly thank the ADB and APEC for the support that they provide towards such 
training and up-skilling of our people and look forward to your on-going collaboration. Thank 
you also to the resource persons for providing the time to be here. 
Finally, I invite you all, and in particular our overseas visitors, to take the opportunity to see a 
bit  of  our  beautiful  country  whilst  you  are  here.  Do  enjoy  our  local  hospitality!  There  is 
definitely a Fiji way of doing things, which you can find out about from my colleagues who are 
joining you for the Seminar! 
I  now  have  much  pleasure  in  officially  opening  the  ADB/APEC  FRTI  Market  Supervision 
Regional Seminar and wish you all a fruitful and successful programme. 
VINAKA VAKALEVU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
