Duvvuri Subbarao: Challenges to the accounting profession – some 
reflections 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
26th Regional Conference of the Western India Regional Council of the Institute of Chartered 
Accounts of India (ICAI), Mumbai, 16 December 2011. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at this conference of the Western India Regional 
1. 
Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). 
2. 
When  I  got  invited  to  speak  at  this  conference,  at  first  I  was  a  bit  surprised.  I 
wondered why you might be wasting valuable conference time listening to the Reserve Bank 
when  there  is  not  much  in  common  between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  accounting 
profession, except possibly the fact that we both lose sleep when numbers go wrong. I then 
spoke to my staff and realized how wrong I was. We share considerable professional space 
and have several mutual concerns. I will address some of those shared concerns. 
3. 
Before doing so though, I must acknowledge another link between the Reserve Bank 
and the accounting profession through Shri Y.H. Malegam, who has been a Director on the 
Central Board of the Reserve Bank almost continuously since 1994 except for a brief interlude 
of  a  few  days.  Shri  Malegam  is,  by  wide  acknowledgement,  one  of  the  foremost  Chartered 
Accountants  in  India  who  has  set  very  exacting  standards  of  professional  competence,  and 
more importantly, of professional conduct. The Reserve Bank has benefited enormously from 
his vast knowledge of accounting, his understanding of the financial sector and his judgement 
of  the  larger  public  interest.  As  a  profession,  you  can  all  be  proud  of  colleagues  like  Shri 
Malegam who enhance public respect for the accounting profession. 
The accounting profession 
4. 
The development of the accounting profession owes its origin to the emergence of 
the  joint  stock  company  and  the  consequent  separation  of  ownership  from  management. 
This  arrangement  triggered  the  need  for  an  independent  and  informed  opinion  on  the 
accounting  of  the  owners’  funds  entrusted  to  the  management  for  their  stewardship.  The 
“raison  d’être”  of  the  profession  is  consequently  based  on  the  confidence  which  the 
profession enjoys with the investing public, and its continued relevance is essentially tied up 
with retaining this confidence. While initially the profession provided this confidence only to 
the shareholders of joint stock companies, today it provides this assurance to a wider base of 
stakeholders including the government, the banking system, regulators and society itself. 
5. 
At  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  depend  on  the  accounting  profession  for  at  least  two 
reasons.  You  audit  the  Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet  of  course,  and  you  also  audit  the 
balance sheets of commercial banks which we regulate and supervise. 
Reserve bank’s balance sheets 
6. 
Let  me  make  a  brief  comment  here  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet.  The 
balance sheet of the Reserve Bank is different from that of commercial organizations in some 
important respects. Uniquely, the Reserve Bank is statutorily mandated to have two balance 
sheets – one for the Issue Department and the other for the Banking Department. The Issue 
Department  handles  the  task  of  issue,  exchange  and  withdrawal  of  currency  notes.  The 
Banking  Department  maintains  the  deposit  accounts  of  banks  and  of  governments.  The 
rationale  for  building  a  firewall  around  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Issue  Department  is  to 
maintain  the  integrity  of  the  asset  backing  for  the  currency  that  we  issue.  The  firewall 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
ensures that the explicit promise that every currency note carries, which is to pay the bearer 
the  sum  mentioned  therein,  is  honoured  in  the  full  accounting  sense.  Our  other  balance 
sheet,  that  of  the  Banking  Department,  reflects  the  transactions  we  perform  in  our  role  as 
banker to banks and to the Central and state governments. 
7. 
In the Reserve Bank, we are deeply conscious of our responsibility for maintaining 
the integrity of our balance sheets. The Reserve Bank’s balance sheets are analyzed by a 
wide array of stakeholders to study the underlying monetary and macro economic trends so 
as  to  make  informed  decisions.  We  have  an  obligation,  therefore,  to  maintain  the  highest 
standards of clarity, transparency and disclosure, and we try our best to meet this obligation. 
RBI and the accounting profession  
8. 
While  the  financial  statements  of  the  Reserve  Bank  are  subject  to  audit  by  your 
profession, as  the  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the  banking  system,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  a 
major  stakeholder  in  commercial  banks  whose  financial  statements  are  audited  by  you.  In 
our  view,  auditors  are  the  “eyes  and  ears”  of  RBI,  and  we  trust  them  to  alert  us  to  early 
warning  signals  to  assist  us  in  our  supervisory  process.  We  also  encourage  auditors  to 
discuss  any  regulatory  issues  with  RBI  before  finalizing  the  accounts.  Further,  during  the 
process  of  “Annual  Financial  Inspection”  of  banks,  the  inspection  team  interacts  with  the 
auditors to discuss issues of regulatory concern.  
Challenges for the accounting profession 
9. 
As several stakeholders depend upon the accounting profession, the profession too 
has to recognize that it has to continue to inspire the trust and confidence of the stakeholders 
if  it  has  to  remain  relevant  and  value  adding.  In  recent  years,  several  challenges  have 
emerged, both at domestic and global levels which, if not effectively addressed, could erode 
that confidence. Let me address what, in my view, are some of the key challenges. 
Competence  
10. 
First,  the  challenge  of  competence.  With  the  growing  complexity  of  the  financial 
sector  and  the  emergence  of  new  and  sophisticated  financial  instruments,  the  knowledge 
base of the profession needs to keep pace with these emerging practices and innovations. 
This requires, not just a continual review of its curriculum, but more importantly, an active, 
well diversified and constantly updated programme of continuing professional education for 
its  members.  Continuing  professional  education  cannot  be  a  mere  “tick  in  the  box”  or 
determined  by  participation  in  number  of  hours  of  education  or  training,  but  should  be 
evaluated by way of outcomes – upgradation of relevant knowledge and skill sets.  
11. 
Towards  improving  the  skill  set  of  the  accounting  profession,  with  particular 
reference  to  auditing  banks,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  some  initiatives.  We  have 
established a practice of an annual Statutory Auditors’ Conference to apprise the statutory 
auditors of banks on the critical issues in the area of banking regulation and supervision. The 
conference also provides a forum for auditors to give us their feedback on current concerns 
and to suggest any changes to our supervisory and regulatory policies. We have found this 
to be an effective forum for mutual exchange of views, and I hope you likewise have found it 
to be value adding. I am open to suggestions on improving this engagement.  
12. 
I am also happy to note in this context that as a result of your Institute’s initiative, 
India is embarking on convergence with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), 
which would then result in our financial accounting and reporting getting to be world class. As 
you are no doubt aware, IFRSs are largely broad principles rather than detailed rules. Their 
application  requires  judgment  and  possibly  even  lateral  thinking,  especially  in  the  area  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
determining the fair value of financial assets and liabilities. The auditing profession needs to 
improve its skill endowment to facilitate a smooth and efficient convergence with IFRS. 
Globalization 
13. 
The  second  challenge  the  profession  needs  to  reckon  with  is  globalization. 
Globalization implies that countries can no longer afford to remain isolated in so far as their 
operating and legal systems are concerned. For the profession, this gets reflected not merely 
in international accounting and auditing standards but also in a number of other areas like 
education,  ethics,  etc.  I  gather  the  ICAI,  with  its  180,000  members,  is  the  second  largest 
accounting institution in the world. It is not sufficient that the Institute merely responds to and 
adopts  global  standards.  It  should,  in  fact,  go  further  and  actively  participate  in  the 
formulation of these standards.  
14. 
I  am  happy  to  learn  that  the  President  of  ICAI  has  recently  been  elected  as  a 
member of the board of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) and that there is 
an  Indian  member  on  the  IASB.  I  also  want  to  commend  the  Institute  for  its  active 
participation  and  involvement  in  several  international  committees  and  projects  aimed  at 
improving  accounting  systems  and  processes.  I  would  only  urge  that  going  forward,  ICAI 
should proactively take the lead in the formulation of accounting standards in areas where 
we have specific concerns as an Emerging Market Economy (EME).  
15. 
Another task the profession needs to address in regard to managing globalization is 
how  it  will  select,  from  within  its  membership,  persons  of  the  requisite  competence  to 
participate in the global forums, and how it will provide them both financial and professional 
support to make this participation rewarding to them individually and to the profession more 
broadly. Needless to say, the process of selection of persons for representing the Institute in 
international forums should be strictly meritocratic and transparent.  
Information Technology (IT) 
16. 
Next on my list is the challenge of Information Technology. In the past, one of the 
main objectives of audit was ensuring the arithmetical accuracy of financial statements. With 
the advent of IT, this task has now been taken over by machines. This has both nudged and 
facilitated the profession to move up the value chain. The main task of the profession has 
now shifted to judgments of value, and to discharge this task, auditors have to demonstrate 
much  higher  levels  of  maturity,  integrity,  independence  and  balanced  judgment.  The 
development of these qualities will be a major challenge in the future. 
17. 
Let me make a comment with regard to IT in banking. Over the past decade, most 
commercial banks have successfully implemented core banking solutions. This has created 
both  opportunities  and  challenges  for  auditors.  Challenges  come  by  way  of  lack  of  visible 
evidence, risk of undetected system errors and bugs and frauds hidden in a labyrinth of data. 
Retrieving information in the computerized environment and assessing the implementation of 
computer related processes will also be critical to the audit process. Opportunities come by 
way  of  increasing  use  of  Computer  Assisted  Audit  Tools  (CAATs)  to  access  databases 
beneath  the  accounting  software  to  create  queries,  write  reports  and  develop  audit  trails. 
While the profession has risen to the challenge of auditing banks in an IT environment, we 
need  to  explore  further  on  how  audit  can  overcome  the  challenges  and  exploit  the 
opportunities of the IT environment to make audit of banks more effective and meaningful. 
Opportunities  
18. 
I am told one of the issues agitating all of you is expansion of opportunities for the 
accounting profession especially in view of the growing membership of the Institute. So far, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
you have enjoyed a monopoly position in respect of certain areas of work, for example, the 
audit of financial statements. The easy way out to seek and expand opportunities would be to 
agitate for continuation of this monopoly position. I believe this will be a mistake. Rather, the 
profession needs to identify emerging opportunities in the market place and develop the skill 
needed to exploit them. 
19. 
Let  me  cite  an  example.  With  concepts  like  core  banking  and  centralized  record 
keeping,  the  relevance  of  the  audit  of  branches  of  Public  Sector  Banks  (PSBs)  has 
significantly  declined.  These  banks  have  represented  to  RBI  that  the  audit  of  bank’s 
branches  should  be  reduced.  There  is  merit  in  this  suggestion,  since  currently  the  cost  of 
audit  of  PSBs  is  significantly  higher  than  the  cost  of  audit  of  comparable  private  sector 
banks. However, the Institute has been resisting this because it would mean a reduction in 
work for its members.  
20. 
I believe the Institute’s efforts in this regard are ill advised. In fact, it makes much 
more sense for the profession to sharpen its skills in the area of concurrent audit for which a 
need  exists  than  to  agitate  for  retention  of  work  which  does  not  add  value.  Similarly,  the 
profession has shied away from the responsibility for prevention and early detection of fraud. 
The  need  for  such  a  service  exists  and  if  the  profession  does  not  fulfill  that  need,  other 
agencies  which  can  provide  this  service  will  displace  auditors  and  deprive  them  of  a 
potentially expanding opportunity. 
Independence  
21. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  challenge  of  “independence”.  The  growth  of  large 
international firms of accountants has created an opportunity for the provision of a multiplicity 
of services. Clients benefit from such umbrella services and attach value to it. However, this 
also  raises  the  vexed  question  of  the  extent  to  which  provision  of  these  multiple  services 
erodes the concept of independence.  
22. 
The case of Enron, which took down along with it the audit firm Arthur Andersen, 
comes  to  mind  in  this  context.  The  sudden  collapse  of  Enron,  an  energy  trading  and 
distributing company, ranked seventh in the Fortune 500, raised a number of questions about 
the accounting and auditing practices followed by the company. The company used creative 
accounting to shift losses and debts off the company’s balance sheet into special purpose 
entities  (SPEs)  thereby  concealing  the  extent  of  its  indebtedness.  The  company  was  also 
reported to have withheld information about SPEs which could have led auditors to insist on 
their consolidation in the balance sheet. Enron’s accounting transgressions misled investors 
to believe that the company was more profitable and less leveraged than it really was.  
23. 
 Andersen audited Enron for all sixteen years since the company’s formation. On top 
of  pure  audit,  it  also  sold  internal-audit  and  consulting  services.  Despite  this  privileged 
insight, Andersen did not discover that Enron was publishing incorrect financial statements 
leading to the term “Enronisation of financial statements”. This raises an important question 
of  conflict  of  interest.  Is  it  the  case  that  the  extensive  consultancy  work  done  by  Arthur 
Andersen for Enron compromised its independence leading to its failure to detect erosion of 
accounting standards? It also subsequently came to light that some members of the Audit 
Committee faced financial conflicts of interest, generated in part by the company’s donations 
to charities to which they were connected. Could this conflict have been prevented?  
24. 
Accounting and auditing practices were also called into question in the collapse of 
Parmalat,  the  largest  dairy  company  in  Europe,  in  one  of  the  biggest  accounting  frauds  in 
corporate history. Like Enron, Parmalat too undertook elaborate derivative deals, often using 
complex  offshore  structures  that  involved  some  of  its  many  subsidiaries.  Investors  and 
bankers struggled to understand the balance sheet or gauge the true extent of its liabilities. By 
the  time  it  collapsed,  Parmalat  had  established  dozens  of  arrangements  involving  offshore 
companies, which did not form part of the company’s consolidated financial statements.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Instances such as these reaffirm the need for systemic reforms in two areas. The 
25. 
first is the regulation of auditors. The profession has argued for years that self-regulation and 
peer review are the right way to maintain standards. But the conduct of Enron, Parmalat etc. 
under  the  very  nose  of  auditors  has  raised  question  about  the  effectiveness  of  soft 
regulation.  The  profession  has  to  find  a  way  of  remedying  this  if  it  wants  to  prevent  the 
imposition of an external regulator. 
26. 
The second reform is the need to eliminate conflict of interest in accounting firms. 
 Should there be a ban on auditors selling consulting services to those they audit? One view 
is  that  there  is  no  real  conflict  of  interest  and  that  better  audits  would  be  the  best  way  to 
assure  regulators  that  such  a  ban  is  unnecessary.  Yet  if  confidence  in  auditing  is  to  be 
regained, perception is equally important. Regulators are likely to demand some meaningful 
change on the issue of such conflict of interest. Overall, this is a complex issue which needs 
to be addressed dispassionately.  
Inter-disciplinary approach  
27. 
Inter-disciplinary approach is the next challenge on my list. In a complex world, no 
single profession can meet all the requirements of market participants. Neither is it possible 
for individual professions to operate in silos catering to specialized needs. Inter-disciplinary 
interaction is therefore not only unavoidable, but in fact desirable. But this creates its own 
problems,  particularly  in  the  area  of  disciplinary  jurisdiction  as  professional  standards  in 
different governing bodies – if such a body exists – may be different and members of such 
bodies may be differently regulated. 
28. 
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  illustrates  the  problems  that  can  arise  from 
divergence of views across disciplines – in this case between the accounting profession and 
prudential banking regulators. There is widespread criticism that the accounting standards, 
more  so  fair  value  accounting  insisted  on  by  accountants,  failed  to  reckon  with  illiquid 
markets  and  distressed  sales,  and  thereby  contributed  to  the  crisis,  or  at  the  very  least 
exacerbated the severity of the crisis.  
29. 
Post-crisis,  there  is  convergence  in  the  views  of  prudential  regulators  and 
accounting standard setters on the desirability of forward looking expected loss approach to 
loan  loss  provisioning.  The  IASB,  FASB  as  well  as  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  (BCBS)  are  actively  engaged  in  finding  a  commonly  agreed  solution  to  this 
complex problem. 
30. 
While  discussing  the  issue  of  loan  loss  provisioning,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the 
Reserve  Bank’s  concern  on  the  issue  of  divergence  in  identification  of  Non  Performing 
Assets (NPAs) and provisioning as certified by statutory auditors vis-a-vis the findings of the 
supervisory inspection conducted by RBI. In the Reserve Bank’s view, in certain cases, the 
statutory  auditors  have  underestimated  the  extent  of  NPAs  and  the  required  provisioning. 
Since RBI, as the supervisor of the banking system, relies and leverages on the work done 
by auditors, the profession should effectively address this issue. Ultimately, it is the statutory 
auditors’ certification that is taken as the “true and fair” statement of the accounts of a bank 
and  is  disclosed  to  all  stakeholders.  It  is  therefore  of  prime  importance  that  there  is  no 
underestimation of provisioning requirements while finalising financial statements of banks. 
Value systems 
31. 
Finally, let me turn to the sensitive and important issue of a value system. Recent 
months have witnessed an agitation across the country about erosion of values in the public 
domain. The norms of a society are determined by the dominant sections of that society, and 
the accounting profession is certainly a dominant section of society. The value system you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
practise in your professional conduct influences the value system of the society. Sadly, we 
see several transgressions. 
32. 
Take the case of Worldcom. Worldcom indulged in major accounting misstatements 
which hid the precarious financial position of the company. Investigations revealed that more 
than three billion dollars worth of costs were wrongly classified as capital expenses over a 
five quarter period. This boosted the reported profits, which were in fact fictitious. 
33. 
The case of Satyam Computer Services here in India was similar. The company’s 
chairman confessed to more than a billion dollar fraud on its balance sheet which was hidden 
from the company’s board, its senior managers and of course the auditors for several years. 
The  truth  followed  a  now  familiar  pattern  –  overstating  profits,  understating  liabilities,  and 
overstating cash causing a big hole in the balance sheet. 
34. 
With so much accounting misconduct in big corporations, stakeholders wonder why 
books  are  not  being  reviewed  on  the  default  assumption  that  there  could  be  fraud  afoot. 
Accounting  experts  explain  that  the  kind  of  forensic  auditing  that  reconstructs  fraud  is  so 
time-consuming and expensive that it could bring an honest business to its knees. However, 
I strongly believe that a robust system of audits, a corporate culture in which ethical conduct 
is encouraged and exemplified and an active and independent Board of Directors can make 
such  frauds  harder  to  perpetrate,  easier  to  detect  and  help  restore  public  confidence  in 
published results. 
35. 
What has been RBI’s contribution in this regard? Recognising the importance of the 
internal  audit  and  inspection  function  as  an  effective  management  tool,  in  April  1994,  the 
Reserve  Bank  advised  all  banks  to  set  up  an  Audit  Committee  of  the  Board  (ACB)  of 
Directors. Needless to say, we need to have skilled and qualified persons on the ACBs to 
make them truly effective. Accordingly, in September 1995, we advised banks to ensure that 
there is at least one non-executive director who should be a Chartered Accountant on the 
ACB.  ACBs  have  since  been  contributing  immensely  by  providing  direction  and  also  by 
overseeing  the  internal  control  function  in  the  bank.  We  have  kept  the  CEO  of  the  bank 
outside the ACB to keep it independent. However, the second in command, the Executive 
Director concerned is a member of the ACB to bring the insider perspective to bear on the 
Committee’s deliberations. However, the presence of an executive director may be seen on 
compromising the independence of the ACB. I will be interested in your views on this.  
36. 
Returning to the larger issue of a value system, the challenge before the profession 
is  therefore  to  demonstrate  by  its  own  conduct,  its  concern  for  upholding  a  value  system 
within itself and consequently within its clientele as also to initiate programmes which create 
sensitivity to the need for greater ethical conduct. In this context I would only like to reiterate 
that you have a significant role as the conscience-keeper of the business world.  
Conclusion 
37. 
Let me now sum up. I have started with briefly identifying the shared professional 
domain of the auditing profession and the Reserve Bank. I have alluded to the uniqueness of 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet,  or  indeed  balance  sheets.  I  then  went  on  to  indicate, 
what in my view, are some of the key challenges that the profession has to address in order 
to  remain  effective  and  to  add  value  to  the  real  sector.  Where  relevant,  I  have  given 
contextual references and illustrations from the Reserve Bank, particularly stemming from its 
role as the regulator and supervisor of the banking system. 
38. 
I wish your deliberations over the next two days all success. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
