Sayuri Shirai: Recent gobal economic developments and monetary 
policy in Japan – growing uncertainty over the European sovereign debt 
issues 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Yamanashi, 2 November 2011. 
 Global economic and financial developments 
I. 
The world currently faces two pressing macroeconomic issues: one is a slowdown in global 
economic  growth,  and  the  other  is  increased  instability  in  international  financial  markets 
triggered largely by fiscal and financial problems in Europe. 
Outlook for the global economy 
A. 
Let me start with the outlook for emerging economies. These economies continue to be the 
main engine for global economic growth, although the pace of growth has slowed somewhat 
in recent months. Their sources of economic strength arise mainly from (1) robust domestic 
demand  reflecting  rising  incomes  and  employment  generation  –  phenomena  commonly 
observed  in  developing  countries,  (2)  considerable  leeway  for  expansionary  fiscal  policies 
thanks  to  their  relatively  sound  public  finances,  (3)  abundant  labor  forces,  and  (4) the 
potential for high labor productivity growth as part of the process of technological catch-up. 
At the same time, some emerging economies are experiencing inflationary pressures, which 
have  been  placing  them  in  the  dilemma  of  containing  inflation  or  decelerating  the  pace  of 
economic growth when making a monetary policy decision. 
By contrast, the pace of economic growth in advanced countries remains moderate. In the 
case of the United States, economic growth so far has been slower than originally expected, 
as  exemplified  by  substantial  downward  revisions  made  by  a  number  of  international 
organizations  and  think  tanks  –  including  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  –  to  their 
projections  for  2011  and  2012.  U.S.  economic  growth  declined  sharply  in  the  first  half  of 
2011,  due  mainly  to  (a)  a  decline  in  automobile  production  caused  by  supply-chain 
disruptions  following  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  and  (b)  a  drop  in  real  household 
incomes reflecting the hike in gasoline prices. On the bright side, corporate profits have been 
substantially strong, and production, business fixed investment, and exports have continued 
to rise. Although some economic indicators suggest a deterioration in business sentiment in 
recent months, the pessimism suggested by sentiment indicators appears to be greater than 
actual corporate business conditions warrant. 
Overall, the pace of economic recovery in the United States has remained modest, because 
the deleveraging process or the adverse impact of the burst housing bubble on household 
balance sheets persists. As housing loans and other debts remain excessive, debt servicing 
exerts a huge burden on households, particularly since employment generation and income 
growth  have  been  sluggish.  Moreover,  given  that  about  30  percent  of  household  financial 
assets  have  been  invested  in  stocks,  the  negative  wealth  effect  caused  by  the  recent 
downturn  in  stock  prices  is  likely  to  be  considerable.  Against  this  background,  President 
Obama in September 2011 proposed a jobs package worth 447 billion U.S. dollars – about 
3 percent  of  GDP,  although  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  proposal  will  gain  approval  in 
Congress. If not, fiscal stimulus to the economy in the coming year may be limited.  
Instability in international financial markets 
B. 
Not only has the pace of global economic growth been decelerating, in international markets 
investors  have  been  increasingly  risk  averse.  This  reflects  growing  concerns  over  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
economic  performance  of  the  United  States  as  well  as  the  worsening  fiscal  and  financial 
problems in Europe, which I will touch upon later. 
Strains  in  international  financial  markets  have  intensified  since  the  middle  of  2011,  in  part 
due  to  the  prolonged  debate  in  the  U.S.  Congress  over  the  fiscal  debt  ceiling  and  deficit 
reduction, and the resulting downgrading of the credit rating for U.S. Treasuries. Moreover, 
high-level meetings of the European Union (EU), the Group of Seven (G-7) countries, and 
the  Group  of  Twenty  (G-20)  countries  all  failed  to  come  up  with  a  decisive  solution  to  the 
fiscal and financial problems in Europe. This series of events prompted global investors to 
become  even  more  risk  averse.  As  a  result,  international  financial  markets  have  become 
highly volatile: the prices of stocks – perceived as riskier assets – fell substantially around 
the globe, while the prices of government bonds of major advanced economies – perceived 
as safer assets – rose (or yields declined). Since October this year, however, stock prices 
have recovered somewhat and yields on government bonds have risen. 
Regarding corporate bond markets, credit spreads have widened, particularly in the United 
States and Europe, and issuing conditions for low-rated corporate bonds have continued to 
remain  unfavorable.  The  number  of  initial  public  offerings  (IPOs)  also  dropped  sharply 
around the globe. What is more, since September the price of gold – generally perceived as 
a  safe  asset  –  as  well  as  the  prices  of  other  commodities  have  declined  as  well.  In  the 
foreign exchange market, meanwhile, the yen, together with the U.S. dollar, has appreciated 
against a wide range of currencies of emerging and commodity-exporting economies on the 
basis of the perception that it is a relatively safe international currency. Moreover, in some 
emerging economies, cross-border capital flows have reversed, leading to a decline in stock 
and bond prices as well as foreign exchange rates. 
The main reason that instability in international financial markets has increased is a lack of 
confidence in measures undertaken by the EU to resolve the fiscal and financial problems in 
Europe.  As  I  will  explain  in  the  next  section,  the  problems  in  Europe  are  unlikely  to  be 
resolved  in  the  short  term.  Therefore,  international  financial  markets  are  expected  to  face 
continued strains for a while. 
The fiscal and financial problems in Europe 
II. 
So  far,  I  have  presented  an  overview  of  the  outlook  for  global  economic  and  financial 
developments. Now, I would like to take a closer look at the fiscal and financial problems in 
Europe,  which  have  become  the  epicenter  of  the  growing  strains  in  international  financial 
markets.1 
Before I go into details, I would first like to make sure that the difference between the EU and 
the euro area is well understood. The EU is an economic partnership between 27 countries 
and constitutes the world’s largest economic zone. It has a population of about 500 million 
and accounts for more than 20 percent of global GDP. People and money can move without 
restrictions  in  the  region.  The  euro  area,  on  the  other  hand,  is  presently  comprised  of  the 
17 EU member states that have adopted the single currency called the euro. Countries with 
large economies, such as Germany, France, Italy, and Spain, are among the members of the 
euro area. The area has a population of about 330 million and accounts for about 15 percent 
of global GDP. It is an economic zone almost as large as the United States. I will follow the 
standard practice of distinguishing between “core countries” (such as Germany, France, the 
Netherlands,  and  Belgium)  and  “peripheral  countries”  (such  as  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal, 
Spain, and Italy). 
                                                 
1  This speech is based on information available as of October 31, 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The three problems faced by the euro area 
A. 
The fiscal problems in the euro area have now reached a critical stage. Looking back, the 
fiscal problems of Greece surfaced in spring 2010, followed by those of Ireland in fall 2010 
and Portugal in early 2011. As these countries – with large fiscal deficits and/or government 
debts – faced a sharp increase in the cost of funding, they had no choice but to ask the EU 
and the IMF to provide them with financial support. With regard to Greece, it became clear 
from the middle of 2011 that its fiscal consolidation and economic reform program, to which it 
had  internationally  committed  itself,  was  far  behind  schedule.  As  a  result,  the  Greek  debt 
crisis resurfaced.  
In addition, market concerns over the fiscal position of peripheral countries intensified. This, 
in turn, adversely affected the creditworthiness of European financial institutions with large 
holdings of government bonds of these countries. As a result, these institutions faced a sharp 
increase in their funding costs as well. 
In response, the EU announced a comprehensive set of measures to address the sovereign 
debt and financial problems at the end of October. This may be considered a step forward. 
The measures appear to have won some support from financial markets. Nevertheless, more 
time is needed to see whether they will help restore stability in international financial markets 
by reviving the risk-taking appetite of investors in general. The euro area is not only a large 
economic zone, but, like the United States, it is also home to the headquarters of many large, 
globally  active  financial  institutions.  Given  Europe’s  close  economic  and  financial  linkages 
with  other  regions,  the  possible  effects  of  volatile  developments  in  the  euro  area  on  the 
global  economy  and  international  financial  markets  are  a  matter  of  great  concern.  I  would 
next like to talk about the three main problems confronting the euro area. 
Fiscal consolidation and economic reform in Greece 
1. 
The first problem is the loss of market confidence in the ability of the Greek government to 
pursue the fiscal consolidation and economic reform program, which triggered the problems 
that the euro area is facing now. Greece had a high level of government debt even before 
joining the euro. Moreover, in the latter half of 2009 it emerged that the Greek government 
had understated the scale of its fiscal deficit by falsifying official statistics. The discovery of 
such an act has given rise to skepticism toward the Greek government’s capacity to properly 
manage  its  economic  and  fiscal  affairs,  resulting  in  the  successive  downgrading  by  rating 
agencies of its government bonds. The downgradings in turn brought about a hike in bond 
yields, making it difficult for the government to raise funds from the market, and forced it to 
ask the EU and the IMF for financial assistance in May 2010. 
The financial assistance has been provided in installments on condition that the program is 
monitored  by  the  IMF  and  the  EU  through  quarterly  reviews  and  makes  progress  on 
schedule.  The  disbursement  of  the  sixth  tranche  was  due  to  be  approved  in  September 
2011; however, the approval was suspended following findings that Greece would be unable 
to  achieve  its  budget  deficit  target  for  both  2011  and  2012.  The  Greek  economy  is  in  the 
middle of a severe recession, and there is a strong likelihood that after facing four successive 
years  of  contraction  it  will  continue  to  shrink.  As  a  result,  tax  revenues  have  not  grown 
despite  increases  in  tax  rates,  thus  undermining  the  government’s  fiscal  reconstruction 
efforts. Additionally, it has been pointed out that, partly because of problems associated with 
the government’s capacity to collect taxes, it is difficult to devise effective measures to raise 
tax revenues. Against this background, financial markets are conscious of the possibility that 
the program of fiscal consolidation and economic reform could stall unless the government 
conducts  more  drastic  expenditure  cuts  and  takes  decisive  measures  to  raise  revenues 
through, for example, the privatization of government enterprises. The sixth tranche is likely 
to be disbursed during the first half of November, following the passage in late October of a 
bill by the Greek Parliament that provides for further reductions in the fiscal deficit, including 
layoffs of public employees. Yet, how things develop remains to be seen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
When it was agreed in May 2010 to provide financial assistance to Greece, it was expected 
that  from  2012  Greece  would  be  in  a  position  to  raise  funds  from  the  market  on  the 
assumption that steady progress would be made in fiscal consolidation and economic reform. 
This scenario looks increasingly unlikely now with Greek government bond yields remaining 
at prohibitively high levels. 
The  EU,  the  IMF,  and  Greece,  therefore,  agreed  on  a  second  bailout  package  for  
Greece – separate from the financial assistance mentioned so far – to provide funds from 
2012 onward. In addition, it was agreed that given the sheer size of the government debt, the 
provision of financial assistance alone was not enough to bring the Greek government debt 
position  to  a  sustainable  level.  Therefore,  through  the  intermediation  of  the  Institute  of 
International Finance (IIF), a global association of financial institutions, financial institutions – 
private-sector creditors – with large holdings of Greek government bonds were asked to bear 
a  part  of  the  burden  on  a  voluntary  basis.  More  specifically,  holders of  Greek  government 
bonds due to mature by 2020 were asked to exchange most of their holdings into new bonds 
at a discount of some 20 percent of the present value; in other words, the debt was to be cut 
by roughly 20 percent. In turn, the principal of the new bonds would be guaranteed and it is 
reported that a large number of the bond holders represented by the IIF agreed. 
More  recently,  however,  some  EU  member  countries  voiced  the  view  that,  with  Greece’s 
fiscal situation deteriorating more rapidly than had been anticipated, a steeper write-down of 
Greek government bonds was necessary. In other words, it became increasingly clear that 
reducing Greek debt by some 20 percent of the present value would be insufficient to sustain 
the Greek government’s ability to repay its debts. In view of this, meetings were held at the 
end  of  October  between  the  EU  and  the  IIF,  and  it  was  agreed  in  principle  that  creditors 
would write off 50 percent of their Greek bonds. At the same time, it was agreed that Greece 
should  implement  further  fiscal  consolidation  measures.  In  order  to  meet  its  international 
commitments,  Greece,  with  the  economy  already  in  a  prolonged  recession,  was  thus 
required  to  introduce  additional  restrictive  fiscal measures,  which  may  intensify  the  vicious 
cycle of economic contraction. Policies for the reduction of national debt are unavoidable, but 
what the Greek economy needs more than anything else to break out of its vicious cycle is to 
press ahead with growth-generating economic reforms and build a path toward credible fiscal 
consolidation to regain market confidence. 
Mechanisms to stop the Greek fiscal crisis from spreading 
2. 
The second problem concerns mechanisms to stop the crisis in Greece from spreading to 
other euro area member states. In response to the financial turmoil triggered by the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers in 2008, European countries introduced various measures to help boost 
the economy and rescue banks. Such measures inevitably led to increases in fiscal deficits 
and government debts. It is in this context that the crisis in Greece spread to some peripheral 
European countries, such as Ireland and Portugal, which were perceived to have relatively 
greater difficulties in proceeding with fiscal consolidation and/or economic reforms.  
In order to prevent the current fiscal and financial problems in the region from triggering a 
chain reaction, the EU created the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) in 2010. The 
EFSF  can  raise  funds  through  the  issuance  of  bonds,  the  proceeds  of  which  can  then  be 
used  to  provide  loans  at  below-market  interest  rates  to  financially  troubled  euro  area 
countries. These bonds are effectively guaranteed by euro area member states that remain 
financially  healthy.  So  far,  loans  in  this  form  have  been  extended  to  Ireland  and  Portugal, 
which requested financial assistance, and the second bailout package for Greece is due to 
use funds from the EFSF. 
Subsequently,  at  the  Meeting  of  Heads  of  State  or  Government  of  the  Euro  Area,  it  was 
agreed to increase the size of guarantees for EFSF bonds, thereby raising the ceiling of the 
facility’s  lending  capacity.  The  EFSF  is  now  able  to  purchase  government  bonds  from  the 
market  and  to  inject  more  funds  into  the  banking  system  by,  for  example,  recapitalizing 
financial institutions. The agreement was ratified in October 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  financial markets,  however,  concerns  emerged  about  possible  contagion  of  the  crisis  to 
other euro area member states such as Spain and Italy. These countries have much larger 
economies, and therefore the lending capacity of the facility already agreed at the Meeting of 
Heads of State or Government of the Euro Area was perceived to be insufficient to fend off a 
further  spread  of  the  crisis.  However,  an  additional  increase  in  the  lending  capacity  was 
difficult due to strong opposition led by Germany. At the Euro Summit, a meeting of EU and 
euro  area  leaders  held  at  the  end  of  October,  it  was  therefore  agreed  to  leverage  the 
resources of the EFSF to enhance its ability to deal with critical situations.2 It will probably 
take a while for the leverage plan to actually take effect, as details have to be worked out in 
November and then need to be approved by each member state. Needless to say, building 
mechanisms  to  prevent  the  fiscal  crisis  from  spreading  to  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is 
extremely  important  for  the  stability  of  international  financial  markets.  What  matters  is 
whether the mechanism succeeds in gaining the confidence of the market.3 
Fiscal problems leading to problems in the financial system 
3. 
The  third  problem  is  that  the  fiscal  problems  in  Europe  are  threatening  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. What started out as a fiscal problem in Greece, coupled with concerns over 
its  ability  to  consolidate  its  finances  and  carry  out  economic  reforms,  has  spread  to  other 
European countries, with doubts arising regarding their creditworthiness. This, in turn, raised 
concerns about the balance sheets of European financial institutions holding large volumes 
of government bonds of peripheral countries. Consequently, European financial institutions, 
including financial institutions from France and Belgium – core countries – began to find it 
difficult  to  raise  funds  from  markets.  The  fiscal  problems  in  Europe  have  thus  begun  to 
seriously undermine the stability of the financial system in the region. 
In  July  2011,  the  results  of  a  stress  test  for  financial  institutions  performed  by  the  EU 
confirmed that progress was being made in strengthening their capital bases. However, the 
results  did  not  mitigate  investors’  concerns  over  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  In 
fact, the IMF has stressed the need for European financial institutions to make a substantial 
capital  enhancement  based  on  its  estimate  of  potential  losses  of  200  billion  euros  that 
European  financial  institutions  could  suffer  in  the  event  of  a  collapse  in  the  prices  of 
government  bonds  of  peripheral  countries  such  as  Greece.  However,  given  the  current 
weakness in stock markets, it is not easy for financial institutions to increase capital on their 
own. As a result, concerns about counterparty risk have increased, causing some financial 
institutions  to  reduce  interbank  market  trading  activities.  In  addition,  uncollateralized 
interbank trading, particularly of term instruments, has been declining, leading to an increase 
in  funding  costs  for  European  financial  institutions,  mainly  for  longer-term  and  U.S.  dollar-
denominated  funds.  In  a  comprehensive  set  of  additional  measures  agreed  at  the  end  of 
October,  the  EU  decided  to  require  European  financial  institutions  to  attain  a  Core  Tier  1 
capital  ratio  of  9  percent  by  end-June  2012,  after  accounting  for  market  valuation  of 
sovereign debt exposures. It was also decided that when financial institutions are unable to 
increase capital by themselves, national governments should provide support or, if they are 
unable to do so, the EFSF should do so.  
It would have been easier to come up with a solution if the problem had been contained to 
fiscal deficits, as was the case for Greece at the beginning. The appropriate response would 
                                                 
2  Leverage here refers to, for example, “guarantees” to be provided by the EFSF, which could amount to many 
times over what the facility can directly lend. If approved, the EFSF could be given more flexibility over the 
measure to prevent a crisis from spreading to major euro area member states. 
In addition, it has already been decided to make the EFSF a permanent institution and set up in mid-2013 the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) with the aim of facilitating a smooth restructuring of government debt 
issued by countries in financial difficulties. It has also been reported that discussions are underway to bring 
forward the starting date of the ESM by a year. 
3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
have been to increase government revenue and reduce expenditure in the short term, while 
pushing  through  a  wide  range  of  economic  reforms  in  the  medium  to  long  term  aiming  to 
achieve sustainable growth. However, when it comes to measures to stabilize the financial 
system,  things  become  much  more  difficult,  because  the  impact  on  international  financial 
markets cannot be ignored. A major factor currently destabilizing international markets lies in 
the  daunting  situation  of  having  to  deal  with  two  crucial  issues  simultaneously  –  fiscal 
imbalances and instability in the financial system. 
Effects on economic activity in Europe 
B. 
The problems in Europe have started to affect activity in the real sector of the economy (such 
as production, business investment, and consumption), setting off a downward spiral among 
the economy, the fiscal situation, and the financial system. Keeping this in mind, I will now 
touch upon the current situation of and outlook for economic activity in Europe.  
At present, the recovery in the European economy seems to be stalling due to the slowdown 
in the domestic and global economies. Growth in exports, which had been the main engine of 
economic growth, has slowed sharply, while growth in production and consumption has also 
decelerated. Furthermore, corporate and consumer sentiment has worsened. Nevertheless, 
the economies of core countries, particularly Germany  with a strong manufacturing sector, 
remain relatively robust on the back of firm business fixed investment. The employment and 
income situation in Germany has also been improving, with the unemployment rate declining 
to  about  7  percent.  In  contrast,  peripheral  countries,  such  as  Greece  and  Portugal,  have 
been  suffering  from  short-term  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  due  to  additional 
austerity  measures  following  the  downgrade  of  their  sovereign  debt  ratings.  Their 
international competitiveness has long been weak, so that it will be a challenge for them to 
achieve  economic  growth,  and  –  as  we  have  already  seen  –  the  market  remains  deeply 
concerned about the sustainability of government finances in these countries. 
With regard to the economic outlook for Europe, a very moderate recovery is expected on 
the  whole.  Although  private  consumption  is  unlikely  to  grow  because  household  incomes 
remain under severe pressure, exports are expected to increase gradually based on steady 
growth  in  emerging  economies.  In  addition,  business  fixed  investment  in  core  countries  is 
expected to remain firm. 
Nevertheless,  restoring  fiscal  health  is  a  challenge  faced  by  all  euro  area  countries.  The 
government-debt-to-GDP ratio for the euro area as a whole was 85.4 percent in 2010, well 
above the euro convergence criterion of 60 percent. This wide gap highlights the need for 
continued  efforts  to  reduce  fiscal  deficits  and  the  limited  scope  for  expansionary  fiscal 
measures  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  As  for  monetary  policy,  the  policy  interest  rate  is 
already  low  at  1.5  percent,  leaving  little  room  for  further  reductions.  In  view  of  the  limited 
room for fiscal and monetary policy, it is necessary to be aware of the possibility of economic 
instability continuing for a while.  
Japan’s economy and the Bank of Japan’s policy measures 
III. 
Based  on  the  developments  in  the  global  economy  and  international  financial  markets 
described  so  far,  I  will  now  talk  about  the  current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  Japan’s 
economy and measures taken by the Bank. For details, please refer to Outlook for Economic 
Activity and Prices released by the Bank on October 28, 2011. 
Japan’s economy 
A. 
Following the earthquake on March 11, 2011, Japan’s economy contracted sharply. This was 
due  to  the  following  factors:  (1)  production  activity  fell  significantly  nationwide  due  to  the 
physical  damage  caused  by  the  earthquake  and  tsunami  to  production  facilities  and  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
distribution  infrastructure  as  well  as  the  disruption  of  supply  chains  in  the  manufacturing 
sector,  especially  in  the  automobile  industry;  (2)  the  nuclear  power  plant  accident  led  to 
electricity  shortages,  which  affected  both  manufacturing  and  non-manufacturing  industries; 
and (3) consumer sentiment weakened as a result of voluntary restraint following the disaster 
and the problem of radiation due to the nuclear power plant accident. 
The current situation 
1. 
Japan’s economic activity has been picking up steadily as the supply-side constraints caused 
by the disaster have been gradually resolved. Supply-chain disruptions, for example, have 
been easing at a faster pace than expected thanks to the efforts made by those involved. 
Production and real exports have returned to their pre-quake levels, although their rates of 
growth have moderated recently. While exports, particularly of automobiles, have increased, 
those  of  iron  and  steel  products  as  well  as  digital  cameras  have  declined.  Business  fixed 
investment has been increasing moderately and the results of the September 2011 Tankan 
(Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  showed  that  business  fixed 
investment  plans,  including  those  of  small  firms,  were  relatively  firm.  While  the  overall 
damage caused by the flooding in Thailand is not clear at this stage, the impact on supply 
chains warrants careful attention, given that Japanese firms, especially in automobile-related 
industries,  have  expanded  their  overseas  production  facilities  for  finished  goods  and  parts 
and  components,  including  in  Thailand,  in  recent  years.  Meanwhile,  although  private 
consumption has almost returned to its pre-quake level, weakness remains in some areas as 
indicated by, for example, the fact that restaurant sales have not returned to their pre-quake 
levels. Also, the number of foreigners visiting Japan has remained below pre-quake levels. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
2. 
Although adverse effects from the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of 
the  yen  may  continue  for  the  time  being,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  return  to  a 
moderate  recovery  path  as  reconstruction  demand  following  the  disaster  gradually 
materializes.  Business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  expand,  provided  that  corporate  profits 
improve, domestic and overseas demand recovers, and government economic policies are 
effective.  Private  consumption  is  also  expected  to  gradually  become  firmer  against  the 
backdrop of a gradual recovery in the employment and income environment. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) has recently been around 
0 percent, partly due to the change in the base year for the CPI in August 2011. As for the 
outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to remain at around 0 percent 
for the time being, with a factor in addition to the base-year change being that the positive 
contribution  from  the  rise  in  the  tobacco  tax  and  in  charges  for  accident  insurance  has 
dissipated since October 2011. Surveys of households, firms, and economists suggest that 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  stable;  however,  future  developments 
warrant continued attention. 
Risks to the outlook 
3. 
While there are  many  uncertainties regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices, 
the three risks that I think warrant the most attention are the following: (1) the risk that if the 
fiscal and financial problems in Europe intensify they may affect Japan’s economy through 
various channels; (2) downside risks with regard to overseas economies other than those of 
Europe;  and  (3)  the  possibility  that  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  growth 
expectations may decline in the longer run. 
As for the first risk, there are two main channels through which Japan’s economy could be 
affected: an international financial markets channel and an international trade channel. 
Let  us  start  by  considering  the  international  financial  markets  channel.  Japan’s  financial 
markets  have  remained  stable  as  a  whole  despite  the  instability  in  overseas  markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Moreover,  so  far  Japanese  financial  institutions’  funding  costs  have  not  been  affected  by 
developments overseas, because their exposure to Greece, Portugal, and Ireland in the form 
of  investment  and  lending  is  relatively  limited.  However,  given  the  growing  international 
linkages in financial markets, if global investors’ appetite for safe assets intensifies further, 
prices of riskier assets (such as stocks) could decline globally. With global financial markets 
being increasingly integrated, stock prices in Japan could fall as a result of developments in 
other markets, and the foreign exchange rate of the yen – which is seen as a relatively safe 
currency – against the U.S. dollar and the currencies of commodity-exporting and emerging 
countries might rise further. Thus, there is a risk that, as a result, business and consumer 
sentiment  may  deteriorate,  pushing  down  economic  growth.  In  fact,  the  diffusion  index  for 
overseas supply and demand conditions in the September 2011 Tankan suggests that there 
is a growing perception of excess supply. 
With regard to the export channel, as I have already stated, there is a possibility that Japan’s 
exports to Europe might be directly affected if economic activity in Europe decelerates as a 
result of the worsening of fiscal and financial problems in the area. It is important to bear in 
mind  that  in  this  case  the  impact  could  be  substantial,  since  Europe  accounts  for  about 
10 percent  of  Japan’s  exports.  Moreover,  there  is  the  risk  that  Japan’s  exports  might  be 
indirectly affected through a decrease in exports to Europe from Asian economies. 
As  for  the  second  risk,  there  is  concern  that  the  slowdown  in  the  U.S.  economy  could 
continue given the weaker-than-expected employment situation and sluggish activity in the 
housing market due to the persistent downward pressure on housing prices as seen in the 
increasing  number  of  home  foreclosures.  On  the  other  hand,  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting  economies,  despite  declining  demand  from  the  United  States  and  Europe,  are 
likely  to  continue  to  grow  thanks  to  potentially  large  domestic  demand;  however,  with 
inflationary  pressures  remaining  strong,  whether  they  can  achieve  a  soft  landing,  that  is, 
achieve  both  price  stability  and  economic  growth  at  the  same  time,  requires  continued 
attention. Attention also needs to be paid to a possible economic slowdown in emerging and 
commodity-exporting  economies  as  a  result  of  capital  outflows  from  these  economies  if 
investors’  risk  aversion  intensifies  further  due  to  contagion  of  the  fiscal  and  financial 
problems in Europe. 
With regard to the third risk concerning firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth 
expectations, Japan’s economy has long been facing the challenge of a decline in the growth 
rate due, among other things, to the shrinking and aging of the population. In addition, Japan 
is  now  confronted  with  new  challenges,  such  as  uncertainty  regarding  the  supply  and 
demand of electric power and the reconstruction effort needed following the earthquake. I am 
of course anxious about the uncertainty regarding reconstruction-related demand, but what 
concerns me more is the uncertainty surrounding electricity supply. Electricity supply during 
this  past  summer,  which  was  a  cause  of  great  concern,  turned  out  not  to  impose 
considerable constraints on the economy, not only because this summer was cooler than the 
extremely hot summer last year, but also because of efforts by firms and households to save 
electricity. In the longer run, however, the resumption of operations at nuclear power plants 
that are or will be under regular inspection is still unclear. Given this and the possibility that 
we might have an extremely cold winter or a heat wave next summer, uncertainty regarding 
the supply of electricity therefore remains, and as long as this uncertainty lingers, corporate 
activity could be restrained. In addition, attention needs to be paid to the possibility that a 
further  appreciation  of  the  yen  could  exert  downward  pressure  on  corporate  profits, 
employment, and income, or accelerate the shift to overseas production, which could in turn 
lead  to  a  decline  in  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations  and 
increase the downside risks to the economy. 
The bank’s conduct of monetary policy and responses to the earthquake 
B. 
Taking  into  account  the  situation  mentioned  above  –  economic  conditions  abroad  and  in 
Japan, the outlook for Japan’s economy, and the various risk factors – the Policy Board of 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the Bank, consisting of nine members including myself, at the Monetary Policy Meeting on 
October  27,  2011  decided  to  enhance  monetary  easing.  I  will  now  explain  the  policy 
measures currently implemented by the Bank as well as the background of the decision.  
Enhancement of the comprehensive monetary easing policy 
1. 
The first of the measures is a strengthening of the comprehensive monetary easing policy 
that  the  Bank  has  been  implementing  in  order  to  pursue  powerful  monetary  easing  and 
underpin Japan’s economy from the financial side. As part of the comprehensive monetary 
easing,  the  Bank  has  set  its  policy  interest  rate  at  an  extremely  low  level  of  around  0  to 
0.1 percent,  and  made  a  commitment  that  it  would  basically  continue  with  the  low  policy 
interest rate until it judged that price stability was in sight. 
Moreover, in October 2010, the Bank established the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the 
Program), a new framework through which the Bank purchases various risk assets, such as 
government  securities,  commercial  paper  (CP),  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds 
(ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) in order to encourage a decline in 
longer-term interest rates and various risk premiums. The Bank increased the total size of 
the Program by about 5 trillion yen to about 40 trillion yen in March 2011, immediately after 
the earthquake, and by about 10 trillion yen to about 50 trillion yen in total in August in light of 
various  risks,  such  as  the  effects  of  uncertainty  regarding  overseas  economies  and  of  the 
rapid appreciation of the yen on business sentiment as well as on economic activity.  
In addition, at the end of October 2011, the Bank decided to increase the total size of the 
Program by about 5 trillion yen to about 55 trillion yen reflecting the fact that some more time 
would  be  needed  to  confirm  that  price  stability  was  in  sight  and  that  due  attention  was 
needed to be paid to the risk that the economic and price outlook would further deteriorate 
depending  on  developments  in  global  financial  markets  and  in  overseas  economies.  Such 
asset  purchases  will  continue  to  be  made  through  the  end  of  2012,  and  since  further 
monetary easing is still in progress, the effects of monetary easing will continue to appear 
hereafter. 
Ensuring stability in financial markets 
2. 
Second, the Bank has been making efforts to ensure stability in financial markets in order to 
maintain the smooth conduct of economic and financial activities in Japan. Immediately after 
the  earthquake,  the  Bank  provided  ample  funds  to  meet  demand  in  financial  markets  for 
several  successive  days  to  preempt  concerns  about  potential  liquidity  shortages  in  the 
interbank money market. Thus, on March 14 – the first business day after the earthquake – 
the  Bank  conducted  funds-supplying  operations  totaling  21.8  trillion  yen.  As  a  result  of 
measures such as this, money market rates, which had temporarily risen immediately after 
the  earthquake,  soon  regained  stability.  Since  then,  with  the  Bank  continuing  to  provide 
ample funds and Japan’s financial system relatively sound, financial markets in Japan have 
remained relatively stable despite the heightened strains in European financial markets.  
Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth 
3. 
Third,  as  part  of  the  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  –  a  more 
medium- to long-term challenge – the Bank has introduced the Fund-Provisioning Measure 
to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth,  which  aims  to  act  as  a 
catalyst for firms and financial institutions working toward this end. Under this measure, the 
Bank provides loans at a low interest rate of 0.1 percent for, if rolled over, up to four years to 
financial  institutions  for  financing  of  and  investment  in  projects  that  help  to  strengthen  the 
medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s economy. The Bank has been working on 
new  initiatives  such  as  the  establishment  in  June  2011  of  a  new  line  of  credit,  which 
expanded the range of eligible investments and loans to encompass loans without real estate 
collateral or guarantees (including asset-based lending, or ABL).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas 
4. 
Fourth,  following  the  earthquake  and  tsunami,  the  Bank  introduced  the  funds-supplying 
operation  to  support  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas  in  April  2011  with  the  aim  of 
supporting  financial  institutions  in  these  areas  in  their  initial  response  efforts  to  meet  the 
demand for funds for restoration and rebuilding. Although there has been some demand for 
credit  for  rebuilding  in  disaster  areas,  it  is  still  subdued.  However,  as  the  six  loan 
disbursements  that  have  been  carried  out  by  the  Bank  show,  there  is  sufficient  credit 
demand and the operation is having some effect, since around 490 billion yen of the total of 
1 trillion  yen  initially  set  by  the  Bank  has  been  disbursed.  The  Bank  has  been  closely 
monitoring  the  funding  situation  of  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas,  which  has  made 
some  progress  reflecting  the  inflow  of  funds  to  support  disaster  areas  and  of  insurance 
payments. The deadline for new applications for loans under this scheme had originally been 
set for the end of October 2011, but on October 7 the Bank announced the extension of the 
deadline  to  April  30,  2012  in  order  to  continue  to  support  financial  institutions  in  disaster 
areas in their efforts to meet demand for funds for restoration and rebuilding. 
U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral 
5. 
Fifth and finally, given the turmoil in international financial markets, the Bank established a 
framework  to  supply  U.S.  dollar  funds  in  emergency  situations  with  the  aim  of  providing 
reassurance to market participants and, in coordination with major central banks abroad, has 
been conducting U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral on a regular 
basis,  with  one-week  funds  being  supplied  weekly  and  three-month  funds,  in  principle, 
monthly.  As  I  mentioned  when  discussing  the  fiscal  and  financial  problems  in  Europe, 
European financial institutions have seen their U.S. dollar funding costs rise. However, U.S. 
dollar funding conditions for Japanese financial institutions do not appear to have tightened 
substantively  when  compared  with  their  counterparts  overseas.  Nevertheless,  given  the 
growing interconnectedness among financial markets worldwide, there is a risk that volatility 
in  global  financial  markets  could  spill  over  to  Japan  in  a  short  period  of  time.  From  this 
perspective,  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  against  pooled  collateral  is  also 
important in that it functions as a safety net for Japanese banks conducting business abroad. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
