Masaaki Shirakawa: What is so special about financial innovation? 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Netherlands Bank conference in honour of Mr Nout Wellink on “Welfare effects of financial 
innovation” (via videoconference) , Amsterdam, 11 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Today  I  am  honored  to  have  the  opportunity  to  appear  as  the  keynote  speaker  of  this 
conference marking the retirement of Nout Wellink. I wish I could participate physically, but 
thanks to innovation, which is the very topic of today’s conference, I am now able to join you 
through videoconference from Tokyo, about 10,000 kilometers away from Amsterdam. 
There  is,  of  course  no  need  for  me  to  remind  you  of  Nout’s  distinguished  career,  at  the 
Netherlands Bank, the Basel Committee and the Bank for International Settlements, to name 
just a few. I would just like to thank him for his contributions on all the occasions I had the 
pleasure of working with him, and for his friendship outside the meeting rooms. 
Central  bankers,  or  policymakers  more  generally,  are  quite  fond  of  innovation.  It  is  the 
catalyst  for  growth.  Innovation  is  the  key  to  increasing  productivity,  and  without  it,  our 
economies can only grow linearly with the increase in input factors. Innovation is now all the 
more important, especially in the developed economies, because – as our population ages 
and the labor force stops growing rapidly – productivity growth underpinned by innovation is 
the only way for us to realize growth in the years ahead. 
In this sense, innovation is something we regard as inherently positive. Nevertheless, we are 
gathered  here  to  examine  the  welfare  effects  of  financial  innovation.  The  fact  that  we  can 
usefully  discuss  such  things  implies  that  not  all  developments  described  as  financial 
innovation  might  be  welfare  enhancing.  Why  is  it  that  we  have  to  persuade  other  people  
– and perhaps even ourselves – of the merits of innovation, when we add the word “financial” 
in front of “innovation”? Today, I would like to explore why we are sometimes uncomfortable 
with  certain  developments  in  the  finance  industry  that  are  labeled  “innovation”  by  their 
promoters,  and  consider  policy  implications  for  central  banks,  with  a  view  to  encouraging 
innovation that would benefit the whole society. Fifteen minutes will not be enough to arrive 
at definitive conclusions, but let me give it a try. 
Drivers of innovations in the financial industry 
II. 
Innovation means changing the way business is conducted in order to better serve the clients 
of  the  business.  It  is  a  constant  adaptive  process,  and  the  changes  could  be  either 
incremental or discontinuous. The financial industry is no exception. In fact, the Netherlands 
was  one  of  the  earliest  centers  of  innovation  in  finance  as  we  know  it.  For  example, 
Amsterdam  was  the  location  of  the  world’s  first  stock  exchange,  established  in  1602.  The 
province of Holland was the first sovereign to issue bonds in the modern sense, backed by 
the  tax  revenues  of  the  sovereign.  The  development  of  finance  through  these  innovations 
contributed enormously to the subsequent development of the Western world. 
Since  then,  innovation  in  finance  has  continued.  Banks  are  pushing  less  paper  around. 
Records are kept centrally in computer systems. ATMs have replaced most functions of bank 
tellers.  In  our  wallets,  plastic  cards  have  become  just  as  important  as,  or  perhaps  more 
important  than,  banknotes  and  coins.  These  changes,  which  provide  the  same  or  better 
service to clients at lower cost, are certainly innovations in the usual sense of the word, and 
we have little concern for their welfare effects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
What we worry about are those changes that are more often associated with the so-called 
“rocket  science”  side  of  banking.  Take  derivatives  for  example.  In  the  early  1990s,  when 
central  banks  first  began  to  take  interest  in  them,  experts  told  us  that  derivatives  enabled 
risks to be unbundled and shifted at a low cost to those who were most willing and able to 
bear  those  risks.1  Given  the  diversity  of  risk  preference  among  economic  agents,  the  new 
distribution  of  risk  after  derivatives  transactions  was  regarded  as  welfare  enhancing. 
Furthermore, as a result of better distribution of risk, it was claimed that the whole financial 
system  should  become  more  resilient.  Conceptually,  this  argument  made  sense,  but  in 
practice, there were spectacular mishaps. 
Our  intuition,  based  on  such  experiences,  tells  us  that  not  all  financial  innovations  are 
created  equal.  Some  may  be  embraced  wholeheartedly,  while  others  may  have  to  be 
carefully monitored and perhaps regulated or even prohibited altogether. 
One possible approach is to look at the drivers of innovation. 
Innovation  can  be  technology  driven  or  modality  driven.  Technology-driven  innovation 
crystallizes when the application of technology results in a better way of doing business. The 
ATM  may  be  the  best  example  in  the  business  of  banking.  On  the  other  hand,  modality-
driven innovation aims at rearranging business processes for the better. Financial risks can 
be shifted around without derivatives, but derivatives make it more efficient to transfer risks. 
The two are not mutually exclusive, but are distinct enough to be the basis for sharpening our 
thinking. 
Generally  speaking,  we  are  more  comfortable  with  technology-driven  innovations  than 
modality-driven  ones.  Nevertheless,  modality-driven 
innovations  are  not  necessarily 
inherently unwelcome. One could argue that modality-driven innovations are just as welfare 
enhancing  as  technology-driven  ones,  and  any  innovation,  be  it  technology  or  modality 
driven, could be harmful if misused. Although we cannot deny such a risk, there should be 
many  more  satisfied  clients  of  innovative  products  and  services  than  dissatisfied  ones. 
Another argument would be caveat emptor. Alternatively, even if the risk materializes, one 
could attribute that to just bad luck. 
Can we accept these views? If the answer is “Yes”, what we need is perhaps a little more 
policing  effort  or  education.  But  in  today’s  forum,  I  do  not  think  we  could  be  satisfied  with 
such a conclusion. 
Are there any issues with incentive structure in modern finance that encourages the misuse 
of  financial  technology?  Even  if  there  is  no  misuse,  should  we  not  be  concerned  with 
incentives to create more complex instruments that can only be understood by a handful of 
educated people, leading to obfuscation of risks under the guise of innovation? Are we not 
seeing too many “once-in-a-hundred-year” accidents? 
Who benefits from innovation? 
III. 
Up  to  now,  I  have  deliberately  remained  vague  on  the  objectives  of  innovation.  Why  do 
financial institutions innovate? Innovations are better ways of doing business, but better at 
what? 
Broadly speaking, the core function of financial institutions is intermediation. For example, if 
a business can obtain capital from the outside, it can invest and grow faster than when it can 
rely only on retained earnings. Financial institutions are ready to stand between savers who 
have the money and businesses that need the money. Another important function, especially 
for  banks,  is  effecting  payments.  If  a  business  knows  that  it  can  easily  exchange  foreign 
                                                 
1  See Bank for International Settlements, Macroeconomic and Monetary Policy Issues Raised by the Growth of 
Derivatives Markets, 1994. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
currency  to  domestic  currency,  it  can  more  conveniently  sell  its  wares  abroad  for  growth. 
Financial institutions are ready to facilitate the transfer of money between buyers and sellers 
of  goods  and  services.  By  standing  between  economic  agents,  financial  institutions  help 
other  economic  agents  overcome  financial  constraints  in  various  ways,  and  through  this 
process  of  effecting  intermediation  and  payments,  help  create  value  and  thus  enhance 
welfare. 
When we focus on this fact, we can finally understand why we are uncomfortable with some 
past developments in the financial industry. Problems seem to have arisen when a product or 
service  is insufficiently  anchored  in  intermediation  or  facilitation  of  payments.  Innovation  is 
useless  or  even  harmful,  if  financial  institutions  lose  sight  of  the  needs  of  their  clients,  or 
more  broadly  the  society.  Technology-driven  innovations  are  more  likely  to  be  beneficial, 
because,  when  the  innovator  is  deliberating  on  the  application  of  technology,  the  client 
cannot usually be ignored. On the other hand, in the case of modality-driven innovations, one 
can easily lose sight of the client when cutting and dicing existing businesses. 
For example, securitization now has a bad name because of its perceived role in the financial 
crisis.  Nevertheless, securitization  is  conceptually  beneficial,  because  it  aims  to  bridge  the 
gap between the risk preferences of lenders and the actual risk profile of borrowers. The only 
condition is probably that the investment bank arranging the transaction must find takers for 
all the tranches. In this regard, some resecuritized products, which inflicted enormous pain 
during  the  recent  financial  crisis,  are  suspect  because  they  include  unsold  tranches  of 
original securitization vehicles, tranches that investment banks could not sell to willing buyers 
or found too unattractive for their own books. 
Considering that financial institutions enhance welfare through intermediation, relevance of 
any  developments  to  intermediation  should  be  a  good  starting  point.  This  perspective  is 
particularly important for modality-driven innovations. 
Dealing with undesirable outcomes 
IV. 
Unfortunately, the world of finance is complex. As a result, one or two simple tests cannot 
separate all the wheat from the chaff. In this regard, one of the most difficult issues involves 
the  claim  that  certain  instruments  or  practices  provide  a  public  good,  namely  the  better 
functioning of markets through enhanced liquidity or more efficient price discovery. 
For example, in the case of high-frequency trading (HFT), one can argue that the increase in 
the  speed  and  execution  serves  no  socially  useful  purpose,  because  most  of  the  HFT 
transactions are netted out and, therefore, very little intermediation actually takes place.2 On 
the other hand, one could argue equally persuasively that trial and error carried out by HFT 
facilitate  price  discovery,  performing  a  useful  function  for  market  participants  that  wish  to 
trade  in  cash  instruments.  After  all,  nobody  has  doubts  on  the  usefulness  of  the  stock 
market, even though the market itself does not perform any intermediation between savers 
and  firms  in  need  of  capital.  If  there  were  only  long-term  buy-and-hold  investors,  market 
liquidity, or the supply of immediacy, would be constrained. The fact that stocks can easily 
change hands facilitates the capital-raising activities of firms. 
This is a difficult issue, but for policymakers, the fact that the “first-best” solution is elusive 
cannot be an excuse for not acting on potentially harmful activities. “Second-best” or “third-
best” solutions will have to be pursued. Instead of focusing too heavily on the welfare effects 
of individual innovations, on which sensible people can disagree, we could consider incentive 
issues  behind  developments  in  the  financial  industry,  especially  purported  innovations  that 
                                                 
2  While  HFT  in  equity  markets  has  been  intensely  debated,  that  in  foreign  exchange  markets  has  been  little 
discussed.  For  recent  discussions  on  the  latter,  see  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  High-Frequency 
Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
are  modality  driven.  Very  often,  modality-driven  innovations  are  the  result  of  efforts  to 
circumvent regulations, taxes, and accounting rules imposed on the financial industry. One of 
the lessons learned from the recent financial crisis is that such innovations tend to mask the 
build-up of excessive risk in the economy with dire consequences. 
Concluding remarks 
V. 
As  I  said  at  the  beginning,  innovation  is  the  key  to  growth.  Financial  innovation  can  also 
promote growth, so long as it facilitates the activities of other economic agents. The invisible 
hand may bring into line the interests of the financial industry and the broader society, but the 
recent  financial  turmoil  has  shown  that  too  often,  improperly  aligned  incentives  in  the 
financial  industry  can  stand  in  the  way.  In  this  regard,  senior  management  of  financial 
institutions, each time their traders and bankers come up with innovative proposals, should at 
least reflect on how the new products or services could add value to activities in the broader 
economy and facilitate intermediation, before giving the go-ahead. 
Meanwhile,  central  banks  must  better  understand  the  incentive  structures  in  the  financial 
industry,  and  ponder  if  their  actions  might  be  distorting  incentives,  giving  rise  to  modality-
driven  innovations  that  hardly  benefit  the  society  as  a  whole.  Doing  so  should  allow  us  to 
avoid those policy decisions – for example, maintaining excessively loose monetary policy for 
too  long  or  offering  too  wide  a  safety  net  through  the  lender-of-last-resort  function  –  that 
inadvertently add momentum to such developments. 
We have, undoubtedly, made important progress in the various international fora, including 
the  Basel  Committee,  of  which  Nout  Wellink  held  the  chair  until  his  retirement.  Still,  much 
work remains, for example the potential for the shadow banking sector to pick up those risks 
pushed out of the formal banking sector as a result of recent regulatory tightening. I hope 
that  today’s  discussions  will  give  us  fresh  ideas  on  how  to  take  on  the  many  remaining 
challenges  with  regard  to  aligning  incentives  and  practices  of  financial  institutions  with 
socially desirable outcomes. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
