Christian Noyer: Challenges and outlook for the global economy 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  a  press  conference,  Saint-Denis, 
Reunion, 14 November 2011. 
 Secretary General of the Prefecture,  
Elected representatives,  
Consul General of China,  
Representatives of civil and military authorities, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today. And not only because it is 20 degrees warmer than 
Paris  at  the  moment,  or  because  I  spent  the  weekend  enraptured  by  the  beauty  of  your 
island and the friendliness of its people.  
I am particularly pleased to be here today because it is extremely important for me to have 
the opportunity to talk directly to local economic players throughout the French territory, listen 
to their views and explain our actions. Above all, in these complex times, such exchanges 
are tremendously valuable.  
I  would  especially  like  to  extend  my  regards  and  thanks  to  the  Mayor  of  Saint-Denis  for 
receiving us in this beautiful venue.  
I  will  start  by  rapidly  recalling  the  crisis  to  date  and  the  solutions  that  have  been 
implemented. In the past months we have witnessed a succession of serious and complex 
events.  It  is  therefore  logical  that  feelings  of  confusion  and  uncertainty  have  developed  in 
society.  I  will  thus  attempt  to  provide  some  useful  insights  into  the  situation  that  we  are 
currently facing. I would be delighted to listen to your comments or reply to your questions 
afterwards.  
The crisis: where do we stand? 
 Epicentre No.1: The United States between 2006 and 2008 
In order to fully understand the current crisis, it is important to realise that it is in fact a new 
episode of the acute crisis that has been with us since 2006.  
Why  2006?  Because  it  was  the  year  in  which  the  US property  market  started  to  fall  after 
several years of continued, strong growth. It is perhaps hard to imagine but the turnaround in 
this market and the problems we are currently experiencing are closely linked.  
Indeed,  this  downturn  greatly  affected  many  low-income  households  in  the  United  States, 
who had taken out residential adjustable-rate mortgage loans (the famous subprime loans). 
When the value of their property plummeted, monthly repayments rose sharply, meaning that 
households were unable to repay their mortgages. This generated losses, albeit very limited 
at the outset.  
But how did these limited losses cause the most serious financial crisis since 1929? In fact, 
subprime loans were packaged into extremely complex financial products, along with other 
debt  securities  and  sold  to  insurers  and  investors.  These  securities,  known  as  “CDOs”, 
developed exponentially in the 1990s and 2000s, and came to represent colossal sums on 
the  balance  sheets  of  many  financial  institutions  worldwide.  These  instruments  were 
intended  to  disperse  credit  risk.  But  when  the  value  of  the  underlying  subprime  loans 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
collapsed in 2006/2007, it became clear, on the one hand, that the risk had not disappeared 
and, on the other, that by increasingly dispersing this risk, it was everywhere.  
This was the crux of the first episode of the crisis. Investors then realised that these products 
were  opaque  and  toxic  and  they  became  distrustful.  The  collapse  of  a  number  of  hedge 
funds in summer 2007 as a result of these products led to a freeze in interbank markets and 
banks stopped lending to each other. In September 2008, these dynamics and the attendant 
loss  of  confidence  culminated  in  the  folding  of  the  major  US investment  bank  Lehman 
Brothers. The seizing up of the interbank market and the magnitude of the shock for banks 
was  even  greater  and  had  an  immediate  impact  on  the  real  economy.  Lending  to  the 
economy declined, investments and international trade collapsed and all regions of the world 
went into recession at the end of 2008.  
This is a brief recap of the first leg of the crisis. You can see that at the outset it was a real 
estate and financial crisis whose epicentre was in the United States.  
Epicentre No.2: Since 2009, the euro area  
But how did this first crisis transform into the euro area crisis that has been raging for the 
past two years? In two words, the answer is public debt.  
Indeed, the financial crisis of 2008 had far-reaching consequences on the public finances of 
most  countries:  tax  revenues  fell  due  to  declining  activity;  welfare  spending  rose  due  to 
higher unemployment; stimulus plans had to be implemented and, in many countries with the 
notable  exception  of  France,  the  cost  of  rescuing  the  financial  system  was  huge. 
Government  deficits  in  numerous  countries  increased  and  their  debt  exploded.  As  an 
indication, the ratio of government debt to GDP of most industrialised countries rose by over 
20 points between end-2007 and today, which is very significant.  
If the fiscal positions of these countries had been sound before 2007, the situation would be 
very  different  today.  But  most  countries  had  large  deficits  and  high  debt  levels  before  the 
crisis. Creditors started to question the ability of some countries to meet their commitments. 
Doubts  emerged  as  to  the  “sustainability”  of  their  public  debt,  despite  the  fact  that,  for 
decades,  markets  had  considered  government  bonds  to  be  risk-free  or  the  safest  type  of 
asset.   
For the past two years, the epicentre of this second episode of the crisis has been in Europe 
because the first doubts about the sustainability of an OECD country’s public debt focused 
on a euro area country: Greece.  
At end-2009, the newly-elected Greek government announced that the government deficit for 
that year was twice as high as expected, above 12%, and that public debt exceeded 100%. 
Creditors  suddenly  lost  all  confidence  and  Greece’s  borrowing  rates  soared,  making  it 
impossible  for  it  to  access  market  financing.  In  fact,  for  years,  Greece  had  made  poor 
management choices: no structural reforms, no privatisation, it had raised wages much faster 
than productivity and, to cap it all, it had massaged its public debt figures. The cocktail was 
explosive and it did indeed explode.  
Markets  then  became  jittery  about  the  debt  of  two  other  euro  area  countries:  Ireland  and 
Portugal. Nonetheless, a distinction should be made between these countries’ situations.  
Ireland enjoyed very strong growth for ten years with exemplary fiscal management. But it 
made two mistakes: on the one hand, it allowed its banking sector to become too developed 
with  huge  exposure  to  US real  estate  assets  and,  on  the  other,  it  gave  an  almost  blanket 
guarantee  to  this  sector.  In  2010,  the  country  was  hit  by  the  US financial  and  real  estate 
crisis  that  caused  banks  to  fail  and  require  massive  State  bail  outs.  Its  fiscal  deficit  then 
exploded,  triggering  panic  on  the  markets.  But,  it  is  clear  that  this  crisis  was  due  to  more 
specific factors.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However, the case of Portugal is closer to that of Greece, even though it is much less critical. 
The  Portuguese  economy  has  constantly  performed  poorly  for  the  past  few  years.  Growth 
and  productivity  have  been  weak  and  fiscal  policies  very  lax.  It  is  therefore  a  crisis  of 
confidence  about  the  sustainability  Portuguese  sovereign  debt  that  caused  its  borrowing 
rates to soar and denying it access to market financing as of last March. 
Greece, Ireland and Portugal are the three countries that have benefited from EU and IMF 
rescue packages. I will return to this in greater detail in a minute. 
The financing conditions of a number of other euro area countries have been extremely tight 
for the past few months, but they have not required bail-outs. This is particularly the case of 
Spain and Italy. Here too, certain economic or political weaknesses along with deteriorated 
public finances are stoking fears in financial markets, which – I should say in passing – have 
the unfortunate habit of lumping all players together and always expecting the worst. 
I would like to stress one point: the current crisis is not a crisis of the euro but a sovereign 
debt crisis. Moreover, we can see that all the turmoil that has been affecting the economy for 
the past few years is ultimately due to indebtedness: first, US household indebtedness and 
then sovereign indebtedness.  
Nevertheless,  since  end-2009, 
the 
implementation of fiscal discipline and, more generally, in the economic governance of the 
euro area. 
The founders of the single currency had put in place the Stability and Growth Pact because 
they  knew  that  a  monetary  union  could  not  work  without  a  common  fiscal  discipline.  Its 
principles  were  sound,  aiming 
its 
implementation was greatly lacking. 
the  crisis  has  revealed  major  shortcomings 
long-term  balanced  budget.  But 
to  achieve  a 
in 
  I believe that two major mistakes were made:  
First, countries – including France and Germany – weakened the Pact by failing to 
comply with the provisions of its preventive arm (they were not in balance over the 
cycle but permanently close to the 3% deficit ceiling), or those of the corrective arm 
(they never abided by the sanctions). 
Second,  the  euro  area  did  not  equip  itself  at  the  outset  with  an  instrument  for 
monitoring  competitiveness.  The  basic  premise  is  important  and  simple:  when 
joining a monetary area whose goal is to achieve a rate of inflation of just below 2%, 
changes in its unit production costs must be in line with this central bank objective. 
In all the countries that did not abide by this calculation and this discipline, year after 
year, there was a loss of competitiveness.  
The  crux  of  the  matter  is  that,  as  soon  as  countries  were  approved  for  euro  area 
membership, they considered that they were protected simply because they belonged to a 
single currency area: as their fiscal or competitiveness gaps were no longer penalised by the 
markets  that  indiscriminately  lent  to  all  euro  area  Member  States  at  the  same  rate.  When 
doubts  started  to  emerge,  the  markets  reacted  rapidly,  violently  and  often  excessively, 
although it must be said that real underlying problems existed.  
How the euro area sovereign debt crisis has been dealt with to date 
What have we done to tackle the urgent issues stemming from the crisis and to deal with the 
underlying problems?  
Tackling the urgent issues 
To  tackle  the  urgent  issues  stemming  from  the  crisis,  it  was  first  essential  for  the  three 
countries that were experiencing major difficulties to be able to continue funding themselves: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  EU and  the  IFM  stepped  in  to  assist  them.  They  did  this  via  bilateral  loans  in  the 
beginning, and then in the framework of a structure that borrowed on the markets backed by 
a  guarantee  from  the  euro area  Member  States:  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility 
(EFSF). This support was subject to strict conditionality to ensure that the sustainability of 
public finances was restored and the country in question regained its competitiveness. These 
countries therefore undertook to meet deficit reduction targets in order, ultimately, to be able 
to tap the markets directly for their funding needs. This support was always designed to be 
temporary and encourage sound fiscal policies. 
Central  banks  also  played  a  decisive  role  throughout  the  crisis.  First,  they  cut  their  key 
interest rates sharply after the crisis of 2008 in order to guarantee price stability and boost 
lending  and  activity.  Furthermore,  they  provided  financial  institutions  with  liquidity  to  limit 
credit crunches. Since 2008, the Eurosystem, for example, has conducted fixed-rate tenders 
with full allotment against an extended range of eligible collateral. Since 2010, it has run a 
programme to purchase government securities of countries in difficulty in order to support the 
market, ease pressure on interest rates and thus improve the efficiency of the transmission 
of  its  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy.  In  addition,  cooperation  between  the  world’s 
major  central  banks  was  stepped  up,  in  particular  for  the  provision  of  foreign  currency 
liquidity.  
The  rescue  packages  put  in  place  for  Portugal  and  Ireland  are  working  well.  Ireland  in 
particular  has  considerably  reduced  its  deficit,  and  implemented  very  extensive  economic 
structural  reforms  approved  by  a  broad  political  and  social  consensus.  It  is  ahead  on  the 
execution of the programme and has even already returned to a path of growth.  
In Greece, unfortunately, the situation is less rosy. For several months, it has appeared that 
Greece  would  not  manage  to  meet  its  targets  for  reforms  and  deficit  reduction.  This  has 
exacerbated market concerns.  
To resolve this situation, the Heads of State or Government of the euro area and the IMF 
worked towards an agreement that was reached on 21 July 2011. This agreement allowed 
for major progress:  
– 
First, it agreed to support a new rescue programme for Greece, better suited to its 
situation, with lower interest rates and extended maturities; 
Second,  it  included,  on  an  exceptional  basis  and  solely  for  Greece,  a  voluntary 
contribution of the private sector to write down the country’s debt and enable it to 
recover; 
Lastly, it considerably bolstered the EFSF’s scope of action. 
– 
It is important to realise that this constitutes major progress, in particular from the point of 
view  of  European  integration.  No  one  would  have  imagined  that  this  would  have  been 
possible a few years ago. However, it was not enough to contain the crisis.  
As  of  last  August,  against  the  backdrop  of  expectations  of  slower  growth,  financial  market 
tensions  increased  again.  A  vicious  circle  developed  between  the  risk  of  a  Greek  default, 
uncertainties surrounding the debt of other euro area countries and their banking sectors. In 
other  words,  as  sovereign  debt  had  previously  been  considered  a  risk-free  asset,  banks 
purchased massive amounts of government bonds. This was especially the case in Europe 
due  to  the  interdependence  of  the  economies  and  the  free  movement  of  capital.  For 
instance, German and French banks have a relatively large exposure to Greek, Italian and 
Spanish debt. The fear of a credit default by these countries therefore constitutes a risk of 
very  heavy  losses  for  banks.  Since  this  would  ultimately  affect  the  public  finances  of  the 
States  if  it  materialised,  it  in  turn  increases  concerns  about  the  fiscal  soundness  of  these 
countries,  creating  a  vicious  circle.  So  you  can  see  that  much  of  this  mechanism  is  not 
entirely  rational.  Only  the  Greek  debt  situation  is  truly  critical,  while  all  the  other  countries 
have  solemnly  undertaken  to  repay  their  debts  in  full  and  they  are  in  a  position  to  do  so. 
Moreover, I have regularly given the exact facts and figures concerning our banks’ exposures 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and their ability to deal with extreme scenarios. But once this mechanism is set in train, it is 
hard to stop it.  
A little over two weeks ago, a European summit offered even more far-reaching solutions to 
calm  the  crisis:  the  EFSF’s  capacity  was  doubled,  banks’  capital  is  to  be  bolstered  more 
rapidly  than  planned  and  Greece’s  creditors  have  accepted  a  50%  debt  writedowns 
(compared with the 21% agreed on 21 July). 
I firmly believe that these are the right solutions. With this debt relief and the loans offered by 
the EFSF, Greece can achieve debt sustainability. I am sure that it will manage to do so if the 
agreements  are  fully  implemented  and  if  it  meets  its  commitments  in  the  areas  of  tax 
collection, structural reforms and privatisation. These efforts are obviously painful and require 
public support, but they are the only way for Greece to get back on its feet.  
Dealing with the underlying problems 
In  addition  to  tackling  the  urgent  issues  stemming  from  the  successive  crises,  it  has  been 
absolutely necessary for each country to implement all the efforts needed to restore them to 
a sound fiscal path. From my point of view, all countries have taken their responsibilities to 
do so. Their credibility is now at stake and they must be committed to bringing their public 
finances back into balance as soon as possible. Moreover, the euro area has considerably 
enhanced its fiscal discipline framework: national budgets have become subject to European 
Commission monitoring, sanctions are more automatic, and early warning mechanism more 
appropriate.  A  new 
imbalances  and 
competitiveness developments has also been put in place.  
I now wish to recall two points. First, excessive public debt is not solely a European problem. 
The sovereign credit rating of the United States was downgraded last summer and its fiscal 
policy  framework  does  not  appear  to  be  much  more  simple  or  rapid  than  that  of  the  euro 
area.  Second,  in  aggregate  terms,  the  euro  area’s  government  deficit  is  one  of  the  “least 
bad”  of  developed  countries.  It  is expected  to  stand  at  around  4.5% at  end-2011  whereas 
those of the United States and the United Kingdom are double for example. Naturally, this is 
not a reason to slow down reforms, quite the opposite. But it shows that our situation is not 
as bleak as some market developments might suggest.  
for  surveillance  of  macroeconomic 
framework 
Measures taken by the G20 in response to the crisis 
We have seen that there is a close link between the US episode that started in 2007 and the 
European  episode.  This  clearly  shows  that  the  different  regions  of  the  world  are  facing 
common challenges and that the solutions must be shared. To this end, the G20 has grown 
in prominence since 2008, and has already made significant changes.  
The  French  presidency  of  the  G20  came  to  an  end  with  the  Cannes  Summit  in  early 
November. As you may have noticed, the Greek situation grabbed the limelight meaning that 
the  major  advances  made  this  year  may  not  have  received  all  the  consideration  they 
deserved. I would therefore like to finish my talk by recalling some of these advances:  
– 
First,  the  G20,  the  FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee,  continued  their  work  on  the 
reform  of  the  international  financial  regulatory  system  underway  since  2009,  in 
particular regarding systemically important institutions; 
Second,  the  G20  finished  its  work  on  the  “Framework  for  strong,  sustainable  and 
balanced  growth”.  This  involved  strengthening  economic  cooperation  between 
countries and better taking into account the potentially damaging effects of national 
policies  on  other  countries.  For  example,  countries  running  balance  of  payment 
deficits undertake to carry out reforms, while surplus countries commit to stimulating 
domestic demand.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Third,  the  G20  also  started  work  on  reforming  the  international  monetary  system. 
This  is  naturally  a  long-term  project,  but  there  have  been  encouraging  signs,  in 
particular concerning the international role of emerging market currencies 
Lastly, G20 countries have fully understood the risk of excessive public debt. All the 
countries in this situation committed to reversing the trend. 
 It is the combination of short- and long-term national, European and international solutions 
that will enable us to truly emerge from this crisis.  
Major challenges lie ahead, but they are also opportunities to create a more stable economic 
environment for the future.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
