Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening our future 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of 
the Financial Sector Blueprint at Sasana Kijang “Strengthening Our Future”, Kuala Lumpur, 
21 December 2011. 
 It  is  my  great  honour  to  welcome  you  to  Sasana  Kijang  for  the  launch  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia’s Financial Sector Blueprint. On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia and the financial 
services industry, Yang Amat Berhormat Dato’ Sri, I wish to express our appreciation to you 
for your presence here this afternoon to launch the Financial Sector Blueprint. This Blueprint 
marks a new phase in the development of the financial system. It focuses on new areas that 
will strengthen the competitiveness and efficiency of the financial sector and its potential role 
in  facilitating  our  ongoing  economic  transformation  and  greater  regional  economic  and 
financial integration and thus to enhance Malaysia’s long term economic growth potential.  
The  Blueprint  themed  “Strengthening  Our  Future”  builds  on  and  reinforces  the  solid 
foundations  that  has  been  achieved  in  this  decade.  Malaysia  has  benefited  from  a  well 
developed,  more  competitive  and  well  regulated  financial  system.  The  financial  system 
emerged from the global financial crisis strong and resilient, and has continued to support 
our domestic economy even during these most challenging of times. 
The recommendations in the Blueprint has taken into account the expected changes in the 
international and domestic environment and its consequent demands on the financial system 
in this next decade. It also takes into account Malaysia’s aspirations to become a high value-
added, high income economy.  
Within the global economic landscape, emerging economies will assume a more significant 
role. While emerging economies will continue to be affected by global developments, most 
are  able  to  demonstrate  resilience  and  are  expected  to  remain  on  a  growth  trajectory.  By 
2030, emerging economies are projected to account for 60% of total world output, from the 
current 40%.  
At  the  same  time,  the  economies  and  financial  markets  in  the  global  economy  and 
international financial system have become more interconnected as a result of greater cross-
border trade and financial flows. The continued development and deepening of our financial 
markets and increased financial liberalisation in emerging economies will reinforce this trend 
towards greater interconnectivity.  
More recently, the financial sector has been the target of a renewed focus and priority by the 
international  community.  Wide  ranging  financial  reform  measures  have  been  introduced  in 
the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis  to  address  the  weaknesses  that  have  surfaced 
during the crisis.  
Several changes are also transforming the domestic environment. New domestic sources of 
growth, the greater role of the private sector in the economy, demographic changes, rising 
incomes and a growing middle class, and the accelerated pace of urbanisation cumulatively 
will  significantly  change  the  demands  on  the  financial  sector.  These  trends  will  also  be 
affected by initiatives taken by the Government to transform the economy in this next decade 
into  a  high  value-added,  high-income  economy,  the  greater  leverage  on  the  advances  of 
technology and the acceleration of the pace of regional financial integration in Asia. 
The Malaysian financial system enters this new environment from a position of strength. The 
successful implementation of the first Financial Sector Masterplan in this recent decade has 
produced a financial system that is well positioned to respond to the new imperatives of the 
decade  before  us.  Our  financial  institutions  are  well  capitalised  with  strong  buffers  and 
improved risk management and governance practices. Significant efficiency gains have also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reduced intermediation costs in an environment of greater competition. This is largely arising 
from  the  cumulative  efforts  to  building  strong  institutions,  the  development  of  the  financial 
infrastructure, and the strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework.  
This decade has also seen the enactment of wide ranging legislation that has given greater 
certainty and predictability in the financial system. This includes the Central Bank of Malaysia 
Act  2009  and  the  Financial  Services  Act  expected  to  be  tabled  in  Parliament  in  2012  has 
strengthened  the  legal  framework  for  the  financial  sector.  It  will  also  enhance  the  Bank’s 
capacity  to  manage  risks  from  financial  intermediation  activities  that  occur  outside  the 
banking system and provide enhanced powers for timely intervention actions. 
The  enhanced  intermediation  during  this  decade  has  benefitted  access  to  financing, 
particularly  for  small  and  medium  enterprises,  has  also  improved,  both  in  volume  and 
efficiency.  By  leveraging  on  the  distribution  networks  of  commercial  banks,  enhanced 
product and risk management capabilities, access to financing by this sector has increased 
at an annual rate of almost 20% since 2005.  
The  financial  infrastructure  in  Malaysia  has  also  been  significantly  strengthened.  Malaysia 
has an effective financial safety net that includes a comprehensive deposit insurance system 
and institutional arrangements that provide avenues for advisory, redress and rehabilitation. 
Innovations in payment systems and instruments as well as infrastructure for the issuance, 
trading  and  settlement  of  debt  securities  and  the  access  improved  market  information  has 
contributed to greater efficiency and has also enhanced the overall price discovery process. 
To support our liberalisation measures our payment infrastructure has also been enhanced 
to support cross-border trade settlements in local currency and cross-border liquidity support 
arrangements for financial institutions. 
Today, Malaysia also has a deep and vibrant bond market which is the largest in South East 
Asia, and a comprehensive Islamic financial system that is recognised as among the most 
advanced in the world. The bond market comprising of the conventional and sukuk market 
has  trebled  in  size,  providing  businesses  with  alternative  access  to  financing  solutions 
including  in  multicurrency  to  meet  a  diverse  range  of  risk  and  maturity  preferences.  The 
strengthened Islamic financial institutions, the establishment of key financial infrastructure for 
Islamic finance including the regulatory and supervisory framework have positioned Malaysia 
at the frontier of Islamic finance.  
The recommendations in the Blueprint aim to build on this progress towards resulting in the 
development of a financial sector that will meet the economic and financial realities of this 
new decade. The financial system envisaged 
 
will  be  firmly  anchored  in  the  real  economy  in  providing  financial  services  that 
contribute positively to growth;  
that  offers  a  diverse  range  of  products,  services  and  institutions  that  cater  to  the 
financial needs of a broader spectrum of Malaysian households and businesses;  
will be reinforced by deep, liquid and efficient foreign exchange and money markets 
to complement the bond market;  
that is more engaged with the region and other parts of the world;  
that can contribute meaningfully to Malaysia’s economic transformation; and finally,  
a  financial  system  that  is  inclusive  in  reaching  Malaysians  across  all  social, 
geographic and economic stratas.  
   It  is  envisaged  that  by  2020,  the  financial  system  is  expected  to  expand  from  the  current 
4.3 times to six times of GDP. Correspondingly, the financial sector contribution to nominal 
GDP is projected to rise from 8.6% to between 10 to 12% in 2020. More than half of total 
financing in 2020 will be raised through financial markets, while Islamic finance will continue 
to increase in prominence, growing at a faster pace to account for 40% of total financing.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in 
the 
financial 
intermediation 
linkages  between 
the  various  sub-sectors 
(vii)  achieving  greater  economic  efficiency 
for  a  high  value-added,  high-income  economy; 
in  our  economy.  Malaysia  will  also  continue 
inclusion;  (iv)  strengthening  regional  and  international 
The  Blueprint  has  adopted  an  integrated  approach  that  reflects  a  financial  sector  that  has 
increasing 
financial  system.  The 
recommendations,  in  the  Blueprint  are  thus  centred  on  achieving  nine  major  areas: 
(i) effective 
(ii) the 
development of deep and dynamic financial markets; (iii) greater shared prosperity through 
financial 
integration; 
(v) internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance;  (vi)  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system; 
through  electronic  payments; 
(viii) empowered consumers; and (ix) talent development for the financial sector.  
A strong focus in the Blueprint is on developing the financial ecosystem to enhance funding 
for  innovation  which  represents  a  key  transformative  agenda  in  our  new  economic  model. 
Ten  initiatives  in  the  Blueprint  are  devoted  directly  to  nurturing  sources  of  financing  for 
innovative enterprises in all sectors and at various stages of development. Over the next ten 
years,  steps  will  be  taken  to  achieve  a  wider  range  of  funding  sources  for  new  ideas, 
including new conduits for financing and investments in innovative industries.  
With the foundations now in place for greater liberalisation, the Blueprint extends this path by 
assuming  a  more  regional  and  international  complexion.  This  will  entail  positioning  our 
financial sector to participate more effectively in the mobilisation of regional surplus funds to 
productive  investments  in  the  region.  The  financial  sector  will  also  advance  the  country’s 
external  orientation  by  serving  Malaysian  corporations  in  their  regional  and  international 
operations,  as  well  as  facilitating  greater  participation  of  international  and  regional 
corporations 
the 
internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  to  facilitate  greater  cross-border  Islamic  financial 
activities. The Blueprint will also pave the way for the integration of the existing national-level 
Shariah  Councils  into  a  single  apex  authority  on  Shariah  matters  to  be  established  for  all 
institutions offering Islamic financial services in Malaysia. 
In the Blueprint, financial liberalisation will be pursued in the best interests of Malaysia. The 
goals  for  financial  liberalisation  are  twofold.  Firstly,  to  improve  allocative  efficiency  to 
productive  economic  activities,  to  increase  the  operational  efficiency  and  lower  further  the 
intermediation costs, and to encourage greater financial innovation. Secondly, to strengthen 
further  Malaysia’s  economic  and  financial  linkages  with  the  region  and  other  parts  of  the 
emerging world. Key recommendations in the Blueprint include more flexible limits on foreign 
participation in financial institutions, the issuance of new licenses to financial institutions with 
specialised  expertise  that  are  able  to  contribute  to  Malaysia’s  economic  aspirations  and 
financial sector development. In implementing these strategies an assessment will be made 
on  the  factors  contributing  to  the  best  interests  of  Malaysia.  In  addition  to  the  prudential 
criteria that must be met, the presence of strong and well-managed domestic banking groups 
that  will  account  for  a  significant  share  of  resident  deposits  will  remain  important  for  the 
orderly growth and development of the financial sector and of the Malaysian economy. 
As our financial sector continues to advance over the next decade, priority will continue to be 
accorded  to  ensuring  that  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  remains  current  and 
continues to foster a sound and stable financial system within a more dynamic landscape. 
Given the more complex nature of risks stemming from greater convergence in the financial 
sector,  the  proposed  new  financial  services  legislation  will  be  to  promote  consistent 
approaches to regulation and supervision across the financial sector, strengthen the Bank’s 
capacity to manage risks associated with financial intermediation including financial activities 
that currently outside the regulated system.  
A national consumer credit law and improved arrangements for combating financial crime are 
also included in the recommendations. To ensure that cross-border financial linkages do not 
propagate  risks  across  borders,  the  Central  bank  will  intensify  its  coordination  with  other 
regional  and  international  supervisory  authorities,  focusing  in  achieving  more  consistent 
to  spearhead 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
regulatory and supervisory standards, timely information exchange and effective supervisory 
colleges. 
An  important  agenda  under  the  Blueprint  will  be  to  accelerate  the  migration  from  paper-
based  payments  to  electronic-payments  to  generate  significant  economic  efficiencies  from 
more expedient, secure and cost-effective means of moving funds. A range of measures will 
be introduced to accelerate the pace of migration towards e-payments, including driving the 
adoption of the mobile phone banking and payment transactions, increasing the number of 
point-of-sale  terminals,  and  introducing  a  pricing  structure  that  incentivises  the  use  of 
e-payments.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  expressing  the  Bank’s  appreciation  for  all  the  valuable  contributions 
received from the industry, Government agencies and other stakeholder groups with whom 
the  Bank  engaged  over  the  course  of  this  year  to  develop  the  recommendations  in  the 
Blueprint. In total, the Blueprint sets out 69 recommendations to achieve the vision for the 
financial sector in 2020. The Blueprint provides the vision and direction to secure a financial 
system  that  will  firmly  support  and  drive  Malaysia’s  long-term  growth  potential  and 
aspirations. It will be our shared commitment that will result in its success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
