Barry Whiteside: Development of microfinance in Fiji 
Opening speech by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the South 
Pacific Business Development’s First Year Anniversary, Suva, 7 December 2011. 
 Mr. Gregory Casagrande – Founder of the South Pacific Business Development Group, 
Mr.  Elrico  Munoz  –  General  Manager,  South  Pacific  Business  Development  Microfinance  
Fiji Ltd, 
Management, Staff and Members of South Pacific Business Development Microfinance Fiji, 
Our Lady Entrepreneurs 
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
A Good Afternoon and bula vinaka to you all!  
It  is  an  honor  and  great  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  celebrate  South  Pacific 
Business  Development  (SPBD)  Fiji’s  first  anniversary  as  a  microfinance  institution  in  Fiji. 
From what I have heard, it has certainly been a year of many successes. 
I  wish  to  thank  Elrico  for  his  kind  invitation  and  I  congratulate  SPBD  for  its  impressive 
achievements in providing inclusive financial services to almost 3,000 women and organizing 
more than 145 village-based groups throughout the Rewa, Tailevu, Namosi, Suva and Lami 
areas. What a wonderful achievement! 
Women and microfinance 
The  theme  for  your  foundation  day  of  “Empowering Women through  Microfinance”  is  a 
very fitting one. It not only reflects the work that is being done by SPBD, but also serves as a 
national  call  to  encourage  women  to  believe  in  their  talent  and  skills  and  to  use  these 
effectively to improve their families livelihoods. I applaud the management and all you micro 
entrepreneurs of SPBD for taking up this initiative and excelling in it. 
The availability, to previously unbanked and underserved areas, of small loans, savings and 
investment  opportunities,  micro-insurance  and  other  financial  products  and  services, 
provides a truly powerful tool for social and economic change, especially for women. 
Several studies reveal that by having access to some form of financial services, women have 
become more confident and more independent. They are receiving the recognition that they 
deserve in their families, their communities and their villages. Today, women play a crucial 
role  in  decision  making.  I  believe  that  all  clients  of  SPBD  Fiji  present  here  today  have 
experienced this change and it is definitely a positive one for our whole country. 
This is what microfinance is all about, empowering women, making a positive change that 
spreads  its  benefits  not  only  to  your  family  members,  but  also  to  the  community  at  large. 
Microfinance acts as a bridge for women to be able to turn their dreams into reality. I know 
many of you have personally felt and lived this welcome change. 
Microfinance to support these developments 
includes  microfinance,  has  been 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, 
acknowledged  the  world  over  as  being  critical  to  lifting  the  living  standards  of  people  and 
addressing  poverty.  Financial  inclusion  is  all  about  the  availability  of  safe  savings, 
inclusion,  which 
financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
appropriately designed loans and appropriate insurance and payment services, all designed 
for the poor and low income households. Financial inclusion is about empowering or helping 
people to help themselves to increase their income, acquire capital, manage risk and work 
their way out of poverty and into a better life. 
According to the 2008–2009 Household Income and Expenditure Survey for Fiji, there has 
been a large increase in the number of self-employed women in our country. Data indicate 
these women represented 24 percent of total self-employed in 2008, up from 16 percent in 
2002. I would expect the numbers to have increased even further with the advent of SPBD 
Fiji and your participation over the past 12 months. These numbers are surely a positive sign, 
indicating  that  recent  initiatives  to  encourage  and  support  women  in  self-employment  are 
clearly bearing fruit. 
To all micro-entrepreneurs present here today and to those who are interested in starting up 
a micro business, please remember that microfinance is not only about receiving loans. It is 
much more than that. It is also about savings. Therefore, it is very important that you make 
wise decisions while using the funds that are made available to you. I encourage you to take 
heed of the financial literacy training that is disseminated to you by the Company. 
Saving a dollar today, and whenever you can, will go a long way. Starting your own business 
is  the  very  first  step.  Ensuring  that  you  expand  this  business  is  also  very  critical  for  a 
sustained  flow  of  income.  Using  the  revenue  from  your  own  business  to  put  food  on  your 
table  and  to  educate  your  children  are  the  building  blocks  for  a  prosperous  nation. 
Microfinance is a platform that has provided you with an opportunity to do just that. 
Development in financial inclusion and microfinance 
Ladies  and Gentleman,  as  you  may  be  aware,  in  2009  a National  Microfinance Workshop 
was  organized  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  supported  by  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme  (PFIP).  A  key  outcome  at  this  workshop  was  the  commitment  by  all  the 
participants  to  a  common  vision  of  “…reaching  at  least  150,000  unbanked  citizens 
through a coordinated national effort by the year 2014”. 
It  is  extremely  encouraging  to  note  that  we  are  on  track  towards  achieving  these  goals, 
perhaps  even  earlier  than  targeted.  By  September  this  year,  34  percent  of  the  150,000 
persons targeted, have since had some form of access to basic financial services. This, I am 
happy  to  say,  is  due  to  the  efforts  of  all  the  stakeholders  that  are  part  of  this  process  of 
enabling an outreach of greater financial inclusion in Fiji. 
In  addition  to  this,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  has  continued  its  outreach  and  awareness 
programmes by way of microfinance expositions or expos throughout Fiji. This year we held 
two expos, as a follow up to those held in Ba, Labasa and Suva in 2010.  
A first ever microfinance expo was held in the Maritime zone (from 21 to 25 March) covering 
Savusavu, Taveuni, Koro, Gau and Levuka. 
The  second  expo  was  when  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  partnership  with  thirteen  other 
stakeholders,  including  SPBD,  organized  a  Microfinance  Village  at  the  2011  Vodafone 
Hibiscus Festival in Suva from 19–27 August. The objective was to disseminate and promote 
awareness to the public about the broad range of financial services and products available 
and to create an opportunity for the micro-entrepreneurs to not only sell their wares, but to 
also allow them to gather financial information from all the various financial institutions which 
had  set  up  their  stalls  under  one  roof  at  Albert  Park.  I  understand  that  some  of  you 
entrepreneurs even took the opportunity to make some investments and open some savings 
deposits. 
I  would  just  like  to  mention  that  the  RBF  Microfinance  Village  was  awarded  the  “Most 
Entertaining Booth” by the Hibiscus Festival organizers. The spectacular performances by 
the SPBD clients, which I am sure include some of you who are present here today, were 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
one of the highlights in the village. The colourful costumes and traditional and contemporary 
dance numbers made the event fun-filled and more family oriented. A big Vinaka Vakalevu to 
all the performers. 
We are indeed really grateful for the tremendous on-going support from all the stakeholders 
that have enabled us to take a collaborative approach to greater financial inclusion in Fiji. 
SPBD catalyst for promoting microfinance 
Ladies and Gentlemen, today I am extremely delighted to share some of the achievements 
that SPBD Fiji has accomplished in its short life in our country. 
In  just  12  months  of  operations,  the  company  has  been  able  to  provide  some  form  of 
financial service to almost 3,000 women. The range of activities, in which the entrepreneurs 
are  involved,  signifies  how  innovative  women  are  in  ensuring  a  sustained  livelihood  for 
themselves and their families. 
SPBD Fiji clients have saved about $300,000 and have taken out $2.3 million as loans to 
start or expand a small business. It is also pleasing to note that SPBD has maintained an 
excellent repayment rate of no less than 97 percent. This is a tremendous outcome and it 
speaks volumes for the Company’s policies and procedures and relationships with the lady 
clients. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  today,  we  shall  also  witness  a  showcase  of  how  entrepreneurship 
development  through  microfinance  has  changed  the  lives  of  women.  I  congratulate  the 
finalists of the SPBD Businesswoman of the Year Awards, for serving as living inspiration to 
all  the  ladies  here.  To  all  you  businesswomen,  I  salute  you  for  taking  that  extra  step  to 
improve your lives and the lives of your loved ones. 
I  understand  SPBD  has  partnered  with  other  institutions  in  providing  better  services  to  its 
clients.  An  example  is  its  partnership  with  Westpac  in  the  provision  of  financial  literacy 
sessions in the villages. Recently, SPBD has partnered with the Life Insurance Corporation 
of India to provide microinsurance coverage for its members at very affordable cost and with 
simple,  easily  understood  procedures.  Very  soon,  SPBD  clients  will  also  be  able  to  repay 
their  loans  and  build  their  savings  through  Vodaphone’s  MPAiSA  mobile  phone  payment 
system. 
SPBD  has  been  working  tirelessly  to  ensure  that  its  clients  are  getting  the  best  services 
available. 
In  the  coming  years,  we  look  forward  to  SPBD  expanding  its  services  not  only  across  the 
whole island of Viti Levu, but also to the other islands, including Vanua Levu and even the 
smaller  islands.  I  understand  the  Company  has  an  ambitious  target  of  reaching  15,000 
clients by 2015. I certainly wish SPBD the very best in achieving this vision. 
Conclusion  
Ladies and Gentlemen, in concluding, I would just like to say that it is important for us in the 
Reserve Bank to be acquainted with, and be a part of, the ongoing initiatives, developments 
and future prospects in Fiji’s microfinance sector. As a regulator we try our best to create an 
enabling  environment  for  microfinance  to  thrive  in  Fiji.  It  is  our  job  to  ensure  there  is  a 
competitive  market  that  upholds  the  value  of  transparency  and  accountability  and  a  level 
playing field for all. 
The  active  participation  of  women  in  the  economy,  as  well  as  contributing  to  economic 
growth, is something that microfinance facilitates and something we can all be proud of. The 
onus is on each one of you present here today to work hand in hand to provide your families 
a means to better your standard of living. The time cannot be more opportune for those who 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
are  thinking  of  making  a  difference  in  their  lives  to  be  part  of  microfinance  and  the  whole 
financial inclusion drive. 
Ladies,  please  take  this  moment  to  reflect  on  the  positive  changes  that  microfinance  has 
brought about in your family, community and the nation at large. You are doing something 
special, so I urge you to keep up the momentum. We all know that an economy is only as 
good as its individual units that encompass it. 
I have always believed that “financial inclusion is not about giving handouts to anyone, it’s 
about helping the people to help themselves”. 
Once again, I thank Mr. Casagrande and Mr. Munoz for their kind invitation. I wish them and 
their team at SPBD every success. I also would like to express my appreciation to SPBD for 
continuing to contribute to the development of microfinance in Fiji. May you continue to do so 
for many more years. 
To  all  you  award  nominees  here  today,  I  wish  you  the  best  and  congratulate  you  on  your 
achievements. In my mind, even if you miss out on a prize, you are all still winners. 
Vinaka Vakalevu. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
