Barry Whiteside: Brief update on Fiji’s economy 
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Opening  of 
Bank South Pacific’s Lautoka Branch, Lautoka, 10 November 2011. 
 Mr Kevin McCarthy, BSP Fiji Country Manager 
Management and Staff of Bank South Pacific 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Let me start by thanking Mr. McCarthy for his kind invitation to come to Lautoka this evening 
to open Bank South Pacific’s newest branch. It is an honour for me to be here.  
I must say that I have many fond memories of our second city, as I spent some of my most 
formative years here when my Dad served as Postmaster back in the 1960s. I can clearly 
remember  my  Drasa  Avenue  School  days,  and  the  homes  we  lived  in  on  Kadavu  Street, 
Valima Hill and Tagimoucia Street – stretching from one end of town to the other. 
I also remember the great abundance and sweet smells of sugar cane and mangoes, and the 
sound of the regular sirens to signal the change of shift at the then CSR mill. I remember 
tasting  “burnt”  sugar  for  the  first  time  many  years  ago  and  taking  early  morning  rides  to 
Saweni on the Free Train. As you may have guessed I have many fond memories of this city. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  opening  of  your  new  Lautoka  Westfield  Branch  is  another 
milestone to check off in BSP Fiji’s relatively short history in our country. This Pacific bank 
continues to expand its operations and make its presence known in our market. 
Not long ago, when it opened its doors in December 2006, BSP was regarded by some as a 
small operator with a niche market inherited from Habib Bank, the bank whose single branch 
Fiji  operations  BSP  had  purchased.  We  of  course  know  that  BSP  is  the  largest  bank  and 
major  player  in  its  home  country  of  Papua  &  New  Guinea  with  more  than  FJD9  billion  in 
assets. (Note: K10.972 billion as at June 2011) 
However,  BSP  has  come  to  our  country  with  a  specific  purpose  to  grow  its  international 
footprint.  I  can  say  that  in  the  short  span  of  time  since  its  inception  here,  it  has  certainly 
worked  hard  to  make  its  presence  felt.  My  staff  inform  me  that  BSP  Fiji  operations  now 
includes  representation  points  through  20  branches  (including  your  Westfield  Branch), 
48 agencies, 97 ATMs, 171 EFTPOS Merchants and 568 EFTPOS Terminals. 
The  recent  advent  of  SMS  banking  has  further  widened  BSP’s  in-country  reach  currently 
recording 64,000 registered users. BSP has also expanded in terms of its deposit base which 
now  stands  at  more  than  200,  000  deposit  accounts  valued  at  more  than  $688m.  Staff 
numbers  have  also  increased  to  565  compared  to  11  that  started  with  the  branch  in 
December 2006. 
During  these  challenging  times,  it  is  always  encouraging  to  see  businesses  expand  their 
operations  to  better  serve  their  customers’  needs.  I  wish  to  congratulate  BSP  for  its 
commitment to Fiji and also for the confidence it has shown in the Fiji economy. 
The BSP Westfield Branch 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  many  people  would  place  Lautoka  outside  the  circle  of  fast 
developing  urban  centers  in  Fiji,  by  these  I  mean  Suva  and  Nadi.  Your  city  has, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
unfortunately,  not  really  enjoyed  the  growth  seen  in  these  two  centers  over  the  last  two 
decades.  However,  I  do  know  that  you  have  in  your  presence,  business  men  and  women 
who have maintained their links over the years and have the community of Lautoka in their 
collective hearts. They continue to have faith and run their operations here. I do, however, 
look  forward  to  seeing  changes  and  more  bright  spots  emerging  with  the  longed  for 
resurgence of sugar, an industry on which your city had been founded. 
I also read with interest just last week of additional prospects in regard to a fish processing 
business that is being established here. The generation of much needed new employment 
and activity can only mean good things for your community and Fiji. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I find the decision by Kevin and his Team to open this new branch in 
Lautoka,  a  very  strategic  one.  It  is  no  secret  that  we  have  come  through  a  period  of 
extremely sluggish growth. It is also no secret that during such times commercial banks will 
work hard to ensure that their clients continue to remain with them. They will also need to 
work harder to acquire new clients. It can be a time of great competition. 
With all banks in Fiji of reputable names and brands, customer service and convenience will 
play a major role in maintaining banking relationships. 
The  opening  of  this  new  Westfield  Branch  will  provide  BSP  with  a  platform  to  maintain  its 
customer base and also get new stable and quality customers. 
I  have  been  told  that  this  new  Westfield  branch  will  have  general  banking  facilities  on  the 
ground floor, while the lending and international sections will be based on the first floor, with 
management.  I  have  also  been  informed  that  the  branch  will  host  a  Premium  Service 
Centre  for  High  Value  customers  –  providing  personal  bankers,  international  business, 
priority tellers for business banking customers as well as a safe deposit box facility.  
The  move  to  this  new  location  will  also  make  way  for  the  renovation  of  the  old  premises 
which I have been told will be re-opened as a multi-function business centre, offering among 
other  things,  BSP  First,  the  bank’s  priority  banking  platform.  This  is  expected  to  extend 
BSP’s exposure to the corporate community in Lautoka, with a reliance on brand and retail 
presence. 
You  may  have  all  noticed  the  close  proximity  of  the  location  of  this  new  branch  to  central 
areas of convergence in the city such as the Lautoka Bus Terminal and the main shopping 
centres around it. I have been made aware that the BSP Automatic Teller Machine located in 
the Sugar City Mall is the highest performing ATM out of all the BSP ATMs in Fiji, and no 
doubt  the  opening  of  this  branch  will  compliment  an  already  active  presence  of  BSP  in 
Lautoka.  
Someone once said that “If we don’t take care of our customers; someone else will ”. 
BSP  has  certainly  heeded  these  words  by  opening  a  new  branch  that  will  take  care  of  its 
present and future customers in Lautoka. 
I take this opportunity to thank BSP for its role in providing guidance and leadership to the 
business community and to the wider Fiji economy through its services, innovative products 
and great expansion towards introducing the latest banking technology to Fiji. 
Brief economic update 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to take this opportunity to share with you a few updates on 
our economy. 
The  IMF  Article  IV  Mission  for  Fiji  concluded  its  2011  just  6  days  ago  and  noted  that  our 
financial system remains sound. The Mission also concurred with the recent policy stances of 
the Reserve Bank. On growth prospects, the IMF Mission has noted a growth of 2 percent in 
2011, by far the best result of the past 5 years, and in part reflecting a bounce back after two 
consecutive years of contraction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Reserve  Bank  has  continued  with  its  accommodative  stance  with  regard  to  monetary 
policy  to  encourage  banks  to  lend  more  and  stimulate  growth.  However,  in  the  current 
situation  of  high  liquidity  in  the  banking  system,  we  will  remain  vigilant  to  any  signs  of 
inflation coming through domestic pressures. 
Liquidity  in  the  banking  system,  measured  by  bank  demand  deposits  held  at  the  Reserve 
Bank, is currently around $522 million. This liquidity stems from growth in reserves coupled 
with weak demand for credit from the domestic economy. This can be seen in low annual 
growth  rates  in  commercial  bank  lending.  We  have  however  seen  some  pickup  in  recent 
months. 
Foreign  reserves  are  currently  around  $1.5  billion,  sufficient  to  cover  nearly  5  months  of 
imports of goods and non-factor services. 
In view of the relatively comfortable reserves position, the Reserve Bank has further reduced 
some exchange controls and will continue to work with banks and other key stakeholders to 
reduce uncertainties considered as hindrances towards increasing investment. 
Ladies  and gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  maintains  an  open  door  policy  in  regard to  new 
entrants to the financial system in Fiji, provided that potential licensed entities meet relevant 
legislative and regulatory requirements. It was in this spirit that we approved the acquisition 
of the former Colonial National Bank by Bank South Pacific Limited, and we will continue to 
approve other players into the market to allow for healthy competition. Such competition will 
benefit us all. 
BSP has again today demonstrated its confidence in Fiji by further putting in new capital to 
expand its branch network. I would urge all of us here this evening to make a difference to 
raise investment, and ensure that Fiji’s economic growth is sustainable. 
Official opening 
Once  again,  I  thank  Mr.  McCarthy  for  his  kind  invitation.  I  wish  him  and  his  team  at  BSP 
every success in their operations in Fiji. 
I now have much pleasure in declaring the BSP Westfield, Lautoka branch open. 
Vinaka. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
