Rundheersing Bheenick: Review of the year gone by and reflections on 
the present and future outlook 
Statement  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Port  Louis, 
7 October 2011. 
 As  I  settled  down  to  write  this,  it  struck  me  that  what  I  had  described  as  “stressful  and 
extraordinary  times”  in  my  previous  Statement  seem  set  to  last  for  quite  some  time.  The 
global economy has become even more unpredictable and much of the traditional thinking is 
being  put  to  the  test  as  longheld  paradigms  are  thrown  overboard.  Hopes  of  a  quick  and 
easy  recovery  faded  away  rapidly.  New  threats  have  emerged.  Persistent  Eurozone 
sovereign debt concerns have thrown markets into turmoil, driving bond-yields of vulnerable 
economies to record highs. 
The situation has been no less alarming on the other side of the Atlantic where Standard & 
Poor’s downgraded the credit rating of the US, a debt default was averted in extremis, and 
financial markets plunged. Business sentiment and consumer confidence have nosedived as 
businesses  and  households  postpone  spending  and  consumption.  All  these,  together  with 
jittery markets hungry for good news that, when they come, prove all-too-fleeting, make this 
super-cycle one of the most volatile ever witnessed. 
In  most  advanced  economies,  the  global  recession  had  a  negative  impact  on  budgetary 
conditions,  with  many  governments  gradually  adopting  austerity  measures.  Under  the 
pressure of market sentiment, fiscal consolidation and structural adjustments have become 
the order of the day. 
Emerging economies could not long survive unscathed. So it has been for Mauritius. As we 
engaged  to  deal  with  these  snowballing  challenges,  the  Bank  remained  alert  and  nimble, 
taking decisive and timely action to protect the interest of the Mauritian economy. 
As in years past, let me recapture the highlights of the year gone by and briefly comment on 
the present and future outlook. 
 
The  financial  health  of  our  banks  was  at  the  top  of  our  agenda.  They  remained 
resilient  and  profitable,  with  aggregate  pre-tax  profits  standing  at  Rs13.3  billion  in 
2010/11, as against Rs13.9 billion in the preceding year. 
A  sure  sign  of  the  fine  health  of  our  banking  sector  was  the  entry  of  additional 
operators on the banking scene, with (i) the conversion of a non-bank deposit taking 
institution into a full-fledged bank in June 2010 and (ii) the first Islamic bank starting 
operations in March 2011. 
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) took a number of proactive measures during 
the year. When the economic climate showed signs of losing momentum, the MPC 
decided unanimously in September 2010 to lower the Key Repo Rate (KRR) by a 
full 100 basis points, to support the on-going restructuring of enterprises. This policy 
decision went in the opposite direction of the stance that most central banks were 
adopting  at  the  time.  We  were  vindicated  in  our  decision  when  domestic  data 
releases  in  the  first  half  of  2011  indicated  that  the  economy  was  performing  well 
despite  the  uncertain  global  economic  environment.  However,  since  inflationary 
pressures  started  building  up,  the  MPC  adjusted  its  monetary  policy  stance  and 
proceeded to two successive hikes in the KRR  in March and June 2011. Inflation 
rose sharply from 1.7 per cent in June 2010 to 5.1 per cent in June 2011. 
The year was characterised by a system plagued with excess liquidity, a situation 
diametrically  opposite  to  what  prevailed  in  many  leading  economies.  The  Bank 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
innovated by issuing instruments of longer maturity, namely Bank of Mauritius Notes 
of 2-Year, 3-Year and 4-Year maturities. To complement these measures, we raised 
the Cash Reserve Ratio in successive steps from 5.0 per cent to 7.0 per cent. The 
measures  were  so  successful  that  the  excess  reserves  disappeared,  with  the 
system even experiencing short bouts of liquidity stress. 
Faced  with  the  impact  of  the  low  interest  rates  on  our  investments  in  the  major 
currencies,  we  actively  pursued  our  reserves  diversification  strategy  –  you  will 
remember that we had more than doubled our gold holdings to around 6 per cent of 
our  reserves.  We  reduced  our  percentage  holdings  of  US  dollars  which  stood  at 
around 70 per cent in 2001 down to around 30 per cent currently. We increased our 
holdings  in  high-yielding  currencies  –  namely  New  Zealand  dollars,  Australian 
dollars as well as the Danish krone and the Swedish krona – and our investment in 
Fixed  Income  Securities.  We  entrusted  a  new  mandate  for  the  management  of 
150 million euros to the Bank for International Settlements. We added the Sovereign 
Investment  Partnership  of  the  World  Bank  as  a  portfolio  manager  for  an  initial 
tranche of 100 million US dollars. These initiatives are already bringing results and 
have strengthened our balance sheet. Discussions are on-going for the investment 
of part of our reserves in the securities of some BRICS, namely India, South Africa 
and China. 
We  have  consolidated  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  during  the  year.  The  gross 
official international reserves of the country increased from Rs70.1 billion at the end 
of  June  2010  to  Rs81.7  billion  at  the  end  of  June  2011.  Furthermore,  the  import 
coverage of the country’s net international reserves increased from 39.5 weeks at 
the end of June 2010 to 41.5 weeks at the end of June 2011. 
Currency markets showed very high volatility throughout Financial Year 2010/2011. 
In spite of this turbulence, we succeeded in maintaining a fairly stable exchange rate 
during the year under review. As observed by the International Monetary Fund in its 
Article  IV  Consultation  Report  of  February  2011,  our  currency  was  broadly  in  line 
with economic fundamentals. 
While in most advanced economies, there was a marked deterioration in the public 
accounts,  our  public  finances  have  proved  to  be  quite  resilient  to  shocks.  Public 
sector debt remained quite close to the statutory level of 60 per cent of GDP. From 
57.7 per cent as at end-December 2010, it fell to 55.9 per cent at end-June 2011. 
Moody’s  rating  of  Baa2  and  stable  outlook  for  Government  of  Mauritius  bonds 
reflected the healthy state of our public finances. 
We struck a major blow for transparency when we took the bold decision to publish 
the CAMEL Ratings of all banks in the country. The first ratings were published in 
April 2011 and it is hoped that making these ratings widely available will lead to a 
better-informed consumer while encouraging banks to keep up their performance. 
The Bank, now a full member of the Islamic Financial Services Board, pursued its 
efforts to consolidate the enabling environment for Islamic finance. We joined in the 
global initiative to launch the International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation 
as a founder-member in October 2010, along with ten other central banks and two 
multilateral organizations. We provided for staff training in Islamic finance under the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) which we signed with Bank Negara Malaysia 
in October 2010. 
We  also  joined  the  International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers  as  an  Associate 
member  as  we  are  actively  working  towards  the  establishment  of  a  deposit 
insurance scheme for Mauritius. 
During  the  year  in  review,  in  collaboration  with  the  banking  sector,  we  put  in 
significant  efforts  to  accelerate  the  upgrading  of  our  national  payment  system  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
        2 
          enable the clearing of cheques electronically. I am pleased to report that the cheque 
truncation system is now a reality in Mauritius and cheques are cleared in real time. 
I shall come back on this development in my next Statement. 
We  made  much  headway  in  consolidating  our  position  on  the  regional  front.  The 
Bank of Mauritius was appointed as the Settlement Bank of REPSS, the Regional 
Payment and Settlement System, to assist the cross-border payment and settlement 
needs  of  exporters  and  importers  of  COMESA  member-states  through  their 
respective Central Banks. We are all set for REPSS to go live soon. The System will 
allow  for  same  day  settlement  at  much  lower  cost  as  compared  to  the  current 
system which relies on settlement via universal banks established in money centres. 
We are also looking into the possibility of extending the REPSS platform to countries 
beyond COMESA. 
In our endeavour to strengthen relations and bilateral ties with peers in the region, 
we welcomed Governor Laporte of the Central Bank of Seychelles at the head of a 
delegation to share our experience in certain areas of central banking. We hosted 
the 31st Meeting of the Bureau of the COMESA Committee of Governors of Central 
Banks in August 2010. 
A  further  focus  this  year  was  our  enhanced  Communication  and  Outreach 
Programme.  The  most  direct  form  of  communication  was  through  a  program  of 
regular speeches by senior Bank officials, including myself. In fact, a record number 
of speeches have been uploaded on the Bank’s website to inform the public on the 
thinking of the Bank on various issues of topical interest. The MPC Statement and 
the  post-MPC  press  conference  have  become  reference  points  for  the  media  and 
the  public  at  large,  including  Mauritius-watchers  overseas.  The  decision-making 
process  of 
its 
accountability. 
We  also  received  the  visit  of  eminent  speakers  from  abroad,  namely  Paul  Collier, 
Professor of Economics and Director of the Centre for African Studies, University of 
Oxford  who  delivered  a  talk  on  “Central  Banking  Challenges  in  Africa”,  and  Mr 
Steven  Barrow,  Head  of  G10  Strategy  at  Standard  Bank  London,  who  addressed 
the topic of “Making Policy in a Difficult Global Environment”. 
As indicated in my previous Statement, we concluded and signed an MoU with the 
Competition  Commission  of  Mauritius  to  promote  and  maintain  a  competitive  and 
sound financial environment in Mauritius. 
As  a  responsible citizen,  the  Bank  brought  its  contribution  for  a  greener  Mauritius 
with the creation of a Bamboo Garden in the Midlands region situated in the central 
part  of  the  island.  We  sought  the  expertise  of  the  Agricultural  Research  and 
Extension  Unit  of  the  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  to  assist  us  in 
developing the Bamboo Garden and we accordingly entered into an MoU with them. 
At the time of writing this Statement, the project is under implementation. 
Still  in  the  context  of  its  programme  of  Corporate  Social  Responsibility,  the  Bank 
sponsored  the  National  Inter  Club  Youth  Championship  for  the  fourth  consecutive 
year in Mauritius and for the second time in Rodrigues. 
Tenders were launched for the construction, on a D&B basis, of the Bank’s regional 
office at Rodrigues. 
We  pursued  our  policy  to  enhance  the  professional  competence  of  our  staff  to 
respond to the new exigencies facing central banks. Human resource development 
continued to be one of our top priorities. Training was mainly in the fields of bank 
supervision and macroeconomic modelling. 
transparent,  enhancing 
thus  become  more 
the  MPC  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Looking ahead 
Our monetary policy framework has achieved commendable credibility in a short period and 
has even been held up as a model for similar countries by the IMF. But after four years of 
operation, our MPC was ripe for a review. Sir Alan Budd, a well-known figure in the world of 
finance in the UK and a founder-member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of 
England,  conducted  an  in-depth  review  of  the  MPC.  One  of  the  areas  he  was  specifically 
asked to look into was how to enhance transparency and communication. Sir Alan Budd’s 
recommendations took on board our proposals to publish both the minutes of meetings and 
the pattern of individual votes. The recommendations will take effect as from the next MPC 
meeting (December 2011). So we will be looking at a still more transparent MPC, which will 
without doubt enhance its credibility. 
We also have plans in the year ahead to deepen our financial market through the listing of 
Government securities on the stock market and conducting single-maturity auctions. By the 
time this Report would be in the public domain, we would be holding the online auctioning of 
Government paper. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  the  issue  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions.  In  our  case,  the  concern  is  the  high  degree  of  concentration  in  the  banking 
sector, which I have raised in recent public addresses. In view of the likely implications on 
financial stability, the Bank intends to deal with this issue in collaboration with the banking 
industry. 
Our country has garnered considerable praise internationally for what we have achieved so 
far. We continued with top rankings in leading league tables such as the Index of Economic 
Freedom,  the  Corruption  Index  of  the  Mo  Ibrahim  Foundation,  the  World  Bank’s  Ease  of 
Doing Business index, the Global Competitiveness Report etc. But, as investment advisers 
are supposed to warn their customers, past performance is no guarantee of future results. 
The heightened uncertainty and the turbulent external environment mean that the winners of 
to-morrow  will  be  those  who  can  adapt  and  evolve  faster  than  the  competition  to  the 
changing environment. 
My gratitude goes to Dr the Honourable Navinchandra Ramgoolam, GCSK, FRCP, our Prime 
Minister, for his unstinting support during my second term of office. The year under review 
started with Hon. Pravind K. Jugnauth, MLA heading the Treasury. I record my thanks to him 
for the cordial working relations that we enjoyed during his tenure of office. After the Cabinet 
re-shuffle of August 2011, Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, GCSK, MLA, took over as 
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development. I look forward to a 
fruitful  working  relationship  with  him  as  the  Treasury  and  the  Central  Bank,  with  collective 
resolve, move the country forward. 
I  seize  the  opportunity  to  thank  the  Chairman  and  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Mauritius 
Bankers Association, the Chief Executives of banks and all the stakeholders with whom I had 
the  pleasure  of  working  and  thank  them  for  their  collaboration  and  contribution  to  the 
considerable work undertaken by the Bank during this past year. 
I also extend my appreciation to my two Deputy Governors and to the staff of the Bank for 
their contribution to the Bank’s work. 
As this Annual Report goes to press, the crisis is very much on and no one can really say for 
sure where the global economy is heading. Against this brittle setting, we will put in every 
effort to shore up our economy, particularly the banking sector, to make it less sensitive to 
external  shocks.  We  will  ensure  that  we  will  not  compound  these  external  shocks  by 
domestic  policy  mistakes.  The  challenges  on  the  horizon  call  for  an  exceptional  degree  of 
vigilance  and  enlightened  policymaking.  I  trust  that  our  countrymen  will  live  up  to  these 
expectations. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
