Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Financial factors in commodity markets 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Paris 
EUROPLACE International Financial Forum, Tokyo, 28 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I feel privileged to have the opportunity today to speak at this International Financial Forum 
organized by Paris EUROPLACE. This is my second time to stand before you, following my 
presentation  last  year.  It  is  always  a  great  pleasure  to  join  this  forum,  since  Paris 
EUROPLACE  has  been  playing  a  pivotal  role  in  providing  opportunities  for  market 
participants to deepen mutual understanding. I salute the members of Paris EUROPLACE for 
their dedication.  
It is also a great pleasure to have our friend Christian NOYER, Governor of the Banque de 
France, among our distinguished participants. I would like to take this opportunity to extend 
my  sincere  gratitude  to  Christian  and  the  Banque  de  France  for  their  invaluable  support 
under the French presidency, for the work of the G20 Study Group on Commodities, chaired 
by my colleague Hiroshi NAKASO.1 My presentation today, in which I would like to share with 
you some of the findings of the Study Group, has profited greatly from such cooperative work 
between  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Bank  of  Japan.  However,  the  views  expressed 
hereafter are my own, and do not necessarily represent the views of the Study Group. 
Last year, I discussed in some detail the nature and impact of electronic trading in financial 
markets,  examining  how  the  global  expansion  of  electronic  trading  has  affected  market 
microstructure.  Today,  I  will  focus  on  another  significant  development:  that  is,  the  growing 
influence of financial factors on commodity markets. In fact, my presentation this year is in 
many ways a sequel to the one last year, not only because both presentations aim to shed 
light on financial innovations in the various markets, but also because electronic trading is an 
important issue per se in commodity markets. I will come back to this point later.  
High and volatile commodity prices 
2. 
Commodity prices have been fluctuating considerably both in terms of speed and amplitude. 
A surge in commodity prices until 2008 was followed by a sharp downfall in the midst of the 
financial crisis. Prices rose again from early 2009 to levels comparable to the peaks reached 
in 2008, though they had again declined until recently (figure 1).  
These see-saw developments pose a serious challenge to policymakers when dealing with, 
for example, inflationary pressures. Consequently, intensive research has been conducted to 
discern  the  main  drivers  behind  these  price  developments.  At  this  juncture,  three  factors 
have been identified as important. 
The first, and the most fundamental driver, has been the tightening of demand and supply 
conditions (figure 2). On the one hand, the rapid growth of the global economy, notably in 
emerging  economies,  has  been  a  major  factor  behind  strong  commodity  demand.  On  the 
other hand, a long period of underinvestment, coupled with geopolitical and climate-related 
shocks,  has  severely  constrained  supply  growth.  Consequently,  as  inventories  and  spare 
capacity have declined, commodity markets have become increasingly vulnerable to various 
                                                 
1  See  Report  of  the  G20  Study  Group  on  Commodities  under  the  chairmanship  of  Mr.  Hiroshi  Nakaso, 
November 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
shocks  in  both  demand  and  supply.  The  tariffs,  export  restrictions  and  other  ad-hoc 
measures adopted by some countries may also have aggravated market imbalances. 
The  second  factor  driving  these  fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  is  global  monetary 
conditions.  Accommodative  monetary  conditions,  especially  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global 
financial  crisis,  seem  to  have  contributed  to  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  in  various  ways 
(figure 3). In particular, monetary policy affects aggregate demand in general, which in turn 
influences the demand for commodities.  
On top of these two factors, the third driver is what might be described as “financialization” 
(figure  4).  Partly  influenced  by  globally  accommodative  monetary  conditions,  financial 
investors have entered the commodity markets and changed market participants’ behavior in 
important ways, especially with respect to appetite for portfolio rebalancing and carry trades. 
In  fact,  during  the  past  several  years,  the  rise  in  price  levels  and  volatility  in  commodity 
markets has coincided interestingly with the growing rate of participation of financial investors 
in these markets.  
Growing importance of financial investors 
3. 
Investment  in  commodity-related  financial  products  has  increased  considerably  both  in 
quantity and scope in recent years. The estimated market value of commodity-related assets 
under management reached almost 450 billion USD by mid-2011, from only 260 billion USD 
in mid-2008.  
Both  instruments  and  players  have  diversified  considerably.  In  addition  to  the  traditional 
commodity  investors,  such  as  commodity  trading  advisors  (CTAs)  and  commodity-
specialized hedge funds, index investors and ETF sponsors have become prominent players. 
Moreover,  we  now  observe  very  active  participation  of  various  hedge  funds,  proprietary 
trading  desks  of  banks,  broker-dealers  and  trading  units  of  large  non-financial  enterprises. 
Accordingly, investment and trading strategies have also become more diverse.  
In  particular,  let  me  focus  on  the  changing  nature  of  index  investment.  It  is  true  that  a 
significant proportion of investment is still tied to strategies which replicate major indices by 
investing in the front end of the curve and passively rolling into the next contract each month. 
However,  some  managers  are  adopting  so-called  “enhanced”  index  strategies,  which  may 
entail  positions  on  various  parts  of  the  curve  or  allow  investments  in  subsets  of 
commodities.2 
ETF sponsors have also diversified their investment strategies. ETF sponsors, especially in 
the  case  of  ETFs  linked  to  the  price  of  precious  metals,  typically  take  long  positions  in 
commodity spot markets under so-called physical ETF schemes. However, we have seen the 
emergence  of  synthetic  ETFs,  that  is,  ETFs  backed  by  derivatives.  Under  synthetic  ETF 
schemes,  ETF  sponsors  often  engage  in  total return  swaps  or  commodity  futures  to  issue 
ETFs  linked  to  major  indices.  They  also  use  other  types  of  derivatives  to  issue  complex 
products such as short ETFs and leveraged ETFs, although their presence is still limited at 
this stage. 
Turning  to  other  participants,  hedge  funds  typically  take  both  long  and  short  positions  for 
arbitrage purposes or based on macro-economic views. CTAs trade in futures markets and 
often  employ  technically-based  trading  strategies  such  as  trend  following  strategies.  More 
recently, some CTAs have become increasingly involved in algorithmic and high-frequency 
trading (HFT). 
                                                 
2  This  is  often  described  as  a  response  to  changes  in  the  shape  of  futures  curves  and/or  a  crowding  out  of 
investor activities in some part of the curves. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The growing participation of financial investors in commodity futures markets may also affect 
spot markets. In particular, several leading commercial and investment banks have become 
increasingly  active  in  some  physical  markets,  providing  liquidity  to  their  clients  through 
arbitrage between physical and financial markets. 
There seems to be a variety of motives behind the growing investment in commodities. Some 
investors  view  commodities  as  an  effective  tool  in  hedging  against  inflation.  Institutional 
investors  with  a  long-term  investment  horizon  have  been  attracted  by  the  diversification 
benefits for portfolio rebalancing and high convenience yields. Furthermore, some investors 
consider  commodity  investments  as  a  proxy  for  investment  in  rapidly  growing  emerging 
market economies. Investable assets in these economies are still limited. Thus, in order to 
gain exposure to these rapidly growing emerging market economies, some investors turn to 
commodity investments correlated strongly with growth in these economies. Finally, for some 
investors,  arbitrage  opportunities  may  have  been  the  main  motive  for  investing  in 
commodities. 
Financial investors’ impact on commodity markets 
4. 
Greater  participation  by  financial  investors  in  commodity  markets,  which  I  have  called 
financialization,  brings  important  economic  benefits  by  providing  liquidity  to  the  market. 
Enhanced market liquidity can reduce hedging costs for both producers and consumers.  
However, there may be costs as well. The growing importance of financial investors suggests 
that commodity prices may have become more sensitive to financial investors’ decisions and 
position-taking. This may lead to commodity prices deviating from values consistent with their 
“fundamentals”.  Such  deviation  may  occur,  for  example,  when  financial  investors’  liquidity 
constraints outside commodity  markets trigger substantial financial outflows, relative to the 
size  of  the  commodity  markets  themselves.  A  similar  situation  may  arise  when  financial 
investors’ risk appetite swings wildly.3 
A  particularly  delicate  subject  in  this  regard  is  the  role  of  algorithmic  and  high-frequency 
trading. Although still a matter of some debate, a general consensus seems to be emerging 
in  the  equity  markets  that  such  trading  techniques  enhance  the  proper  functioning  of  the 
market in normal times by providing liquidity, but in contrast they tend to disappear suddenly 
from the market and thus contribute to market disruption when sharp price movements occur 
due to unexpected and unprecedented events. However, in commodity markets, the precise 
role of algorithmic and high-frequency trading is yet to be determined.  
To sum up, it is not easy to identify to what extent the growing presence of financial investors 
has  actually  moved  commodity  prices  away  from  “fundamentals”.  The  current  literature  on 
this point is inconclusive. Although there is consensus that the tightening in physical supply 
and demand has been one of the main causes of large fluctuations in recent years, it is also 
plausible  that  financial  investments  have  affected  price  dynamics,  at  least  over  short  time 
horizons, as we have observed the same dynamics in other financial markets. 
Toward resilient and well-functioning commodity markets 
5. 
In view of what I have described so far with respect to recent developments in commodity 
markets, let me now draw three policy implications relating to market functioning and macro 
prudential policy.  
                                                 
3  The  deviation  may  also  happen  when  “herding  behavior”  is  observed.  Herding  may  occur,  for  instance,  if 
market participants extrapolate a series of recent price increases as reflecting better “fundamentals”, and then 
choose to follow such price movements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
To enhance transparency 
First, the transparency of both physical-products and commodity-derivatives markets needs 
to be enhanced. 
As I mentioned earlier, the expansion of financial investor participation in commodity markets 
can  bring  about  benefits  by  reducing  hedging  costs  for  producers  and  consumers.  At  the 
same  time,  trend  following  strategies,  especially  when  they  are  combined  with  algorithmic 
and  high-frequency  trading  techniques,  may  move  commodity  prices  away  from  values 
consistent  with  “fundamentals”  over  short  time  horizons.  This  deviation  may  persist 
depending on how quickly offsetting forces come into play. In this regard, it is important to 
enhance the transparency of physical and futures commodity markets in order to improve the 
market price discovery mechanism.  
In this context, improving the quality and timeliness of information in physical-products and 
commodity-derivatives markets is essential. Improving data availability on commodity market 
transactions is also a precondition to understanding the microstructure of these markets.  
To guard against financial vulnerability 
Second, it is important to assess and bear in mind the potential financial vulnerability arising 
from the increased exposure of financial investors.  
The exposure of financial investors to commodity markets appears to remain relatively small 
when  compared  to  total  assets  under  the  management  of  institutional  investors.  However, 
increased  diversity  and  complexity  of  both  financial  instruments  and  players  in  the 
commodity  markets  requires  closer  monitoring  to  assess  their  impact  on  the  risk 
management of financial institutions, and ultimately, on the overall development of financial 
markets.  
For  example,  the  increased  correlation  between  commodity  derivatives  markets  and  other 
financial markets suggests a higher risk of spillover effects from one market to another. The 
active  involvement  of  several  leading  commercial  and  investment  banks  in  physical 
commodity  markets may present challenges to the way they manage  these risks and how 
they incorporate them into their integrated risk management systems.  
The  increasing  presence  of  algorithmic  and  high-frequency  traders  in  the  markets  also 
highlights the need to deepen our analysis of their impact on market stability and integrity. 
Moreover,  though  their  presence  in  commodity  markets  is  as  yet  limited,  increasingly 
complicated  products  such  as  short  ETFs  and  leveraged  ETFs  may  also  pose  substantial 
risks with respect to counterparty, liquidity, and collateral management when they become 
popular. 
To develop emerging economies’ financial markets 
Finally, I would like to highlight the urgent need to develop and expand financial markets in 
rapidly growing economies.  
As I mentioned earlier, commodity markets seem to be serving to some extent as a proxy for 
investments in rapidly growing emerging market economies. This tendency may be stronger 
when monetary conditions are globally accommodative and financial investors’ appetite for 
portfolio rebalancing and carry trades is growing. It would be helpful for financial stability to 
broaden  and  deepen  local  bond  and  equity  markets  in  those  economies,  thereby  allowing 
funds to be channeled more directly to investments, and hence reducing possible shocks to 
commodity markets. 
In addition, it is desirable that transparent and resilient commodity markets are developed in 
Asia, where strong demand for commodities is being generated. Developing such markets 
further would be beneficial for the area by enhancing the liquidity of commodities in the Asian 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
time zone, as well as by developing tradable markets for those commodities such as rice, 
which are in great demand and produced in the region, but whose global market is yet to be 
developed.  
Concluding remarks 
6. 
In my presentation today, I have highlighted recent developments in commodity markets and 
the implications of these developments. As I have pointed out, the growing participation of 
financial  investors  in commodity  markets  can  bring  important  economic  benefits  by  adding 
liquidity to the market and thereby improving market functioning. However, the diversity and 
complexity of financial instruments and players calls for closer monitoring of their impact on 
the overall development of commodity markets as well as for an assessment of the potential 
financial  vulnerability  arising  from  the  increased  exposure  of  financial  investors.  These 
developments should be thoroughly and regularly analyzed.  
In  terms  of  the  macro-prudential  framework,  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  its  efforts  to 
enhance the stability, efficiency and integrity of the financial system as a whole.  
Thank you for your kind attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 