Seiji Nakamura: Japan’s monetary policy and developments in economic 
activity and prices 
Speech  by  Mr  Seiji  Nakamura,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Okinawa, 9 November 2011. 
 I. 
Recent economic developments at home and abroad 
Changes in Japan’s economy after the Great East Japan Earthquake 
A. 
Following the Great East Japan Earthquake on March 11, 2011, Japan’s economy faced two 
major supply constraints: supply chain disruptions and electric power shortages. As a result, 
production plunged, and exports dropped considerably, with those of cars and related goods, 
for example, falling by 50 percent from the level in February 2011. Uncertainty heightened 
further  due  to  the  electric  power  supply  constraints  following  the  nuclear  power  plant 
accident.  In  these  circumstances,  business  and  consumer  sentiment  deteriorated,  and 
Japan’s economy came under strong downward pressure. The restoration of supply chains, 
however,  progressed  faster  than  expected  thanks  to  the  many  different  creative  solutions 
found  at  the  individual  firm  level  –  something  at  which  Japanese  manufacturers  excel. 
Moreover, because of changes in the way production is organized as well as wide-ranging 
efforts to reduce the use of electric power, production levels were not considerably hampered 
even though electric power shortages during peak hours in the summer had been expected. 
In  this  manner,  Japan’s  economy  has  more  or  less  resolved  the  supply-side  constraints 
caused by the damage from the disaster, and is now in a phase where the level of demand at 
home and abroad – rather than the level of production – plays the key role in determining the 
outlook for the economy. Today, I will talk about recent economic developments at home and 
abroad, the outlook for Japan’s economy, uncertainties regarding the outlook, and the Bank 
of Japan’s monetary policy stance. 
Overseas economic developments 
B. 
Although  the  pace  of  growth  in  advanced  economies  has  been  decelerating,  the  global 
economy  as  a  whole  has  been  on  a  moderate  recovery  trend,  led  by  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies. In September 2011, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
projected that the year-on-year growth rate of the global economy would be 4.0 percent in 
both  2011  and  2012  and  4.5  percent  in  2013.  Although  these  projections  are  down  from 
those in June, taking into account the fact that advanced economies are decelerating, they 
are not necessarily low given that they are at around the same level as the average annual 
growth rate of 4.1 percent observed in the period from 2000 until 2008, the year that Lehman 
Brothers 
failed.  The  contribution  of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies, 
particularly  China,  to  overall  global  growth  is  more  than  70  percent,  highlighting  the 
importance of these economies.  
Next,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  economy  of  each  major  area.  Starting  with  the  U.S. 
economy,  it  has  been  recovering  at  a  moderate  pace,  although  the  pace  of  recovery  has 
been slowing. The annualized quarter-on-quarter growth rate of real  GDP on a seasonally 
adjusted basis for the July–September quarter of 2011 was 2.5 percent, up from 1.3 percent 
in  the  previous  quarter.  The  growth  rate  increased  slightly  because  private  consumption, 
particularly car sales, was firm and business fixed investment rose against the background of 
favorable corporate earnings. Developments in the housing market, on the other hand, have 
remained sluggish, preventing meaningful progress in the adjustment of household balance 
sheets. According to Zillow, a firm that provides information on the U.S. real estate market, 
almost  30  percent  of  all  single-family  homes  with  mortgages  in  the  United  States  are  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
negative equity, that is, the value of the real estate is below the outstanding amount of debt. 
This  figure  illustrates  how  seriously  the  balance  sheets  of  U.S.  households  have  been 
damaged.  The  unemployment  rate  has  also  remained  high  at  around  9  percent,  and  the 
recovery in employment has been slow. Moreover, the European debt crisis has started to 
affect  U.S.  financial  markets,  and  at  the  meeting  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC)  on  November  1  and  2  the  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  revised 
downward their projections of real GDP growth in the United States. While the U.S. economy 
is likely to continue to recover, the pace of growth is likely to remain only moderate partly due 
to limited room for additional fiscal or monetary stimulus measures. 
In Europe, growth in exports has become sluggish owing to the deceleration in the pace of 
recovery of the world economy, and the pace of recovery of the euro area as a whole has 
also  been  slowing.  The  most  critical  issue  in  the  European  economy  at  present  is  the 
sovereign debt problems. These began in peripheral European economies such as Greece, 
but  have  rapidly  grown  into  problems  involving  the  whole  of  Europe.  As  these  problems 
spread, investors quickly have grown increasingly risk averse and strains in financial markets 
have heightened. Business and consumer sentiment has also been under strong downward 
pressure. Moreover, financial institutions’ lending attitude has been tightening and their asset 
base  been  shrinking.  Consequently,  the  sovereign  debt  problems  are  starting  to  have  a 
negative impact on economic activity in Europe. As for the outlook, the pace of recovery of 
European economies is likely to remain slow in general, with some differences in pace by 
country, due to the continuation of downward pressure arising from the prolongation of the 
European debt crisis and to cuts in fiscal spending as part of fiscal consolidation measures in 
the  euro  area  economies.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB) 
decided to lower the key ECB interest rates at the meeting of the Governing Council held on 
November  3,  2011.  There  remains  considerable  uncertainty  as  to  how  the  European  debt 
crisis will unfold, and the timing of a recovery in market confidence is unclear.  
Emerging and commodity-exporting economies have continued to grow at a relatively rapid 
pace led mainly by vigorous domestic demand, although the pace of increase in exports has 
been  slowing  due  to  the  deceleration  in  the  U.S.  and  European  economies.  In  some 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies, the policy stance toward monetary tightening 
has  been  eased  due  to  concerns  about  instability  in  domestic  financial  markets  and  the 
negative  effects  on  economic  activity.  However,  in  many  other  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, inflationary pressure remains high. Meanwhile, in China, the year-on-
year growth rate of real GDP in the July–September quarter was 9.1 percent. Although this is 
a  slight  decline  from  the  previous  quarter,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  remains  relatively 
high. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) in September was 
6.1  percent,  significantly  above  the  Chinese  government’s  full-year  target  of  4  percent  for 
2011. As for the outlook, the Chinese economy on the whole is likely to maintain its relatively 
high rate of growth as the authorities work to contain inflation and curb upward pressure on 
real estate prices.  
Current conditions of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
C. 
Japan’s economic activity has continued to pick up thus far. The September 2011 Tankan 
(Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  released  by  the  Bank  showed 
significant  improvements  in  the  diffusion  index  for  business  conditions,  particularly  in  the 
motor vehicles industry, and confirmed the rising trend in business fixed investment reflecting 
upward revisions in plans for such investment for the second half of fiscal 2011. Although the 
rapid recovery in production appears to have paused, as indicated by the slight month-on-
month  decline  in  the  preliminary  figure  for  the  industrial  production  index  in  September, 
production  is  expected  to  resume  its  upward  trend.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  this 
assessment does not take full account of the effects of the flooding in Thailand and therefore 
needs to be treated with caution. Reflecting the pickup in production, real exports, particularly 
those of motor vehicles and related goods, have been increasing and have surpassed pre-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
quake  levels.  Corporate  activity  has  been  improving  in  general.  With  consumer  sentiment 
heading toward a pick-up, private consumption has been showing signs of improvement in a 
wide range of areas, including retail sales, outlays for travel, and spending in restaurants and 
the like. While the number of foreign visitors to Japan in September was 25 percent below 
the  previous  year’s  level  due  in  part  to  rumors  about  radiation  contamination  and  to  the 
appreciation of the yen, the extent of the year-on-year decline has gradually been shrinking 
since April.  
As for the outlook, it is possible that the pace of increase in exports will level out because of 
the  effects  of  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  because  we  are  likely  to  see  a  waning  of 
demand  associated  with  inventory  restocking  and  the  recapturing  of  market  share 
temporarily lost due to supply constraints. As for the domestic economy, however, there are 
signs of a rise in demand related to reconstruction after the disaster, and domestic demand 
as a whole is likely to grow at a moderate pace. Demand related to reconstruction is likely to 
increase further as a third supplementary budget for fiscal 2011 is currently being deliberated 
in the Diet.  
Semiannually, in April and October, the Bank releases the Outlook for Economic Activity and 
Prices, or the Outlook Report for short, in which it makes public its forecasts for economic 
activity and prices for the next two to three years. In the October Outlook Report released 
recently, the forecasts for the year-on-year growth rate of Japan’s real GDP were 0.3 percent 
for  fiscal  2011,  2.2  percent  for  fiscal  2012,  and  1.5  percent  for  fiscal  2013.  Figures  were 
revised slightly downward from the forecasts made in the interim assessment in July 2011, 
reflecting the effects of the appreciation of the yen as well as the deceleration of overseas 
economies. 
As for prices, against the background of the gradual improvement in the aggregate supply 
and  demand  balance,  the  forecasts  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  for  all 
items  less  fresh  food  were  0  percent  for  fiscal  2011,  0.1  percent  for  fiscal  2012,  and 
0.5 percent  for  fiscal  2013.  Compared  to  the  forecasts  made  in  July,  figures  were  revised 
downward, mainly because of the change in the base year for the CPI, which takes place 
every five years and was conducted in August 2011. The base year is changed to revise the 
composition  of  the  CPI  basket  and  the  weight  of  individual  items,  so  that  the  CPI  reflects 
changes over time in the variety of goods consumed, in lifestyles, and in consumer behavior. 
As a result of the base-year change, the average year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for 
January–July 2011 was revised downward by 0.6 percentage point. 
Uncertainty regarding the outlook 
D. 
While uncertainty persists regarding the outlook for Japan’s economy both in terms of upside 
and downside risks, developments with respect to the following downside risks in particular 
require close attention. 
First, it remains highly uncertain how the European debt crisis will unfold. It will likely take a 
long time before the crisis is resolved. At the Euro Summit held on October 26, agreement 
was reached among the member states of the euro area on the reduction of Greek debt, the 
strengthening  of  European  financial  institutions’  capital  bases,  and  the  boosting  of  the 
lending  capacity  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  aimed  at  serving  as  a 
safety  net  at  a  time  of  crisis.  The  announcement  of  the  agreement  on  these  issues 
temporarily  calmed  international  financial  markets.  However,  as  shown  by  the  subsequent 
turmoil in the domestic political situation in Greece and the discussions at the Group of 20 
(G-20) Leaders Summit in Cannes, the details and implementation of the comprehensive set 
of additional measures agreed at the Euro Summit as well as the austerity measures of the 
relevant  countries  remain  extremely  uncertain.  Consequently,  market  participants  remain 
wary  with  regard  to  the  creditworthiness  of  European  financial  institutions.  For  example, 
interest markups, which serve as a risk premium, in interbank funds transactions in Europe 
remain elevated and the situation is still tense. This is because the European debt crisis is no 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
longer confined to the problems of countries with excessive liabilities, such as Greece and 
Italy,  but  is  spreading  throughout  the  euro  area,  and  –  triggered  by  a  fall  in  confidence  in 
bonds issued by these heavily indebted countries – a negative feedback loop has started to 
operate  in  which  the  decline  in  creditworthiness  of  European  financial  institutions  and 
growing  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity  reinforce  each  other.  Under  these 
circumstances, with the market extremely sensitive to any negative news, careful attention 
should  be  paid  to  “tail  risks”,  that  is,  risks  with  a  low  probability  of  materialization  but  a 
devastating  impact  if  they  do  materialize.  For  the  European  economies  to  overcome  the 
negative feedback loop, it is crucial that peripheral countries carry out fundamental reforms 
of their fiscal structures and that medium- to long-term economic growth is raised through the 
strengthening of productivity and competitiveness. However, it inevitably takes time to press 
ahead,  through  democratic  processes,  with  decisions  that  will  entail  pain,  and  the 
discrepancy between the amount of time required and the time span the market can tolerate 
is a cause of concern. Moreover, the current European debt crisis has revealed problems in 
the governance of economic and fiscal affairs in the euro area. To avoid this type of crisis in 
the  area  from  recurring,  not  only  reforms  of  the  fiscal  structures  of  the  heavily  indebted 
countries  but  also  fundamental  reforms  of  institutions,  including  the  issue  of  fiscal 
management of the euro area, will be necessary. 
Second, as for the U.S. economy, it is likely that balance-sheet adjustments in the household 
sector will continue to be a drag on economic growth, making it difficult for the economy to 
gain  upward  momentum  and  creating  vulnerability  to  downside  risks.  Recovery  in  the 
housing market and the employment situation is likely to take some time. The risk of the U.S. 
economy registering low growth for longer than expected should be borne in mind, as room 
is limited for additional policy measures on both the fiscal and the monetary front. 
And third, the risk persists that business sentiment may deteriorate further. Many Japanese 
firms did their utmost to overcome supply constraints resulting from the damage caused by 
the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  and  only  recently  have  finally  returned  to  full-scale 
production. They are now working to recover the market shares at home and abroad that had 
been  lost  due  to  the  disaster.  The  deceleration  of  overseas  economies  and  the  continued 
appreciation of the yen at this crucial stage – just when Japanese firms are returning to full-
scale operation – are depressing business sentiment, particularly among exporting firms, by, 
for  example,  causing  downward  revisions  of  their  profits.  In  addition,  there  are  concerns 
about electric power supply constraints resulting from uncertainties regarding the resumption 
of  operations  at  currently  idle  nuclear  power  plants,  and  such  concerns  could  have  a 
negative impact on business fixed investment and consequently the employment situation. 
At  the  same  time,  as  the  devastating  flooding  in  Thailand  is  likely  to  negatively  affect 
production  in  Japan  through  a  decline  in  exports  from  Japan  to  Thailand  and  damage  to 
supply chains in Asia, including those in Thailand, the situation warrants careful monitoring. 
Efforts toward fiscal consolidation around the world 
E. 
Restoring the health of public finances is a policy priority common to all advanced countries. 
Even  before  the  financial  crisis,  the  fiscal  balances  of  advanced  countries  were  generally 
deteriorating against the background of a long-term trend of declining economic growth and 
expanding social security burdens due to population aging. Following the failure of Lehman 
Brothers  in autumn  2008,  the  fiscal  health  of  advanced  countries  deteriorated  further  as  a 
result  of  economic  stimulus  and  support  measures  on  the  fiscal  front to  combat  the  sharp 
economic  downturn.  With  concerns  intensifying  over  the  European  debt  problem,  market 
views  are  hardening  regarding  excessive  public  debts,  as  these  could  disrupt  the  global 
economy. Since the beginning of 2011, rating agencies have downgraded the government 
securities of the United States, Japan, Spain, and Italy, because these countries were seen 
to be taking insufficient measures to reduce their fiscal deficits. The G-20 Cannes Summit 
held on November 3 and 4, 2011 reaffirmed member countries’ commitment to achieve fiscal 
consolidation  as  agreed  at  the  Toronto  Summit  on  June  26  and  27,  2010,  as  part  of  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
action  plan  to  strengthen  medium-term  foundations  for  growth.1  Advanced  countries  have 
been working on fiscal consolidation as a policy priority with a high degree of urgency:2 
(1) 
In the United States, the Budget Control Act of 2011, in which deficit reductions of 
more than 2.1 trillion U.S. dollars in the period from fiscal 2012 to fiscal 2021 were 
agreed, was enacted by Congress in August. 
As  for  the  euro  area  economies,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  states  that,  in  order  to 
maintain confidence in the single currency, the euro, the deficit-to-GDP ratio should 
not exceed 3 percent, and that the government debt-to-GDP ratio should not exceed 
60 percent. In Germany, the deficit-to-GDP ratio was 3.3 percent in 2010, but in the 
Stability  Programme  submitted  to  the  European  Commission  in  April  2011,  the 
government stated that the ratio would be reduced to below 3 percent in 2011. In 
France, the deficit-to-GDP ratio was 7.0 percent in 2010, but the government stated 
that it would reduce this ratio to no more than 3 percent by 2013 and achieve fiscal 
balance by 2016. 
In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron’s government raised the rate 
of value-added tax in January 2011 and aims to halve the ratio of public-sector net 
borrowing  (borrowing  by  the  general  government  and  public  firms)  to GDP  by  the 
end  of  fiscal  2013,  and  to  substantially  reduce  the  public-sector  net  debt-to-GDP 
ratio by the end of fiscal 2015. 
(2) 
(3) 
Meanwhile, in Japan, the ratio of general government gross financial liabilities to GDP stands 
at  199.7  percent,  while  the  deficit-to-GDP  ratio  stands  at  8.1  percent.  The  former  is 
considerably higher than in other advanced countries, such as the 93.6 percent in the United 
States,  94.1  percent  in  France,  87.0  percent  in  Germany,  and  82.4  percent  in  the  United 
Kingdom. It is even far higher than that in Greece, which – at 147.3 percent – triggered the 
European debt problem, or the 126.8 percent in Italy, which is suffering from a loss in market 
confidence.  Nevertheless,  yields  on  10-year  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  have 
generally  remained  below  2  percent  for  more  than  ten  years  and  have  recently  been 
fluctuating  at  around  1  percent.  According  to  data  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the 
outstanding amount of government bonds has increased by about 70 percent during the past 
ten  years,  from  392  trillion  yen  in  fiscal  2001  to  667  trillion  yen  in  fiscal  2011.  During  this 
period, however, interest payments on JGBs have remained more or less unchanged, rising 
only  slightly  from  9.4  trillion  yen  to  9.9  trillion  yen.  Despite  this  secular  increase  in  the 
outstanding amount of government bonds, the Japanese government has been able to raise 
funds at low interest rates without difficulties. This fact seems to have dulled the sense of 
crisis in Japan and led to procrastination in addressing the problem. 
Demand for government bonds in Japan has been sustained by the accumulation of surplus 
funds  at  financial  institutions,  partly  reflecting  efforts  by  firms  to  strengthen  their  balance 
sheets and reduce borrowing amid low economic growth since the bursting of the bubble in 
the early 1990s. The sustained demand for JGBs, with yields of only around 1 percent, is 
attributable to the sense that – in a situation where the opportunities for Japanese financial 
                                                 
1  The Toronto Summit Declaration stated that “advanced economies have committed to fiscal plans that will at 
least  halve deficits by  2013  and stabilize  or reduce  government  debt-to-GDP ratios  by 2016”. However, on 
Japan, it stated that “recognizing the circumstances of Japan, we welcome the Japanese government’s fiscal 
consolidation plan announced recently with their growth strategy”. The “Fiscal Management Strategy”, decided 
by  the  Japanese  Cabinet  before  the  Toronto  Summit,  set  the  target  of  reducing  the  ratio  of  the  primary 
balance deficit relative to GDP to half its fiscal 2010 level by fiscal 2015, and to achieve a primary balance 
surplus by fiscal 2020. 
2  The  government  debt-to-GDP  ratios  for  2010  quoted  below  are  the  “general  government  gross  financial 
liabilities” taken from OECD Economic Outlook, No. 89, released in May 2011, while the fiscal deficit-to-GDP 
ratios are the “general government financial balances” from the same publication. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
institutions  to  invest  their  funds  are  limited  –  JGBs  are  safe  and  liquid  assets  that  will 
continue to command market confidence. 
This confidence in JGBs rests on the confidence that payments of interest and principal are 
backed by future government revenues and, moreover, that the government and the Bank 
have  the  will  and  ability  to  restore  long-term  fiscal  health  and  maintain  the  value  of  the 
currency.  In  the  case  of  Greece,  even  though  there  was  no  major  change  in  the  level  of 
economic activity, yields on 10-year government bonds surged from around 4.5 percent in 
October 2009 to nearly 9 percent six months later in April 2010 and are hovering at around 
28  percent  at  present.  This  increase  was  due  to  abrupt  changes  in  market  participants’ 
confidence  in  the  Greek  government’s  will  and  ability  to  improve  the  fiscal  balance  in  the 
medium to long term, which forms the basis for its capacity to redeem government securities. 
In  Japan,  more  than  60  percent  of  the  outstanding  amount  of  JGBs  is  held  by  banks, 
insurance  companies,  and  pension  funds,3  which  receive  their  funds  in  the  form  of  bank 
deposits and insurance premiums. It could therefore be said that the public is the ultimate 
holder of JGBs, although the general public probably is not aware of this. It should be noted, 
however, that, amid the rapid aging of the population in Japan, there is no guarantee that in 
the future financial institutions will continue to channel personal savings into JGBs in a stable 
manner. 
When these points are taken into account, the possibility cannot be ruled out that long-term 
interest  rates,  which  at  present  are  hovering  at  around  1  percent,  could  start  to  rise  for 
whatever reason and the consequent increase in the interest burden could exert inordinate 
pressure on public finances. 
The “Fiscal Management Strategy,” decided by the Japanese Cabinet in June 2010 sets a 
clear  target  of  achieving  a  primary  balance  surplus  by  fiscal  2020,  followed  by  a  stable 
reduction in the amount of public debt relative to GDP. 
For the time being, it is possible for the government to raise funds at low interest rates and it 
is unlikely that there will be a major disruption in the supply and demand balance for JGBs. 
However, debts must be repaid and cannot be defaulted on. Reducing the real value of debt 
through  inflation  is  also  not  a  solution,  given  the  enormous  economic  costs  this  would 
involve.  There  are  no  shortcuts  to  fundamental  fiscal  reform,  and  although  it  may  entail  a 
great deal of pain, it cannot wait much longer, since fiscal consolidation inevitably takes time. 
Thus, giving due consideration to developments in economic activity, Japan urgently needs 
to steadily implement concrete measures toward medium- to long-term fiscal consolidation 
while interest rates are low and JGBs still command the confidence of the market. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
I will now move on to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. The Bank has been consistently 
making  its  utmost  contributions  through  the  three-pronged  approach  of  pursuing  powerful 
monetary  easing  consisting  of  comprehensive  monetary  easing  that  was  introduced  in 
October  2010,  ensuring  financial  market  stability,  and  providing  support  to  strengthen  the 
foundations for economic growth. The Bank further enhanced monetary easing following the 
Great East Japan Earthquake in March 2011 due to increased concerns about the effects of 
the deceleration in domestic and overseas economies and instability in the foreign exchange 
and financial markets. 
                                                 
3  See  the  Flow  of  Funds  Accounts  released  by  the  Bank  of  Japan.  The  figure  is  the  share  of  JGBs  held  by 
banks, insurance companies, and pension funds in the  outstanding amount of JGBs and Fiscal Investment 
and Loan Program (FILP) agency bonds. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Given the extremely limited room for a further decline in short-term interest rates, the Bank 
has been pursuing the comprehensive monetary easing policy introduced in October 2010 
mainly  through  the  purchase  of  financial  assets  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Program 
(hereafter the Program). The Program has been repeatedly expanded in size on a significant 
scale. In addition, the Bank has made it clear that it will continue the virtually zero interest 
policy until it judges that price stability on the basis of the “understanding of medium- to long-
term price stability” – inflation of around 1 percent – is in sight, provided that no problem is 
identified in examining risk factors, including the accumulation of financial imbalances.4 
More recently, in August 2011 the Bank significantly increased the total size of the Program by 
about 10 trillion yen, from about 40 trillion yen to about 50 trillion yen, in response to the rise in 
various risks. However, subsequently, downside risks to the economy materialized in the form 
of, for example, greater adverse effects on Japan’s economic activity from the deceleration in 
overseas  economies  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen.  Consequently,  in  the  October  2011 
Outlook  Report,  the  Bank’s  forecasts  were  revised  slightly  downward  from  those  made  in 
July 2011.  Moreover,  the  Bank  judged  that  there  was  increased  risk  that  the  outlook  for 
economic  activity  and  prices  could  deteriorate  further  depending  on  developments  in 
international financial markets and overseas economies. Therefore, even though purchases of 
financial assets under the Program were still approximately 10 trillion yen below the maximum 
amount decided in August, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 27, 2011 the Bank 
decided  to  further  enhance  monetary  easing  by  increasing  the  total  size  of  the  Program  by 
about 5 trillion yen, to about 55 trillion yen, for additional purchases of JGBs. 
The  Bank  needs  to  do  all  it  can  –  by  vigorously  implementing  these  monetary  easing 
measures – to help Japan’s economy overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth 
path with price stability. 
                                                 
4  The “understanding” is the level of inflation that each Policy Board member understands as being consistent 
with price stability over the medium to long term. The current “understanding” shows that “on the basis of a 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  it  falls  in  a  positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower,  centering  around 
1 percent”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
