Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Bild am Sonntag 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in Bild am 
Sonntag, conducted by Messrs Walter Mayer and Michael Backhaus on 27 October 2011, 
and published on 30 October 2011. 
 failed 
to  pay  sufficient  attention 
In  addition,  some  countries 
Mr President, your term of office comes to an end on Monday. The euro is in stormy 
waters and the captain is leaving the ship. How hard is that for you? 
It has been an immense honour and responsibility to be President of the ECB for the last 
eight years, and to have been able to maintain price stability since the inception of the euro. 
The last four years have been a very challenging period for all the staff of this institution. This 
global  crisis  has  presented  all  of  us  –  both  governments  and  central  banks  –  with 
considerable and thoroughly unexpected challenges. In any case, this eight-year mandate, 
which is not renewable, is an essential feature of the independence of the ECB.  
In  recent  weeks  and  months  you’ve  spoken  forcefully  about  this  being  the  most 
severe crisis since the Second World War. Can you now give the all-clear, following 
the decisions taken by the Heads of State or Government this week? 
The global crisis began in the United States, before spreading throughout the industrialised 
world. The crisis is not over. It has laid bare the weaknesses of advanced economies. We 
are now seeing the weaknesses of the US and Japanese economies – but also, of course, 
Europe’s weaknesses. Europe’s governments have made serious mistakes, such as failing 
to comply with the Stability and Growth Pact. And they did so despite the fact that the ECB 
was emphatic in warning them of the importance of complying with the requirements of the 
Pact. 
their  own 
competitiveness.  The  critical  issue  now  is  for  the  rules  of  the  Pact  to  be  comprehensively 
tightened up and implemented. The European Council was in full agreement on this point. 
What would be the worst case scenario were all of the Member States’ precautionary 
measures to fail? 
The decisions taken at the summit meeting need to be implemented with great precision and 
speed.  The  euro  area’s  Heads  of  State  or  Government  have  a  plan,  and  national 
governments and the European Commission now have some hard work ahead of them. Swift 
and  full  implementation  of  those  decisions  is  now  absolutely  critical.  We  will  monitor  this 
process very carefully. Now is the time for action. 
What kind of future would Europe have without the euro? 
We have to be very careful to distinguish between the euro as a currency and the problem of 
financial  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The  first  13  years  of  the  euro  have  seen  the  currency 
retain  its  value,  both  domestically  and  externally.  Annual  inflation  currently  averages  
2.0% – and just 1.56% in Germany. That is lower than in the previous 50 years. Inflation will, 
in all probability, remain very low for the next ten years – at around 1.8% according to current 
expectations. So, we have price stability in the euro area. We are rightly proud of that fact, as 
we have achieved what was expected of us: we have secured price stability and ensured that 
the  euro  is  a  credible  and  trusted  currency.  The  financial  stability  of  the  euro  area  is  a 
different  story.  This  has  been  undermined  by  mismanagement  on  the  part  of  certain 
governments.  However,  following  the  decisions  taken  this  week,  I  am  confident  that 
governments can succeed in restoring financial stability. A critical issue in this respect will be 
the will of the people. I was very impressed by the decisiveness displayed by the German 
parliament this week.  
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in 
The euro’s rescue fund is being significantly strengthened, with its total firepower set 
to  reach  €1,000 billion.  Does  this  mean  that  the  ECB  will,  in  future,  be  able  to  do 
without its controversial purchases of stressed countries’ government bonds? 
We have adopted special measures during the crisis because they were necessary in order 
to correctly transmit our interest rate decisions to the economy. In August 2007 we supplied 
banks with liquidity at fixed rates of interest in order to stabilise the markets. Second, we took 
the  decision  to  buy  covered  bonds.  And  third,  we  intervened  in  some  government  bond 
markets  to  help  improve  the  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy.  Such  actions  are  only 
justified 
the  exceptional  circumstances  of  a  major  global  crisis.  Once  national 
governments’  new  tools  to  restore  financial  stability  are  up  and  running,  we  will  have  no 
reason to continue with these special measures.  
Does  the  ECB  really  have  complete  freedom  as  regards  government  bonds,  or  is  it 
under political pressure? 
The ECB takes its decisions in full independence. We have consistently demonstrated this, 
taking  controversial  decisions  on  interest  rates  and  other  matters.  Under  the  Treaties, 
members  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  are  not  permitted  to  take  instructions  from 
anybody  –  neither  from  governments  nor  from  interest  groups.  Indeed,  they  are  not  even 
allowed  to  ask  for  instructions.  It  was  for  monetary  policy  reasons  that  the  Governing 
Council, in full independence, adopted all the non-standard measures.  
The  crisis  is  being  caused  by  excessive  debt  in  euro  area  countries.  Do  we  need  a 
political union, or is a return to the Stability and Growth Pact of Maastricht sufficient in 
order to prevent such events from recurring in the future? 
What is important at the moment is to monitor compliance with the now considerably stricter 
stability requirements. We had initially called for these to go further – calling, for example, for 
more automatic sanctions against “deficit sinners”. Significant progress has been made, and 
that now needs to be rigorously implemented. That includes strengthening the presidency of 
the  Eurogroup  and  the  body  of  staff  which  is  to  monitor  economic  developments.  In  the 
medium and long term we need to strengthen Europe’s political structures, which will not be 
possible  without  amendments  to  the  Treaty.  I  would  say  –  as  a  citizen  of  Europe,  not  as 
President  of  the  ECB  –  that  we  could  proceed  in  the  direction  of  significantly  stronger 
European governance with well-defined responsibilities. With that new governance, it would 
be  possible,  in  countries  that  consistently  fail  to  comply  with  stability  requirements  and 
thereby  threaten  the  financial  stability  of  the  euro  area,  to  directly  implement  appropriate 
measures. In the long term, therefore, we will need to go further in the direction of political 
union. But the decision on that will lie with the people of Europe. 
What was your most important decision, your greatest success? 
As a central banker, you are constantly taking important decisions – for example on interest 
rates.  All  of  these  decisions  are  taken  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  price  stability,  which  is  a 
prerequisite for sustainable growth and job creation. As a result, it is difficult to say that  a 
particular  decision  was  the  most  important.  But  the  greatest  challenge  for  the  ECB’s 
Executive  Board  was  to  recognise  in  2007,  in  real  time,  that  something  very  significant  – 
something very dangerous – was happening. We were the first central bank in the world to 
recognise  the  reality  of  the  situation  and  quickly  implement  comprehensive  measures  in 
response.  
Horst Köhler, with whom you negotiated the Maastricht Treaty, describes the markets 
as “monsters”. Is he right? 
I would not necessarily go as far as Horst, for whom I have great respect, but I can see what 
he could have meant by that. Supervisory authorities need stronger means of monitoring the 
rapid development of new technology and need to ensure that all innovation in the financial 
markets continues to serve the real economy and is not to its detriment. Realisation as to 
what was happening in the markets came somewhat late. We are currently seeking to correct 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that. Authorities the world over agree that we need to discipline the markets and the financial 
system as a whole and make them much more resilient in all circumstances. 
Jesus drove the money-changers – i.e. the bankers – out of the temple. How do you, 
as a man of money, feel about this parable? 
Central  bankers  are  guardians  of monetary  stability,  which  is  a  public  good.  So,  when  the 
markets run riot, whether on the upside or on the downside, we ensure that there is a return 
to discipline. Wisdom needs to discipline “animal spirits” – excessive greed or fear. On the 
other  hand,  I  would  certainly  warn  against  making  it  difficult  for  banks  to  carry  out  their 
functions. In Europe, banks finance 75% of all economic activity. The real economy needs 
banks  to  finance  investment,  and  we  should  not  mistreat  or  ignore  them.  We  would  be 
shooting ourselves in the foot if we did that. 
You  experienced  the  occasionally  violent  protests  of  the  1968  movement  at  close 
quarters – from ministries in Paris with people demonstrating in front of them. How 
seriously do you take the “Occupy” movement, which has spread from Wall Street to 
cities around the world? 
I  think  we  should  always  be  very  attentive  to  the  signals  coming  from  society.  They  are 
manifold  and  complex.  People  are  asking  themselves  how  it  was  that  first  the  financial 
markets and then the real economy turned out to be so vulnerable. We now need to make 
our market economies much more robust, as only they are capable of creating wealth and 
employment. And banks need to strengthen their resilience and avoid behaviour – including 
excessive bonuses – that is not compatible with the values of our societies. These are the 
messages that I would take from public opinion. We are all working hard to strengthen the 
financial system, both at the European and at the global level.  
To  what  extent  has  the  greed  of  the  financial  markets  damaged  the  notion  of  the 
market economy and freedom in Europe and beyond? 
We should be very conscious of the fact that certain behaviour in the markets has caused 
considerable irritation. That includes the size of certain bonus payments. This has shocked 
the public on both sides of the Atlantic. We therefore need a change in values and a change 
in behaviour in this respect. We are all living in democracies, and for that reason it is very 
important that society accepts the values and behaviour observed in the economy.  
You’ve  spent  the  last 40  years  working  in  the  public  sector  in  the  area  of  monetary 
policy – first in Paris for France, and now in Frankfurt for the euro area. Can you tell us 
something: what is money, the nature of money? 
Money has an essential function. It acts as a store of value, it is a means of exchange and it 
allows  people  to  calculate  the  price  of  everything.  Money  is  an  inseparable  element  of 
civilisation, as it allows the division of labour. It is only thanks to money that we have cities at 
all. I would compare money to a poem, since a poem always retains its structure, just as a 
gold coin always retains the image stamped on it. Once formed – whether written or minted – 
these two things should not and cannot be altered. Goethe gave considerable thought to this 
issue, as you can see from reading Faust. 
To what extent are you personally fascinated by money? 
I, personally, am not fascinated by wealth. 
In  Germany  we  say  that  money  rules  the  world.  Would  you,  as  a  man  of  money, 
confirm that? 
No, I would not say that at all. Ideas rule the world – hopefully. Money is a means, not an 
end; an instrument, not the ultimate goal; un moyen, pas une fin.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Your  wife  recently  said  on  German  television  that  the  question  of  whether  she  was 
pleased that her husband’s work was coming to an end was a “delicate and difficult 
question”. She also said that she hopes you find something to occupy yourself with 
as soon as possible. What does Madame Trichet mean by that? 
Did she really say that? She knows me well. I will certainly remain active. But I will wait until I 
have left the ECB before deciding what exactly I will do. 
Does she perhaps mean that Jean-Claude Trichet cannot be happy without work? 
You can trust my wife on that! 
Mr Trichet, why is your signature on the euro banknotes?  
The euro banknotes are issued by the ECB. I therefore sign the euro banknotes as President 
of the ECB, on behalf of the Governing Council. Currently there are around 14 billion euro 
banknotes in circulation. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
