Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Mechanisms to prevent and manage banking 
crises in the future 
Speech  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the 
presentation  of  the  report  entitled  “Mecanismos  de  prevención  y  gestión  de  futures  crisis 
bancarias”, Fundación de Estudios Financieros, Madrid, 1 December 2011. 
 The crisis still with us has seen the adoption of a broad package of financial measures at the 
global, European and national levels. The global response has had political backing at the 
highest level of the G-20. In the implementation of this response, a key role has been played 
by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  which  has  coordinated  the  work  of  numerous 
international  institutions  and  committees.  In  Europe,  in  addition  to  the  implementation  of 
these  global  agreements  on  the  continent,  other  worthwhile  initiatives  have  been  adopted. 
These  include  most  notably  changes  in  the  supranational  supervisory  architecture.  Finally, 
with regard to Spain, both the Banco de España and the Finance Ministry have contributed 
long  and  hard  to  implementing  these  global  and  European  initiatives.  But,  to  highlight  a 
singular  facet  of  the  Spanish  response,  I  should  like  to  mention  the  restructuring  of  our 
financial system.  
I shall spare you my assessment of the numerous and substantial changes stemming from 
various fora that have marked progress in recent years. The authors of the book give a good 
account of this and, were I to repeat what they say, they might not be read. And it is precisely 
my role here today to encourage people to read them. I would therefore prefer to share some 
broad reflections with you, having experienced this crisis from my vantage points on the FSB, 
the ECB Governing Council and at the Banco de España. Further, given the key juncture at 
which we stand, I shall add further remarks as to what we must do in Spain to emerge from a 
crisis in which, after four years, we remain immersed. 
My first suggestion is that we cease to refer to the “crisis” in the singular and start talking 
about “crises” in the plural. This is because the far-reaching shock the Spanish economy and 
its  banking  system  have  undergone  has  not  been  caused  by  a  single  crisis  but  by  the 
extraordinary  overlapping  of  three  economic/financial  crises.  Spain  had  never  experienced 
such an occurrence in its history, a fact which should be borne in mind when deciding on the 
best  exit  therapies.  The  impact  of  the  first  of  the  three  crises,  the  so-called  international 
financial crisis, came about in a context in which the banking system was reasonably well-
supervised  and  focused  on  the  traditional  retail  business.  But,  as  was  noted  at  the  time, 
neither the economy nor its credit institutions would prove immune to its consequences, in 
particular to the global recession and to the seizing-up of the regularly used external funding 
mechanisms. The second crisis is a typically Spanish crisis, associated with excesses in the 
real  estate  sector,  private-sector  debt  and  deteriorating  competitiveness,  a  crisis  which  in 
principle seemed to be a familiar bugbear. However, this time the imbalances emerged within 
a  monetary  union,  which  has  invalidated  many  of  the  instruments  used  in  the  past  to 
overcome apparently similar crises. The third crisis is in the euro area, the clearest but not 
the  only  sign  of  which  has  been  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  which  has  affected  Spain  with 
particular force. The upshot of the overall impact of these three crises is an extraordinarily 
complex scenario with multiple and unprecedented interactions, which means we must avoid 
intellectual laziness and seek innovative solutions to manage an exit from the situation. This 
is because many of the solutions used in the past are not only no longer available or useless, 
but – given the side-effects – may even prove harmful. 
I shall now try to draw your attention to the responses that crises prompt. As is well known, 
crises, which entail so many personal tragedies, may ultimately have beneficial effects in the 
countries they affect if the response to them is the correct one. My first observation is that 
any  crisis  usually  generates  not  only  one  response  but  three  types  of  response.  The  first 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reaction  leads  to  the  design  and  adoption  of  measures  whose  aim  is  to  prevent  a  similar 
crisis  recurring.  The  second  response  to  the  crisis  drives  us  to  equip  ourselves  with  new 
tools  that  mitigate  the  effects  of  future  crises,  because  experience  tells  us  that,  even 
assuming that all the preventive  measures conceivable today are adopted, it will never be 
possible  to  do  away  once  and  for  all  with  economic  crises.  The  third  response  to  a  crisis 
does  not  involve  preventing  or  adopting  tools  to  manage  future  crises,  but  looking  for  the 
right  way  to  manage  the  current  crisis  from  which,  need  I  remind  you,  we  have  not  yet 
emerged.  
I make this distinction between the three types of response that an economic crisis always 
elicits so that my following remarks may be better understood. Firstly, I think that most of the 
huge efforts deployed to date at the global and European level in response to the crisis have 
focused on avoiding or mitigating future crises. Yet much less time and imagination has been 
used in designing and agreeing on measures to emerge from where we are. I am certain that 
we are now much better prepared to prevent the recurrence of a crisis such as the present 
one,  but  the  problem  is  that  we  still  do  not  know  how  to  exit  from  it.  Moreover,  there  is  a 
second reason for stressing the difference between the three types of response, which is that 
both the measures seeking to prevent the recurrence of a similar crisis, and those seeking to 
increase the future resilience of the financial system are usually of little use in resolving the 
problems that affect economies and financial systems in the short term, that is to say now. 
The  authorities  naturally  wish  to  “sell”  the  decisions  they  are  adopting. But  nobody  should 
think  that  the  immediate  application  of  the  measures  aimed  at  preventing  future  crises  or 
mitigating their intensity will suffice to resolve our short-term problems.  
If we analyse the matters addressed on the FSB or European Commission’s agendas, we 
will  see  that,  until  relatively  recently,  most  progress  has  been  centred  on  preventing  the 
repetition of a crisis such as the current one, which has affected the entire financial system. 
And in the case of a fresh crisis arising, the aim has been for the financial system – for banks 
and for the authorities – to have resolution mechanisms that mitigate its adverse effects. With 
sole regard to the management of future crises, although major efforts have been made to 
move  towards  more  effective  crisis-resolution  arrangements,  most  of  the  prescriptions 
admittedly require time to be effectively set in place, meaning that they cannot be used to 
manage the current crisis.  
Returning  to  the  management  of  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis,  much  progress  has 
clearly  been  made  in  the  reform  of  European  governance.  Indeed,  henceforth  instruments 
will be available that make the recurrence of a crisis such as the present one highly unlikely, 
and  undoubtedly  this  work  is  very  useful  and  very  important  going  forward.  Had  these 
instruments been available to us from the outset of the Monetary Union, the current crisis in 
the euro area would surely not have broken, since the levels of cross-country divergence in 
terms  of  competitiveness,  excessive  debt  or  budget  deficits  that  we  are  trying  to  redress 
would not have been reached. But all this progress has a very limited impact on our most 
immediate  problem,  which  is  to  manage  the  crisis  in  which  we  are  immersed.  And  what  I 
wish to stress here is that this task requires very different tools from those needed to prevent 
this  type  of  divergence  recurring  in  the  future.  18  months  on  from  the  outbreak  of  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis,  we  have  robust  mechanisms  to  prevent  and  sanction  future 
imbalances, mechanisms that may be reinforced further if the improvements proposed by the 
ECB or some of the suggestions by the German government are finally heeded. But we have 
still not managed to activate the right mechanisms to halt the current market dynamic.  
Another  example  of  reasonable  approaches  in  respect  of  financial  regulation  –  but  which 
may prove insufficient to emerge from the current crisis – is the handling of moral hazard, the 
perverse  incentive  which  induces  agents  to  pursue  inappropriate  and  risky  behaviour 
because they assume they are not going to pay for the consequences. It is known that banks 
and countries behave imprudently when they think that they will be bailed out, that others will 
bear the consequences of their conduct. There is broad consensus that both in the regulation 
of  banking  business  and  in  that  of  sovereign  debt,  elements  are  needed  to  reduce  moral 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
hazard to a minimum, and sufficient deterrents must be in place so that banks and countries 
have  an  interest  in  acting  correctly.  Indeed,  a  large  part  of  our  work  for  the  future,  and  in 
particular the change in resolution arrangements, is geared to preventing such irresponsible 
behaviour.  
However,  as  things  currently  stand,  the  strategy  of  punishing  with  bankruptcy  those  who 
have “done wrong” or “lent badly” may have undesirable and far-reaching side-effects both in 
the banking sector and as regards sovereign debt. The disorderly bankruptcy of an institution 
might have very adverse repercussions for the national or indeed European banking system 
as a whole. Default by a Monetary Union member country might cause a most considerable 
knock-on  effect  on  other  sovereign  risks.  It  is  not  reasonable  to  ignore  these  externalities 
when calibrating the true scale of this “moral” consideration. 
The recent years of crisis have offered us two patent examples of the adverse consequences 
of applying a “moral” view to the solution of problems at an inappropriate time, i.e. not before 
they occur – which would have its logic – but during the crisis. One example was when the 
authority  of  a  European  country  suggested  letting  a  bank  go  bankrupt  for  having  made 
management mistakes. Wisely, it quickly changed its mind, showing that wisdom does not 
mean never committing errors but rather recognising such errors in time. The consequences 
of the other example of the mishandling of moral hazard were worse. I refer here to the initial 
reaction to the euro area sovereign debt crisis. As we have often repeated at the European 
Central  Bank,  the  negative  consequences  of  openly  admitting  the  possibility  of  sovereign 
debt  default  by  one  of  the  euro  area  countries,  and  even  of  demanding  default  as  a 
centrepiece of any bail-out programme, were perhaps not taken sufficiently into account. And 
these factors have no doubt contributed significantly to the crisis attaining its current scale.  
But let us be clear: avoiding the costs associated with the potential bankruptcy of or default 
by  banks  and  countries  is  perfectly  compatible  with  laying  down  rigorous  conditionality 
criteria  when  extending  aid  to  resolve  crises.  Averting  bankruptcies  in  specific  cases  does 
not  mean  going  “soft”  on  banks  or  countries  which  took  on  too  many  risks  or  incurred 
excessive debt. Countries or credit institutions should be helped only in exchange for strict 
conditions.  And  not  only  for  moral  reasons  (never  helping  those  who  do  not  help 
themselves),  but  essentially  because  to  be  able  to  stand  on  one’s  own  two  feet  it  is 
necessary to enact far-reaching restructuring and reforms. The experience of the IMF is most 
illustrative  as  regards  the  importance  of  demanding  strict  conditionality  criteria  so  that  aid 
programmes may be successful. 
Another fairly common mistake is to believe that crisis-management solutions should always 
and everywhere be the same. Before applying uniform measures, it should be borne in mind 
that countries may differ in respect of their problems, their legislation and their institutional 
structure.  Likewise,  learning  from  the  past  may  prove  of  limited  use  when  it  comes  to 
teaching us how to act in the face of a crisis such as the present one. As I have illustrated 
when  talking  about  the  Spanish  case,  the  current  crises  may  generate  a  very  different 
pathology  from  those  in  the  past,  which  means  new  solutions  tailored  to  the  present-day 
problems must be sought. 
In this respect, a consistent and internationally coordinated response to the crisis must be 
made compatible with a reasonable adaptation to the specific circumstances of each country. 
For  example,  it  is  one  thing  handling  a  bank  crisis  in  a  country  where  the  major  systemic 
institutions have been seriously affected and where, therefore, a rapid response is called for, 
providing  all  the  public  aid  needed  to  avoid  the  harmful  consequences  that  a  bank  failure 
might  have  on  the  banking  sector  and  on  the  economy  as  a  whole.  It  is  quite  different  in 
another country where the problems are confined to small institutions, where the ultimate aim 
should not be their survival in order to avoid a serious interruption in the flow of credit, but 
rather their removal as soon as possible at as little cost as possible. 
Indeed, some of the biggest developed economies witnessed, at the onset of the financial 
crisis, how several of their leading banks were collapsing. This was because, in addition to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the sudden downturn in the value of their assets, they saw the short-term funding channels 
on  which  they  relied  so  heavily  disappear.  Given  this  scenario,  the  logical  and  no  doubt 
inevitable reaction was to swiftly inject huge amounts of public money. Yet in Spain’s case, 
there was overall excess capacity in the sector and the problems were at a group of small or 
medium-sized  institutions  with  a  reasonably  long-term  financing  structure.  All  told,  the 
advisability  of  earmarking  public  funds  to  these  institutions  immediately  was  much  less 
evident. On one hand, it is not surprising that ailing institutions should apply for public aid, if 
possible without conditions. But the mission of the authorities is to look out for the general 
interest,  setting  conditions  for  this  aid  that  ensure  the  adjustment  and  restructuring  of  the 
sector and the creation of new, stronger and better managed institutions, of a sufficient size 
to gain access to wholesale funding, thus enabling them to channel funds appropriately to 
the economy as a whole.  
Conversely, it is not surprising that those institutions in a better position should call for the 
swift  winding  up  of  the  institutions  facing  problems.  Yet  as  one  of  the  articles  in  the  book 
being presented today clearly explains, bank-resolution processes can entail enormous costs 
for  taxpayers,  which  must  be  set  against  the  unquestionable  benefits  of  shortening 
restructuring time. Moreover, insofar as these costs may affect sovereign risk, the cure might 
prove worse than the illness. 
But let us talk about the present, about what we should do now. Evidently, not only have we 
not exited the crisis, but the information reaching us shows that the crisis may worsen in the 
coming  months.  Exit  will  depend  on  what  the  reaction  is  on  the  domestic,  European  and 
global fronts. At present, the key to our future lies in the capacity of the European institutions, 
the European Council, the Eurogroup and the ECB, and the national governments, to act in 
unison,  each  in  its  own  area  of  responsibility,  with  a  single,  shared  objective:  to  halt  the 
dangerous  current  market  dynamic.  In  the  absence  of  joint  action,  any  piecemeal  and 
uncoordinated  progress  on  any  of  those  fronts  will  be  worth  little.  European  progress  is 
absolutely  vital  so  that  the  adjustment  drive  in  the  national  economies  should  not  prove 
sterile. Headway in these adjustments is likewise vital for preparing the terrain on which the 
European institutions must progress.  
So  as  not  to  overstay  my  welcome,  and  given  that  next  week  several  meetings  involving 
these European institutions are to be held, I propose that we assume that these meetings will 
eventually see the adoption of the decisions needed to turn the markets around. 
This  assumption  about  what  the  European  institutions  will  do  allows  me  to  conclude  my 
address by talking exclusively about our national problems. What must Spain do to emerge 
from  the  crisis?  As  I  said  at  the  outset,  the  conjunction  of  three  economic  crises,  and  in 
particular  the  worsening  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  mean  that  precise  economic  policy 
implementation is extremely difficult at present, although the diagnosis as to what must be 
done is relatively simple and widely known.  
At present, what is most important is to promptly pursue an ambitious reform of our labour 
market  institutions,  while  continuing  to  make  headway  on  two  key  fronts:  budgetary 
consolidation and financial system restructuring. In the past two years significant steps have 
been taken in both these areas, but to achieve fully satisfactory results, perseverance with 
the path of reform is needed.  
Starting with the reform of the labour market institutions, certain measures have been taken 
recently. But the truth is that, since the outset of democracy, Spain has not been capable of 
making any meaningful progress in this area, whereas most European countries have used 
the past three decades to reform their labour systems, in order to achieve higher levels of 
flexibility and job protection, i.e. greater “flexicurity”. During this time, the Spanish economy 
has  been  radically  modernised  in  many  other  areas,  through  the  adoption  of  regulatory 
frameworks and measures comparable to those of the most advanced economies, such as 
the  removal  of  barriers  to  trade,  the  liberalisation  of  certain  sectors,  privatisations,  etc. 
However, our labour market, which is characterised by the very high levels of unemployment 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
generated  during  crises  and  also  by  its  inability  to  reduce  unemployment  rates  during 
upturns,  has  retained  the  same  institutional  structure  with  no  substantial  changes  for 
30 years. The cost for workers of this resistance to reform has been insecurity both for the 
unemployed  and  for  those  who  have  jobs  but  fear  losing  them.  The  insensitivity  of  wage 
growth to the cyclical situation and to productivity generates numerous perverse effects. First 
and  foremost,  the  adjustment  to  shocks  is  borne  entirely  by  employment.  But  also  wage 
growth in some sectors or firms may be lower than it would have been if more flexible labour 
institutions had allowed productivity gains at the firm level. This is what one observes when 
the  situation  of  Spanish  workers  is  compared  with  that  of  workers  in  those  European 
countries that have the highest levels of flexicurity. 
For all these reasons, as I have so often said, Spain’s labour institutions must be reformed in 
order to lay the foundations for employment creation and for reducing unemployment from its 
very  high  current  level  to  one  similar  to  those  of  other  European  countries.  All  I  can  add 
today  is  that  a  gradual  process  is  no  longer  sufficient.  The  seriousness  of  the  situation 
requires the adoption forthwith of a reform that draws our labour market closer to the levels 
of job flexibility and security prevailing in most European countries. 
Reform of our labour institutions is very necessary for many reasons. First, to put an end to 
the personal and family drama that unemployment entails. But also to help reduce the budget 
deficit.  Indeed  a  more  efficient  labour  market,  that  gave  us  unemployment  rates  similar  to 
those of other countries, would permit the costs of unemployment – which in Spain amount to 
around 4% of GDP – to be reduced, and would increase government receipts from income 
and consumption taxes without tax rates having to be raised. A reduction in unemployment 
and  an  increase  in  employment  are  also  very  important  for  the  banking  system.  First, 
because  high  rates  of  unemployment  eventually  lead  to  higher  default  rates.  Second, 
because  a  reduction  in  unemployment  is  essential  to  reverse  a  trend  that  is  having  very 
serious effects on banks, namely the fall in solvent demand for credit. That said, at present, 
owing to the worsening of the sovereign crisis, supply-side factors are also contributing to the 
decrease in lending to households and firms which, as usual in this type of situation, affects 
small and medium-sized firms disproportionately. 
However, as I have repeatedly said, labour reform, accompanied by liberalisation processes 
to  foster  a  more  competitive  environment,  is  the  only  way  within  the  context  of  monetary 
union of achieving an internal devaluation within a relatively short space of time. This reform 
will  not  have  immediate  effects,  but  that  only  makes  it  all  the  more  pressing.  Without  this 
reform, the recovery in competitiveness could only be achieved through an extremely slow 
and  very  painful,  with  unacceptable  suffering 
for  many  Spaniards  and  negative 
consequences beyond the purely economic ones. 
Turning to budgetary policy, lowering the deficit is absolutely necessary given the stance of 
the  markets,  whose  distrust  of  the  sovereign  debt  of  the  euro  area  countries  has  been 
increasing in recent weeks. Admittedly, tough decisions have already been taken in Spain, 
such as the reform of pensions, which have served to reduce the deficit not only in the short 
run, but also in the medium and long term. However, there is still a long way to go merely to 
comply in 2012 with the 4.4% budget deficit commitment, whatever the final figure for 2011. 
Finally, some very significant progress has been made in Spain in recent years in financial 
restructuring. The banking system has written off bad debts (equivalent to more than 10% of 
GDP in the last three-and-a-half years), the average size of banks has increased, capacity 
has been reduced and a process is under way to transform the savings bank sector, which 
will help these institutions to meet the new prudential regulation requirements and strengthen 
their ability to fund themselves on the markets. Yet, as I said in September when presenting 
the results of the recapitalisation required by the royal decree law passed early this year, the 
restructuring process cannot be considered to have been completed. In fact, insofar as the 
economic forecasts for 2012 have in recent weeks been revised drastically downwards and 
funding problems on wholesale markets have worsened for all European banks, the pressure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
on our credit institutions has intensified and therefore the need for adjustment and financial 
restructuring not only remains but has actually increased. 
During  economic  upturns  the  major  danger  is  complacency,  which  leads  one  to  think  that 
reforms are not necessary because everything (growth, employment, government revenues) 
is going well. During crises however, the great danger is reform fatigue, tiring of reforms that 
have no visible effects in the short term. 
For this reason, we must not only press ahead with financial restructuring, but must also be 
open to the possibility of taking further action when this is considered necessary. That said, 
irrespective of the instruments that may soon be adopted, both the objective and the main 
criteria that have been followed in recent years should, in my opinion, be maintained. The 
objective is clear and leaves little room for discussion: to have solid institutions that are able 
to contribute effectively to the financing of households and businesses. And it would also be 
useful to preserve the main criteria used hitherto in the financial restructuring. Specifically, I 
am referring to the anticipation of problems, minimisation of the use of public funds, reducing 
capacity, the conditionality of assistance, the emphasis on downsizing balance sheets and 
the promotion of transparency. 
First  it  is  very  important  to  anticipate  problems.  The  primary  obligation  of  a  banking 
supervisor is to ensure at all times that the credit institutions operating are solvent and viable. 
However, good supervisors should not limit themselves to analysing the present, but should 
also anticipate possible scenarios of non-viability that might arise in the future and attempt to 
reduce problems to a minimum before they emerge. When the crisis broke, the 45 Spanish 
savings  banks  then  existing  were  all  solvent  and  viable.  However,  taking  into  account  the 
new economic and financial environment stemming from the crisis, it was possible to foresee 
that while some of them were very well-managed and unquestionably sound, many others, 
within a matter of years or months, might eventually be non-viable. That is why it was urgent 
to change the legislation on restructuring, which had been designed to resolve isolated, non-
systemic crises and which, in particular, was not appropriate for managing the restructuring 
of savings banks. Moreover, the legislation then in force involved the use of tools that had 
been  very  useful  for  resolving  crises  in  the  past,  but  that  were  banned  by  the  Monetary 
Union.  Consequently  it  was  important  to  create  instruments  such  as  the  FROB  to  enable 
preventive  action  to  be  taken,  before  the  situation  worsened  and  required  a  wholesale 
winding up of institutions. Apart from the costs of winding up, there was a risk, especially at a 
time of global banking crisis, that contagion might spread throughout the Spanish financial 
system. 
When  examining  the  possible  formulae  for  financial  restructuring,  the  authorities  ruled  out 
some that definitely might have speeded up the process of restructuring the banks. They did 
so  on  the  basis  of  prudence,  since  a  sudden  sharp  deterioration  in  public  finances  in  the 
midst of the crisis could, as it did elsewhere in Europe, have meant that the rescue of the 
banking system brought the country to the brink of bankruptcy and an eventual bail-out. The 
containment of public spending matters not only from a medium-term perspective; given the 
current  vulnerability  of  sovereign  debt  on  the  markets,  its  short-term  effects  must  also  be 
considered. 
It is also essential to maintain the criterion of demanding conditionality when designing public 
assistance, so that this is only received by institutions that adjust their capacity and manage 
to improve their efficiency, which is easier to do when their size is increased. At the same 
time, any strategy that encourages banks to seek private solutions requires more time than 
one  of  wholesale  public  intervention.  But  this  system  of  incentives,  which  has  required  an 
enormous amount of work not only by the supervisory authorities at the Banco de España 
but also by many savings bank managers, has meant that most institutions have voluntarily 
undertaken  integration  and  restructuring  process.  That  has  not  only  served  to  reduce  the 
contribution  of  the  Spanish  taxpayer,  but  also  to  increase  banks’  size  and  reduce  their 
capacity, thus giving rise to a banking system that is somewhat better prepared to withstand 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the crisis than the one we had when it started, although all the institutions still have much to 
do in the way of improving their efficiency. 
It is also important to emphasise that the key to every restructuring is to clean up balance 
sheets.  Some  of  the  criticisms  that  you  may  have  heard  during  the  savings  bank 
restructuring process have been that it was unfair to require savings banks first to write down 
their  assets  and  then  to  recapitalise  too.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  I  do  not  think  that 
anybody would now consider that we should have started in any other way than by requiring 
assets be written down, and then at a later stage, requiring recapitalisation. Balance sheet 
restatement is not just “one” possible formula for restructuring, but rather a vital ingredient of 
all restructuring processes. 
Finally,  I  understand  but  do  not  share  the  view  of  those  who  see  a  danger  in  forcing 
institutions  to  increase  transparency  in  the  midst  of  a  crisis.  I  am  convinced  that,  in  the 
present  situation  of  general  distrust  in  the  markets,  suspicion  is  always  much  worse  than 
reality, however problematic that may be. Admittedly, despite increased transparency, doubts 
persist  as  to  the  extent  to  which  our  banks  have  cleaned  up  their  balance  sheets.  And 
although  write-downs  have  been  very  intense,  unsatisfactory  economic  performance  might 
make further efforts along these lines necessary in future. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  let  me  conclude  by  reiterating  that  such  is  the  speed  of  change  in  the 
economic environment in Spain, Europe and the world in recent months, and even in the last 
few weeks, that it would be a grave error to establish rigid criteria that rule out the possibility 
of incorporating fresh financial restructuring tools, if changing circumstances mean that they 
are required in order to achieve the final goal. That can be none other than to have a set of 
solid credit institutions ready to effectively meet the solvent demand of Spanish households 
and firms for funds. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
