Carlos da Silva Costa: Fostering cooperation between the ESS and the 
ESCB   
Opening address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Bank 
of Portugal workshop on “Fostering cooperation between the ESS and the ESCB”, Lisbon, 
25 November 2011. 
 Members  of  the  Committee  on  Monetary,  Financial  and  Balance  of  Payments  Statistics, 
Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  am  very  pleased  that  the  Banco  de  Portugal  can  host  this  Workshop  on  “Fostering 
cooperation  between  the  European  Statistical  System  (ESS)  and  the  European  System  of 
Central Banks (ESCB)” – an event meant to recognise and celebrate the 20th Anniversary of 
the Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics (CMFB) – and I 
would like to extend a warm welcome to all of you for joining us today.  
It  is  also  my  great  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  briefly  address  you  on  this  joyous 
occasion.  
Let me start by saying that the Banco de Portugal thinks highly of the work that the CMFB 
has  undertaken  for  the  last  two  decades  in  assisting  the  Commission  to  achieve  close 
cooperation with the European Union (EU) Member States in the fields of monetary, financial 
and balance of payments statistics. I would like to praise specially the advisory role provided 
by  the  Committee  in  the  context  of  the  issues  raised  by  the  application  of  the  Excessive 
Deficit Procedure (EDP).  
Over  this  20-year  period,  the  CMFB  acted  in  a  very  relevant  fashion,  accompanying  the 
reinforcement of integration in Europe, especially during the creation of the Economic and 
Monetary Union.  
The  Committee  was  able  to  develop  the  right  conditions  for  an  effective  and  mutually 
beneficial  cooperation  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  national  statistical  institutes  and  the 
Eurostat and, on the other hand, the national central banks and the European Central Bank 
(ECB),  thus  fostering  the  interchange  of  statistical  knowledge  among  these  entities  and 
contributing to bringing about efficient data collection and compilation as well as access to 
high-quality EU and euro area economic and financial statistics. Ultimately, the work of the 
CMFB has contributed very positively to building further trust in official statistics.  
I remain convinced that, to help us coping with the predicaments that the euro area is facing 
at the present juncture, the CMFB still has a unique and significant role to play.  
Indeed,  four  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  largest  financial  crisis  since  the  Great 
Depression,  global  financial  stability  has  yet  to  be  secured  and  many  policy  challenges 
remain to be addressed:  
 
 
 
 
Global recovery is not proceeding at a balanced pace  
Large global imbalances persist  
Widespread public debt sustainability concerns have emerged  
Links  between  weak  balance  sheets  of  both  governments  and  the  banking  sector 
have  led  to  renewed  tensions  in  financial  markets,  particularly  affecting  the  euro 
area.  
At the national level, it is clear that utmost priority must be placed in restoring public debt 
sustainability,  increasing  domestic  savings  and  enhancing  potential  growth  in  the  crisis-hit 
countries.  These  are  necessary  conditions  to  stabilise  external  debt  and  put  it  on  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
downward  path.  These  objectives  are  at  the  core  of  the  recently  approved  financial 
assistance programme to Portugal.  
At  the  EU  level,  a  new  economic  governance  model  is  needed  to  deliver  fiscal  discipline, 
prevent sustained losses in competitiveness and promote financial stability. 
For this purpose, in October 2010, the European Council endorsed the proposals put forward 
by a special task force on economic governance led by President van Rompuy. Building on 
the recommendations of the task force, the European Parliament and the Council adopted, in 
November  2011,  the  six  legislative  proposals  presented  by  the  European  Commission  in 
September 2010.  
The new economic governance model comprises: 
 
A reformed Stability and Growth Pact, aimed at enhancing the surveillance of fiscal 
policies  and  applying  enforcement  measures  more  consistently  and  at  an  earlier 
stage  
New provisions aimed at strengthening national fiscal frameworks  
A new surveillance mechanism of macroeconomic imbalances.  
 
 
It remains to be seen whether the new surveillance framework will prove sufficient to ensure 
a smooth functioning of the euro area.  
The  current  turmoil  in  financial  markets  that  I  have  concisely  addressed,  together with  the 
challenges  posed  by  globalisation  and  the  vulnerability  of  economies  to  cross-border 
financial risks, call for the need to fully and timely capture this evolving reality by means of 
relevant statistics, produced and disseminated on a regular basis.  
Statistics  are  a  public  good.  Therefore,  compiling  and  communicating  top-quality  statistics 
require efficient production and dissemination processes, in line with international standards 
and in compliance with commitments to national and international organisations.  
The  design,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  EU  policies  constantly  require  statistical 
support to ensure that the policies address the relevant issues and that the expected results 
will be achieved. Just as EU policies evolve, good statistics have to develop in parallel.  
In this regard, it is necessary to strike a proper balance between reducing the respondents’ 
reporting  burden  and  requiring  more  data  (e.g.,  raw  micro  data)  for  compiling  high-quality 
statistics.  Enhanced  collaboration  among  statistics  compilers  is  also  warranted,  mainly  as 
regards  the  interchange  of  quantitative  information  and  knowledge  for  statistical  purposes. 
Effective and efficient interagency statistical cooperation, especially at international level, is 
instrumental to the quality, relevancy and cost-effectiveness of macroeconomic statistics. To 
reach  this  stage,  I  believe  that  we  need  to  further  strengthen  the  statistical  governance  in 
Europe.  
With  this  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  draw  on  the  speech  made  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet, 
former  president  of  the  ECB,  at  the  3rd  ECB  Conference  on  Statistics,  in  2006.  In  his 
communication, he mentioned that “Good governance is particularly important for statistics 
that  have  a  direct  administrative  and  policy  use  in  Europe,  such  as  the  indicators  for 
assessing the convergence of EU Member States that do not yet belong to the euro area and 
the  statistics  underlying  the  excessive  deficit  procedure”.  From  there,  he  moved  to  the 
importance  of  interagency  cooperation  for  statistics  purposes  and  the  role  played  by  the 
CMFB in this process, emphasising that “While Eurostat is responsible for these statistics, it 
can  benefit,  when  deciding  upon  conceptual  issues,  from  the  considerable  statistical 
expertise available at the Eurostat, the ECB, the NSIs and the NCBs, as brought together in 
the CMFB”. Another important point raised by Mr Trichet in his speech regards the need to 
safeguard  the  independence  of  the  statistical  function.  On  this  topic,  he  said  that  “...  the 
compilation of government finance statistics – and all other statistics for that matter – should 
not  be  subject  to  political  considerations.  The  compilers  of  these  statistics  must  act  in  full 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
scientific independence, and the government must ensure that sufficient resources are made 
available for their task”. He also highlighted the need to periodically appraise the relevance of 
extant statistics, by stating that “... it is important to regularly review the cost/benefit ratio of 
existing statistics that were agreed upon many years ago”.  
These wise words are still relevant today and I fully support them.  
I  find  particularly  interesting  the  idea  expressed  by  Mr  Trichet  on  the  same  occasion  that 
“over time the European statistical systems will develop in the direction of genuine systems 
with  regional  competence  centres,  coordinated  by  the  European  institutions.  The  mutual 
interdependence of statistics compilers would then increase, which in turn calls for a further 
strengthening of international statistical governance.”  
That being said, I now turn to the subject that brought us here today, which is twofold: the 
Lisbon  Workshop  and  the  related  Banco  de  Portugal’s  sponsorship  of  the  book  that 
celebrates the 20th Anniversary of the CMFB.  
I will start with the latter.  
To  celebrate  its  20th  Anniversary,  the  CMFB  thought  of  publishing  a  book  offering  a 
recollection of the main milestones that were achieved during these two decades, as well as 
some reflections on a number of statistical issues in which the Committee is expected to be 
involved in the future.  
In recognition of the good work carried out by the CMFB through all these years, the Banco 
de Portugal decided to support that initiative by sponsoring the publication of the book. The 
outcome of this undertaking will be presented by the next speaker in a little while.  
As  to  the  Lisbon  Workshop,  its  principal  goal  could  be  summarised  in  the  following 
statement:  Drawing  from  the  past  to  prepare  for  the  future!  This  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  very 
fitting and commendable proposition.  
During  the  two  sessions  of  the  Workshop  and  the  ensuing  debate  the  participants  are 
expected to draw on the lessons learnt from CMFB’s past mandates to find ways to further 
reinforce the collaborative efforts between central banks and statistical offices, with a view to 
better coping with the challenges ahead as regards official statistics (e.g., early identification 
of the likely changes and the true underlying economics of the events and transactions that 
have to be measured).  
It  is  my  firm  belief  that  your  combined  efforts  and  your  expertise  will  bring  in  a  dynamic, 
productive and efficient meeting, with interesting presentations and fruitful discussions about 
the issue of interagency statistical cooperation at national and EU levels. 
Before giving the floor to Mr Cadete de Matos, for him to proceed with the commentary and 
delivery of the book, I would like to conclude this brief address by wishing you all the best in 
whatever your future holds.  
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
