Sabine Lautenschläger and Andreas Dombret: Deutsche Bundesbank’s 
2011 Financial Stability Review 
Presentation  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Vice-President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank, 
and Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, of 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  2011  Financial  Stability  Review,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
10 November 2011. 
 Part I (Dr Andreas Dombret) 
I  am  pleased  to  present,  together  with  Ms  Lautenschläger,  this  year’s  edition  of  the 
Bundesbank’s Financial Stability Review. The environment for our report could hardly have 
presented a greater challenge. Near the end, the flow of events had swollen to a cascade. At 
the European and international level, policymakers took decisions of major import in Brussels 
and Cannes. At the same time, the news from Athens, in particular, was keeping Europe on 
edge. 
On  the  one  hand,  this  environment  made  things  difficult,  for  we  want  our  report  to  be 
absolutely on top of current events.  
On the other hand, it is precisely in such times that we need to stop for a second, take stock 
and ask: What is actually the current state of financial stability? And what should be the key 
criteria informing a smart financial stability policy and a smart regulatory regime? After all, 
our  Financial  Stability  Review  seeks  not  just  to  analyse  current  events  but  also  to  find 
answers to longer-term questions as well. 
The current situation 
What is our assessment of financial stability in 2011? Our main diagnosis is that the risks to 
the  German  financial  system  have  increased  perceptibly  this  year.  High  sovereign  debt  is 
certainty the greatest risk factor, and is likely to remain so for some time to come. 
Among the positives: the German financial system has responded to the increased risk by 
improving its resilience. Our review recognises and praises the fact that German banks and 
insurers have made good use of the tailwind created by the rapid recovery of the German 
economy which began in spring 2009. However, new strains are looming on the horizon. The 
improved resilience will probably be increasingly put to the test.  
A  look  at  the  factors  affecting  financial  stability  this  year  shows  that  the  situation  has 
changed.  The  positives  have  to  do,  in  particular,  with  progress  in  Germany’s  financial 
system.  Capitalisation  has  improved,  while  the  earnings  situation  has  remained  stable. 
Funding vulnerabilities have been further reduced. In addition, Europe’s policymakers have 
taken measures to counter the crisis of confidence plaguing Europe’s banking system. I shall 
say more about that later on.  
However, the negatives form a longer list. Heading this list is the sovereign debt crisis, along 
with its widening and its contagion effects. Developments in the financial markets should also 
be mentioned here. Current tensions, such as impaired funding liquidity and market liquidity, 
but  also  new  structural  risks  such  as  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  high  frequency 
trading (HFT), are at the centre of attention. Let us now take a closer look at these negatives. 
The current setting: high sovereign debt is the biggest risk 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  widened  and  worsened.  After  Greece  and  Ireland  in  2010, 
Portugal was forced to accept financial assistance from the international community in May 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of this year. In the summer, the two large euro-area countries Spain and Italy were sucked 
into the sovereign debt crisis.  
The  high  levels  of  sovereign  debt  have  generated  massive  contagion  effects  within  the 
banking  sector.  The  first  casualties  were  the  banking  systems  of  the  Troika  programme 
countries – Greece, Ireland and Portugal. Their access to the money and capital markets is 
meanwhile very limited. However, large European banks with an international focus are now 
likewise threatened with contagion. For example, the severe reactions in the equity markets 
and CDS markets have hit the financial sector particularly hard (Chart 1). 
The Bundesbank believes that the German financial system’s exposure to Greece, Ireland 
and Portugal is, on the whole, manageable – not least because German banks have been 
doing better since 2009. As at end-June 2011, German banks’ exposure to all Greek debtors 
– by this I mean the public sector, the financial sector, corporates and households – totalled 
just under €28 billion, while German insurers’ outstanding claims on Greece totalled around 
€2  billion  (Chart  2).  Balance  sheet  exposure  to  all  borrowers  from  the  two  other  Troika 
programme countries – Ireland and Portugal – stands at €63 billion for German banks and a 
little over €10 billion for German insurance companies.  
Exposure  to  borrowers  in  the  major  euro-area  countries  Italy  and  Spain  is  larger.  German 
banks’ exposure to the Italian government sector is €42 billion, and that of German insurers 
€9 billion. Exposure to the government sector of Spain is €23 billion for German banks and 
nearly €6 billion for German insurers.  
The  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  European  banking  system  is  currently  leaving  its  mark  on 
financial stability in Germany and Europe. Three additional factors are playing a role. First, 
procyclicality in the financial system itself is amplifying the crisis. Second, problematic legacy 
portfolios  have  not  yet  been  fully  dealt  with.  Third,  the  persistent  low-interest  rate 
environment continues to harbour potential dangers. 
The financial system has in-built procyclicality, which is itself amplifying the crisis. Financial 
markets display a considerable degree of co-movement. There are high correlations between 
various asset classes such as equities, commodities and selected currencies (Chart 3). This 
comes  as  little  surprise  if  we  look  at  the  many  possible  shock-amplifying  factors.  Credit 
conditions such as automatic margins and haircuts on posted collateral can trigger liquidity 
spirals.  Automatic  pegs  to  ratings,  such  as  in  the  investment  rules  of  mutual  funds,  can 
intensify  pressure  to  sell  when  prices  are  falling.  In  fact,  the  growing  number  of  passive 
investment strategies is narrowing the range of sentiment in the financial markets. 
Other  trading  strategies  reinforce  such  automatic  triggers,  such  as  high  frequency  trading 
(HFT), which is predicated on advantages of speed by extremely rapid computer-operated 
trading in order to make profits. HFT is estimated to make up 70% of all equities trading in 
New York and 40% in Frankfurt. It should be noted, however, that HFT primarily focuses on 
the most liquid 5% to 10% of shares as well as on the most liquid currency pairs. For one 
thing, HFT is a concern in terms of market integrity. Extremely fast software routines can be 
misused  to  manipulate  the  market.  For  another,  HFT  raises  a  host  of  financial  stability 
issues.  HFT  can  create  “ghost  liquidity”  which  vanishes  precisely  when  it  is  needed  most 
urgently.  
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) also pursue passive trading strategies. They try to track the 
yield movement of a portfolio, usually an index. The attendant counterparty risks, such as are 
created by swap agreements, give cause for concern. Banks must not be permitted to create 
ETFs in order to refinance illiquid portfolios; otherwise, liquidity risk could potentially arise if 
investors suddenly pull out of these ETFs. 
However, we need to keep an eye not only on new trends but also on legacy problems from 
the first stage of the financial crisis. For they have not yet been completely overcome. Our 
attention  remains  focused  on  two  asset  classes:  commercial  real  estate  and  structured 
securities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  is  particularly  in  the  international  commercial  real  estate  markets  that  pressure  could 
resurge,  especially  as  a  lot  of  commercial  real  estate  is  up  for  refinancing.  The  major 
German banks with an international focus have a current commercial real estate portfolio of 
€274  billion.  Half  of  this  portfolio  is  accounted  for  by  foreign  business:  13%  by  the  United 
States and 7% by the United Kingdom. 
These banks are still holding a considerable volume – €150 billion as at the end of June – of 
exposure to structured products (Chart 4). €67 billion of this relates to residential mortgage-
backed  securities  (RMBS)  and  €16  billion  to  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities 
(CMBS),  whereas  around  €33  billion  is  in  collateralised  debt  obligations  (CDOs).  The 
portfolios  of  structured  securities,  however,  have  declined  by  €55  billion  from  last  year  
– some €20 billion owing to maturities and redemptions, but also around €21 billion due to 
transfers to resolution agencies. 
The  low-interest  rate  environment  is  still  impacting  on  our  financial  system  behind  the 
scenes,  entailing  sizeable  medium-term  risks.  This  was  discussed  at  length  in  last  year’s 
Financial Stability Review. However, risks contained in banks’ balance sheet structure, such 
as overleveraging or excessive maturity transformation, are not so much at the current focus 
of our attention. Our main worry at the moment relates to imbalances in a very short-term-
oriented  financial  system  that  can  divert  funds  quickly  between  asset  classes  and  thus 
contribute  to  market  volatility.  Over  the  course  of  the  year,  this  has  become  apparent 
particularly in the asset classes emerging market economies and commodities (Chart 5). 
Part II (Sabine Lautenschläger) 
Germany’s financial system facing challenges 
Germany’s banks are better equipped to tackle the crisis today than in 2008. The key drivers 
are:  higher  capital  levels,  stable  earnings  thus  far  and  stabler  funding  through  increased 
customer deposits. Contrary to fears held in 2008 and 2009, German banks have lived up to 
their  responsibility  as  financial  intermediaries.  There  has  not  been  a  credit  crunch  in 
Germany, nor do we see any signs at present of one occurring.  
One  of  the  interesting  details  of  the  in-depth  analysis  is  the  medium-term  comparison 
between the spring of 2008 and the summer of 2011. For a group of 13 major German banks 
with an international focus, the tier 1 capital ratio under the currently applicable Basel II rules 
rose  from  8.1%  to  13.1%  (see  Chart  6  for  the  sources  of  capital  formation).  Leverage  
– measured as total assets to tier 1 capital – dropped from 43 to 33. Risk-weighted assets 
have also declined further, reducing capital requirements by almost 30%. 
The  earnings  situation  of  the  major  German  banks  with  an  international  focus  has  been 
stable for a relatively long time. Earnings have remained within a narrow corridor in the last 
10 quarters (Chart 7). In the second quarter of 2011, the interest margin – defined as interest 
income divided by total assets – was, at 0.83% on an annualised basis, well above its long-
term average of 0.72%.  
The third key finding is that funding has become more stable. The rising trend in customer 
deposits is continuing. Customer deposits now make up 44% of liabilities (Chart 8). It must 
be  noted,  however,  that  the  competition  for  deposits  is  pushing  down  margins.  Also,  the 
rolling-over  of  the,  in  some  cases  short-term,  wholesale  liabilities  is  a  major  challenge 
depending on the market situation. 
Vulnerability is visibly falling with regard to US dollar funding, too. At a current level of US$61 
billion, the US dollar refinancing gap is at roughly its pre-crisis level. However, the share of 
short-term wholesale liabilities, such as via US money market funds, remains a key feature of 
US dollar funding. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Although,  on  the  whole,  the  tension  in  the  European  interbank  market  merits  a  critical 
assessment, since October “the German institutions” have been, on average, investing much 
more money in the deposit facility than they have been taking out through the ESCB tender 
operations.  
However, painting an overly positive picture would not be the right thing, either. Germany’s 
banks, too, are operating in a setting that is fraught with major uncertainty. Banking business 
thrives on mutual trust, on borrowers’ confidence in lenders and vice versa. This mutual trust 
and  confidence  has  been  disrupted.  For  one  thing,  of  course,  because  the  crisis  was 
triggered by the banking system. For another – and this is specific to Europe – because the 
markets see the public finances of many Eurosystem countries as being unsustainable.  
The  difficulties  some  countries  are  having  with  their  public  finances  are  having  a  direct 
knock-on  effect  on  institutions.  This  notably  includes  the  need  to  write  down  government 
bond portfolios and volatile financial markets. However, it is our impression that Germany’s 
banks are well prepared for this challenge. 
A more serious issue is that, in the long run, the real sector cannot completely decouple from 
the uncertainty of the overall situation. The German economy has weathered the crisis very 
well  thus  far.  The  leading  indicators,  however,  are  pointing  to  a  certain  cyclical  downturn  
– which will also tend to squeeze banks’ earnings. 
Yet the factor I see as being the biggest problem, in terms of its potential impact, is the loss 
of  confidence.  We  believe  the  correlation  is  monotonic:  the  sounder  the  state  of  public 
finances, the more confidence people have in that country’s banks, and vice versa. 
Europe’s  policymakers  have  responded  to  this  loss  of  confidence  and  have  initiated  a 
recapitalisation  of  major  European  banks.  In  this  process,  70  European  credit  institutions, 
including 13 German banks, marked to market their entire holdings of bonds issued by and 
loans  granted  to  EEA  countries  as  at  end-September.  After  marking  the  bonds  to  market, 
each institution is required to have a core tier 1 capital ratio of 9%. According to provisional 
calculations  by  the  EBA  –  largely  on  the  basis  of  half-year  figures  –  European  credit 
institutions  currently  have  a  combined  capital  shortfall  of  €106.4  billion,  of  which  German 
institutions  account  for  €5.2  billion.  Taking  into  consideration  earnings  performance  in  the 
third quarter of 2011 and the impact of the introduction of the Capital Requirements Directive 
CRD III on individual institutions, this capital requirement figure of German banks is likely to 
increase.  The  modest  size  of  the  German  banking  system’s  capital  requirements  in 
comparison with other European countries is chiefly due to the fact that German institutions 
have recently raised their capital ratio. In addition, banks generally hold government bonds 
issued by their own sovereign, and German government bonds enjoy a top credit rating. 
I  am  convinced  that  the  EU  package  is  a  key  step  towards  restoring  confidence  in  the 
banking system. However, I am also convinced that it cannot be the sole approach to solving 
the problem.  
Instead,  this  crisis  will  also  have  long-run  consequences  for  the  banking  system.  The 
attractiveness of government financing business has been diminishing because it has turned 
out to be appreciably riskier than the available returns. Rating downgrades and wider bank 
CDS spreads are making funding more expensive and could lead to a revision of business 
models.  
The sovereign debt crisis will require not only policymakers, but also the financial industry 
itself, to implement far-reaching reforms. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Part III (Dr Andreas Dombret) 
the  Bundesbank  give 
What needs to be done now? 
Our  Financial  Stability  Review  provides  not  only  analysis  but  also  evaluations  and 
recommendations.  What  advice  can 
to  market  participants, 
policymakers and the interested public?  
Our  recommendations  to  market  participants  rest,  at  the  core,  on  two  fundamental 
messages.  One  is:  take  a  more  long-term  view  in  your  business!  The  requirements  of  the 
markets are changing constantly. Provisioning and smart risk management are necessary for 
sustainable  business  –  not  least  in  the  financial  sector.  The  second  message  is  that 
regulators  and  policymakers  are  not  the  only  parties  responsible  for  giving  the  markets  a 
proper framework. Market participants themselves are primarily responsible for making the 
markets work. 
Our  recommendations  are  aimed  at  encouraging  a  longer-term  business  policy  focus. 
Specifically,  banks  must  further  strengthen  their  capital  base  in  response  to  the  loss  of 
confidence in the banking sector; and the salaries and bonuses paid by banks have to go 
down if banks earn less – this applies especially to investment banking. 
The second plank of our recommendations addresses market participants’ self-responsibility 
for  the  organisation  of  the  markets.  This  means  that  even  systemically  important  financial 
institutions (SIFIs) must be able to exit the market without the financial system collapsing. It 
is therefore necessary to develop recovery and resolution plans (RRPs) for SIFIs. We also 
think that it is appropriate to propose the establishment of a code of conduct for HFT in order 
to preclude the use of potentially unfair practices. Enhancing the transparency of ETFs would 
also help improve the markets’ ability to handle the risks. 
Last  but  not  least,  I  wish  to  turn  to  our  recommendations  for  policymakers.  We  can 
distinguish  between  two  sorts  of  policymakers.  Our  first  set  of  recommendations  is 
addressed to those responsible for financial stability policy itself. It seems important to me 
that financial stability policymakers, with all the fires that need to be put out, should not lose 
sight of the ultimate objective: the goal is not to push the markets back as far as possible. On 
the contrary: the goal is to create an intelligent framework for markets that work. 
Enhancing 
infrastructure  are  essential 
ingredients of a sustainable market framework. Our recommendations are therefore directed 
at making the shadow banking system more transparent. This means, above all, the rigorous 
implementation  of  new  internationally  harmonised  reporting  requirements  for  the  shadow 
banking  system.  Another  key  requirement  is  to  obtain  a  clearer  picture  of  what  risks  are 
being  assumed  by  hedge  funds.  It  is  therefore  important  to  stipulate  the  use  of  central 
counterparties  (CCPs)  for  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  trading  and  set  up  trade 
repositories – also for commodity markets. 
A  further  pillar  of  a  sustainable  market  framework  involves  giving  banking  regulation  and 
supervision a stronger macroprudential focus. Our recommendation in this respect is aimed 
at achieving internationally harmonised insolvency regimes for banks. 
In  addition,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  decisions  on  the  use  and  dosage  of 
macroprudential tools remain the prerogative of national supervisors. The goal here is that 
macroprudential instruments such as the anti-cyclical capital buffer should be set by national 
authorities, including German authorities; for these instruments must be able to respond to 
the situation in the respective country – for instance, to that country’s credit and real-estate 
markets. 
In addition, we also have recommendations for fiscal policymakers. This is self-explanatory 
at  a  time  when  high  government  debt  is  the  most  pressing  problem.  Because  of  this  high 
level of government debt, it is particularly important to pursue a sustainable fiscal policy and 
transparency  and  strengthening 
financial 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
to implement supportive structural reforms. In Germany, too, the task of consolidating public 
finances  must  continue.  The  incentives  for  pursuing  sound  national  fiscal  policies  must  be 
restored  in  Europe.  It  is  imperative  that  policymakers  respect  the  boundary  between 
monetary and fiscal policy. Which brings us back to the topic that is currently concentrating 
our minds most – the sovereign debt crisis in Europe. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 1 
BALANCE SHEET EXPOSURE OF GERMAN BANKING SYSTEM*) 
AND INSURERS TO SELECTED COUNTRIES
Chart 2 
€ bn; as at June 2011
Borrowers
Government sector
Country
Belgium
France
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Portugal
Spain
United States
Banks
8,6
23,7
17,5
5,9
42,2
6,2
22,6
80,0
Insurers
4,1
7,9
2,1
2,9
9,0
2,1
5,7
4,8
Banks and money 
market funds
Banks
Insurers
Other financial sector Enterprises/ 
households
Banks
Banks
Insurers
Insurers
15,5
49,8
0,7
4,0
54,4
7,3
47,4
26,3
24,0
20,2
0,0
1,0
29,4
0,6
9,1
4,1
1,7
7,8
0,5
26,5
5,0
1,2
20,2
169,5
0,1
6,2
0,0
3,5
1,1
0,2
3,2
7,1
6,4
33,4
9,2
5,6
16,1
6,2
29,2
107,4
0,4
2,7
0,0
0,1
0,7
0,2
0,3
1,4
Source: The Deutsche Bundesbank's credit register of loans of €1.5 million or more. ― * Definitions based on BIS banking statistics.
DEUTSCHE BUNDESBANK
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Total
Banks
32,3
114,7
27,8
42,0
117,7
20,9
119,5
383,1
Insurers
28,7
37,0
2,1
7,3
40,3
3,1
18,3
17,4
 7
Chart 3 
 Chart 4 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES: SELECTED INDICATORS FOR RISKS 
ASSOCIATED WITH CAPITAL INFLOWS*)
Chart 5 
Net capital 
inflows as % 
of GDP 1)
Credit growth (real) 2)
Equity valuation 3)
z score
Country
Argentina 6)
Brazil
China
India
Indonesia 
Mexico
Russia
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
South Korea
Turkey
0,4
1,3
1,3
-0,6
2,0
0,5
0,0
-1,0
0,1
-0,5
1,3
Year-on-year 
change (%)
35,3
19,6
10,1
11,8
17,5
11,8
7,8
3,1
-0,7
-1,4
34,6
Average of 
the last three 
years (%)
15,2
14,8
18,7
8,8
12,8
2,3
8,0
5,2
-0,6
3,4
18,2
z score
P/E ratio 4)
-0,2
-0,7
-1,4
-0,3
-0,1
0,5
-1,3
-1,2
-0,7
-0,2
0,0
z score of 
the estimated 
P/E ratio 4)
0,1
-0,5
-1,2
-0,7
0,5
0,5
-1,4
-0,8
-0,8
-0,5
0,0
z score       
P/B ratio 5)
0,3
-0,2
-1,0
-0,3
0,6
0,3
-0,7
-0,8
-0,4
0,0
-0,3
Sources: Bloomberg, Datastream, IMF, SAMA and Bundesbank calculations. — * The z score is the distance, expressed as the number of 
standard deviations, between the last data point and the mean of the dataset. — 1 The IMF regards a z score > 1 as problematic (values shaded in 
red). — 2 The IMF defines a period of strong credit growth as a period in which average real credit growth over a three-year timeframe exceeds 17% 
(values shaded in red). — 3 The IMF regards z scores > 1.5 as requiring observation and > 2 as problematic. Bloomberg uses the current-year 
profits to calculate the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio. In order to calculate the estimated P/E ratio, Bloomberg surveys market watchers on their profit 
expectations for the coming 12 months. — 4 Price-to-earnings ratio. — 5 Price-to-book value ratio. — 6 Argentina’s real credit growth was 
calculated using official inflation statistics and may therefore potentially be overstated.
DEUTSCHE BUNDESBANK
 Chart 6 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
Chart 7 
Chart 8 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
