Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Credit reporting and risk management training 
Welcoming and opening address by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the 
Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Third  Credit  Reporting  and  Risk  Management  Training, 
Kuala Lumpur, 26 September 2011. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to Malaysia and to the third series of the Workshop 
on “Credit Reporting and Risk Management Training”, jointly organised by the International 
Finance Corporation (IFC) and Bank Negara Malaysia. This annual workshop has provided 
an important platform for experts from the different parts of the world to exchange views and 
experiences on developments in the credit registry landscape and the role of credit registries 
in preserving financial stability and in contributing towards economic and social development. 
Indeed, centralised credit information registries, or credit bureaus, are a critical part of the 
infrastructure  that  facilitates  and  enables  the  efficient  expansion  and  outreach  of  credit 
intermediation  in  an  economy.  This  is  now  well-supported  by  empirical  evidence.  A  well-
functioning credit bureau serves as a lubricant to the intermediation process by overcoming 
one  of  the  fundamental  challenges  with  any  credit  market,  that  is  the  asymmetry  of 
information between lenders and borrowers. The wider use of credit information can make an 
important  contribution  to  prudent  financial  management,  not  just  among  borrowers  by 
minimising  incidences  of  excessive  borrowings,  but  also  among  lenders  by  encouraging 
greater discipline during periods of exuberance when lenders may be tempted by rapid rises 
in asset prices and perverse incentives, to throw caution to the wind. It also has an important 
role  in  promoting  access  to  financing  for  various  segments  of  the  society.  Borrowers  who 
maintain  a  good  credit  history  and  demonstrate  strong  financial  discipline  are  able  to 
leverage on such “reputational collateral” to secure borrowings at more favourable terms 
and rates. 
Credit registries have also been used extensively to support enhanced banking and financial 
market supervision. There can be little doubt, particularly after the events of the sub-prime 
mortgage crisis, that the accumulation of credit that is premised on informed credit decisions, 
whether taken at an individual, institutional or system-wide level, will contribute to the stability 
of the overall financial system.  
While the collection of credit information on borrowers in Malaysia started many years ago, it 
was not until the aftermath of the Asian Financial Crisis that a centralised credit information 
registry  was  realised.  The  crisis  proved  to  be  a  defining  moment  for  Malaysia  on  several 
fronts and was instrumental in advancing critical reforms in the development of our financial 
infrastructure.  The  Central  Credit  Reference  Information  System,  or  CCRIS,  (owned  and 
operated by Bank Negara Malaysia) was established in October 2001 and has since been 
acknowledged  as  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  public  registries  in  the  world.  The 
operationalisation  of  CCRIS  expanded  the  role  of  the  credit  information  registry  beyond  a 
supervisory focus to supporting prudent and more efficient credit and financial management 
decisions among Malaysian borrowers and financial institutions.  
CCRIS  enables  real  time  access  to  both  positive  and  negative  credit  information  on  all 
borrowers  in  the  banking  system  and  of  a  selected  group  of  non-banks.  At  present,  the 
system contains more than 21.9 million outstanding credit accounts and 7.6 million borrower 
records.  The  system  is  supported  by  rigorous  controls  that  protect  the  integrity  of  such 
information, which in turn, enables the Bank and supervisors to perform granular and multi-
dimensional analysis and assessments of credit risks and credit-related vulnerabilities in the 
banking system.  
For  banking  institutions  in  Malaysia,  the  ability  through  CCRIS,  to  tap  into  ten  years  of 
borrower  credit  records  spanning  the  entire  population  of  banking  institutions  has  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
instrumental  in  accelerating  enhancements  to  the  management  of  credit  risk  by  banks,  in 
particular  the  development  and  validation  of  credit  scoring  models.  Today,  information 
extracted from CCRIS is used as a key input in banks’ credit decisions. The availability of 
current information has also facilitated more expedient and robust credit decisions. Hence, 
while banks’ exposures to the household sector have been on a strong growth trajectory and 
account  for  more  than  half  of  banks’  lending  portfolio,  the  quality  of  the  portfolio  has 
remained sound, with a net impairment ratio sustained at a low 2%. The banking system’s 
exposures to other retail and small businesses have also grown in the last decade, in part 
due to the established credit track record captured in CCRIS, which have enabled small and 
medium sized enterprises (SMEs) and micro enterprises to benefit from improved access to 
financing.  These  developments  in  turn,  have  resulted  in  a  more  balanced  and  diversified 
credit portfolio of banking institutions. 
In addition to CCRIS, there exist other private sector-owned credit bureaus in Malaysia that 
specialise  in  niche  areas  of  value-added  information  and  that  offer  differentiated  risk 
management products to financial institutions. With the wider use of information provided by 
these credit bureaus, a priority has been to put in place a structure and framework for the 
appropriate oversight of their activities. This is essential to provide the necessary safeguards 
and  to  protect  the  privacy  of  data  subjects.  It  is  also  equally  important  to  ensure  the 
accuracy,  completeness  and  timeliness  of  credit  information  that  is  used  by  financial 
institutions to form credit decisions. Inaccurate, incomplete and dated or delayed information 
can  have  damaging  effects  on  individuals  in  terms  of  access  to  financing,  while  exposing 
banking  institutions  to  the  risk  of  losses.  Two  key  pieces  of  legislation  that  were  recently 
enacted  to  support  these  outcomes  are  the  Credit  Reporting  Agencies  Act  2010  and  the 
Personal  Data  Protection  Act  2010.  The  Credit  Reporting  Agencies  Act  2010  governs  the 
operations  of  private  credit  bureaus  and  provides  for  the  development  of  a  regulated  and 
structured credit information sharing industry. The Personal Data Protection Act 2010 on the 
other  hand  regulates  the  collection,  processing  and  handling  of  personal  information  for 
commercial purposes by data users and provides safeguards for the data subjects against 
the abuse of such information for improper or unauthorized purposes. The operationalisation 
of  these  laws  are  currently  in  progress  and  we  look  forward  to  a  productive  exchange  of 
experience during the course of this workshop which will benefit our own efforts to build a 
conducive environment for the orderly development of private credit bureaus. 
Despite  the  compelling  public  benefits  provided  by  credit  registries,  regulators  face 
considerable challenges in educating consumers to appreciate how credit reports can help 
enhance  their  access  to  credit  and  improve  the  terms  under  which  credit  is  provided.  The 
role of regulators in public outreach is particularly important in the initial stages of building 
credit  reporting  systems  to  promote  public  confidence  and  wide  participation.  A  common 
frustration that has emerged from the more pronounced emphasis on credit reports in lending 
decisions  has  been  that  access  to  credit  increasingly  depends  on  an  individual’s  credit 
history, and yet, one can only build a credit history if credit is granted. I note with interest that 
the workshop will discuss potential solutions to this dilemma. It is important that as the credit 
reporting  landscape  continues  to  evolve  and  assume  more  prominent  roles  in  influencing 
borrowing  and  lending  behaviours,  appropriate  attention  is  paid  to  consumer  education  to 
mitigate  consumer  anxiety  and  ensure  that  consumers  understand  and  can  exercise  their 
legitimate rights. 
As  uncertainties  continue  to  cloud  the  global  economic  outlook  at  a  time  when  borrowers 
have become more financially literate, lenders have become more innovative, and financial 
products have evolved to become more sophisticated and intricate, the need for an effective 
and efficient financial infrastructure becomes increasingly more critical to ensure the prudent 
expansion of credit and risk taking. This workshop addresses a key part of that infrastructure 
that can contribute towards avoiding damaging effects of a financial crisis induced by credit 
excesses.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Before  I  end  my  remarks,  allow  me  to  say  a  few  words  about  this  magnificent  building, 
Sasana Kijang. Designed to be a nexus for thought leadership and collaboration in central 
banking, “Sasana” is a Sanskrit word that describes a site, centre, building or arena where 
communities gather for meetings, while the Kijang is a small yet very intelligent animal that is 
depicted  in  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  logo.  The  architectural  concept  of  Sasana  Kijang  is 
inspired from the shape of the Cowrie shell, a popular form of money in the Malay Peninsula 
during  the  3rd  century  with  its  building  facade  derived  from  the  geometric  patterns  of 
traditional  Malaysian  songket  motifs, 
fabric  designs. 
Sasana Kijang  hosts  a  learning  centre  with  state-of-the-art  training  facilities  for  local  and 
foreign  participants  and  provides  opportunities  for  the  exchange  of  views  and  experience 
towards promoting capacity building in central banking. In addition to training facilities, offices 
and  conference  halls,  Sasana  Kijang  also  houses  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  Knowledge 
Management Centre and the Bank Negara Malaysia’s Museum and Art Gallery which is open 
to  the  public.  I  hope  all  of  you  will  take  the  opportunity  to  explore  the  Bank’s  collection 
displayed  at  the  Museum  and  Art  Gallery  and  to  enjoy  the  activities  in  the  Knowledge 
Management Centre. As visitors to Malaysia, your stay here is not complete unless you have 
treated yourself to the variety of food, traditional and modern, that the country has to offer. 
On that note, I wish you all a productive engagement and a pleasant stay in Kuala Lumpur. 
the  hand  woven 
reflecting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
