Guy Debelle: The present and possible future of secured issuance 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Australian Securitisation Forum, Sydney, 21 November 2011. 
 Thanks to Craig Evans, Justin Fabo, Tom Rosewall and Claudia Seibold for their assistance and helpful discussions. 
The  funding  of  the  banking  system  has  very  much  been  front  and  centre  at  various  times 
throughout the financial crisis, and it is under heavy scrutiny again.  
The  particular  aspect  of  bank  funding  that  I  want  to  focus  on  today  is  the  role  of  secured 
funding,  a  topic  at  the  heart  of  a  conference  on  securitisation.  The  development  I  wish  to 
highlight is the quite divergent trends in the composition of bank funding over the past four 
years,  particularly  in  terms  of  the  share  of  secured  versus  unsecured  funding.  The  most 
striking  example  is  in  Europe,  where  banks  have  raised  around  half  of  their  wholesale 
funding in 2011 in the form of secured funding, whereas in the US there has been almost a 
complete  absence  of  secured  funding  (outside  that  raised  by  the  mortgage  agencies). 
Instead  the  banking  system’s  funding  has  almost  entirely  been  driven  by  deposits.  In 
Australia, the composition of bank funding has also changed over the past four years, in a 
manner more along the lines of the US than the European experience.  
These developments reflect changes on both the supply and demand side including:  
 
Banking systems generally have experienced slow (or even negative) growth on the 
asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet  but  deposit  growth  has  been  considerably  faster. 
Hence,  customer  deposits,  both  retail  and  corporate,  have  accounted  for  a 
considerably larger share of bank funding than they did pre-crisis. As a result, the 
need for banks to raise funds in wholesale markets has declined.  
Investors, particularly over the past year and particularly in Europe, have exhibited a 
strong  preference  to  purchase  secured  forms  of  funding  from  banks.  As  I  will 
discuss  later,  it  is  not  clear  to  me  that  the  delineation  between  secured  and 
unsecured  funding  for  the  banking  system  is  quite  so  stark  as  current  market 
conditions would imply.  
 At this point, it is worth thinking about the various forms of funding available to banks. For the 
purposes of this talk I will simplify these into five categories:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Equity raising.  
Deposits, some portion of which may be insured or guaranteed.  
Unsecured wholesale funding, in the form of bond issuance or short-term paper.  
Asset-backed  issuance,  such  as  residential  mortgage  backed  securities  (RMBS), 
where the bank sells a security backed by a pool of assets to the market. The assets 
are no longer present on the bank’s books after the sale.  
Covered bonds, where the issuance is again backed by a pool of assets. However, 
in this case, the assets remain on the balance sheet of the issuing bank, and the 
investor is given an additional claim on the balance sheet of the bank.  
5. 
Note that the first three forms of funding are claims on the bank’s balance sheet as a whole. In the 
case of deposits, in many countries, insurance or guarantees provide protection up to some level 
but  any  deposit  larger  than  that  is  a  form  of  unsecured  funding.  Asset-backed  issuance  is 
obviously  secured  issuance,  while  covered  bonds  are  primarily  secured  issuance  but  with  an 
element of unsecured funding in terms of the recourse to the balance sheet as a whole.  
Today  I  will  focus  primarily  on  the last  three  modes  of  funding,  generally  characterised  as 
wholesale funding. First I will summarise developments in bank funding in Australia, the US, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Europe and UK since the financial crisis began over four years ago. Central bank actions in 
each of these areas have had implications for bank funding, so I will then spend a little time 
discussing this issue. Finally I will pose some questions about how wholesale funding might 
evolve in the future, focussing particularly on the sustainability and desirability of the current 
investor preference for secured issuance.  
Present 
Graphs 1 to 4 show the patterns of bank wholesale funding over the past five years in the 
US,  UK,  Europe  and  Australia,  using  the  taxonomy  described  above.1  The  one  additional 
source of wholesale funding (not described above) is government-guaranteed bond issuance 
for the period from September 2008 until the cessation of the guarantee on new issuance.  
In every case bar Australia, it is noteworthy that the level of wholesale issuance in 2011 is 
substantially below that in 2007. To a large extent, this reflects the fact that outside Australia, 
credit growth has been very low or even negative for much of this period (Graph 5 below). 
The other important factor, mentioned earlier, is the relatively strong growth in deposits in all 
four regions. This trend is well documented for the US, Europe and the UK in a graph from a 
recent paper published by some of my colleagues on the Committee on the Global Financial 
System.2 In Australia, since mid 2007, deposits have grown at an annualised pace of 11 per 
cent,  compared  with  credit  growth  of  5  per  cent.  As  a  result,  while  the  level  of  wholesale 
issuance by Australian banks in 2011 is about the same as that in 2007, it is a significantly 
smaller share of total bank funding.  
In the US, there are three developments that stand out. First, is the marked decline in the 
issuance  of  non-agency  mortgage-backed  securities.  In  2010  and  2011,  almost  all  of  the 
mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  issuance  in  the  US  has  been  by  the  agencies.  As  you 
recall, the agencies purchase eligible loans from mortgage originators (including banks) and 
either keep them on their own balance sheets or pool them into MBS to be sold to investors. 
(They can also provide guarantees to MBS issued by approved lenders and purchase MBS 
to  hold on  their  own  balance sheets.)  Second  is  the significant  decline  in  unsecured  bond 
issuance from 20 per cent of wholesale funding in 2007 to 11 per cent in 2011.  
Graph 1 
                                                 
1   Note that private placements are not well captured in the data used here, except in the case of Australia. 
2   See  Graph  A4.1  in  “The  Impact  of  Sovereign  Credit  Risk  on  Bank  Funding  Conditions”,  Committee  on  the 
Global Financial System, Paper No 43, July 2011. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The change in issuance patterns in the US is also affected by the fact that a sizeable share 
of housing lending in the US was funded off balance sheet. As that source of housing finance 
has dried up significantly, and housing lending growth has been negative for more than two 
years now, a much greater share of lending has been in the “conforming” market supported 
by the agencies. So the changes in funding are much larger for the shadow banking system 
in the US, than they are for the balance sheet funding of the banking system.  
More  generally,  when  comparing  the  changes  in  funding  across  the  four  regions,  it  is 
important to bear in mind that a significantly smaller share of finance to both the household 
and business sectors was, and is, provided by the banking system in the US than in the other 
regions.  
In Europe, unsecured issuance accounted for a little over half of total issuance in 2011, a 
similar  share  to  2007.  However,  the  issuance  pattern  varies  quite  markedly  across 
institutions. The stronger institutions have generally had ready access to unsecured funding, 
but a number of institutions have been shut out of unsecured markets, particularly since the 
middle  of  this  year.  The  composition  of  secured  funding  has  changed  dramatically,  with 
covered issuance accounting for the vast bulk of secured issuance in 2011, compared with a 
roughly  equal  split  in  2007.  The  covered  market  has  been  the  primary  funding  source  for 
those institutions unable to tap unsecured markets. But the secured issuance data are also 
significantly affected by “self-securitised” issues, both MBS and covered, which are retained 
on the balance sheet of European financial institutions to access liquidity at the ECB (see 
below).3  Finally,  the  aggregate  figures  for  Europe  mask  some  quite  significant  differences 
across countries and institutions with, for example, secured issuance by German institutions 
almost  entirely  in  the  form  of  covered  bonds  (pfandbriefe)  while  banks  in  the  Netherlands 
issue RMBS.  
Graph 2 
 In the UK, the share of unsecured issuance in total issuance is about the same in 2011 as it 
was  in  2007,  at  just  over  50  per  cent.  However,  total  unsecured  issuance  is  significantly 
smaller in 2011 than in 2007. The share of funding from MBS has declined but has been fully 
compensated for by an increase in the share of covered bond issuance. Note that part of this 
                                                 
3   For more detail, see “Recent Developments in Securitisation”, European Central Bank, February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
shift  reflects  a  compositional  shift  in  the  industry.  Entities  such  as  Northern  Rock,  which 
sourced a large share of their funding from MBS, were a large part of the market in 2007 but 
are obviously not so today. A final point on the UK data: the large amount of MBS in 2008 
predominantly  reflects  “self-securitised”  issuance  in  order  to  access  the  Special  Liquidity 
Scheme (SLS) at the Bank of England; more on which shortly. 
Graph 3 
 In Australia, the share of unsecured funding has actually increased between 2007 and 2011, in 
contrast  to  the  other  regions.  In  large  part  this  reflects  a  compositional  effect.  A  number  of 
institutions,  some  banks  but  particularly  non-banks,  were  significantly  more  reliant  on  MBS  for 
their funding than the larger banks. Following the dislocation in the MBS market, the larger banks 
now account for a much larger share of the financial sector in 2011 than they did in 2007.  
Graph 4 
 Obviously in Australia, the covered bond market is in its infancy, with the first issue only last 
week,  following  the  passage  of  enabling  legislation  in  October.  So  nearly  all  the  secured 
issuance this year has been in the form of MBS.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Credit  growth  in  Australia,  while  slow  relative  to  recent  Australian  history,  has  outstripped 
that in the other three regions (Graph 5). But it is apparent from the Australian data that total 
wholesale  issuance  is  broadly  the  same  in  2011  as  it  was  in  2007,  and  hence  a  smaller 
share of overall funding, with deposits accounting for the difference.  
Graph 5 
 Differences in central bank support 
The nature of central bank support has also had an influence on the developments in bank 
funding.  The  balance  sheets  of  the  Fed,  ECB  and  Bank  of  England  have  increased 
significantly since 2007. The ECB’s balance sheet has approximately doubled, while those of 
the Fed and the Bank of England have roughly tripled over the past four years (Graph 6). 
The Reserve Bank of Australia’s balance sheet, while increasing in 2008,4 is smaller than it 
was in 2007 (reflecting the withdrawal of deposits at the RBA by the Future Fund to invest in 
a broader range of assets).  
Graph 6 
                                                 
4   See the “Operations in Financial Markets” chapters in the Reserve Bank of Australia Annual Reports of 2009 
and 2010 for more discussion. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In the US, the Fed’s program of quantitative easing has injected a large amount of liquidity 
into the banking system. Moreover, the Fed’s program of asset purchases has included over 
US$1 trillion of mortgage-backed securities.  
Similarly in the UK, the Bank of England has conducted a large asset purchase program. It 
has  also  provided  support  to  the  banking  system  through  the  Special  Liquidity  Scheme, 
whereby  banks  were  able  to  exchange  MBS  or  covered  bonds  for  Treasury  Bills  to  more 
easily obtain liquidity in the market. At its peak, £287 billion of securities were exchanged for 
£185 billion of bills. Drawdowns under this scheme closed in January 2009, and a large part 
has been repaid this year with the remainder to be repaid by January 2012.  
In  Europe,  the  ECB  has  assisted  bank  funding  through  its  fixed  rate  full  allotment  liquidity 
provision operations. This has enabled banks that are having difficulties obtaining funding in 
the market to borrow from the ECB against acceptable collateral at the ECB’s policy rate for 
terms of up to one  year or so. As  mentioned  above, some of this collateral has taken the 
form  of  secured  issuance  retained  on  the  books  of  the  issuing  bank.  The  ECB  has  also 
supported  bank  issuance  through  its  covered  bond  purchase  program.  In  its  initial  phase, 
which  commenced  in  July  2009,  the  ECB  purchased  €60  billion  in  covered  bonds.  It  has 
recently restarted the program with the intention to purchase a further €40 billion.  
In Australia, the RBA provided liquidity support to the banking system through its repurchase 
operations,  including  against  self-securitised  mortgages,  at  the  height  of  the  dislocation  in 
funding  markets  in  2008  and  2009.  But  the  RBA’s  liquidity  provision  has  been  at  normal 
levels for over two years now.  
Future 
The  first  part  of  my  talk  today  has  summarised  the  current  state  of  affairs  in  wholesale 
funding markets. In the final part of my speech, I will briefly discuss how things might evolve 
in the future.  
There  is  a  clear  preference  on  the  part  of  investors  in  the  current  risk-averse  climate  for 
secured  investments.  A  number  of  financial  institutions,  particularly  in  Europe,  have  been 
only able to access funding through covered bonds.  
I  don’t  see  this  trend  towards  predominantly  secured  issuance  as  being  sustainable.  A 
difficult message for this forum to digest I know, but securitisation is not the be all and end all 
of funding!  
Banks can’t encumber their balance sheets through secured issuance to such an extent that 
unsecured issuance, and even deposit gathering, is no longer possible. Too much issuance 
of  covered  bonds  and  you’re  effectively  back  in  the  unsecured  world.  Hence  most 
jurisdictions put a cap on the amount of covered bonds that can be issued. In Australia, the 
cap  on  the  total  amount  of  encumbrance  is  8  per  cent  which,  given  the  degree  of  over-
collateralisation  in  covered  bonds,  translates  into  an  issuance  level  below  that,  and  well 
below a level which is likely to compromise the safety of deposits.  
Nevertheless, the introduction of covered bonds does subordinate unsecured debt holders to 
a degree. Any pricing gain obtained from issuing covered bonds is likely to be offset to some 
extent by a demand from unsecured debt holders for more compensation in the future. So I 
see the role of covered bonds as primarily broadening the potential investor base rather than 
a means of reducing overall funding costs for banks. There is clearly a segmented investor 
base.  Some  investors  will  only  buy  covered  bonds  and  have  no  interest  in  RMBS  or 
unsecured paper. Other investors are completely happy with RMBS and have no interest in 
covered  bonds  which  pay  a  lower  yield  for  a  similar  credit  exposure.  I  would  expect  that 
covered bonds are likely to be primarily an offshore funding source for the Australian banks 
with the domestic investor base more comfortable with RMBS.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In that regard, it is worth posing the question as to how different the various forms of bank 
funding actually are. All of the forms of funding are claims on a bank’s balance sheet in one 
form or another. Unsecured bank funding (including deposits) is a claim on the balance sheet 
of  the  bank  as  a  whole.  The  assets  underpinning  that  claim  are  the  same  form  as  those 
which back the secured issuance.  
An  RMBS  is  not  an  on-balance  sheet  claim,  but  is  a  claim  on  a  set  of  assets  very  much 
representative of a sizeable part of the balance sheet. In Australia, at least, the mortgages 
which  are  securitised  by  banks  in  their  RMBS  issues  have  similar  characteristics  to  those 
mortgages  which  remain  on  the  banks’  balance  sheets.  The  same  is  also  true  of  the 
forthcoming covered bond issues by the  Australian banks. So the underlying assets aren’t 
that much different, rather the difference is in the degree of credit enhancement provided by 
subordination in the case of RMBS or over-collateralisation (and additional recourse to the 
balance sheet) in the case of covered bonds.  
The strong motivation for the current preference of investors for secured issuance is about 
repositioning  themselves  towards  the  front  of  the  creditor  queue.  That  is  the  fundamental 
point of differentiation between the various forms of funding. But ultimately, everyone can’t 
be at the front of the queue.  
In theory, or in a less risk-averse environment than the current one, pricing should equalise 
the  incentives  to  issue  and  purchase  the  various  forms  of  funding.  Investors  should  be 
compensated  for  their  risk  of  being  further  down  the  creditor  queue  with  a  higher  risk 
premium. But in today’s environment, there are plenty of examples where market pricing is 
not always sending the most accurate signal. In due course, investors in bank paper might 
again  come  to  the  realisation  that  there  is  not  as  stark  a  difference  between  secured  and 
unsecured issuance, as current pricing would suggest. Investors need to heed the seminal 
words of The Saints: “Know Your Product” and do the necessary due diligence.  
So in the end, I think we should return to a world where banks access all five of the sources 
of funding I outlined at the beginning of my talk. It is useful to have a diverse range of funding 
instruments  at  hand,  as  at  various  points  in  time,  some  markets  are  more  functional  than 
others. A world where the only source of funding available is secured is just not sustainable.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
