Njuguna Ndung’u: Microfinance transparency 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the African 
Microfinance Pricing Transparency Leadership Forum, Nairobi, 6 October 2011. 
 Mr. Ives Terracol, Regional Director, Agence Française de Développment; 
Mr. Chuck Waterfield, Chief Executive Officer, MicroFinance Transparency; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  with  you  this  morning  during  this  important  African 
Microfinance Pricing Transparency Leadership Forum. Before I make my opening remarks, 
let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  organizers  of  this  conference,  MicroFinance 
Transparency, for inviting me to share some thoughts on this pertinent topic. I would also like 
to extend a warm welcome to all the participants who have travelled from other countries to 
Kenya  and  to  say  “Karibu  Sana”.  I  hope  you  will  take  some  time  to  enjoy  our  beautiful 
country with its rich culture and diverse tourist attractions. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  financial  inclusion  has  been  recognized  now  in  development 
debates  and  action  across  the  globe.  This  is  more  so  in  developing  and  emerging 
economies,  which  record  the  highest  poverty  levels  and  constitute  majority  of  the  world’s 
unbanked  population.  The  drive  to  enhance  financial  inclusion  is  thus  critical  given  that 
increasing  evidence  shows  that  it  is  key  in  reducing  the  economic  vulnerability  of 
households,  promoting  economic  growth,  alleviating  poverty  and  sustainably  improving  the 
quality of peoples’ lives. 
The  push  for  financial  inclusion  is  entrenched  in  Government  of  Kenya’s  Development 
Blueprint, Vision 2030 and lies at the core of the Central Bank of Kenya’s strategic actions 
towards  implementing  this  Vision.  It  is  in  this  regard  that  the  Central  Bank,  together  with 
market players, has embraced several initiatives and reforms aimed at enhancing the level of 
financial inclusion. These include licensing of deposit taking microfinance institutions (DTMs) 
and  credit  reference  bureaus  (CRBs);  introduction  of  shariah  compliant  banking  products, 
mobile phone money transfer services and the agency banking model. These measures and 
new institutions help in completing the financial infrastructure picture in Kenya that reflects its 
market structures as well. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in effect, we have seen a significant decline of barriers to entry into 
the financial sector, increased infrastructure distribution and innovative instruments targeting 
the lower segments of the population. These have resulted in tremendous increases in the 
levels,  reach  and  depth  of  access  to  financial  services.  To  highlight  a  few,  bank  accounts 
have  grown  from  2.5  million  to  over  14  million  in  just  over  5  years,  while  mobile  money 
transfer  services  have  led  to  over  15  million  Kenyans  being  integrated  into  the  financial 
system. The regulated microfinance industry has also grown tremendously with the licensing 
of six Deposit Taking Microfinance institutions with 57 branches, 1.5 million deposit accounts 
valued at Ksh.9 billion and 0.53 million loan accounts with an outstanding loan portfolio of 
Ksh.15 billion.  
Despite these remarkable developments in the Kenyan financial sector, we are cognisant of 
the fact that there still remains great need within the Kenyan market for appropriate and more 
affordable financial services. Given that this situation is not unique to Kenya, but applies to 
most,  if  not  all,  African  nations  represented  in  this  Forum,  it  is  imperative  that  improving 
access  to  financial  services  remains  key  in  our  development  agenda.  We  need  to  solve 
costs, barriers to entry, physical distance and market concentration problems. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  we  undertake  to  enhance  access  to  financial  services  as 
regulators  and  policy  makers,  we  must  ensure  that  financial  services  are  provided  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
competitive market environment. Let us learn from developments in the microfinance sectors 
in  parts  of  Bosnia  and  India,  that  recently  experienced  crises.  The  challenges  in  these 
countries were instigated by issues such  as multiple lending and client over-indebtedness, 
aggressive competition, erosion of credit quality standards, a lack of transparency in pricing, 
a  weak  credit  information  sharing  framework  and  inadequate  regulation.  Beyond  these 
challenges, currently the broader issue of transparent and responsible pricing is becoming a 
concern for the global microfinance industry. Price is an incentive. 
Transparent  and  responsible  pricing  is  essential  for  stimulating  growth,  efficiency  and 
effectiveness of the financial sector. It is indeed a key ingredient for incentivising innovation, 
enhancing  informed  decision-making  by  consumers  and  fostering  the  development  of 
healthy,  vibrant  and  competitive  markets.  Transparency  in  pricing  is  critical  because 
consumers  have  the  right  to  know  the  exact  price  of  products  in  the  market.  Conversely, 
nontransparent  (or  opaque)  pricing,  prevents  consumers  from  making  informed  decisions 
about  borrowing.  This  ultimately  reduces  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  compete 
effectively,  free  market  forces  to  operate  properly  and  the  financial  sector  to  develop 
efficiently and sustainably. 
Policies  to  entrench  relevant  consumer  protection  measures,  including  transparency  and 
truth-in-lending regulations combined with the promotion of competition and efficiency among 
credit  providers,  can  go  a  long  way  toward  expanding  the  reach  of  sustainable  finance, 
particularly  credit,  while  safeguarding  consumer  interests.  We,  as  policymakers  and 
regulators, therefore, have to take up the responsibility of stimulating competition in financial 
institutions and promoting innovation aimed at improving efficiency and lowering prices. We 
must, however, also endeavour to put in place consumer protection measures to ensure our 
consumers  are  not  exploited.  Financial  institutions,  on  the  other  hand,  should  seek  to 
maintain  transparency  regarding  interest  rates  charged  on  the  borrowers.  Further  they 
should  adopt  new  technology  to  increase  productivity  and  efficiency  in  their  operations  to 
reduce these rates. 
It is imperative that concerted efforts be put into educating financial clients. When clients are 
financially informed they are empowered to demand safe, cost-efficient and quality financial 
services at fair prices. This makes it necessary for service providers to competitively innovate 
products suitable for their customers’ needs and pockets. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  the  push  to  enhance  consumer  protection  is  also  entrenched  in 
Kenya’s  Vision  2030  strategy  which  aims  at  improving  transparency  and  increasing 
competition in the financial sector to benefit customers and the overall economy. The Kenyan 
constitution also has specific provisions on consumer rights. In this regard, the Central Bank 
has initiated a number of reforms and initiatives including the amendment of the Banking Act 
and Prudential Guidelines, publication of information on charges and lending rates and the 
conducting of a series of studies and surveys to foster competition in the banking sector and 
develop a disclosure regime for consumer interest rates. To complement these efforts, the 
Bank also actively participates in financial education campaigns to aid consumers in making 
better and informed financial decisions. In particular, the Bank is a pivotal member of a public 
private  partnership  whose  aim  is  to  champion  the  development  of  a  national  strategy  for 
Financial Education and Consumer Protection in Kenya. 
Effective  consumer  protection  and  financial  literacy,  especially  with  regards  to  price 
disclosure,  are  key  in  ensuring  that  lenders  behave  responsibly  and  ethically;  and 
consumers, especially the poor, gain the capacity to use this information to make informed 
decisions about financial services in order to enhance their economic wellbeing. Ladies and 
Gentlemen,  the  practice  of  price  transparency  ultimately  contributes  to  the  health  and 
vibrancy  of  our  financial  markets,  and  enhances  the  extension  of  access  to,  and  use  of, 
appropriate financial products and services. 
As  I  conclude,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  express  my  confidence  that  this  workshop  will 
present an invaluable platform for African leaders in the microfinance industry and financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sector  to  share  their  experiences  on  pricing  transparency  in  the  various  jurisdictions 
represented here. It will also present us with an opportunity to acquaint ourselves with the 
global best practices on the same. We should remember that PRICE is an incentive and can 
be  a  disincentive  –  it  has  to  be  appropriate.  With  these  few  remarks,  I  now  declare  this 
workshop officially open and take this opportunity to wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
