Lars E O Svensson: Monetary policy after the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
conference “Asia’s role in the post-crisis global economy”, held at Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, 29 November 2011. 
 I thank Claes Berg, Hans Dellmo, Hans Dillén, Anil Kashyap, and Bengt Pettersson for helpful discussions and 
comments. Carl Andreas Claussen of the Riksbank staff contributed to the paper. The views expressed here are 
my  own  and  are  not  necessarily  shared  by  the  other  members  of  the  Riksbank’s  Executive  Board  or  the 
Riksbank’s staff. 
In the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009 there has been a lively debate about 
what caused the crisis and how the risks of future crises can be reduced. Some blame loose 
monetary policy for laying the foundations for the crisis. There is also a lively debate about 
the future of monetary policy, whether it needs to be modified in the light of the crisis, and 
what its relation to financial stability should be. Here I will discuss the lessons for monetary 
policy from  the financial crisis, the relation between monetary policy and financial stability, 
the  role  of  monetary-policy  instruments  other  than  the  policy  rate,  and  some  issues  for 
emerging-markets arising from capital flows and exchange-rate movements. My conclusions 
are as follows: 
The  crisis  was  not  caused  by  monetary  policy  but  by  other  factors,  mainly  regulatory  and 
supervisory  failures  in  combination  with  some  special  circumstances,  such  as  low  real 
interest rates due to global imbalances and U.S. housing and housing-financing policy. Easy 
monetary policy in the United States did not cause the crisis. 
A lesson from the crisis is that price stability is not enough to achieve financial stability. But, 
importantly,  interest-rate  policy  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability.  A  separate 
financial-stability policy is needed for financial stability.  
Given this, flexible inflation targeting – applied in the right way and using all the information 
that is relevant for the forecast of inflation and resource utilisation, including the conduct of 
financial-stability policy when appropriate – remains in my view the best-practice monetary 
policy before, during, and after the financial crisis. It was financial-stability policy that failed 
and caused the crisis, and that needs to be improved, not monetary policy. 
When setting up a better financial-stability policy, it is important to understand that monetary 
policy  is  distinct  and  different  from  financial-stability  policy.  The  two  policies  have  different 
objectives  and  different  suitable  instruments.  Furthermore,  the  responsibility  for  monetary 
policy  and  control  of  the  monetary-policy  instruments  rests  with  the  central  bank,  but  the 
responsibility for financial-stability policy and control of the financial-stability instruments are 
in  most  countries  shared  between  several  authorities.  It  is  important  to  conceptually 
distinguish financial-stability policy from monetary policy and avoid conceptual and practical 
confusion  between  the  two  policies.  Confusion  risks  leading  to  a  poorer  outcome  for  both 
policies  and  makes  it  more  difficult  to  hold  the  policymakers  accountable.  Trying  to  use 
monetary policy to achieve financial stability leads to poorer outcomes for monetary policy 
and is an ineffective way to achieve and maintain financial stability.  
However, the fact that financial-stability policy and monetary policy are distinct and different 
does  not  mean  that  there  is  no  interaction  between  them.  This  interaction  needs  to  be 
considered.  Monetary  policy  should  be  conducted  taking  the  conduct  of  financial-stability 
policy into account, and vice versa. This is similar to how monetary policy is conducted taking 
fiscal  policy  into  account,  and  vice  versa.  Importantly,  under  normal  conditions,  financial 
stability  is  handled  by  financial-stability  policy,  not  by  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy 
should be the last line of defence for financial stability, not the first.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
It  follows  that  financial  stability  as  an  objective  of  monetary  policy  makes  little  sense, 
whereas  financial  stability  as  an  objective  for  the  central  bank  makes  sense,  if  the  central 
bank gets control over the financial-stability instruments. 
The standard monetary-policy tools are the policy rate and communication. During the crisis 
when policy rates have been at or close to their zero lower bound, we have seen other more 
unconventional instruments being used, including Large Scale Asset Purchases (LSAP) by 
the  Federal  Reserve.  I  believe  the  LSAPs  conducted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  have  had 
substantial  beneficial  effects  on  the  U.S.  economy  and  that  the  objections  that  have  been 
raised against them are not convincing.  
Forward guidance about the future policy rate has been used as an unconventional tool in 
statements by the Bank of Canada, the Bank of Japan, and the Federal Reserve during the 
crisis.  However,  forward  guidance  in  the  form  of  published  policy-rate  forecasts  have  for 
several years been a conventional policy instrument for the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 
Norges Bank, the Riksbank, and the Czech National Bank. I have long been in favour of the 
publication of a policy-rate forecast on a regular basis, based on both the existing practical 
experience of publishing such forecasts and the fact that what matters for the economy and 
private-sector decisions is not what the policy rate is during the one or few months until the 
next  policy  meeting  but  what  the  longer  interest  rates  are.  These  longer  rates  result  from 
market expectations of future policy rates and term premiums. Publishing a policy-rate path 
would  be  the  most  direct  way  to  affect  interest-rate  expectations,  especially  since  central 
banks should have better information about their own intentions than anyone else. 
Based  on  the  observation  that  emerging-market  economies  have  received  large  capital 
inflows lately, with risks of bubbles and other negative effects, some observers suggest that 
the  effects  on  capital  flows  to  other  countries  should  be  taken  into  account  when,  for 
instance, the Federal Reserve sets its monetary policy. I do not agree with that conclusion. It 
seems to me that the problems for the emerging-markets concerned to a large extent depend 
on the decision of these countries to stabilise their dollar exchange rate or even peg to the 
dollar.  Countries  that  choose  to  peg  to  the  dollar  will  tend  to  import  U.S.  expansionary 
monetary policy into to their own country. This monetary policy may in many cases be too 
expansionary  for  the  countries  concerned,  creating  an  overheated  economy  with  risks  for 
bubbles and other negative consequences. A flexible exchange rate would give the countries 
the  option  of  conducting  an  independent  monetary  policy  appropriate  for  the  country  in 
question. If countries nevertheless choose a peg to the dollar, with capital inflows, bubbles, 
and other negative effects, they are themselves responsible for those effects. 
More expansionary monetary policy, for instance, in the U.S. in the form of lower long rates 
due to LSAPs, tends to depreciate the dollar, all else equal. This does not mean that the U.S. 
is conducting a beggar-thy-neighbour policy that hurts other countries. A weaker currency is 
a normal consequence of more expansionary monetary policy in an open economy. Other 
countries can adjust their policy in response. All countries cannot depreciate their currency 
against  each  other,  but  all  countries  can  conduct  more  expansionary  policy  if  they  prefer, 
using  conventional  or  unconventional  policy  tools.  This  will  increase  real  activity  and  both 
exports and imports, which in a situation with underutilised world resources is to the benefit 
of all. Monetary policy is not a zero-sum game.  
Flexible inflation targeting still best-practice monetary policy 
My starting point is that the objectives of a good monetary-policy framework are twofold: to 
stabilise inflation around a low level and resource utilisation around the highest sustainable 
level. Such a framework is fully consistent with the dual mandate of maximum employment 
and stable prices of the Federal Reserve, with its mandate-consistent inflation rate, and the 
flexible  inflation  targeting  of  the  Riksbank,  with  its  inflation  target  (Bernanke  2011a, 
Svensson  2011a).  There  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  the  monetary-policy 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
frameworks  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Riksbank,  although  the  communications 
strategies of the two institutions are somewhat different.1  
The dual mandate and flexible inflation targeting boil down to “forecast targeting” (Woodford 
2007,  Svensson  2011b),  that  is,  choosing  a  policy-rate  path  such  that  the  corresponding 
forecasts for inflation and resource utilisation “look good” in the sense that they best stabilise 
inflation  around  the  mandate-consistent/target inflation  rate  and  resource  utilisation  around 
its highest sustainable level. Thus, “looking good” implies an efficient trade-off between the 
stability of inflation and the stability of resource utilisation.2 
Is the financial crisis a reason to modify this framework of flexible inflation targeting? That 
depends on the causes of the crisis. As I see it, the financial crisis was caused by factors that 
had very little to do with monetary policy. These factors were the macro conditions, global 
imbalances that led to low real interest rates and high asset prices and the Great Moderation 
that  led  to  a  systematic  underestimation  of  risk  and  a  substantial  expansion  of  credit; 
distorted incentives in financial markets that led to extreme levels of leverage and risk-taking 
and  a  lack  of  due  diligence;  regulatory  and  supervisory  failures  that  underestimated  or 
disregarded  the  fragility  of  the  financial  sector;  eventually  enormous  information  problems 
with extremely complex asset-backed securities and huge hidden off-balance-sheet liabilities; 
and  some  very  specific  circumstances,  such  as  the  U.S.  housing  policy  to  support  home 
ownership for low-income households and related sub-prime mortgages contributing to the 
U.S.  housing  boom.  Importantly,  none  of  these  causes  had  anything  to  do  with  monetary 
policy,  except  indirectly  in  that  monetary  policy  may  have  contributed  to  the  Great 
Moderation (Bean 2009, Svensson 2010). 
So what conclusions can we draw from this about the conduct of monetary policy and any 
need to modify the framework of flexible inflation targeting? One obvious conclusion is that 
price stability is not enough to achieve financial stability (Carney 2009, White 2006). Good 
flexible inflation targeting by itself does not achieve financial stability, if anyone ever thought 
it did.  
Another conclusion is that interest-rate policy is not enough to achieve financial stability. The 
policy rate is an ineffective instrument for influencing financial stability, and policy rates high 
enough  to  have  a  noticeable  effect  on  credit  growth  and  house  prices  will  have  a  strong 
negative effect on inflation and resource utilisation, even in sectors that are not experiencing 
any  speculative  activity.  The  use  of  the  policy  rate  to  prevent  an  unsustainable  boom  in 
house prices and credit growth poses major problems for the timely identification of such an 
unsustainable development, as well as for the assessment of whether policy-rate adjustment 
would have any noticeable impact on the unsustainable development, and of whether, in the 
longer run, the outcome for inflation and resource utilisation would be better.3 
Thus, it was financial-stability policy that failed, not monetary policy. Monetary policy in the 
form of flexible inflation targeting – applied in the right way and using all the information that 
                                                 
1  For  instance,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  mandate-consistent  inflation  rate  has  to  be  inferred  from  the  Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  participants’  longer-term  inflation  forecasts,  whereas  the  Riksbank  has  an  explicit 
inflation target; the Federal Reserve’s Greenbook and Bluebook (now replaced by the Tealbook) are published 
with  a  five-year  lag,  whereas  the  Riksbank  publishes  an  extensive  Monetary  Policy  Report  or  a  shorter 
Monetary  Policy  Update  (which  also  include  a  policy-rate  path)  after  each  policy  meeting;  and  the  Federal 
Reserve’s minutes are non-attributed but attributed transcripts are published with a five-year lag, whereas the 
Riksbank’s minutes are attributed.  
2  Kohn (2007), Svensson (2011b), and Woodford (2007) explain why forecast targeting is both a better way of 
conducting policy and a better description of actual policy than following an instrument rule such as the Taylor 
rule.   
3  See Assenmascher-Wesche and Gerlach (2010), Bean (2009), Bean, Paustian, Penalver and Taylor (2010), 
Bernanke  (2010),  Dokko,  Doyle,  Kiley,  Kim,  Sherlund,  Sim,  and  Van  den  Heuvel  (2009),  IMF  (2009),  and 
Kohn (2008, 2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
is  relevant  for  the  forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilisation,  including  the  conduct  of 
financial-stability policy when appropriate – remains in my view the best-practice monetary 
policy before, during, and after the financial crisis. 
Monetary policy and financial-stability policy are different 
This  leads me  to  the  more  general  question of  what  the  relation  between  monetary  policy 
and  financial  stability  should  be.  For  instance,  it  is  sometimes  said  that  the  objectives  of 
monetary policy should be expanded to include financial stability (Eichengreen, Rajan, and 
Prasad  2011,  and  Eichengreen  et  al.  2011).  Such  suggestions  give  the  impression  that 
monetary policy and financial stability are the same thing. But they are not. It is important to 
conceptually distinguish financial-stability policy from monetary policy and avoid conceptual 
and  practical  confusion  between  the  two  policies.  Confusion  risks  leading  to  a  poorer 
outcome for both policies and makes it more difficult to hold the policymakers accountable. 
Trying  to  use  monetary  policy  to  achieve  financial  stability  leads  to  poorer  outcomes  for 
monetary policy and is an ineffective way to achieve and maintain financial stability.  
Different economic policies, such as fiscal policy, monetary policy, and labour market policy, 
can be distinguished according to their objectives, the policy instruments that are suitable for 
achieving the objectives and the authority or authorities that control the instruments and are 
responsible  for  achieving  the  objectives.  From  this  point  of  view,  it  is  clear  that  monetary 
policy  and  financial-stability  policy  are  distinct  and  different,  and  understanding  this  is 
important. 
Monetary policy, in the form of flexible inflation targeting, has the objective of stabilising both 
inflation around the inflation target and resource utilisation around a sustainable level. Under 
normal  circumstances,  the  suitable  instruments  are  the  policy  rate  and  communication, 
including  the  publication  of  forecasts  of  inflation,  the  real  economy  and  (by  some  central 
banks)  the  policy  rate.  In  times  of  crisis,  as  we  have  seen  during  the  financial  crisis,  in 
particular  when  the  policy  rate  is  at  or  close  to  the  zero  lower  bound,  other  more 
unconventional  instruments  can  be  used.  These  instruments  include  fixed-rate  lending  at 
longer  maturities,  asset  purchases  (quantitative  easing)  to  affect  longer  interest  rates  and 
expectations  of  future  short  rates  and  foreign-exchange  intervention  to  prevent  currency 
appreciation or even to induce currency depreciation. The authority responsible for monetary 
policy is typically the central bank. In many countries, including all the member states of the 
EU, the central bank is given exclusive authority over monetary policy by statute and various 
measures to protect this policy independence are put in place.  
Financial-stability  policy  has  the  objective  of  maintaining  and  promoting  financial  stability. 
Financial  stability  can  be  defined  as  a  situation  in  which  the  financial  system  can  fulfill  its 
main functions of submitting payments, transforming saving into financing and providing risk 
management  with  sufficient  resilience  to  disruptions  that  threaten  these  functions.  The 
available instruments are, under normal circumstances, supervision, regulation and financial 
stability  reports  with  analyses  and  leading  indicators  that  may  provide  early  warnings  of 
stability threats.  
In times of crisis, authorities may use instruments such as lending of last resort, variable-rate 
lending  at  longer  maturities  (credit  policy,  credit  easing),  government  lending  guarantees, 
government capital injections, special resolution regimes for insolvent financial firms, and so 
forth. The responsible authorities vary across countries, but the powers are typically divided 
between several authorities. The lender of last resort function is with the central bank, but 
other instruments are often in the hands of other authorities.  
So,  financial-stability  policy  and  monetary  policy  are  conceptually  distinct,  with  distinct 
objectives  and  distinct  suitable  instruments.  The  decision  frequency  is  also  different.  In 
monetary policy, decisions are often taken 6–8 times a year. In policy for financial stability, 
decisions may be taken 1–2 times a year. When it comes to the instruments, the interest rate 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is  a  blunt  and  unsuitable  instrument  for  affecting  financial  stability  and  it  thus  makes  little 
sense to assign the objective of financial stability to monetary policy. However, it may make 
sense to assign the objective of financial stability to the central bank, if the central bank is 
given control of the appropriate supervisory, regulatory and crisis management instruments. 
Whether giving the central bank such a broad remit would also be the best solution is too 
complex an issue to address in this context. 
The fact that financial-stability policy and monetary policy are distinct and different does not 
mean  that  there  is  no  interaction  between  each  policy  and  the  other  policy’s  objectives. 
Monetary policy affects the real economy and thereby profitability, asset prices and balance 
sheets. Thereby it affects financial stability. Financial-stability policy directly affects spreads, 
lending and other aspects of financial conditions as well as the transmission mechanism of 
monetary policy. This means that monetary policy should normally be conducted taking the 
conduct  of  financial-stability  policy  into  account,  and  financial-stability  policy  should  be 
conducted  taking  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  into  account.  This  is  similar  to  how 
monetary policy is conducted taking the conduct of fiscal policy into account, and vice versa. 
Note that this way of conducting monetary policy and financial-stability policy – in line with a 
non-cooperative Nash equilibrium rather than a coordinated equilibrium – does not depend 
on  how  the  authority  for  financial-stability  policy  is  shared  between  different  institutions.  It 
should be conducted this way regardless of whether the central bank has the sole authority 
or whether it is shared between several institutions.  
Thus, under normal conditions, financial stability is handled by financial-stability policy, not by 
monetary policy. In a second-best situation, without appropriate supervision and regulation, if 
the  policy  rate  is  the  only  available  tool  and  there  is  a  trade-off  between  its  effect  on  the 
monetary-policy objectives and financial stability, that trade-off should be taken into account. 
Normally, however, the policy rate is not the only available tool, and much better instruments 
are available for affecting financial stability. Monetary policy should be the last line of defence 
of financial stability, not the first line.4 
In discussions of monetary policy and financial stability, there have been many references to 
the “risk-taking channel” (Borio and Zhu 2008), according to which leverage and risk in the 
financial sector increase with lower policy rates. However, the general discussion on and the 
existing  models  for  policy  rates,  the  risk-taking  channel,  and  so  on  consistently  seem  to 
suffer  from  confusion  between  nominal  policy  rates  and  the  general  level  of  real  interest 
rates.  Models  such  as  those  of  Adrian  and  Shin  (2011)  and  Diamond  and  Rajan  (2011) 
include  a  short  real  rate  but  no  nominal  policy  rate  and  no  explicit  monetary  policy. 
Furthermore,  there  is  no  distinction  between  the  short  real  rate  and  the  neutral  real  rate. 
What monetary policy in the real world can do by setting a short nominal policy rate is only to 
temporarily make the short real interest rate deviate from the neutral real interest rate, which 
in turn is beyond the control of monetary policy. The effects that are attributed to monetary 
policy should only be the effects the  deviation between the short real rate and the neutral 
rate, not the effects of the whole level of the short real rate, the sum of the deviation and the 
level of the neutral real rate. The neutral real rate is affected by many things and can be low 
                                                 
4  Woodford (2011) sets up a model where the probability of a financial crisis is assumed to be an increasing 
function  of  a  state-variable  that  may  be  identified  with  leverage.  Furthermore,  leverage  is  assumed  to  be 
increasing  in  lagged  leverage  and  the  current  output  gap  and  is  also  subject  to  shocks.  From  these 
assumptions  obviously  follow  a  case  for  tighter  monetary  policy,  “leaning  against  the  wind,”  in  order  to, 
everything  else  equal,  reduce  the  output  gap  and  thereby  leverage  and  the  probability  of  a  financial  crisis. 
However, the introduction in Woodford’s model of financial-stability instruments such as capital requirements, 
possibly cyclical ones, would allow leverage to be controlled more directly than indirectly and bluntly by the 
policy rate via the output gap. Monetary policy would be free to focus on stabilising inflation and the output gap 
and need not lean against the wind. In the realistic case when the state variable affecting the probability of a 
financial  crisis  is  a  vector  that  includes  not  only  leverage  but,  for  instance,  maturity  mismatch  and  liquidity 
mismatch,  it  is  even  more  the  case  that  additional  financial-stability  instruments  such  as  restrictions  on 
maturity and liquidity mismatches are superior to the policy rate in achieving and maintaining financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
for many years for several reasons, including global imbalances, fiscal policy, and shocks to 
aggregate demand and supply. This confusion means that the conclusions from this work for 
monetary policy are not clear.  
Monetary-policy instruments  
The standard monetary-policy instruments are the policy rate and communication, including 
statements  and  the  publication  of  forecasts  of  inflation,  the  real  economy  and  (by  some 
central banks) the policy rate. During the financial crises, in particular when the policy rate is 
at or close to the zero lower bound, we have seen other more unconventional instruments 
being used to implement more expansionary policy, as noted above. 
There is a lively debate and a considerable body of research on the effects of the LSAPs 
undertaken by the Federal Reserve. Estimates based on a number of recent studies, as well 
as  Federal  Reserve  estimates,  suggest  that,  all  else  equal,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  QE2 
program launched in November 2010 lowered longer-term interest rates by 10 to 30 basis 
points.  Federal  Reserve  analysis  further  indicates  that  a  reduction  in  longer-term  interest 
rates would be roughly equivalent in terms of the effect on the economy to a 40 to 120 basis 
points reduction in the federal funds rate (Bernanke 2011b). This is a large reduction in the 
federal  funds  rate.  In  FRB/US  simulations  discussed  by  Yellen  (2011)  and  reported  by 
Chung, Laforte, Reifschneider and Williams (2011), QE2 is assumed to lower 10-year yields 
by  about  15  basis  points,  which  reduces  the  unemployment  rate  by  about  0.3  percentage 
points and increases core PCE inflation by about 0.2 percentage points. This is a significant 
effect  of  QE2  alone,  on  top  of  the  effects  of  the  previous  LSAPs.  I  believe  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  LSAPs  have  had  a  significant  positive  effect  on  the  U.S.  economy  and  that  the 
objections raised against them are not convincing (Svensson 2011a).  
Regarding the increase in the monetary base that follows from the Federal Reserve’s asset 
purchases, the fact that the Federal Reserve can pay interest on reserves means that a large 
monetary  base  no  longer  by  itself  leads  to  inflation.  In  the  standard  textbook  treatment,  a 
large  monetary  base  implies  a  zero  policy  rate.  But  when  the  Federal  Reserve  can  pay 
interest  on  reserves,  a  large  monetary  base  does  not  prevent  the  Federal  Reserve  from 
setting the policy rate at any level required to restrict aggregate demand and prevent too high 
inflation.  This  means  that  from  a  monetary-policy  perspective  the  Federal  Reserve  can 
unwind the LSAPs at any pace that it deems appropriate when they are no longer needed. 
Forward  guidance  about  the  future  policy  rate  in  the  form  of  a  policy-rate  forecast  was 
adopted by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in 1997, Norges Bank in 2005, the Riksbank 
in 2007, and the Czech National Bank in 2008. It has become a standard part of monetary-
policy  communication  in  these  central  banks.  Forward  guidance  in  the  form  of  statements 
about the future policy rate was introduced by the Bank of Canada in 2009 and the Bank of 
Japan in 2010. The Federal Reserve introduced language in the March 2009 statement that 
it anticipated rates to remain at low levels for an “extended period” and in the August 2011 
statement that it anticipated rates would remain low “at least through mid-2013.”  
I  have  long  been  in  favour  of  the  publication  of  a  policy-rate  forecast  on  a  regular  basis 
(Svensson 2003). This is based on both the existing practical experience of publishing such 
forecasts and the fact that what matters for the economy and private-sector decisions is not 
what the policy rate is during the one or few months until the next policy meeting but what the 
longer interest rates are that result from market expectations of future policy rates and term 
premiums. These longer interest rates have an impact on the economy through capital costs, 
the stock market, the exchange rate, and other asset prices (Blinder 1998, D’Amico, English, 
López-Salido, and Nelson 2011, Woodford 2005). It would therefore seem that publishing a 
policy-rate path would be the most direct way to affect interest-rate expectations, especially 
since central banks should have better information about their own intentions than anyone 
else. Publication of the central bank’s assessment of the future path for the policy rate is thus 
a  separate  tool  in  the  monetary  policymaker’s  toolbox.  This  tool  can  be  particularly  useful 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
when  the  policy  rate  has  reached  the  effective  zero  lower  bound,  and  there  is  a  need  for 
even more expansionary policy. Given this, it may seem a mystery why still so few central 
banks choose to publish a policy-rate path, when an increasing number of central banks are 
publishing  forecasts  of  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  I  welcome  very  much  that  “[t]he 
FOMC  continues  to  explore  ways  to  further  increase  transparency  about  its  forecasts  and 
policy plans” (Bernanke 2011a). 
Global interest rates and emerging-market capital inflows 
Emerging-market economies have been subject to increased inflows of foreign capital over 
the last few years, and some emerging-market policymakers have expressed concerns about 
the related risks of bubbles and other negative effects. IMF (2011a) examined international 
capital flows over the last 30 years and found that net capital flows to emerging markets have 
been  strongly  correlated  with  changes  in  global  financing  conditions,  rising  sharply  during 
periods with relatively low global interest rates.  
Based on these and similar observations some observers have conclude that the effects on 
capital flows to other countries should be taken into account in, for instance, Federal Reserve 
policy decisions. For example, Eichengreen, Rajan, and Prasad (2011) find that the political 
authorities  in  large  economies  “should  let  considerations  of  these  external  effects  play  an 
explicit role in the monetary policy framework. Central banks in these countries should pay 
more attention to their collective policy stance and its global implications.”5 
I do not agree with that conclusion. The Federal Reserve’s mandate concerns U.S. inflation 
and employment, and the Federal Reserve is not responsible for inflation, real developments, 
and monetary policy in other countries except as they feed back into the United States. That 
responsibility should rest with the policy authorities in those countries. Countries that choose 
to  stabilise  their  dollar  exchange  rate  or  even  peg  to  the  dollar  will  tend  to  import  U.S. 
expansionary monetary policy into to their own country. This monetary policy may in many 
cases  be  too  expansionary  for  the  countries  concerned,  creating  an  overheated  economy 
with risks for bubbles and other negative consequences. A flexible exchange rate would give 
the  countries  the  option  of  conducting  an  independent  monetary  policy  appropriate  for  the 
country in question. In particular, they would be able to respond appropriately to changes in 
interest rates and other variables in the rest of the world. If countries nevertheless choose a 
peg  to  the  dollar,  with  capital  inflows,  bubbles,  and  other  negative  effects,  they  are 
themselves responsible for those effects. 
Consider  the  following  thought  experiment.6  Let  the  world  consist  of  two  large  economies, 
called  the  domestic  and  foreign  economy,  respectively.  Let  the  domestic  economy  be  an 
emerging-market economy with flexible inflation targeting, a flexible exchange rate, and free 
capital  flows.  Suppose  that  the  domestic  economy  is  initially  in  an  equilibrium  with  the 
inflation  forecast  on  the  inflation  target,  the  resource-utilisation  forecast  at  a  sustainable 
level,  a  constant  exchange-rate  forecast,  zero  capital  flows,  and  a  given  policy-rate  path 
consistent  with  this.  Suppose  the  foreign  interest  rate  falls,  due  to  more  expansionary 
monetary  policy  in  the  foreign  economy  in  order  to  increase  demand  and  activity  in  the 
                                                 
5  Eichengreen,  Rajan,  and  Prasad  are  members  of  the  Committee  on  International  Economic  Policy  and 
Reform, a non-partisan independent group of experts (academics and former government and central bank 
officials). In its September 2011 report (Eichengreen et al. 2011), the committee suggests that “[m]echanisms 
should (…) be developed to encourage large-country central banks to internalize the spillover effects of their 
policies.  Specifically,  we  call  for  the  creation  of  an  International  Monetary  Policy  Committee  composed  of 
representatives  of  major  central  banks  that  will  report  regularly  to  world  leaders  on  the  aggregate 
consequences of individual central bank policies.” 
6  Ferrero,  Gertler,  and  Svensson  (2009)  provide  a  suitable  model  for  such  thought  experiments,  a  New 
Keynesian DSGE model of a world with two large countries and tradable and nontradable goods. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
foreign  economy.  Everything  else  equal,  this  has  two  consequences  for  the  domestic 
economy.  First,  due  to  increased  foreign  activity,  foreign  demand  for  domestic  exports 
increases somewhat. Second, the interest-rate differential between the domestic and foreign 
interest rates increases. This will trigger an incipient capital inflow into the domestic economy 
and appreciation of the domestic currency. Suppose the appreciation is so large as to trigger 
depreciation expectations that balance the increased interest-rate differential. This will again 
stabilise the capital flow at zero. Everything else equal, the appreciation of the currency is a 
real  appreciation,  which  is  contractionary  for  the  tradable-goods  sector.  Assume  that  this 
contractionary effect dominates over the initial increase in export demand, so the net effect 
on the tradable-goods sector is contractionary. Demand for, and the output of, nontradable 
goods may expand somewhat from the appreciation, but assume that the contraction of the 
tradable-goods sector dominates so the net effect on domestic output is a contraction. The 
appreciation  also  leads  to  lower  inflation,  through  lower  prices  on  imported  goods.  The 
resource-utilisation and inflation forecasts will fall below a sustainable level and the inflation 
target, respectively.  
The  appropriate  monetary-policy  response  under  flexible  inflation  targeting  is  to  lower  the 
policy rate and the policy-rate path. This will stimulate the economy, moderate the nominal 
and real appreciation, and shift up the forecasts of inflation and resource utilisation towards 
the  target  and  a  sustainable  level,  respectively.  In  the  new  equilibrium,  the  currency  has 
appreciated  somewhat  in  real  terms,  the  nominal  and  real  interest  rate  will  be  lower,  the 
tradable-goods  sector  may  have  contracted  somewhat,  and  the  nontradable-goods  sector 
may  have  expanded  somewhat.  This  is  the  monetary-policy  response  that  I  vote  for  when 
this situation arises for Sweden. 
Suppose that for some reason the central bank is not willing to accept the nominal and real 
appreciation of the currency. By lowering the domestic interest rate and the policy-rate path 
so as to keep the interest-rate differential and its forecast unchanged, the central bank could 
in principle maintain a fixed exchange rate and zero capital flow. But the lower nominal and 
real interest-rate paths are expansionary, and the inflation and resource-utilisation forecasts 
will  shift  up,  above  the  inflation  target  and  a  sustainable  level,  respectively.  The  domestic 
economy  is  effectively  importing  the  foreign  economy’s  monetary  policy,  which  is  too 
expansionary  for  the  domestic  economy.  The  increased  growth  and  activity  and  the 
expectation that the central bank may eventually have to accept an appreciation may then 
still lead to a capital inflow, even though the interest-rate differential is unchanged. In order to 
prevent an appreciation, the central bank has to intervene and buy foreign exchange. This 
leaves  more  time  for  capital  inflows,  and  the  accumulated  capital  inflow  may  grow.  The 
economy starts becoming overheated, asset prices grow, and bubbles may develop. In order 
to  prevent  the  situation  from  becoming  more  problematic,  the  central  bank  may  consider 
what  the  IMF  calls  capital-flow  management  measures  (CFMs),  including  capital  controls 
(residency-based CMFs) (IMF 2011b). The authorities may also consider a fiscal contraction 
and financial-stability measures to improve the situation.  
This  is  a  highly  stylized  and  very  simplified  thought  experiment.  Still,  I  think  it  conveys  an 
important insight, namely that a substantial part of the problem is due to the central bank’s 
unwillingness to accept the nominal and real appreciation, even though this appreciation is a 
natural  equilibrium  response  to  the  lower  world  interest  rate.  Are  the  reasons  for  that 
unwillingness so important that they take precedence over the problematic consequences?7 
More expansionary monetary policy in the U.S., for instance in the form of lower long rates 
due to LSAPs, tends to depreciate the dollar, all else equal. Does this mean that the U.S. is 
conducting a beggar-thy-neighbour policy that hurts other countries? I do not see it this way. 
                                                 
7  The policy response to recent capital inflows to emerging-market economies is further discussed in the IMF 
staff framework for policy advice on managing capital inflows, IMF (2011b).   
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A  weaker  currency  is  a  normal  consequence  of  more  expansionary  policy  in  an  open 
economy. Each of the countries affected has the option of adjusting its own monetary policy 
in  response.  All  countries  cannot  depreciate  their  currency  against  each  other,  but  all 
countries  can  conduct  more  expansionary  policy  if  they  prefer,  with  conventional  (lower 
policy  rates)  or  unconventional  methods  (such  as  asset  purchases).  More  expansionary 
monetary policy will increase real activity, world trade, and both exports and imports, which in 
a situation of underutilised resources is to the benefit of all. Monetary policy is not a zero-
sum game.  
References 
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun S. Shin. 2011. “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics.” 
In  Friedman,  Benjamin  M.,  and  Michael  Woodford,  eds.,  Handbook  of  Monetary 
Economics,Volume 3a, chapter 12, pp. 601–650. Elsevier. 
Assenmascher-Wesche, Katrin, and Stefan Gerlach. 2010. “Credit and Bubbles.” Economic 
Policy 25(63), pp. 437–482. 
Bean,  Charles  R.  (2009),  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great 
Contraction.” Schumpeter Lecture, Barcelona, 25 August. www.bankofengland.co.uk. 
Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver, and Tim Taylor. 2010. “Monetary Policy 
after the Fall.” In Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead. Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City. www.kansascityfed.org. 
Bernanke, Ben S. 2010. “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble.” Speech on January 3. 
www.federalreserve.gov. 
Bernanke, Ben S. 2011a. “The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and 
Practice.” Speech on October 18. www.federalreserve.gov. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  2011b.  “Statement.”  Statement  before  the  Committee  on  Financial 
Services, U.S. House of Representatives, July 13. www.federalreserve.gov. 
Blinder, Alan. 1998. Central Banking in Theory and Practice. MIT Press. 
Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu. 2008. “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” BIS Working Papers, Bank for International 
Settlements. www.bis.org. 
Carney, Mark 2009. “Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilise Economic 
Activity.” In Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City. www.kansascityfed.org. 
Chung,  Hess,  Jean-Philippe  Laforte,  David  Reifschneider,  and  John  C.  Williams.  2011. 
“Have  We  Underestimated  the  Likelihood  and  Severity  of  Zero  Lower  Bound  Events?” 
Working Paper Series, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
D'Amico,  Stefania,  William  English,  David  Lopez-Salido,  and  Edward  Nelson.  2011.  “The 
Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effects.” Working 
paper, Federal Reserve Board. 
Diamond,  Douglas  W.  and  Raghuram  Rajan.  2011.  “Illiquid  Banks,  Financial  Stability,  and 
Interest Rate Policy.” NBER Working Papers, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 
Dokko,  Jane,  Brian  Doyle,  Michael  T.  Kiley,  Jinill  Kim,  Shane  Sherlund,  Jae  Sim,  and 
Skander  Van  den  Heuvel.  2009.  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  House  Bubble.”  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2009-45. 
Eichengreen,  Barry,  Mohamed  El-Erian,  Arminio  Fraga,  Takatoshi  Ito,  Jean  Pisani-Ferry, 
Eswar Prasad, Raghuram Rajan, Maria Ramos, Carmen Reinhart, Hélène Rey, Dani Rodrik, 
Kenneth  Rogoff,  Hyun  S.  Shin,  Andrés  Velasco,  Beatrice  W.  di,  and  Yongding  Yu.  2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
“Rethinking Central Banking.” Report from the Committee on International Economic Policy 
and Reform. www.brookings.edu. 
Eichengreen,  Barry,  Raghuram  Rajan,  and  Eswar  Prasad.  2011.  “Central  Banks 
Need  a  Bigger  and Bolder  Mandate.” Financial Times, October 24. 
Ferrero, Andrea, Mark Gertler, and Lars E.O. Svensson. 2009. “Current Account Dynamics 
and  Monetary  Policy.”  In  Gali,  Jordi,  and  Mark  Gertler  (eds.),  International  Dimensions  of 
Monetary Policy, Chicago University Press. 
IMF. 2009. World Economic Outlook. International Monetary Fund. www.imf.org. 
IMF. 2011a. World Economic Outlook. International Monetary Fund. www.imf.org. 
IMF. 2011b. “Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows – Cross-Cutting Themes and 
Possible Policy Framework.” Report from International Monetary Fund. www.imf.org. 
Kohn,  Donald  L.  2007.  “John  Taylor  Rules.”  In  From  the  Great  Moderation  to  the  Great 
Deviation:  A  Round-Trip  Journey  Based  on  the  Work  of  John  B.  Taylor.  Hoover  Institution 
Press. 
Kohn, Donald L. 2008. “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited.” Speech on November 
19. www.federalreserve.gov. 
Kohn, Donald L. 2009. “Policy Challenges for the Federal Reserve.” Speech on November 
16. www.federalreserve.gov. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.  2003.  “The  Inflation  Forecast  and  the  Loss  Function.”  In  Central 
Banking,  Monetary  Theory  and  Practice:  Essays  in  Honour  of  Charles  Goodhart,  Edward 
Elgar. 
Svensson, Lars E. O. 2010. “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability.” policy lecture at the 
CEPR/ESI 14th Annual Conference on “How Has Our View of Central Banking Changed with 
the Recent Financial Crisis?”, hosted by the Central Bank of Turkey, Izmir, October 28, 2010. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.  2011a.  “Practical  Monetary  Policy:  Examples  from  Sweden  and  the 
United States.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Forthcoming in Fall 2011 edition. 
Svensson, Lars E. O. 2011b. “Inflation Targeting.” In Friedman, Benjamin M., and Michael 
Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3b, chapter 22. North-Holland. 
White, William R. 2006. “Is Price Stability Enough?” BIS Working Paper no. 205.  
Woodford,  Michael.  2005.  “Central  Bank  Communication  and  Policy  Effectiveness.”  In  The 
the  Future.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City. 
Greenspan  Era:  Lessons 
ww.kansascityfed.org. 
Woodford, Michael. 2007. “The Case for Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy.” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, pp. 3–24. 
Woodford,  Michael.  2011.  “Inflation  Targeting  and  Financial  Stability.”  Sveriges  Riksbank 
Economic Review, forthcoming. 
Yellen,  Janet  L.  2011.  “The  Federal  Reserve's  Asset  Purchase  Program.”  Speech  at  the 
Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Denver. www.federalreserve.gov. 
 
for 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
