Glenn Stevens: The role of internal audit in financial services firms 
Opening remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
Institute of Internal Auditors Financial Services Forum, Sydney, 17 November 2011. 
 I am pleased to be with you this morning to open this Financial Services Forum focusing on 
the role of internal audit in financial services firms.  
The Reserve Bank’s Audit Department has a long association with the IIA and we are strong 
supporters of the work of the Institute.  
The fact that you are holding this Forum is significant. As all of you know only too well, there 
have  been  many  practices  exposed  in  global  financial  institutions  over  the  past  few  years 
that show poor risk management and failure of controls over lending and trading activities. 
The fact that these issues continue to surface is a clear indication that the subject matter of 
today’s Forum remains relevant.  
From  my  own  experience  at  the  Reserve  Bank  over  many  years,  I  have  gained  an 
appreciation of the important role that internal audit can play in our financial institutions. The 
Reserve Bank is, of course, very  much a bank. We have a substantial balance sheet that 
requires  management,  we  provide  a  range  of  banking  services  to  government  clients,  we 
operate key pieces of financial infrastructure, and we rely heavily on our IT systems to deliver 
these services.  
Over  the  years,  we  have  worked  to  develop  a  detailed  risk  management  framework  to 
identify where the key risks lie, and set out how they are to be managed. Yet even though 
much work has gone into developing that framework, like any risk-management approach, it 
can only ever be a work in progress – and it remains under continual review. Complementing 
the  risk  framework,  our  internal  audit  program  focuses  its  attention  on  the  most  important 
risks identified by management.  
Like many auditors today, our Audit Department takes a broad view of their responsibilities, 
reviewing not only the effectiveness of controls but also whether they are the most efficient 
way  to  achieve  an  end.  I  know  that  they  are  conscious  that  procedures  they  may  have 
recommended  some  years  ago  may  no  longer  be  appropriate,  given  the  changes  in 
technology.  And  of  course  technology  continues  to  challenge  both  our  systems  operators 
and our auditors, as the threats to the security of our data and communications increase.  
Audit Department’s work is overseen by the Board’s Audit Committee, which has among its 
members two of the Bank’s independent directors, one of whom (Jillian Broadbent) is chair, 
and which also brings external expertise to bear on assessing the overall audit work of the 
Bank. This is a key part of the governance structure.  
Of course, these arrangements are not unique in any way. They are designed both to meet 
requirements  for  Commonwealth  authorities  and  also  to  be  in  line  with  good  practice  at 
commercial entities. They do, however, give us at the Reserve Bank an insight into some of 
the practical challenges facing other financial organisations.  
Of  particular  importance  to  this  audience,  we  also  recognise  the  challenges  involved  with 
appointing, training and keeping an audit staff capable of assessing whether the controls are 
working as they should. Our audit team has continually to improve its understanding of the 
breadth and depth of our business and changes to it. To help us maintain best practice, our 
auditors need to ensure that their technical skills remain up to speed. The IIA’s training and 
certification processes play an important role in assisting this process.   
Fostering improvements to the practice of identifying and managing risks, and to the audit 
processes that are an integral part of that, are central to development of policies aimed at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fostering greater financial stability, both in Australia and internationally. The financial stresses 
of the past few years have placed much greater emphasis on this aspect of our policy work in 
the Reserve Bank. There are few signs that the additional focus is going to lessen any time 
soon. If anything, it will increase.   
Domestically,  we  have  worked  closely  with  the  other  members  of  the  Council  of  Financial 
Regulators on a number of initiatives including the Financial Claims Scheme, the structure of 
financial  market  regulation  and  the  role  of  central  counterparties  in  the  settlement  of 
securities and derivatives transactions.  
Internationally,  through  our  membership  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and the G-20, along with colleagues in APRA and the 
Treasury,  we  have  been  involved  in  efforts  to  strengthen  the  international  financial 
architecture, the rules governing the risks to which financial institutions are exposed and the 
buffers they are obliged to maintain in case things go wrong.  
The implications of these initiatives on the way in which financial institutions are managed 
are  potentially  far  reaching.  They  are  also  important  for  internal  auditors,  in  two  respects. 
First, they are designed to make the institutions you are working for more resilient in the face 
of a wide range of pressures. If the changes are made effectively, they should help you sleep 
a  little  better  at  night.  But  second,  many  of  the  changes  are  complex  and  challenging, 
requiring  important  shifts  in  the  way  institutions  operate,  with  even  more  emphasis  on 
controls focused on risk than in the past. There is clearly a need for internal auditors to keep 
well  abreast  of  these  developments  in  financial  institutions  so  that  you  can  play  the  role 
expected  of  you  in  contributing  to  good  corporate  governance  and,  thus,  to  improved 
prospects for financial stability.  
Australia’s corporations and governments, not to mention savers and investors, rely heavily 
on your work and it is crucial that it is done well. Today’s agenda suggests that you should 
finish the day even better equipped to meet this challenge. I wish you a successful day.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
