Mark Carney: Bank note launch 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  MaRS  Discovery 
District, Toronto, Ontario, 14 November 2011. 
 the 
is  World  Diabetes  Day  and 
is  no  coincidence.  November  14 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  the  MaRS  Discovery  District,  where  science  and 
innovation meet. 
I am here to announce the issue of the new $100 bank note which is available, as of today, in 
banks across the country. 
We  are  very  proud  of  our  innovative  polymer  bank  notes.  They  are  more  secure,  more 
economical, and better for the environment than any we have issued previously. These notes 
are also potent symbols of our rich heritage. 
The  design  of  the  $100  bank  note  celebrates  Canadian  innovation  in  medical  research, 
including the discovery of insulin to treat diabetes. We are honoured to issue this note on the 
site where Banting and Best conducted their groundbreaking research almost a century ago. 
Many forget that diabetes was once a death sentence. The discovery of insulin changed that. 
It was at that desk, Sir Frederick Banting’s desk, where science and innovation met and the 
lives of hundreds of millions of people changed. 
Today’s  date 
120th anniversary of Sir Frederick Banting’s birth. 
This $100 note is a tribute to Canadian researchers who have left their mark in many areas. 
Allow me to mention the transformational work of John Hopps, who invented the pacemaker 
in 1950. He developed this life-saving device at the University of Toronto's Banting Institute, 
located across the street from here. 
This spirit of innovation carries on today and so the note also celebrates the scientists who 
continue to make our world a better place by improving the lives of many. Here in MaRS, 
medical professionals are mapping the human genetic code as well as tackling some of the 
most daunting medical challenges of our time, including cancer and macular degeneration. 
These polymer notes don’t just celebrate innovation; they are themselves at the frontier of 
bank  note  technology.  They  were  developed  by  a  team  of  physicists,  chemists,  engineers 
and other experts from the Bank of Canada and from across the bank note industry. 
There is no other currency like it anywhere in the world. These new notes contain a unique 
combination of transparency, holography and other sophisticated security elements. 
In addition to impressive security features to stay ahead of counterfeiting threats, these bank 
notes will last longer – at least two-and-a-half times longer than paper – and will therefore be 
more economical. 
These bank notes are also green. Their environmental footprint is smaller than that of the old 
currency made from cotton-based bank note paper. Once these new notes are removed from 
circulation, they will be recycled into other products right here in Canada. 
Since the new notes were unveiled last June, Bank of Canada staff across the country have 
been training the millions of cash handlers and tens of thousands of police officers about how 
to check the security features of the notes. This training, of course, is ongoing. The RCMP 
continues to be a strong and committed partner in the fight against counterfeiting. 
Reports of the death of cash are greatly exaggerated: Our research shows that cash is used 
for more than half of all shopping transactions. Canadians need a currency they can trust. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
That is why we are launching today the most secure and advanced note series in the Bank’s 
history. 
In short, these new bank notes are a 21st century innovation in which all Canadians can take 
pride. We are honoured to launch them here at MaRS, with its links to past glories, current 
successes, and the promise of future Canadian medical innovation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
