European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Athens, 
8 May 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press  conference  here  in  Athens.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Garganas  for  his  kind 
hospitality and to express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of 
the meeting of the Governing Council.  
Let  me  report  on  the  outcome  of  our  meeting,  which  was  also  attended  by  Commissioner 
Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Inflation rates have risen significantly since 
the  autumn,  owing  mainly  to  increases  in  energy  and  food  prices.  As  we  have  said  on 
previous occasions, inflation rates are expected to remain high for a rather protracted period 
of time, before gradually declining again. The latest information confirms our assessment that 
upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium term, in a context of continuing very 
vigorous money and credit growth. At the same time, the economic fundamentals of the euro 
area  are  sound,  and  incoming  macroeconomic  data  continue  to  point  to  moderate  but 
ongoing  real  GDP  growth.  However,  the  level  of  uncertainty  resulting  from  the  turmoil  in 
financial markets remains unusually high and tensions still persist. Against this background, 
we emphasise that maintaining price stability in the medium term is our primary objective in 
accordance  with  our  mandate.  The  firm  anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations is of the highest priority. The Governing Council remains strongly committed to 
preventing second-round effects and the materialisation of upside risks to price stability over 
the  medium  term.  We  believe  that  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will  contribute  to 
achieving our objective. We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the 
coming weeks. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
The latest data and survey information on economic activity confirm previous expectations of 
moderate but ongoing growth in the first half of 2008. In particular, industrial production data 
for  the  first  months  of  the  year  showed  resilience,  while  economic  sentiment  generally 
continued to soften. Overall, the euro area economy has sound fundamentals and does not 
suffer from major imbalances.  
In line with available forecasts, both domestic and foreign demand are expected to support 
ongoing real GDP growth in the euro area in 2008, albeit to a lesser extent than during 2007. 
While moderating, growth in the world economy is expected to remain resilient, benefiting in 
particular from strong growth in emerging economies. This should continue to support euro 
area  external  demand.  Meanwhile,  investment  growth  in  the  euro  area  should  provide 
ongoing support to economic activity, as capacity utilisation remains solid and profitability in 
the non-financial corporate sector has been sustained. At the same time, employment and 
labour force participation have increased significantly and unemployment rates have fallen to 
levels  not  seen  for  25  years.  This  supports  real  disposable  income  and  thus  consumption 
growth, although purchasing power is being dampened by the impact of higher energy and 
food prices.  
The uncertainty surrounding this outlook for economic growth remains high, and downside 
risks prevail. In particular, risks relate to the potential for the financial market turbulence to 
have  a  more  negative  impact  on  the  real  economy  than  previously  anticipated.  Moreover, 
downside risks stem from the dampening impact on consumption and investment of further 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 1
unanticipated  increases  in  energy  and  food  prices.  Risks  also  arise  from  protectionist 
pressures and the possibility of disorderly developments owing to global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  has  remained  above  3%  for  the 
past  six  months.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  it  was  3.3%  in  April  2008.  This 
outturn confirms the ongoing strong short-term upward pressure on inflation, resulting largely 
from sharp increases in energy and food prices at the global level in recent months.  
Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  these  commodities,  the  annual 
HICP  inflation  rate  is  likely  to  remain  significantly  above  2%  in  the  coming  months, 
moderating  only  gradually  over  the  course  of  2008.  Accordingly,  we  are  currently 
experiencing a rather protracted period of high annual rates of inflation. In order to ensure 
that current high inflation rates remain temporary, it is imperative that they do not become 
entrenched  in  longer-term  expectations  or  lead  to  broadly  based  second-round  effects  in 
wage and price-setting. 
The  risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation  over  the  medium  term  remain  clearly  on  the  upside. 
These  risks  include  the  possibility of  further  rises  in  energy  and  food  prices,  as well  as  of 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  beyond  those  foreseen  thus  far.  Most 
importantly,  there  is  a  risk  that  price  and  wage-setting  behaviour  could  add  to  inflationary 
pressures.  In  particular,  the  pricing  power  of  firms,  notably  in  market  segments  with  low 
competition,  may  prove  stronger  than  currently  expected.  Moreover,  higher  than  expected 
wage growth may emerge, taking into account high capacity utilisation, tight labour market 
conditions  and  the  risk  of  second-round  effects  owing  to  the  high  level  of  current  inflation 
rates. 
Against this background, it is imperative that all the parties concerned, in both the private and 
the  public  sector,  meet  their  responsibilities.  Wage-setting  needs  to  take  into  account 
productivity  developments,  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  in  many  economies,  and 
price competitiveness positions. Moderate labour cost increases are particularly necessary in 
countries  which  have  lost  price  competitiveness  in  recent  years.  Second-round  effects 
stemming  from  the  impact  of  higher  energy  and  food  prices  on  price  and  wage-setting 
behaviour must be avoided. In this context, the Governing Council is concerned about the 
existence  of  schemes  in  which  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to  consumer  prices.  Such 
schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a wage-price spiral, which 
would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the  countries  concerned.  The 
Governing Council therefore calls for such schemes to be avoided. The Governing Council is 
monitoring  wage  negotiations  in  the  euro  area  with  particular  attention.  In  the  view  of  the 
Governing Council, continued responsible wage agreements are of key importance in order 
to preserve price stability in the medium term and thereby the purchasing power of all euro 
area citizens.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  Annual  M3  growth  remained  very  vigorous  at  10.3%  in  March, 
supported  by  the  continued  strong  growth  of  MFI  loans  to  the  private  sector.  At  the  same 
time, annual M1 growth continued to moderate in March, reflecting higher short-term interest 
rates which encouraged further shifts from overnight into time deposits. While the impact of 
the  flat  yield  curve  and  other  temporary  factors  suggest  that  annual  M3  growth  currently 
overstates the underlying pace of monetary expansion, nonetheless, even after taking such 
effects  into  account,  a  broad-based  assessment  of  the  latest  data  confirms  that  the 
underlying rate of money and credit growth remains strong. 
The growth of household borrowing has moderated over recent months, reflecting the impact 
of higher short-term interest rates and cooling housing markets in several parts of the euro 
area. However, the growth of loans to non-financial corporations has remained very robust. 
While some future moderation can be expected in the light of tightening financing conditions 
and slower economic growth, bank borrowing by euro area non-financial corporations grew 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2008
at an annual rate of 15.0% in the year to March 2008, and the flow of loans in recent months 
has been strong.  
For  the  time  being,  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  financial  market  turbulence  seen  since 
early  August  2007  has  strongly  influenced  the  development  of  broad  money  and  loans. 
Continued strong loan growth to non-financial corporations suggests that the availability of 
bank credit to euro area firms has not been significantly impaired by the financial turmoil thus 
far. Further data and analysis will be required in order to obtain a more complete picture of 
the  impact  of  the  financial  market  developments  on  banks’  balance  sheets,  financing 
conditions and money and credit growth. 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis clearly confirms the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail 
over the medium term, in a context of very vigorous money and credit growth and with no 
significant signs of supply constraints on bank loans. The economic fundamentals of the euro 
area  are  sound,  and  incoming  macroeconomic  data  continue  to  point  to  moderate  but 
ongoing  real  GDP  growth.  However,  the  level  of  uncertainty  resulting  from  the  turmoil  in 
financial  markets  remains  high.  Against  this  background,  we  emphasise  that  the  firm 
anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  is  of  the  highest  priority  to  the 
Governing  Council.  We  believe  that  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will  contribute  to 
achieving  this  objective.  The  Governing  Council  remains  strongly  committed  to  preventing 
second-round  effects  and  the  materialisation  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments  over  the  coming 
weeks. 
Regarding fiscal policies, the latest forecast by the European Commission points to a rise in 
the euro area general government deficit ratio in 2008, followed by a further small increase in 
2009. This deterioration in part reflects a less favourable economic environment and a likely 
reversal of windfall revenues accrued in past years. However, it also reflects a standstill in 
fiscal consolidation and new deficit-increasing measures in a number of countries with fiscal 
imbalances,  including  some  with  high  deficits.  For  several  countries,  the  attainment  of  the 
country-specific  medium-term  objectives  by  2010  at  the  latest,  which  is  the  commitment 
made by euro area governments in Berlin in April 2007, is clearly at risk. In these countries, 
much more ambitious policies are imperative. For all countries, prudent fiscal policies would 
also help to counteract current inflationary pressures. 
At  the  current  juncture,  it  is  also  important  to  reinforce  the  structural  reform  agenda,  in 
particular with a view to fostering market integration and to reducing rigidities in product and 
labour  markets.  Policy  initiatives  aimed  at  enhancing  competition  in  market  segments  with 
low competition, such as services and energy, would allow pricing behaviour to adjust and 
thus  contribute  to  lower  inflation  pressures.  Furthermore,  policies  to  increase  trend 
productivity growth would contribute to smaller unit labour cost increases and ultimately also 
to higher employment. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 3
