José Manuel González-Páramo: Financial systems, new technologies 
and productivity growth 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Summer  School  of  the  University  of  Málaga,  Ronda, 
11 July 2008. 
 Introduction1 
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Ronda and participate in the Summer School of the 
University  of  Málaga.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers,  particularly  Professors  Amparo 
Ruiz  Sepúlveda  and  David  Bueno  Vallejo,  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you 
some views on the relationship between financial systems, new technologies and productivity 
growth.  
The notion that financial and economic activities are closely interrelated is not new. Indeed, it 
has a long tradition in economic theory. For instance, Clément Juglar – the French economist 
who was among the first to investigate the nature of business cycles – argued back in 1860 
that economic fluctuations originate in the credit system. 
Financial  development  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  economic  performance  of  our 
economies. Indeed, developments in the financial system can directly influence productivity 
growth in the euro economy, since the financial sector accounts for a significant and growing 
share  of  output  and  employment  in  our  economies.  More  generally,  developments  in  the 
financial  sector  have  an  impact  on  economic  performance  well  above  their  relative 
importance  in  employment  or  output.  This  is  because  financial  services  represent  key 
intermediate inputs into other sectors of the economy, and thereby provide a very important 
contribution to productivity, innovation and economic growth in the long term. In fact, a well-
functioning  financial  system  enables  an  economy  to  exploit  its  full  potential  for  output  and 
employment growth.  
Productivity growth in the financial system  
2.  
Developments  in  the  financial  system  can  directly  influence  the  performance  of  our 
economies, since the financial sector accounts for a significant and growing share of output 
and employment in the euro area.2 
More generally, the increase in the relative importance of services in developed economies 
has  been  singled  out  as  one  of  the  potential  explanations  for  the  substantial  decline  in 
macroeconomic  volatility  over  the  last  two  decades  (the  so-called  “Great  Moderation”).  In 
particular, the share of euro area total value added and employment accounted for by the 
services sector has significantly risen since the 1980s. As a result, the structure of the euro 
area  economy  has  increasingly  shifted  away  from  traditional  manufacturing  industries 
towards services.  
                                                 
1   This  speech  has  benefited  from  inputs  from  various  ECB  reports  and  articles  in  the  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin 
quoted in the text. I am grateful to Angela Maddaloni, David Marqués, Alex Popov and Rolf Strauch for useful 
comments. 
2   See  Taskforce  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (2006), 
Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services sectors, ECB Occasional paper No. 44. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 1
Within the services sector, over the last few decades there has been a slight increase in the 
importance of financial intermediation relative to other services sub-sectors. Data show that 
in 2005 financial and business services represented the sub-sector accounting for the largest 
share of value added. Their relative importance for employment is more limited, as a result of 
their relatively high productivity compared to other services sub-sectors.  
Indeed, in contrast to other sub-sectors, financial services are substantially more exposed to 
international competition and the use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). 
Besides, the liberalisation of this sector started in the EU earlier than regulatory reforms in 
other  services.  As  a  result,  the  financial  sector  has  been  subjected  to  the  combined  of 
pressure of: (1) increased competition from capital markets and foreign financial institutions, 
and (2) earlier deregulation. The combination of technological progress and market structural 
changes should have spurred productivity growth in the euro area financial industry. 
Nevertheless,  data  from  the  EU  KLEMS  Growth  and  Productivity  Accounts  spanning  the 
1996-2005  period  show  that  labour  productivity  growth  in  financial  services  was  rather 
disappointing over this period, especially if compared with their corresponding performance 
in the US. Indeed, labour productivity growth of the financial sector was slightly negative in 
the euro area over this decade, while it outperformed the economy as a whole in the US.  
Thus, in the euro area the financial services sector seems to have to some extent contributed 
to two important developments in labour productivity over this period: (1) the sharp slowdown 
in  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  euro  compared  to  the  period  1980-1995;  (2)  the 
emergence of a significant labour productivity growth gap between the euro area and the US.  
Weak productivity developments in the financial services are also evident if we look at total 
factor  productivity  growth,  a  factor  generally  believed  to  have  played  a  key  role  in 
determining the emergence of a significant output growth gap between the US and the euro 
area  over  1996-2005.  Indeed,  over  this  period  the  financial  services  sector  provided  a 
significant  negative  contribution  to  euro  area  output  growth,  compared  with  a  marginal 
positive contribution in the US. It should be noted that, while the negative rate of growth of 
TFP for this sector deteriorated in the euro area compared with the level observed over the 
period  1980-1995,  over  the  same  period  the  financial  sector  recorded  a  significant 
turnaround in the US. Developments across individual euro area countries were fairly mixed, 
but  in  the  majority  of  cases  TFP  growth  either  improved  at  best  only  marginally  or 
deteriorated significantly. 
Overall, the deterioration in the productivity performance of the euro area financial services 
industry – and, more generally, the evidence of disappointing productivity performance also 
in  other  market-services  sub-sectors  making  relatively  intensive  use  of  ICT  –  reflects 
insufficient technological and innovation spillovers as well as the negative impact of labour 
and  market  rigidities.  From  the  policy  point  of  view,  these  findings  point  to  the  need  to 
continue implementing structural reforms, introducing measures aimed at increasing market 
competition and investing in education and human capital formation in order to achieve the 
objectives of the Lisbon strategy. 
Financial sector and growth  
3.  
Developments in the financial sector have an impact on economic performance well above 
their share in total employment or value added.3 This is because the financial sector provides 
an important contribution to the efficient functioning of the entire economy, by ensuring that 
the  most  valuable  real  investment  opportunities  receive  the  necessary  financing  at  a 
reasonable cost. In particular, a well-functioning financial system fosters saving and capital 
                                                 
3   For a more detailed discussion see Chapter II of ECB (2008), Financial Integration in Europe, April. 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2008
accumulation, allows for a more efficient spatial and inter-temporal allocation of resources, 
enhances  risk-sharing  and  improves  the  diversification  of  risk.  It  can  reduce  the  cost  of 
capital  as  well  as  that  of  financial  intermediation  and  improve  competitiveness,  thereby 
lowering  prices  and  stimulating  economic  growth,  job  creation  and  welfare.  Insofar  as 
financial  services  are  important  for  the  economy  as  a  whole  and  enable  other  economic 
transactions to run smoothly, they are associated with strong externalities affecting the rest 
of the economy.  
The  efficiency  of  a  financial  system  typically  depends  on  several  key  factors,  including  its 
degree of integration, market competition, level of development and innovation capacity. In 
particular, many studies have found evidence of a correlation between the level of financial 
development  and  the  economic  growth.4  Indeed,  there  is a  significant  amount  of  empirical 
evidence derived from cross-country data showing that countries in which more credit to the 
private sector is extended typically experience stronger economic growth.  
In standard neoclassical models, financial development fosters growth mainly by supporting 
a  higher  level  of  investment  activity.  Other  models  suggest  that  the  positive  influence  of 
financial development may work through the accumulation of human capital (by supporting 
investment in education by individuals). However, recent studies have found evidence that in 
developed economies a more relevant channel through which financial intermediation affects 
economic growth may work through increases in total factor productivity.5  
There  is  increasing  interest  in  understanding  the  specific  channels  through  which  financial 
development affects productivity. Some studies have found out that this may be related to 
the superior ability of countries with more developed financial systems to finance investment 
for technological-related reasons or to enable firms to adopt new technologies more quickly. 
In  addition,  it  has  also  been  argued  that  finance  fosters  growth  by  stimulating  “creative 
destruction”,  in  the  words  of  Joseph  Schumpeter,  the  famous  Austrian  economist  who 
argued  that  fluctuations  in  investment  and  economic  activity  are  determined  by  credit-
financed innovation waves.  
According to this argument, developed financial markets help to channel scarce capital from 
declining sectors to firms that are expected to grow faster and also make it easier for firm to 
enter industries facing good growth prospects. Hartmann et al. (2007) test this hypothesis for 
a  group  of  22  OECD  countries  and  indeed  find  that  in  countries  with  more  developed 
financial  markets,  industries  with  better  growth  prospects  tend  to  benefit  from  more 
investment activity.6 
How developed are the financial markets in the euro area? In order to answer this question, 
ECB  staff  members  have  developed  aggregate  measures  of  the  size  of  stock,  bond  and 
loans markets that can be used as proxies for the degree of development of capital markets 
as a whole.7 Based on these indicators, one can conclude that on average, capital markets in 
euro area countries tend to be smaller than those of the UK and US, and roughly comparable 
in  size  to  those  of  Japan.  It  has  been  suggested  that  differences  in  the  degree  of 
development  and,  more  generally,  efficiency  of  capital  markets  may  have  played  a  role  in 
explaining the better economic performance of the US relative to the euro area in the second 
                                                 
4   For reviews see Levine, R. (2005), “Finance and growth: Theory, evidence and mechanisms”, in Aghion, P. 
and  S.  Durlauf  (eds.)  The  Handbook  of  Economic  Growth,  Amsterdam:  North-Holland;  Papaioannou,  E. 
(2007), “Finance and growth: A macroeconomic assessment of the evidence from a macroeconomic angle”, 
ECB Working Paper 787. 
5   For a review see Papaioannou (2007), cit. 
6   Hartmann,  P.,  F.  Heider,  E.  Papaioannou  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial  markets  and 
innovation in productivity and growth in Europe””, ECB Occasional Paper 72. 
7   See  Chapter  II  of  ECB  (2008),  Financial  Integration  in  Europe,  April,  p.  27  for  more  details  on  the 
methodology. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 3
half  of  the  1990s.8  It  should  be  noted  though  that  there  are  significant  differences  across 
euro area countries, with the relative size of capital markets in some countries comparable or 
even bigger than in the Anglo-Saxon countries. 
Of course, one important difference between the capital markets of the euro area and other 
developed economies regards the relative importance of their market segments. In general, 
the euro area still has a much more “bank-based” system compared with the rather “market-
based” system in the US. However, the euro area financial landscape is changing, as a result 
of  a  number  of  structural  developments,  including  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  increasing 
financial integration, securitisation and other forms of financial innovation, the impact of long-
run demographic trends, etc.  
Financial innovation  
4.  
I  have  mentioned  securitisation  as  one  of  the  factors  changing  the  euro  area  financial 
landscape. This is an important issue since securitisation is an example of a relatively mature 
form of financial innovation, a factor that plays an important role in determining the degree of 
efficiency  of  a  financial  system.  Indeed,  financial  innovation  can  render  financial  markets 
more  efficient  by  rendering  them  more  complete,  thereby  allowing  firms,  households  and 
governments  to  interact  in  the  market  place  facing  lower  transaction  costs,  enhanced  risk 
sharing instruments and contracting possibilities. I will concentrate on two specific examples 
of financial innovation: securitisation and the development of venture capital financing. 
lending-related  assets, 
together  with  relentless 
Securitisation 
Securitisation – the practice of transforming formerly illiquid assets into portfolios of assets 
that  can  be  sold  widely  –  is  particularly  common  in  the  banking  sector.  In  fact,  asset 
securitisation  was  introduced  in  the  1970s  in  the  US  precisely  for  the  purpose  to  allow 
depository institutions to sell their pools of mortgage loans before maturity, thereby providing 
an  additional  source  of  funding.  Banks  subsequently  extended  the  securitisation  model  to 
other  forms  of  credit,  such  as  consumer  credit  and  student  loans,  that  were  historically 
regarded as highly illiquid. 
Increasing  securitisation  of 
financial 
innovation  in  credit  markets,  have  led  to  the  diffusion  of  a  new  business  model  –  the 
“originate to distribute” model – among banks, particularly those of large size. Under this new 
model, banks originate loans but sell them to structured investment vehicles (often set up by 
themselves) to be repackaged and subsequently sold as asset-backed securities (ABSs).  
In  principle,  this  business  model  is  attractive  for  banks  since  it  provides  them  with  a  new 
source of financing to expand lending (thereby mitigating their funding liquidity risks), while 
also allowing them to economise on costly capital requirements. From the point of view of the 
economy  as  a  whole,  the  “originate  to  distribute”  model  could  be  viewed  as  having  many 
advantages. First, capital requirements are costly, thus the ability to sustain a given level of 
credit supply with a lower volume of capital enables the banking sector to reduce the costs of 
financing  for  borrowers.  Moreover,  it  may  be  seen  as  representing  a  step  towards  more 
complete  credit  markets,  thereby  contributing  to  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the  economic 
system. In addition, the securitisation of loans in principle could reduce a secular source of 
vulnerability of the economies, by taking risk concentrations associated with loan portfolios 
away from the banking sector and spreading them more broadly across other sectors. As a 
result, the “originate to distribute” model may potentially diminish the likelihood of the credit 
busts and banking crises that have historically been a major source of macroeconomic and 
                                                 
8   See  for  instance  Lamfalussy,  A.  (2003),  “Creating  an  integrated  European  market  for  financial  services”, 
Cass/IEA Financial Services Regulation Seminar Series. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2008
financial instability in many economies. I will come back to this point later on when talking 
about the implications of financial developments for financial stability. 
Following  a  relatively  slow  start  compared  to  the  US,  the  European  market  for  structured 
finance  products  has  grown  rapidly  during  the  last  5-10  years,  often  at  double-digit  rates. 
This  development  has  been  even  more  pronounced  in  the  euro  area  compared  with  other 
regions due to a variety of factors, including the introduction of the single currency, further 
financial  market  integration  through  the  use  of  credit  derivatives  and  related  financial 
instruments, and an innovative financial industry.9 Growth in structured finance products has 
also been fuelled by high demand from investors stemming from the search for yield, in an 
environment of relatively low yields, and diversification opportunities. Securitisation has also 
been positively affected by the general move towards a more market-based financial system. 
Nevertheless, the volume of issuance of ABSs relatively to the size of the economy for the 
euro area as a whole remains lower than in the UK and the US, probably reflecting regulatory 
and legal barriers to financial integration.10 Within the euro area, the countries in which the 
issuance  of  ABSs  is  more  frequent  are  Spain,  Ireland,  Luxembourg,  the  Netherlands  and 
Portugal. 
Venture capital financing 
Venture  capital  is  a  type  of  private  equity  investment  provided  by  specialised  investors  as 
start-up money to finance new high-risk firms with large scope for growth (e.g. those involved 
in new technologies), in return for an equity position in the firm.11 It represents an alternative 
source  of  capital  financing,  especially  for  those  categories  of  firms  (start-ups  and  small 
innovative firms) for which informational asymmetries are particularly pronounced, as it has 
been  documented  by  the  credit  channel  literature.  Indeed,  even  bank  financing  may  be 
difficult to obtain for such firms, as they are usually involved in high-risk businesses, but have 
little collateral to offer. Under a venture capital agreement, the investor acquires a significant 
equity stake in the firm, which provides him/her with the right incentive to monitor and control 
the firm and overcomes the potential asymmetric information problems. Venture capitalists 
also serve their portfolio firms by providing coaching and guidance, as well as networking for 
strategic  alliances  and  further  funding.  Finally,  venture  capital  financing  is  provided  on  a 
piecemeal basis over several stages, which reduces the entrepreneur’s incentive to skimp on 
effort during the early life of the firm.  
It  should  be  noted  that  providing  financing  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  is  very 
important  in  the  euro  area  because  these  categories  of  firms  represent  a  significant 
component  of  the  economies  of  many  of  its  members.  Thus,  the  financing  of  small-  and 
medium-sized  firms  is  crucial  for  fostering  entrepreneurship,  competition,  innovation  and 
growth in Europe. In addition, venture capital financing plays an important role in supporting 
the  diffusion  of  new  technologies  in  existing  sectors  and  in  fostering  the  developments  of 
new industries. In that sense, venture capital is a type of finance which is ideally suited for 
the  purpose  of  transforming  scientific  knowledge  into  commercial  output.  For  instance,  a 
recent study of the European biotech industry by ECB Staff has shown that venture capital 
financing increases the number of patent applications per unit of industrial R&D, suggesting 
that the involvement of venture capital investors makes R&D investment more efficient.12 
                                                 
9   See ECB (2007), Structural Issues Report on “Corporate finance in the euro area”, May. 
10   These calculations do not include covered bonds which differ from ABS in that the securitised assets remain 
on the balance sheet of the originating bank. 
11   For a more detailed discussion see Chapter II of ECB (2008), Financial Integration in Europe, April. 
12   See  Popov,  A.  and  P.  Roosenboom  (2008),  “Venture  capital  and  innovation  in  the  European  bio-tech 
industry”, ECB mimeo. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 5
Despite having grown substantially over the past ten years, venture capital financing in most 
euro area countries remains a fraction of venture capital financing in the UK or, especially, in 
the US. While average euro area venture capital financing in the late 1990s was larger than 
in the UK, this is no longer the case. Within the euro area, only Finland has levels of venture 
capital financing that can rival those of the United States. A second-tier group of countries 
(Belgium, Germany, France, Ireland and the Netherlands) have similar amounts of venture 
capital  financing.  Finally,  early-stage  venture  capital  financing  remains  limited  in  Austria, 
Greece, Italy and Spain.  
It  is  not  clear  whether  the  apparent  weakness  of  the  European  venture  capital  sector  is 
caused by (1) a lack of capital supplied, perhaps reflecting lack of liquidity in still somewhat 
nationally segmented venture capital markets, (2) legal, regulatory and tax barriers, or (3) a 
shortage  of  viable  exit  options  for  venture  capitalists  through  liquid  specialised  equity 
markets. 
in 
the  monetary 
Implications for central banks 
the  banking  sector  may  affect 
5.  
From the point of view of central banks, developments in the financial sector have a special 
role that distinguishes them from other services. In so far as financial developments influence 
the long term output and employment growth, they can affect the wide range of indicators 
and tools that central banks use to monitor and model the behaviour of the economy. More 
specifically,  changes 
transmission 
mechanism. A more developed and efficient financial system is likely to contribute to a more 
effective, harmonised and smooth transmission of the single monetary policy. In addition, the 
stability  of  the  financial  system  is  also  a  crucial  concern  for  central  banks  and  for  the 
economy as a whole. In principle, deeper and more complete financial system should provide 
a number of social benefits, including better risk hedging and risk diversification that render 
economies  less  vulnerable  to  disturbances.  However,  there  have  long  been  concerns  that 
some financial developments may lead to increased speculative behaviour, market volatility 
and, ultimately cause or exacerbate financial crises.  
Securitisation  provides  an  interesting  illustration  of  how  financial  developments  may 
influence  the  traditional  monetary  transmission  mechanism  and  raise  questions  about 
financial stability.  
As  noted  above,  securitisation  provides  banks  with  a  new  source  of  financing  and  capital 
regulatory relief. Therefore, under normal macroeconomic conditions, one of the anticipated 
consequences  of  securitisation  should  be  an  overall  increase  in  the  aggregate  supply  of 
loans.13  By  affecting  the  ability  and  incentives  of  banks  to  grant  credit,  changes  in 
securitisation activity are also likely to affect the way monetary policy is transmitted through 
credit  markets.  For  instance,  according  to  the  “bank  lending  channel”  theory,  banks’ 
conditions  can  significantly  affect  how  their  supply  of  credit  responds  to  monetary  policy 
changes.  In  this  respect,  after  a  monetary  tightening,  the  drop  in  the  supply  of  credit  is 
expected  to  be  larger  for  small,  less  liquid  and  poorly  capitalised  banks.  However, 
securitisation may weaken the effects of these factors on the transmission mechanism since 
(1)  it  may  enable  banks  to  provide  additional  lending  without  increasing  the  size  of  their 
balance  sheets,  (2)  it  allows  them  to  obtain  additional  liquidity  independently  of  their 
securities  holdings,  and  (3)  by  removing 
through 
securitisation,  banks  can  improve  their  capital  position  on  account  of  the  transfer  of  credit 
risk. There is some evidence that the increase in securitisation may have reduced the impact 
of monetary policy changes through the “bank lending channel”, although this effect seems to 
their  balance  sheet 
loans 
from 
                                                 
13   For a discussion see the article on “Securitisation in the euro area” in ECB Monthly Bulletin, February 2008. 
6 
 BIS Review 89/2008
financial  market 
turmoil,  some  commentators  have  argued 
be dependent on the economic cycle and other factors, such as bank risk.14 However, this 
does not necessarily mean that the banking sector or the credit markets have become less 
relevant  since  they  transmit  monetary  policy  impulses  through  several  other  channels 
(notably, balance sheets).15 Besides, securitisation affects banks in many different ways that 
may  render  them  more  sensitive  to  changes  in  monetary  policy  (e.g.  by  tightening  the 
relationship between banks’ funding ability and conditions in wholesale capital markets).  
An additional issue that has become rather topical over the past year is the potential impact 
of  securitisation  and  the  “originate-to-distribute”  model  on  financial  stability.  As  mentioned 
earlier,  in  principle  the  ability  to  securitise  loans  should  enhance  the  banking  sector  and 
reduce  the  likelihood  of  the  credit  busts  and  banking  crises  that  have  historically  posed  a 
major threat to financial stability in many economies. However, even before the outbreak of 
the  current 
that,  while 
securitisation certainly spreads existing risks, it may in fact encourage the creation of further 
risks,  particularly  by  relaxing  the  incentives  for  banks  to  screen  and  monitor  borrowers  in 
order  to  alleviate  the  informational  asymmetries  associated  with  credit  contracts.16  In 
addition, it has been argued that the markets for securitised loans and credit derivatives may 
have  failed  to  spread  risks  as  effectively  as  expected  and,  by  contrast,  may  have 
exacerbated  information  asymmetries,  probably  as  a  result  of  their  opacity  and  the 
complexity of the underlying contracts. More generally, the recent turmoil has highlighted a 
number of weaknesses in the credit markets, namely in the areas of transparency, valuation, 
risk  management  practices,  the  current  prudential  framework  and  market  functioning. 
However, a number of recommendations have been put forward by a wide range of fora and 
organisations (e.g. the Financial Stability forum) that should be fully implemented in order to 
restore the public’s confidence in the ability of securitisation to contribute to social welfare. 
To  sum  up,  financial  systems  provide  an  important  contribution  to  productivity,  innovation 
and non-inflationary economic growth in the long term. Central banks have a keen interest in 
ensuring their orderly and efficient functioning since this is essential for the smooth conduct 
of monetary policy and for the safeguarding of financial stability. 
                                                 
14   See for instance Altunbas, Y., L. Gambacorta and D. Marqués (2007), “Securitisation and the bank lending 
channel”, ECB Working Paper 838. 
15   For a review of the development of the literature on the credit channel see Bernanke, B. (2007), “The financial 
accelerator and the credit channel”, Speech at the Fed Atlanta Conference on “The credit channel of monetary 
policy in the twenty-first century”, 15 June. 
16   See Rajan, R. (2005), “Has financial development made the world riskier?”, NBER WP 11728 and Sufi A. and 
A. Mian (2008) “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default 
Crisis”, paper presented at the May 2008 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Banking Structure Conference. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 7
