Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Moving the economy forward to a higher growth 
path 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Annual Reception fo rthe Banking Community, Central 
Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 15 January 2008. 
 Honorable Justices of the Supreme Court, Honorable Members of the Philippine Congress, 
Members  of  the  Cabinet,  leaders  of  the  Philippine  banking  sector,  representatives  of  our 
partner organizations, fellow workers in government, special guests good evening.  
On  behalf  of  the  Members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  I  welcome  all  of  you  to  our  traditional 
Annual Reception for the Banking Community.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  As  you  have  noticed,  while  we  hold  this  event  for  the  banking 
community,  we  do  invite  representatives  from  other  sectors.  This  is  in  recognition  of  the 
important role the banking industry and these sectors play in moving our economy forward. 
While  we  decide  and  act  independently  of  each  other,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  our  policies, 
programs, and activities are bound to affect the others.  
In other words, no one acts in a vacuum; we are interrelated. It is in this spirit that we bring 
you together within the storied and historic walls of our Fort San Antonio Abad.  
And  now,  let  me  give  you  a  brief  overview  of  how  our  economy  performed  in  2007,  our 
common report card in other words and how our future is shaping up, 2008 in particular.  
I am pleased to report that 2007 was indeed a remarkable year for the Philippine economy, 
as it showed its resilience and ability to sustain its growth momentum, in the face of severe 
volatilities in global financial markets and record world oil prices.  
Our  economy,  as  measured  by  GDP,  turned  in  its  best  performance  in  30  years  by 
expanding at a faster-than-expected rate of 7.1 percent in the first three quarters last year. 
There are indications that this strong performance was carried through the fourth quarter last 
year, based on preliminary reports on agricultural output as well as the services sector which 
includes telecommunications and tourism.  
Noteworthy is the fact that we achieved in 2007….the ideal convergence of high economic 
growth with low inflation, which at 2.8% is our lowest in 20 years. 
In turn, low inflation kept interest rates on a downtrend, led by the bellwether 91-day T-Bill 
rate which averaged 3.4% in 2007, the lowest level ever. For our business sector, including 
banks, this generally meant lower cost of doing business.  
As  an  industry,  our  banks  continued  to  gain  strength,  achieving  faster  growth  in  terms  of 
resources, capitalization, and profitability in 2007.  
At the same time, our external position continued to be strong, with our gross international 
reserves at end December registering an all-time high of $33.7 billion, while our Balance of 
Payments  for  the  first  eleven  months  of  2007  a  surplus  of  $7.8  billion,  also  a  record  high 
level.  
As  such,  the  peso  ended  stronger  versus  the  weakened  US  dollar  in  2007,  claiming  once 
again the distinction as one of Asia’s best performing currency. This effectively minimized the 
impact of record-high oil prices on our economy and generated billions of pesos in savings 
for the government in terms of debt service.  
We  know  that  the  18.8%  appreciation  of  the  peso  against  the  dollar  in  2007  adversely 
affected many exporters and overseas Filipinos. What I can say is that the Bangko Sentral 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 1
and other agencies of government are addressing this concern, as we do recognize the vital 
contributions to the economy of these two important sectors.  
In  the  financial  sector,  our  reform  efforts  in  2007  remained  directed  towards  building  a 
resilient banking system and promoting a vibrant domestic capital market. 
On  other  key  fronts,  the  BSP  continued  to  adopt  measures  to  further  broaden  access  of 
SMEs and the microfinance sector. 
And  in  support  of  the  full  development  of  the  domestic  capital  market,  we  have  taken  an 
active role in creating a sound market infrastructure that will enhance system integrity and 
promote overall market confidence.  
In retrospect, our much-improved economic conditions are the result of significant structural 
and policy reforms implemented in recent years by the institutions represented here tonight.  
Now, after hearing our good macroeconomic and banking performance, you may be thinking, 
what does 2008 hold in store for the banking system, for the economy, for each of us?  
What is the forecast? Clear? Sunny? Partly sunny? Partly cloudy? What do you think?  
I think, “sunny with patches of thunderstorms”. Why do I say this?  
Well, with the reform agenda – which we crafted over the last three, four years – in full swing 
and our macroeconomic fundamentals at their strongest in 2 decades, I believe that we are 
now better equipped to handle disturbances than we were, say, ten, even five years ago.  
And as we continue on the reform path, I am confident we can look to sunny skies but that is 
not to say that it will always be sunny for I see patches of clouds nearby.  
I see potential financial disturbances from the yet unfolding subprime mortgage problem in 
the US, the now-growing consensus for a deeper-than-first-expected slowdown in the US, as 
well  as  the  elevated  and  more  volatile  oil  and  commodity  prices.  These  risks,  although 
essentially out of our control, are real and could threaten our outlook. 
We therefore need to build on what we have so far achieved. We will continue to sharpen our 
tools  for  implementing  sound  monetary  policy.  We  will  also  continue  to  reinforce  sound 
structural reforms in the banking system to ensure its overall safety and efficiency as well as 
its  adaptability  and  inclusiveness,  as  evidenced  by  our  substantial  strides  in  propagating 
sustainable microfinance in increasingly innovative forms.  
Moreover, with the infrastructure and instruments of the domestic capital market now mostly 
in  place,  our  challenge  is  to  make  the  capital  market  a  truly  potent  alternative  source  of 
funding and investments for domestic industry. We are already seeing growing evidence of 
this.  
And in support of the financial reform agenda, we will continue to cooperate with institutions 
concerned on the passage of key legislations such as the amendment of the BSP Charter, 
the PERA Bill, and the CISA. I believe we all agree that the creation of a comprehensive and 
reliable credit information system is key to unlocking credit flows at more affordable rates that 
will benefit the micro, small and medium enterprises that dominate our economy and employ 
most of our people. 
One crucial challenge that we face, and for which I earnestly request your support, is to help 
ensure  that  we  improve  the  economy’s  absorptive  capacity  –  either  through  improving 
access to credit, by providing better risk management products and tools that would allow for 
project financing to flourish and, ladies and gentlemen by actually extending credit!  
This is the way, I believe, that the PROBLEM of PLENTY, which you have time and again 
heard  me  say,  would  no  longer  be  a  problem  of  plenty,  but  be  a  POT  of  PLENTY  for  the 
MANY. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2008
Indeed, our responsibility to the community extends beyond ensuring that the macroeconomy 
is stable, and that the banking community is sound.  
In this context, we believe that part of our role is to enhance financial literacy and education 
as well. Hence, we have partners and collaborators beyond the circle of banks and financial 
institutions.  
Our  financial  education program  targets  our  key  stakeholders,  including  overseas  Filipinos 
and their dependents as well as students, starting with our Grade I pupils.  
In this regard, we are inviting our banks and other institutions to join our financial education 
program  by  reproducing  the  materials  we  have  developed  to  ensure  its  widespread 
dissemination.  
For  your  information,  the  groundbreaking  joint  program  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  and  the 
Department  of  Education  calls  for  the  incorporation  of  lessons  in  saving  and  money 
management for all elementary students – from Grade I to Grade VI – starting this June, for 
schoolyear 2008-2009. I call on all of you, therefore, to help make this a success.  
We  believe  that  through  this  program,  we  shall  be  on  the  right  path  to  nurturing  a  new 
generation  of  Filipinos who  are  adept  in  managing  their  personal  as well  as  their  county’s 
finances. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  these  reforms  and  initiatives  will  continuously  propel  our  economy 
forward  to  ever  higher  growth  paths.  With  your  strong  support  and  cooperation,  we  can 
continue to fortify the economy, making it more resilient to ride out unpredictable winds of 
change and able to deliver another productive year. Together, let us continue to lay a solid 
and strong foundation for our country’s future.  
Thank you all.  
And now, let us offer a toast to a better and strong year for our economy and the Philippines 
as a whole. Mabuhay! 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 3
