Toshihiko Fukui: Overall review of the Bank of Japan’s conduct of 
monetary policy 
Statement  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  concerning  the  Bank's 
Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control, before the Committee on Financial 
Affairs, House of Representatives, Tokyo, 11 January 2008. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for 
the  first  half  of  fiscal  2007  to  the  Diet  on  December  11,  2007.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this 
opportunity to present an overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in Japan's economy 
I.  
Japan's economy is expanding moderately as a trend, although the pace of growth seems to 
be slowing mainly due to the drop in housing investment. 
Housing  investment  has  dropped  substantially,  affected  by  the  revised  Building  Standard 
Law  coming  into  force.  With  higher  materials  prices,  business  sentiment  has  become 
somewhat  cautious.  Exports,  however,  have  continued  to  increase  in  a  situation  where 
overseas economies continue to expand with momentum being gained across a wide range 
of  economies.  Business  fixed  investment  has  also  continued  to  trend  upward  against  the 
background  of  generally  high  corporate  profits.  Inventories  have  been  more  or  less  in 
balance with shipments, and there has not been adjustment pressure on production capacity 
and  labor.  With  regard  to  the  household  sector,  although  nominal  wages  per  worker  have 
been somewhat weak, employee income has been rising moderately with the increase in the 
number  of  employees.  In  this  situation,  private  consumption  has  been  firm.  Reflecting  the 
rise in domestic and external demand, production has continued to increase. 
These developments seem to indicate that a virtuous circle of growth in production, income, 
and spending has basically remained in place. Therefore, Japan's economy is expected to 
continue expanding moderately, although for the time being the pace of growth is likely to 
slow in a situation where housing investment is likely to remain sluggish. 
Global  financial  markets,  meanwhile,  have  remained  unsettled  due  to  the  U.S.  subprime 
mortgage  problem.  The  functioning  of  markets  for  securitized  products  has  deteriorated 
significantly  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  stock  markets  have  continued  to  be 
unstable  worldwide.  Moreover,  uncertainty  regarding  global  economic  developments,  for 
example, downside risks to the U.S. economy, has been increasing. The Bank considers it 
necessary to continue to monitor carefully developments in global financial markets and the 
global economy, as well as the effects from the rise in materials prices, such as the surge in 
crude oil prices. 
The  three-month  rate  of  change  in  the  domestic  corporate  goods  price  index  has  been 
positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of 
change in the consumer price index (excluding fresh food) became positive in October 2007, 
registering 0.1 percent in that month and 0.4 percent in November. As for the outlook, it is 
projected to follow a positive trend due to the rise in prices of petroleum products and food 
products in the short run and the positive output gap in the longer run. 
As for financial conditions, the environment for corporate finance has been accommodative. 
In  the  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets,  the  issuing  environment  has  been  favorable  as  a 
whole,  although  issuance  spreads  on  those  issued  by  firms  with  low  credit  ratings  have 
expanded  slightly.  The 
to  be 
lending  attitudes  of  private  banks  have  continued 
BIS Review 10/2008 
 1
accommodative. Under  these circumstances, the amount  outstanding of lending by private 
banks  has  been  increasing  moderately,  and  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  and  corporate 
bonds issued has been above the previous year's level. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
Regarding the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank's basic thinking has been that (1) given 
the extremely accommodative financial conditions, the level of interest rates is to be raised if 
Japan's economy is to follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability, and (2) the 
pace of increase in interest rates should be determined in accordance with improvements in 
the economic and price situation without any predetermined view. 
The Bank will continue to conduct appropriate monetary policy while confirming that Japan's 
economy  remains  likely  to  follow  a  path  of  sustainable  growth  under  price  stability  by 
monitoring economic activity and prices as well as the situation of financial markets at home 
and abroad and thoroughly assessing relevant upside and downside risk factors. 
Disposal of stocks purchased from financial institutions 
III.  
Although it was not a monetary policy measure, the Bank implemented a stock purchasing 
program  between  November  2002  and  September  2004.  Through  this  program,  the  Bank 
purchased  stocks  held  by  financial  institutions  in  order  to  encourage  them  to  reduce  their 
market risks associated with stockholdings. The Bank has started to dispose of these stocks 
in the market from October 2007, and the book value of the remaining stocks held by the 
Bank  was  approximately  1.5  trillion  yen  as  of  the  end  of  December  2007.  In  disposing  of 
them, the Bank has been extremely careful to avoid any financial losses and also to minimize 
the impact on the stock market by carefully spreading its sales out over time. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2008
