Caleb M Fundanga: Growing investor confidence in Zambia’s economy 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the 
Afreximbank/PTA Bank Financing Agreements Signing Ceremony, Lusaka, 10 June 2008. 
 • The President of AFREXIM Bank 
• The President of PTA Bank 
• Chief Executives and representatives of Financial Institutions Present 
• Distinguished ladies and gentlemen 
I am greatly honoured to be given an opportunity to make these brief remarks at this signing 
ceremony of two important financing agreements. I wish to extend a warm welcome to all of 
you  gathered  here  today,  particularly  those  who  have  travelled  from  outside  the  country.  I 
hope  that  you  will  not  only  have  a  pleasant  ceremony  today  but  also  have  fruitful 
deliberations  at  the  Euromoney  Conferences  starting  tomorrow  at  this  same  venue.  I  also 
hope you will find time to explore the beautiful scenery and experience the warm hospitality 
that Zambia has to offer. 
Mr  President,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  over  the  recent  past,  the  Zambian  economy  has 
performed relatively well. This is reflected in the overall macroeconomic stability which has 
been  underpinned  by  positive  growth  rates  in  real  Gross  Domestic  Product,  low  inflation, 
relative stability in the exchange rate of the Kwacha against major currencies, stable financial 
sector  and  improved  banking  services.  However,  although  incomes  have  generally 
increased, the challenge that still remains is that of meeting the basic needs of the majority of 
Zambians in order to uplift their living standards. This ceremony is therefore more than timely 
as the Government is working tirelessly towards empowering its citizens economically and at 
the same time increasingly diversifying the economy and promoting export led growth. It is 
for  this  reason,  Mr  President  that  the  Government  established  the  Citizen’s  Economic 
Empowerment  Fund  under  the  Citizens  Economic  Empowerment  Act  of  2006  in  order  to 
promote empowerment of citizens in various economic activities. 
This  signing  ceremony  is  yet  another  indication  of  the  growing  investor  confidence  in 
Zambia’s economy. You will be glad to note that the country’s total investment pledges rose 
more than ten times over to US $1.9 billion in 2007 from US $115.6 million recorded in the 
year  2001.  This  is  an  indication  of  the  vast  investment  potential  and  improving  investor 
confidence due to the macroeconomic stability particularly lower inflation and the sound fiscal 
polices that the Government has put in place. Institutional capacity has also been enhanced 
with  effective  supervision  of  the  financial  system  to  promote  efficient  operations  of  the 
banking sector. 
Mr President, the mining sector continues to be the major economic activity in the country. 
Following  the  liberalisation  of  the  sector  and  subsequent  privatisation  of  the  mines, 
Government has continued to facilitate mineral exploration by the private sector and created 
an  attractive  investment  environment  through  the  maintenance  of  macroeconomic  stability. 
This has sustained renewed interest in mining, reflected in a complete rebound in the mining 
sector on the Copperbelt and North Western province start up of new mines. New projects 
such as the Konkola Deep Mine, Lumwana Mine and Nickel Mining in the Southern Province 
have come on board in addition to other mining initiatives going on in most provinces of the 
country.  Another  key  development  in  the  sector  has  been  the  revival  of  zinc  production, 
once, one of Zambia’s metal exports in the 1970s. Sable Zinc of Kabwe (owned by Metorex) 
has commenced processing the mining dumps in Kabwe. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, although investment in the mining sector requires massive capital by 
large  conglomerates,  the  majority  of  our  citizens  are  increasingly  involved  in  the  sector 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 1
through the supply of goods and services to support the mines. However, the main challenge 
to the growth of this sector has been the availability of finance. Most companies struggle to 
find finances to meet their contract obligations. The need for financing is immense especially 
as the mining sector is growing year on year and will need to acquire new equipment and 
spare parts as the mining companies invest heavily in the development of new mines. 
It  is  gratifying  to  know  that  the  USD  50  million  facility  in  favour  of  the  Zambian  Mining 
Services Companies being signed today, is expected to assist major players in the supplies 
and services sub-sector of the mining industry to execute contracts with mining companies. I 
am also reliably informed that the facility will allow eligible companies access financing by 
assigning  receivables  for  execution  of  contracts  such  as  extraction  and  transportation  of 
waste materials, transportation of copper ore from the pits to the smelting plants and contract 
mining. I have no doubt that the facility will go a long way in supporting Zambian companies 
grow and actively participate in the economic development of the country. The Fund will not 
only  augment  the  supply  of  goods  and  services  to  the  mining  sector  but  also  introduce 
important institutions that are critically needed to ensure that the supply system in the sector 
is efficient and sustainable in the long run. 
The USD 80 million in favour of the Export Fund of Zambia has come at a time when the 
Government is increasingly promoting the diversification of the economy through export led 
growth. Strengthening of the external sector performance has continued as evidenced by an 
improved  balance  of  payments  position.  This  has  been  on  account  of  higher  foreign 
exchange  inflows  emanating  from  increased  metal  and  non-traditional  exports  earnings 
coupled with investor confidence in the Zambian economy. The nontraditional exports have 
continued to record unprecedented growth over the past couple of years. For instance, NTEs 
rose  by  63.4%  to  US  $924.4  million  in  2007  from  US  $564.7  million  in  2005  with 
commodities, such as, sugar, copper wire and tobacco, coupled with receipts from tourism 
making notable contributions. 
The  growth  of  this  sector  is  expected  to  be  further  bolstered  by  the  establishment  of  the 
Multi-Facility Economic Zones in Lusaka and Chambishi to further diversify the economy and 
promote  trade,  stimulate  export  activities,  technology,  skills  transfer  and  job  creation.  In 
pursuing  an  export-led  growth  strategy,  the  economic  zones  would  actively  promote  value 
addition  in  identified  specific  products,  such  as,  copper,  vegetables,  tobacco,  gemstones, 
cotton  yarn,  leather  products, sugar  and  oil  cakes,  of  which  the  country  has  a  competitive 
advantage. For instance, there has been a large increase in tobacco production, which has 
led  to  increased  export  earnings.  Unfortunately,  much  of  the  tobacco  is  exported  in  a  raw 
form with very little treatment or processing in the country. Significant investments in plant 
and machinery for value-addition will therefore be needed to offset this scenario. Thus, with 
expected large investments in Economic Zones and Export Fund facilities like the one we are 
witnessing today, Zambia’s competitiveness through value addition is expected to improve. 
Mr President let me also commend all the institutions involved in the two syndicated loans. It 
is  gratifying  to  note  that  these  facilities  have  been  made  possible  due  to  the  partnerships 
between the local financial institutions and international ones. I commend such partnerships 
and challenge other local institutions to enter into similar arrangements to reduce the cost of 
borrowing and promote growth in Zambia. Congratulations should be extended to the Zambia 
National Commercial Bank, ALS Capital and Calag Capital, AFREXIM, PTA Bank and Loita 
Capital to name but a few for the initiative. 
The Bank of Zambia has continued to encourage local banks and other financial institutions 
to partner with international financial institutions and other banks in Africa, Europe and Asia. 
In this regard, in December 2007, the Bank organised a forum to exchange information on 
sources of finance in Lusaka. The forum was well attended and the international institutions 
showcased  their  products  to  their  local  counterparts.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  institutions 
present here today such as Zambia National Commercial Bank, AFREXIM Bank, PTA Bank, 
ALS Capital and Loita Capital were all represented at the forum. I imagine that such fora are 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2008
instrumental  in  structuring  tangible  financing  agreements  like  the  ones  we  are  witnessing 
today. 
Finally, I would, like to request all parties involved in the management of these facilities to 
ensure that the funds reach the intended beneficiaries and that controls are put in place to 
avoid  abuse.  The  beneficiaries  should  also  ensure  that  their  projects  are  implemented 
effectively  and  expeditiously  without  any  delay.  In  this  regard,  may  I  request  the  Zambian 
Mining Services Companies and the Export Fund of Zambia to take necessary measures in a 
timely manner to fulfill the requirements for declaring these loans effective and for starting 
implementation. 
I  would  like  to  wish  all  those  involved  success  in  their  management  of  the  funds  and 
implementation of the projects so that we can ensure that the development impacts expected 
from  these  important  initiatives  become  a  reality  for  the  intended  beneficiaries  and  the 
country at large. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 3
