Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on the current financial market 
correction 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
International Capital Market Association’s Annual Conference, Vienna, 15 May 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at the invitation of the renowned International Capital 
Market Association on the occasion of its 40th Annual Conference. Little did you know back 
in  June  2007,  when  the  invitation  was  extended,  that  the  recent  financial  turbulence  and 
volatility would provide such an important backdrop to my reflections on the subject today. 
I need not remind this audience that we are still some way away from having the full benefit 
of  hindsight  on  the  ongoing  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets.  Both  private  and  public 
institutions across the globe are still deeply immersed in tackling all the consequences on the 
financial system of the continuing process of financial deleveraging.  
Let  me  first  recall  that  public  authorities  –  and  I  would  include  here  the  European  Central 
Bank (ECB) through its semi-annual Financial Stability Review – issued clear warnings on 
the vulnerabiliies that were building up on account of a significant under-pricing of risks in 
some  segments  of  the  financial  markets  already  in  early  2007.  Equivalent  warnings  were 
largely communicated by other central banks, and I had myself, as Chairperson of the global 
economy meeting of Central Bank Governors, regularly expressed the view, in 2006 and at 
the beginning of 2007, on behalf of my fellow Governors, that our judgement was that there 
was a significant under-pricing of risks in general in global finance. 
We do all what we can at the ECB to be equally forward-looking in both our actions and in 
helping  delineate  the  solutions  to  the  present  quagmire.  I  trust  that  in  the  process  of 
characterising the nature of the turmoil it will also become clear what the rationale has been 
behind the response of the central banking community since its eruption early in the summer 
of 2007, and how a consensus is being built on the key policy lessons and initiatives that will 
guide the efforts of private institutions, market participants, central bankers and government 
agencies in the period ahead. 
Factors underlying the recent financial market turmoil 
Whilst  the  trigger  for  the  turmoil  was  clearly  a  myriad  of  problems  associated  with  the  US 
housing  market  correction,  the  sharpness  and  speed  of  the  contagion  to  unrelated  market 
segments revealed vulnerabilities with a nature and complexity that had not always been well 
understood. A constellation of – in my view – three broad factors already individually known 
to market participants and policy makers alike well in advance of the turmoil have reinforced 
one  another  in  a  way  that  almost  nobody  could  have  foreseen.  These  factors  are  an 
abundance  of  liquidity  that  underpinned  a  build  up  of  leverage  in  the  financial  system,  an 
increasingly  interwoven  and  complex  financial  system  the  growth  of  which  was  fed  by 
financial innovation, and some financial agents’ incentives that were aligned against prudent 
practices. 
We should not lose sight of the fact that the first factor – and the driving force behind the 
substantial rise in financial leverage – was a significant excess of savings over investment in 
the  global  economy.  In  time,  this  abundance  of  capital  chasing  investment  drove  an 
increasingly  aggressive  “hunt  for  yield”  which  was  reflected  in  a  surge  of  demand  for  and 
supply  of,  among  other  assets,  highly  complex  financial  products.  As  has  been  argued  by 
many  in  the  international  community,  the  period  preceding  the  current  financial  turmoil 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 1
shares many of the characteristics of previous historical episodes, whereby there is a sudden 
recognition and recoil from underlying credits whose quality was in fact worsening for years.  
Clearly, however, there has been much more to the current episode than simply a surge of 
asset prices in an environment of steadily rising financial market liquidity. A second element 
in the constellation of vulnerabilities was the ubiquity of interlinkages both within and across 
financial systems. Testimony of this evolution, even when compared to just a decade ago, 
are the speed and degree of complexity of today’s capital flows; the relative variety, obscurity 
and  interrelationship  of  many  classes  of  financial  instruments;  and  the  intertwined 
relationship of a growing variety of financial institutions. This clearly placed a heavy burden 
on the risk management procedures of large financial intermediaries. 
I share the view that modern financial intermediation has proven that it has the potential to 
effectively  spread  risk  and  it  has  undoubtedly  promoted  economic  efficiency  and  made 
capital  available  to  productive  sectors  that  would  have  otherwise  not  had  access  to  any. 
Alas, the evolution of the financial system not only facilitated an expansion of the array of 
financial assets available to investors, it also seeded the fragility that later materialised in the 
unprecedented  speed  and  reach  of  contagion  during  the  unwinding  of  leverage.  The 
challenge lies in preventing the system from feeding on itself through a spiralling process of 
leveraging. Financial complexity is an inevitable consequence of increasingly complex and 
global economic activity, and we must find ways of working out the necessary checks and 
balances. 
Abundant  liquidity  and  financial  complexity  embody  in  my  view  the  driving  force  and  the 
scene underlying the process of financial leveraging and its unwinding, but the full picture of 
the  weaknesses 
financial 
intermediation  model  is  not  complete  without  saying  something  about  financial  players’ 
incentive structures – the third factor. Strictly speaking the purpose of the financial system 
is  to  write,  manage  and  trade  claims  on  future  cash  flows  for  the  rest  of  the  economy,  a 
purpose that increasingly fell victim to a game for fees, very short-term apparent profits, and 
arbitraging  regulation.  The  “shadow  banking  system” 
that  rapidly  emerged  as  an 
excrescence of the formal banking sector – unlike its better understood and regulated sibling 
– rested on a poorly understood system of credence (provided by rating agencies) and the 
false perception that the only way for asset prices was upward. Indeed, most remarkably ex-
post, it did not have to set aside capital against the risk of things going wrong, as eventually 
they did when euphoria turned into sobriety. 
Prior  to  the  July  2007  rude  awakening  from  a  false  sense  of  security  of  financial  markets 
participants,  observers  and  regulators  at  large,  these  three  broad  factors  contrived  a 
convergence  of  mechanisms  that  resulted  in  the  upward  spiralling  of  asset  prices,  further 
leveraging,  increasing  complexity  and  shrinking  transparency.  In  closer  immediacy,  they 
together also shaped the particular mechanisms that unleashed the turmoil, First, it took one 
substantial  shock  to  a  single  market  segment  (US  sub-prime  related  credit)  to  trigger  a 
broad-based  drive  to  re-price  credit  risk  across  all  classes  of  financial  instruments  and 
involving a wide range of financial institutions. Second, the process of adjusting risk positions 
in the financial sector was hindered by a – in some cases complete – breakdown in the price 
discovery process across instruments owing to the lack of understanding of the distribution 
and  magnitude  of 
the 
unprecedented system-wide dry-up of liquidity that resulted from reductions in position-taking 
by  major  financial  intermediaries  fed  back  into  the  overall  uncertainty,  thus  escalating 
measured risk and frustrating the very same efforts towards risk reduction. 
that  have  been  unearthed 
the  “originate-to-distribute” 
instruments.  Third, 
risks  underlying 
the  various 
financial 
in 
The response of the central banking community to the turmoil  
Reflecting their different mandates and objectives, the central bank community responded to 
interbank  market  strains  in  various  ways.  We  at  the  Eurosystem  made  the  point at  a  very 
early  stage  that  we  strictly  maintained  the  distinction  between  setting  the  monetary  policy 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2008
stance  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  medium  term,  and  liquidity  decisions  taken  in  the 
course of implementing this stance. This distinction serves to isolate signals of the monetary 
policy  stance  from  the  impact  on  very  short-term  interest  rates  of  the  noise  introduced  by 
liquidity  movements.  At  times  of  market  stress,  underlining  this  distinction  is  even  more 
important  than  in  “normal  times”.  In  circumstances  of  market  stress,  liquidity  management 
may need to be more active in order to contribute to the smooth functioning of the money 
market and to ensure that very short-term money market rates remain close to the minimum 
bid rate of the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations. 
Throughout the period of financial market turmoil, and since the very first hours of the start of 
the  money  market  turbulences,  the  ECB  has  promptly  communicated  to  the  market  its 
liquidity policy intentions and explained its actions. 
It  was  evident  from  the  start  that  credit  institutions  requirement  to  fulfil  their  reserve 
requirement  on  average  throughout  the  maintenance  period,  the  so-called  averaging 
provision,  was  now  used  with  a  preference  to  do  so  early  within  the  period.  Liquidity  on 
different days of a reserve maintenance period was no longer substitutable, and short-term 
interest rates tended rather to behave as if each individual bank perceived its distribution of 
liquidity shocks as strongly biased to the tight side, even if this was of course not the case at 
an aggregate level. 
The first response of the Eurosystem during the turmoil was to try to keep very short-term 
money  market rates near policy rates through more active liquidity management. With this 
objective in mind, the ECB adjusted the distribution of liquidity supply over the course of a 
maintenance period, by increasing the supply at the beginning of the period and reducing it 
later  in  the  period  (the  so-called  frontloading).  The  average  supply  of  liquidity  remained 
unchanged over the whole reserve maintenance period, in line with the Eurosystem’s aim to 
provide  to  the  banking  system  over  each  maintenance  period  the  exact  amount  of  total 
liquidity it needs to fulfil its liquidity deficit. The average size of the Eurosystem’s refinancing 
operations for the maintenance periods since August 2007 remained at around €450 billion, 
as in the first semester of 2007. 
Second, since the 9th of August 2007, the Eurosystem has made more frequent use of fine-
tuning operations than in “normal times”, both in order to inject further liquidity early in the 
maintenance  period  in  addition,  when  necessary,  to  that  provided  in  the  main  refinancing 
operations  but  also  to  absorb  excess  liquidity,  in  order  to  steer  the  EONIA  close  to  the 
minimum bid rate. 
As a third measure, the Eurosystem increased the share of refinancing provided via longer-
term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs),  initially  with  a  three-month  maturity  and,  since  April 
2008, also with a six–month maturity, and reduced the share provided via the one-week main 
refinancing  operations  (MROs).  Accordingly,  the  total  amount  of  outstanding  refinancing 
remained unchanged, while the average maturity was extended. 
As a result of this liquidity policy, the Eurosystem maintained control over short-term money 
market  rates,  supported  banks’  access  to  liquidity  and  the  general  functioning  of  the  euro 
money  market,  without  the  need  for  making  any  structural  change  to  its  operational 
framework for monetary policy implementation. 
Some  central  banks  conducted  additional  actions,  which  mainly  included  expanding  the 
range  of  eligible  collateral  and  of  counterparties.  The  ECB,  which  had  accepted  relatively 
broad ranges of collateral since the start of the euro, did not need to adjust their collateral 
framework. Indeed, owing to its acceptance of a broad range of collateral as well as the large 
number  of  eligible  counterparties,  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  framework  has  been  well 
equipped  to  support  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  during  the  ongoing  market 
turbulence. The share of deposited collateral not used to cover credit from monetary policy 
operations  has  remained  high.  This  suggests  that  availability  of  collateral  has  not  been  a 
constraint on the Euroystem’s counterparties in the wake of the turmoil. 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 3
As the turmoil went on, central banks strengthened their cooperation, first through enhanced 
information  exchange  and  collective  monitoring  of  market  developments  and  later  on  by 
coordinated steps to provide liquidity. In response to a situation where some euro area banks 
were reported to be concerned about the limited availability of funding denominated in US 
dollars, the ECB agreed with the US Federal Reserve to grant loans in dollars to euro area 
banks in connection with the Federal Reserve new Term Auction Facility (TAF) in US dollar.1 
The  first  two  operations,  for  an  amount  of  USD  10  billion  each,  settled  on  20  and  27 
December 2007 and were renewed on 17 and 31 January 2008. Similar operations were also 
carried out by the Swiss National Bank. As continued pressure was observed in the money 
market, the ECB announced on 11 March 2008 its intention to resume carrying out US dollar 
liquidity providing operations in connection with the Federal Reserve Term Auction Facility, 
every second week for as long as needed, and for an increased amount of USD 15 billion 
each, which was further increased to USD 25 billion each, on 2 May 2008. These liquidity-
providing  operations  did  not  have  a  direct  effect  on  euro  liquidity  conditions,  but  aimed  at 
improving global funding conditions.  
The G-10 central banks have since continued to work very closely together and to consult 
regularly on liquidity pressures in funding markets. It is important to stress that the action in 
connection with the TAF marked the first multilateral central bank co-operation in the money 
market field, a market which is central to the implementation of a central bank’s monetary 
policy. 
Key lessons and policy initiatives  
Substantial weaknesses in the functioning of financial institutions and markets were revealed 
by  the  episodes  of  turbulence,  high  level  of  volatility  and  overshooting  on  a  number  of 
markets. The convergence of such diverse factors embodies the first “real magnitude” stress-
test of today’s global financial system. In retrospect, the shock to the global financial system 
following the burst of the internet bubble was, all things considered, relatively modest.  
Various streams of work co-ordinated at the EU level aim at strengthening the supervisory 
and financial stability arrangements – including the introduction of a European mandate to 
national supervisors, the clarification and strengthening of the functioning of the committees 
of supervisors at the level of the 27 nations, the wider use of colleges of supervisors to re-
inforce the supervision of cross-border banking groups and the approval of a Memorandum 
of  Understanding  on  cross-border  cooperation  in  financial  crisis  situations  between  all 
relevant  authorities  in  the  EU  (namely  supervisory  authorities,  central  banks  and  finance 
ministries). Similar reflections have been launched in the US, for example let me mention the 
recent proposals issued by U.S. Treasury Secretary Paulson to strengthen the US financial 
regulatory structure, and are being considered in other nations. 
Equally  or  more  importantly  has  been  the  agreement  at  an  international  level  on  the 
appropriate  methodology  to  identify  the  common  lessons  on  a  co-ordinated  basis  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic  as  well  as  on  both  sides  of  the  Pacific.  The  present  episode  of 
turbulence is a global phenomenon, and thus only a global response can be effective. After 
the  Asian  crisis,  at  the  initiative  of  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  was  created  as  the  informal  grouping  where  a  synthetic 
diagnosis  of  the  state  of  global  finance  could  be  carried  out  with  a  view  to  identifying  the 
potential weaknesses affecting the international financial system and areas for improvement. 
The FSF “Report on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience” recently presented to the 
                                                 
1   The  Eurosystem  loans  were  financed  through  a  currency  arrangement  (swap  line)  between  the  Federal 
Reserve and the ECB, according to  which the Eurosystem provided US dollar loans  with a maturity of one 
month,  at  a  fixed  rate  equal  to  the  marginal  rate  of  the  simultaneous  Federal  Reserve  tenders,  to  its 
counterparties against collateral eligible for Eurosystem credit operations. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2008
international community – and in particular to the G7 and to the International Monetary and 
Financial  Committee  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  –  presents  a  number  of  policy 
recommendations  to  avoid  the  recurrence  in  the  future  of  similar  financial  stresses.  It  is 
remarkable  that  we  have  a  consensus  at  international  community  level  on  implementing 
these recommendations with determination and in line with the recommended timeline. The 
community of central banks will be particularly alert for these recommendations to enter into 
force. In this context, allow me to recall those recommendations that have been identified as 
immediate priorities:  
• 
Financial institutions should fully and promptly disclose their risk exposures, write-
downs  and  fair  value  estimates  for  complex  and  illiquid  instruments  in  their 
upcoming mid-year reporting. They should do so consistently with leading disclosure 
practices as set out in the FSF report.  
The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and other relevant standard 
setters  should  take  urgent  action  to  improve  the  accounting  and  disclosure 
standards  for  off-balance  sheet  entities  and  to  enhance  guidance  on  fair  value 
accounting, particularly on valuing financial instruments in periods of stress.  
Financial  institutions  should  strengthen  their  risk  management  practices,  including 
rigorous  stress  testing,  under  the  support  of  supervisors’  oversight.  Financial 
institutions should also strengthen their capital positions as needed.  
By mid-2008, the Basel Committee should issue revised liquidity risk management 
guidelines and IOSCO should revise its code of conduct for credit rating agencies.  
   I  should  also  recall  those  main  areas  where  important  recommendations  have  to  be 
implemented  either  by  end-2008  or  at  the  latest  by  2009,  namely  revising  capital 
requirements under Pillar I of Basel II (e.g. certain aspects of the securitisation framework), 
strengthening  supervision  and  management  of  liquidity  risk  for  banks,  ensuring  effective 
supervisory  review  under  Pillar  II,  enhancing  transparency  and  valuation,  improving  the 
quality of credit ratings for structured products, strengthening authorities’ responsiveness to 
risk and enhancing robust arrangements for dealing with stress in the financial system.  
Now, expeditious and effective implementation is of the essence. Both should be facilitated 
by the fact that many recommendations are made by those authorities and entities mandated 
to apply them.  
Overall,  I  would  like  to  underline  two  broad  lines  of  actions  which  cut  across  many 
recommendations by the FSF. 
Firstly, augment transparency, as it is not only necessary to make the markets more efficient 
and  to  optimise  the  allocation  of  capital,  but  it  is  also  the  best  insurance  policy  against 
irrational  herd  behaviour  and  unjustified  contagion  in  times  of  stress.  The  present 
turbulences  have,  once  more,  demonstrated  that  opacity  regarding  the  stance  of  markets, 
financial instruments or financial institutions is a recipe for catastrophe. In the prelude to an 
episode of uncertainty and turbulence, absence of transparency inevitably triggers contagion 
and negative herd behaviour – we saw this at the heart of the Asian crisis, we very much 
also see it at the heart of the present episode. Transparency is essential both for financial 
instruments – sophisticated structured products, asset-backed securities, etc. – and for the 
financial institutions themselves. The absence of pertinent, credible and reliable information 
drives  market  participants  to  assume  the  worst  possible  hypothesis  on  those  financial 
instruments or institutions at stake and to act accordingly. 
Secondly, reduce pro-cyclicality, as it embodies two important features of global finance that 
are particularly adverse from a financial stability stand point, namely an emphasis to short-
term considerations and an asymmetry in the response given to booms and busts. While in 
normal times the elements of pro-cyclicality built into global finance are less obvious, acute 
episodes  of  boom  and  bust  make  these  factors  particularly  visible.  Human  nature  being 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 5
human nature, it is probably at the heart of the spontaneous pro-cyclical attitude of market 
participants  triggering  successive  bipolar  phases  of  exuberance  and  despair.  But  it  is  also 
true that some elements of the regulatory framework for the financial system as well as the 
behaviour  of  public  authorities  may  contribute  to  augmenting  the  amplitude  of  the 
fluctuations. We can find such elements of pro-cyclicality in the set of new rules for capital 
adequacy for banks as well as for insurance companies which are more risk-sensitive, in the 
accounting  rules  and  in  the  attitude  of  the  supervisory  authorities  inclined  to  tighten 
prudential standards more in times of difficulty than during the preceeding boom phases. I 
expect  that  the  planned  work  of  the  international  community  in  this  area  will  provide  a 
welcome contribution to reducing the degree of potential pro-cyclicality associated with the 
functioning of global finance.  
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 61/2008
