Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Breakthroughs and break through 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  “Bank  Marketing  Summit”  &  Induction  of  BMAP  of 
Officers, Manila, 29 January 2008. 
 The  officers  and  members  of  the  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the  Philippines  (BMAP), 
colleagues in the banking industry, special guests. Good morning!  
I am pleased that BMAP has chosen a challenging and exciting theme for this year’s Bank 
Marketing Summit: Breakthroughs & Break Through.  
To me, this signifies a strong commitment to raise the bar of service to bank clients; to set 
the pace for responsive and responsible marketing; to be more innovative and efficient in the 
way  you  communicate  and  LISTEN  to  your  clients;  and  to  incorporate  social  responsibility 
objectives in your marketing programs.  
You  must  realize  that  I  have  high  expectations  insofar  as  the  BMAP  is  concerned.  I  will 
explain why.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  BMAP.  2007  represents  a  significant  turning  point  for  our 
economy, with our economic fundamentals described as the best in two decades. In fact, our 
economy  as  measured  by  GDP  is  the  best  we  had  in  three  decades!  Inflation  has  been 
maintained at a low level; so have interest rates. At the same time, the banking sector had 
one  of  its  best  years  in  2007.  That  we  achieved  this  in  the  face  of  many  challenges… 
including record high oil prices makes this economic breakthrough truly exceptional.  
Of  course  this  did  not  happen  overnight.  I  will  not  go  into  details  because  as  responsible 
bankers I am sure you keep abreast of economic developments. I will therefore focus on the 
breakthroughs we have achieved in the banking sector.  
The Bangko Sentral in close coordination with banks and other institutions continued to work 
on  key  reforms  to  ensure  adherence  to  the  tenets  of  good  governance  for  fairness, 
accountability and transparency; we continued to align our practices with global standards, 
including international accounting and financial reporting; we started implementing Basel II 
prescriptions  for  risk-based  capitalization;  and  we  continued  to  expand  the  reach  of  our 
banking system to make it accessible and meaningful to the unbanked.  
The Bangko Sentral has also relaxed the rules governing derivatives activities of banks. The 
aim is to provide a framework where banks and trust entities could expand opportunities for 
financial risk management and investment diversification through prudent use of derivatives. 
This is consistent with the BSP’s continuing thrust to give banks greater flexibility to respond 
to changing market opportunities and allow them to take risks so long as they demonstrate 
the ability to manage and price for those risks.  
As  members  of  a  key  organization  in  the  banking  community,  your  work  as  marketing 
professionals  as  front  liners  is  vital  to  the  continuity  of  our  financial  reform  agenda.  It  is 
important to remember this.  
For even as we achieved a significant breakthrough in our economy, with Moody’s validating 
this with an upgrade in our outlook from stable to positive, there will always be challenges we 
have to deal with. The global economy for instance continues to be adversely affected by the 
lingering effects of the sub-prime mortgage crisis and an economic slowdown in the US, the 
world’s biggest economy.  
This  year,  therefore,  we  expect  BMAP  to  be  more  deeply  involved  in  building  on  these 
reforms to further enhance the risk management process, corporate governance, disclosure 
standards, and capital adequacy.  
BIS Review 12/2008 
 1
One of our continuing priorities is to broaden access of SMEs and the microfinance sector to 
credit.  BSP’s  recent  reform  initiatives  toward  this  end  include  liberalized  branching; 
expansion of FCDU and trust license to include qualified rural banks; and the re-opening of 
quasi-banking license. 
We  also  continue  to  work  on  a  sound  market  infrastructure  to  ensure  secure  and  timely 
completion of transactions, thereby minimizing systemic risk and enhancing the integrity of 
financial  transactions.  This  is  being  implemented  through  the  promotion  of  progressive 
policies on e-commerce and payments system innovation.  
You  can  expect  that  our  policy  thrusts  will  remain  geared  toward  acceptable  risk 
management  practices  that  enable  financial  industry  participants  to  better  assess  and 
manage risks without unduly hampering the ability to innovate. 
The  BSP  will  also  continue  to  take  a  proactive  role  in  accelerating  development  of  the 
domestic capital market. While we have made significant strides in speeding up the reform 
process,  there  is  still  a  lot  of  work  to  do.  The  biggest  challenge  right  now  is  to  make  the 
domestic capital market a truly potent alternative source of funding and outlet for investments 
for  corporates  and  other  entities.  The  synergy  between  the  banking  system  and  a  vibrant 
capital market should create much more opportunities for service and product innovation.  
Another crucial challenge that we face, and for which I earnestly request your support, is to 
help ensure that we improve our economy by actually promoting and extending credit! 
This is the way, I believe, that the PROBLEM of PLENTY – strong dollar inflows, for instance 
– which you have time and again heard me say would no longer be a problem of plenty, but 
be a POT of PLENTY for the MANY. 
In other words, ladies and gentlemen of the BMAP, there is so much going on in the banking 
sector and you are in a position to help your respective banks and our economy benefit from 
it.  
Nevertheless, I must remind you that even as you get involved in the sometimes complex 
details of these reforms you must not forget your customers. I mean, the basic requirements 
of your customers.  
I  remember  that  I  have  asked  BMAP  before  to  take  the  lead  in  informing  their  ATM 
customers of their service fees. Sure, there has been compliance, but I wish there would be 
more active and visible compliance.  
My other request is for BMAP to initiate the posting of the contact details of their high level 
officers who can receive customer feedback that are often overlooked at the branch level. I 
hope  to  see  more  bank  premises  with  this  simple  guide.  As  it  is,  the  Bangko  Sentral 
continues  to  receive  complaints  about  bank  services.  This  tells  us  that  some  of  your 
customers  are  not  getting  the  attention  they  need  and  they  do  not  know  the  bank  officers 
they can call or e-mail.  
Again, this is a challenge that I am sure BMAP can manage quite effectively.  
Finally,  I  invite  all  of  you  to  participate  actively  in  our  financial  education  program.  Our 
financial  education  program  targets  our  key  stakeholders,  including  overseas  Filipinos  and 
their dependents, students, and the general public.  
I know that BMAP officers have been meeting with our Corporate Affairs Office on how they 
can support this important advocacy. In particular, a joint program of the Bangko Sentral and 
the  Department  of  Education  calls  for  the  incorporation  of  lessons  in  saving  and  money 
management for all elementary students – from Grade I to Grade VI – starting this June, for 
school year 2008-2009. I call on all of you, therefore, to help make this a success.  
You can do this by helping print the materials we have developed to ensure its widespread 
dissemination. You can also help by developing parallel campaigns that will develop the habit 
of saving and investing.  
2 
 BIS Review 12/2008
For your information, we have about 14 million students in the elementary levels, 12.8 million 
of whom are in public schools. This is a big and solid critical mass! This also represents a big 
base of potential customers for your banks.  
Equally  important,  if  we  are  successful,  we  shall  be  on  the  right  path  to  nurturing  a  new 
generation of Filipinos who are adept in managing their own resources and in strengthening 
the country’s financial system. Let us cooperate therefore in implementing this breakthrough 
program.  
Indeed,  it  should  be  another  busy  year  for  all  of  us.  I  therefore  call  on  the  officers  and 
members of BMAP to assist the Bangko Sentral in ensuring the successful implementation of 
these  reforms  and  advocacies.  We  will  again  count  on  your  support  and  commitment  to 
these programs.  
Together, let us forge an even stronger partnership as we continue to foster stability in the 
financial system and secure more sustainable and higher growth path for our economy.  
Finally,  I  thank  your  outgoing  officers  –  led  by  Bobby  Banaag  –  for  a  job  well  done  and 
congratulate the new set of BMAP officers – headed by Mike Villareal – on the successive 
breakthroughs they will set during their term.  
Mabuhay ang BMAP! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 3
