Axel A Weber: Financial markets and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
University of Constance, Constance, 25 June 2008. 
 Introduction  
1  
Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here,  at  the  University  of  Constance,  where  I  myself  studied 
economics  some  30  years  ago.  When  I  finished  my  studies,  the  university’s  postgraduate 
studies  programme  “International  Economic  Relations”  had  not  yet  been  launched.  In 
retrospect, I think there were many interesting topics to study in the late 70s and early 80s. 
Think of the two oil price crises of the 1970s or the Great Inflation in the USA. In fact, both 
topics are worryingly relevant today – even though the background story is now a different 
one and our theoretical and empirical insights have advanced significantly.  
I would therefore like to come back to both issues later on when I will also be able to talk 
about  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Eurosystem.  Before  doing  so,  however,  I 
would  like  to  focus  on  yet  another  topic:  financial  markets  and  central  banks.  My  choice 
seems  a  natural  one  given  the  extent  to  which  global  financial  markets  have  been 
characterised  by  turmoil  and  volatility  over  the  past  11 months.  Indeed,  what  began  as  a 
fairly contained deterioration in the (relatively small) US-subprime market in August last year 
has rapidly developed into a severe test of the stability of the global financial system.  
Financial  markets  perform  an  indispensable  task  for  economic  welfare.  They  provide  the 
services  and  products  by  which  the  intertemporal  allocation  of  savings  and  investments  is 
accomplished.  As  such,  financial  market  stability  is  a  precondition  for  macroeconomic 
stability and economic growth. In addition, monetary policy is largely transmitted to the real 
economy and the price level through financial market operations. It should therefore come as 
no  surprise  then  that  central  banks  have  always  had  a  keen  interest  in  financial  market 
developments. And, most certainly, there was no need for the recent financial market turmoil 
to drive home that point. I have chosen two topical questions to guide me in my following 
remarks:  First,  what  are  the  underlying  causes  of  the  recent  financial  market  turmoil? 
Second, how can central banks help avoid disturbances in the financial system?  
The underlying causes of the recent financial market turmoil 
2 
When looking at the underlying causes of the recent tension in the global financial system, is 
one particular development to blame as a clear cause? In fact, numerous culprits have been 
put forward: securitisation, quality of risk management, credit rating agencies, compensation 
schemes,  accounting  standards  –  to  name  just  a  few.  Against  this  background,  I  am 
extremely  sceptical  about  monocausal  explanations.  Instead,  I  believe  that  a  cocktail  of 
various ingredients triggered the shock waves for the financial system.  
Many  ingredients  in  this  recipe  stem  from  innovations  in  financial  intermediation  or,  to  be 
more  precise,  from  a  combination  of  new  and  complex  instruments  to  transfer  credit  risks 
and  the  “originate  and  distribute”  business  model.  The  disruptions  of  the  previous  few 
months have highlighted the increased complexity of credit risk transfer (CRT) instruments. 
This  would  have  been  less  problematic  if  the  risk  management  systems  of  financial 
intermediaries  had  kept  pace  with  the  changing  characteristics  of  the  financial  landscape. 
However, not all of them did. At the same time, the investor base has become more diffuse, 
with some participants being only recent entrants to the CRT markets. All of this suggests 
that several investors may not have fully appreciated the higher-risk nature of CRT products 
and were therefore overly optimistic in their assessments of the risks involved.  
BIS Review 82/2008 
 1
As  you  probably  know,  the  securitisation  activity  was  promoted  by  the  “originate  and 
distribute”  model  at  large  banks  and  securities  firms.  On  a  positive  note,  the  securitising, 
tranching  and  trading  of  credit  risks  has  led  to  a  fairly  broad  risk  dispersion.  But  it  has 
become clear that the “originate and distribute” model can actually improve the resilience of 
the financial system only if a high-quality standard is maintained at all levels of the transfer 
process and no new concentrations of risk arise. The past few years, however, have been 
characterised by a series of distorted incentives which has manifested itself in lax origination 
standards  for  products  such  as  subprime  mortgages  and  an  excessive  reliance  on  credit 
ratings by some investors.  
As a final point, let me add that, at the end of the day, the “originate and distribute” model led 
–  rather  unexpectedly  –  to  a  huge  reintermediation  of  credit  risks  on  to  banks’  balance 
sheets. In other words, the financial market turmoil has demonstrated that removing assets 
from  bank  balance  sheets  does  not  mean  that  banks  are  no  longer  exposed  to  the  risks 
associated  with  them.  Hence,  risk  management  systems  should  reconsider  their  view  of 
reputational  risk,  credit  guarantees  and  credit  lines  to  off-balance-sheet  entities  such  as 
structured  investment  vehicles  and  conduits.  In  a  nutshell,  securitisation,  as  Claudio  Borio 
aptly  put  it  in  2008,  has,  in  the  end,  “distributed  fear  rather  than  risks”.  However,  while 
financial innovation has undoubtedly increased vulnerabilities in the global financial system, 
there  is  more  to  the  present  financial  market  turmoil  than  meets  the  eye  of  the  casual 
observer.  
The  proliferation  of  structured  finance  products  and  the  “originate  and  distribute”  model 
would arguably not have been possible without the benign economic and financial backdrop 
notably robust global economic growth, low inflation, a low level of interest rates, low default 
rates  and  rising  asset  prices  in  many  countries,  not  just  in  the  USA.  This  Goldilocks 
economy,  where  conditions  were  neither  “too  cold”  nor  “too  hot”,  had  –  as  a  side  effect  – 
masked  the  gradual  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  Hence,  while  lending  and  risk-taking 
experienced  rapid  growth,  words  of  warning  by  central  banks  and  other  institutions  were 
largely  disregarded  on  the  basis  of  “this  time,  developments  are  surely  different  from  the 
past”. The fact that minor financial market tensions in the spring of 2005 and in 2006 had left 
financial  markets  more  or  less  unscathed  only  reinforced  that  impression.  Once,  however, 
the  vulnerabilities  in  the  global  financial  system  were  revealed  in  August  last  year  and 
financial 
the  scene  changed 
considerably. 
imbalances  started  unwinding,  we  all  witnessed 
that 
Financial stability analysis at central banks 
3 
For some time now, there has been much talk about financial stability and the respective role 
of central banks, and so I would like to address this topic here. A widely accepted definition 
of financial stability is the ability of the financial system to perform its key functions efficiently 
– namely, the allocation of capital and risks and the settlement of payments and securities 
transactions.  These  functions  must  be  fulfilled  smoothly  not  only  in  normal  times  but  also 
during  periods  of  structural  adjustment  and  stress.  Stable  financial  systems  reduce 
uncertainty  and  therefore  develop  positive  external  effects  on  the  real  economy,  thereby 
contributing to greater economic prosperity. However, the reverse is also true: Instability in 
the financial system can have negative external effects and therefore cause high economic 
costs. 
Contributing to financial stability is thus part of a central bank’s core area of responsibility, in 
order to ensure price stability and avert negative repercussions of the financial system on the 
real  economy.  Just  over  a  year  ago,  some  observers  questioned  this  view,  calling  it  a 
temporary  “fad”  or  even  dismissing  it  as  the  result  of  central  banks’  searching  for  new 
responsibilities – these voices have now been silenced for obvious reasons. Indeed, financial 
stability  analysis  is  anything  but  a  passing  fashion.  It  has  established  itself  as  a  field  of 
research of its own right since the mid-1990s, when financial stability issues were boosted by 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2008
financial globalisation and an acceleration in financial innovation. This is reflected in the wide 
dissemination of financial stability reports, which central banks now produce in more than 50 
countries worldwide.  
I would therefore like to give you a brief overview of the kind of challenges central banks face 
when embarking on financial stability analysis. It starts with the fact that financial stability is 
not  easily  measured.  This  is  hardly  surprising  as,  in  contrast  to  monetary  policy  analysis, 
there is no single indicator (such as inflation) to observe.  
Similarly, initiatives to create some sort of an all-encompassing financial stability index have 
failed to convince so far. Instead, the concept of financial stability involves various financial 
intermediaries,  financial  market  segments  and  infrastructure,  for  which  a  whole  host  of 
different  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicators  exist.  As  a  consequence,  determining  the 
degree of financial stability remains a highly complex task. Moreover, constructing theoretical 
models and conducting model-based financial stability analysis are still in their infancy. One 
particular difficulty lies in modelling periods of stress. To begin with, modellers face a lack of 
relevant data as historical time series on episodes of stress are rare, luckily. More generally, 
it  is  difficult  to  capture  the  behaviour  of  financial  market  participants  because  they  are 
affected by feedback effects between the financial system and the real economy. In many 
cases,  a  shock  to  the  financial  system  will  be  amplified  by  interrelationships  between 
financial markets and economic variables. For instance and without reference to the present 
situation  in  the  euro  area,  if,  after  a  period  of  financial  turbulence,  financial  intermediaries 
experience  a  widespread  process  of  deleveraging,  credit  crunch  mechanisms  might  come 
into  play  that  could  drive  bigger  second-round  effects  on  the  economy  and,  in  turn,  cause 
further losses in the banking sector. How to model such feedback effects consistently is still 
an open issue. 
Another significant limitation to assessing a financial system’s vulnerability to contagion and 
system-wide  stress  is  the  fact  that  financial  instability  is  inherently  non-linear.  As  one 
consequence of this non-linearity, risk factors typically are not normally distributed. Instead, 
their distribution is characterised by fat tails, implying that extreme values are observed more 
frequently than what would be predicted under the assumption of normality. Modelling non-
linearities  greatly  complicates  research,  but  it  is  indispensable,  given  the  central  focus  of 
financial stability analysis on default, contagion and spillover effects.  
To  sum  up,  it  should  come  as  no  surprise  that  a  standard  analytical  model  of  financial 
stability has not yet been developed. At present, modelling is often scattered with respect to 
risk  categories,  financial  market  segments  and  structural  or  regulatory  issues.  Mind  you, 
there  is  no  reason  to  play  down  the  progress  achieved  so  far.  On  the  contrary.  Financial 
stability  analysis  is  becoming  more  and  more  sophisticated,  as  is  borne  witness  by  the 
increasing  number  of  related  working  papers  and  conferences.  As  for  the  recent  financial 
market  turmoil,  central  banks  (and  other  institutions)  have  frequently  and  in  good  time 
warned  of  many  aspects,  notably  excessive  risk-taking  and  a  general  underpricing  of  risk. 
However, the trigger for the recent financial market turbulence, the speed at which it spread 
across  global  financial  markets  and  its  persistence  were  not  foreseen,  but  that  does  not 
conflict  with  my  statement.  Far  from  it  –  financial  stability  analysis  does  not  aim  for 
clairvoyance. Instead, it is most likely that financial crises will continue to emerge in spite of 
perceptible progress in financial stability analysis. But the crucial point is that their impact can 
be alleviated by warnings, moral suasion and – if necessary – adjustments to the institutional 
and regulatory framework.  
Right now, national, European and international institutions and forums are putting a lot of 
effort into identifying the lessons to be learned. In an international context, most notably, the 
analysis and recommendations by the Financial Stability Forum and the recently published 
“Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision” by the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision  deserve  close  attention.  They  are  an  important  step  forward  in 
making the international financial system more resilient.  
BIS Review 82/2008 
 3
The Eurosystem’s current monetary policy stance 
4  
Even though financial stability is of vital interest to the Eurosystem, our primary objective is 
the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. During the past ten years, the Eurosystem 
has lived up to this mandate. Since the inception of the euro, annual inflation in the euro area 
has, on average, remained in the close vicinity of 2% (at 2.05% to be precise), which is only 
marginally above the Eurosystem’s benchmark for price stability. Recently, however, euro-
area inflation has accelerated, remaining above 3% for the past seven months and reaching 
a worrying record high of 3.7% in May. This confirms that the current upward pressures on 
euro-area inflation, which result largely from sharp increases in energy and food prices at the 
global level, are rather persistent.  
On the face of it, the present inflationary pattern seems to bear some resemblance to that of 
the 1970s. Not only is inflation unusually high in many countries but the oil price increase that 
has occurred gradually over the past few years is now comparable in real terms to that of the 
1970s. Furthermore, economic growth is slowing down on a global scale, even though, as far 
as the euro area is concerned, we do expect it to remain robust, but certainly less dynamic in 
the quarters ahead. 
On  closer  observation,  however,  there  are  several  caveats  worth  mentioning.  They  might 
explain  why  the  present  oil  price  shock  has  so  far  been  less  damaging  than  that  of  the 
1970s.  First,  oil  intensity  has  decreased  substantially  over  the  past  30  years  both  as  a 
consequence of the declining relative weight of the energy-intensive industrial sector in the 
industrialised countries and growing ecological awareness. Second, whereas the shocks of 
the 1970s were caused mainly by sizeable disruptions to the oil supply, the present episode 
is  largely  driven  by  unexpectedly  buoyant  demand  for  oil,  particularly  from  the  rapidly 
growing  emerging  market  countries  –  notably  China.  The  latest  price  hikes,  however,  are 
primarily  related  to  supply-side  factors.  The  third,  and  arguably  most  important,  difference 
between today and the 1970s is the accumulated advance in the theory of monetary policy 
making. Monetary theory no longer sees inflation as a by-product of real-sector forces which 
are largely outside the control of the central bank. On the contrary, in the long run inflation is 
generally believed to be a monetary phenomenon. Therefore, there is widespread agreement 
on the substantial benefits of price stability and central bank independence, on the forward-
looking nature of monetary policy and its need for credibility and commitment. 
Given  these  changes  in  monetary  policy,  the  re-emergence  of  an  inflationary  wage-price 
spiral  which  was  characteristic  of  the  1970s  now  appears  less  likely.  But  even  if  these 
differences to the 1970s are reassuring, there is no room for complacency. First, oil prices 
have hiked more strongly and persistently than generally anticipated. Their present level in 
real terms even surpasses that of the 1970s. In addition, the uncertainty surrounding future 
oil price developments greatly complicates the accurate forecasting of inflation and therefore 
poses a further challenge to monetary policy. Second, apprehension is growing that inflation 
expectations are on the rise. In the euro area, this is chiefly true for short-term to medium-
term inflation expectations, which cover the policy-relevant time horizon of monetary policy. 
By contrast, medium to longer-term inflation expectations which are the best indicator of the 
public confidence in the central bank and its credibility have not moved significantly. This is 
especially  true  for  survey-based  measures.  Yet,  even  if  the  rise  in  longer-term  inflation 
expectations is only marginal compared to the substantial temporary increase in the current 
HICP rate, this is not guaranteed to remain unchanged.  
In  that  respect,  the  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s  should  serve  as  a  cautionary  tale. 
Subsequent to the two oil price shocks, many industrialised countries experienced a period 
of elevated inflation. As a word of warning I would like to add that correlation should not be 
confounded  with  causation.  Obviously,  global  developments  at  that  time  were  affected  by 
more than just high and rising oil prices. Nonetheless, I will focus my remarks on the nexus 
between oil price hikes and monetary policy. In particular, I will touch on two examples of the 
1970s, that of Germany (which I am most familiar with) and the USA (which has been widely 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2008
discussed in the macroeconomic literature). Germany suffered to a much lesser extent from 
the Great Inflation than many economies elsewhere. One reason for that might be the high 
inflation aversion in the German public that had evolved as a consequence of the two periods 
of hyperinflation in Germany in the first half of the 20th century. It enabled the Bundesbank to 
adopt  a  firmer  monetary  policy  stance  than  many  of  its  counterparts.  The  start  was  not 
perfect. In 1973, right after gaining freedom of action after the collapse of the Bretton Woods 
system, the Bundesbank tried to keep inflation low by means of moral suasion rather than by 
committing  itself  to  a  clear  strategy.  Trade  unions  more  or  less  ignored  the  Bundesbank’s 
signals and pushed through high increases in nominal wages, trying to compensate for the 
loss in real disposable income. As a consequence, inflation went up. 
But  the  Bundesbank  learned  from  that  experience  and,  in  1975,  together  with  the  Swiss 
National Bank, was the first central bank worldwide to adopt a monetary targeting strategy, 
thereby  committing  itself  publicly  to  a  stability-oriented  policy.  After  the  second  oil  price 
shock, from 1979 to 1981, the Bundesbank sent out clear signals for restoring price stability 
by raising its key interest rates sharply. As a consequence, German inflation did not rise as 
much  as  in  the  USA  and  started  to  decline  earlier.  At  the  same  time,  output  losses  also 
remained lower than in the USA, demonstrating that a restrictive monetary policy can, in the 
medium term, prove superior also in real terms.  
The situation in the USA and in many other industrialised countries was different. In the USA, 
consumer  prices  started  to  hike  as  early  as  the  mid-1960s  for  reasons  which  were  at  first 
unrelated to the oil market (Vietnam War, food prices, monetary policy geared to combating 
recession) from 1½% in 1965 to 6% in 1970 and in the aftermath of the oil price shocks to 
more than 14% in 1980. In response to this persistent upward trend in actual inflation, short-
term inflation expectations also drifted upwards, until they peaked at 12% in 1981. Such a 
spiral  of  mutually  reinforcing  increases  in  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  suggests  that 
monetary policy somehow did not rise to the challenge of that period.  
The macroeconomic literature has put forward numerous, often complementary explanations, 
and I would like to focus on two of them. First, it has been argued that monetary policy in the 
USA – though broadly committed to price stability – did not respond sufficiently strongly to 
high  and  rising  inflation  rates  before  1979  (technically  speaking,  it  did  not  adhere  to  the 
Taylor principle).1 By not readily raising key interest rates, the Fed allowed public inflation 
expectations  to  become  unhinged,  which  gave  rise  to  a  damaging  wage-price  spiral  and 
further fuelled inflation. According to this view, monetary policy itself injected volatility into the 
US economy, thereby contributing markedly to the large and persistent inflation fluctuations 
of the 1970s. As I noted earlier, both the macroeconomic framework of the 1970s and the 
general  understanding  of  monetary  policy  have  undergone  notable  changes.  Nonetheless, 
the  US  experience  demonstrates  how  quickly  inflation  expectations  can  drift  upwards  if 
actual  inflation  is  persistently  above  the  stability  norm  of  the  central  bank  and  if, 
consequently, market participants lose confidence in the central bank’s will to restore price 
stability. 
Another  explanation  of  the  Great  Inflation  focuses  on  the  Fed’s  response  to  output.2  This 
view does not regard the Fed’s weak response to inflation as problematic, but the importance 
it attached to output stabilisation. Indeed, a strongly activist monetary policy, which strives to 
keep  the  economy  close  to  potential,  suffers  from  a  fundamental  conceptual  problem. 
Although such a policy performs well under ideal conditions, it may well produce markedly 
sub-optimal  outcomes  given  the  inevitable  uncertainties  associated  with  estimating  the 
output gap in real time. The latter is what happened during the Great Inflation. It is argued 
that the Fed did not detect the productivity slowdown in the USA, which started in the mid-
                                                 
1   See Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000). 
2   See Orphanides (2003, 2004). 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 5
1960s, in real time. In a similar vein, the Fed (and probably many other central banks) did not 
immediately take account of the fact that a persistent increase in oil prices has a dampening 
effect  on  potential  output,  even  if  the  exact  magnitude  is  difficult  to  quantify  with  any 
precision both directly via a reduction in energy inputs and indirectly via making some of the 
existing  capital  stock  redundant.  Both  factors  led  to  a  systematic  overestimation  of  US 
potential  output.  Consequently,  the  slow-down  in  the  US  economy  after  the  first  oil  price 
shock was (wrongly) perceived as a significant increase in economic slack, which the central 
bank did not want to counter with a tightening monetary policy. For the same reasons, the 
central  bank  systematically  underestimated  inflationary  pressures  and,  hence,  thought  its 
monetary policy stance more restrictive than it actually was. In any case, the lesson to be 
learned  from  this  explanation  is  that  monetary  policy  has  to  factor  in  changes  in  potential 
output even if they are unobservable in real time. In particular, central banks should keep in 
mind that persistent oil price hikes are likely to cause a decline in potential output. Against 
the  background  of  the  Great  Inflation,  the  most  pressing  issue  at  the  current  juncture  is 
whether there is any danger that the Eurosystem will repeat the policy mistakes of the 1970s. 
To  give  you  the  answer  straightaway,  no,  I  do  not  think  so.  As  for  the  risk  of  inaccurately 
assessing  potential  output,  I  would  first  like  to  emphasise  that  the  Eurosystem  does  not 
primarily  aim  at  output  stabilisation.  Our  primary  objective  is  price  stability.  However, 
potential output, the output gap and capacity utilisation are part and parcel of the collection of 
data that the ECB Governing Council monitors to assess the short and medium-term risks to 
price  stability.  But  we  are  aware  of  the  uncertainties  surrounding  such  data  and  make 
allowance for it by cross-checking the short to medium-term indications for monetary policy 
coming from the economic analysis with the medium to long-term perspective stemming from 
the monetary analysis. 
Given  the  Eurosystem’s  stability  orientation,  we  take  the  dampening  impact  of  oil  price 
shocks on potential output into account and have therefore not yielded to calls to relax our 
monetary policy stance. If we did, monetary policy would only strengthen the shock-related 
inflationary pressures. At the current juncture, however, with inflation in the euro area having 
reached a record high and inflation risks still on the upside, there is the concrete risk that 
longer-term inflation expectations will start creeping up more strongly. The experience of the 
Great Inflation demonstrates that a stability-oriented central bank is well-advised to fight the 
risk of broad-based second-round effects decisively and proactively. By doing so, it will keep 
the costs of curbing inflation dynamics relatively low. Our commitment to a systematic focus 
on price stability is even more important, as the recent rounds of wage settlement in the euro 
area  have  not  contributed  to  curbing  inflation  pressures.  On  the  contrary,  recent  wage 
dynamics in conjunction with elevated and persistent energy and food price pressures have 
increased the risk of a prolonged period of intolerably high inflation. 
At our last meeting of the ECB Governing Council, we emphasised that, given the uncertainty 
about  the  economic  outlook  and  the  prevailing  downside  risks  to  economic  growth,  the 
continued  vigorous  expansion  of  money  and  credit  and  the  strong  upside  risks  to  price 
stability,  the  Governing  Council  is  in  a  state  of  heightened  alertness.  Financial  markets 
should by now have understood our readiness to act. It is our strong determination to secure 
a  firm  anchoring  of  medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  in line  with  price  stability. 
After  all,  the  best  contribution  that  the  Eurosystem  can  make  to  sustainable  growth  in  the 
euro area is to safeguard price stability in the medium to long term And lastly we should also 
not  forget  that  a  reliable  monetary  policy  also  helps  to  reduce  uncertainty  in  times  of  an 
ongoing financial market turmoil.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Beyer A., V. Gaspar, C. Gerberding and O. Issing: “Opting out of the Great Inflation: German 
Monetary  Policy  after  the  Breakdown  of  Bretton  Woods”,  paper  prepared  for  the  NBER 
6 
 BIS Review 82/2008
Conference  “A  Retrospective  on  the  Great  Inflation”,  organised  by  Michael  Bordo  and 
Athanasios Orphanides, Woodstock, September 2008. 
Borio, C. (2008), “The financial turmoil of 2007-?: a preliminary assessment and some policy 
considerations”, BIS Working Paper No 251, March 2008. 
Clarida,  R.,  J.  Galí  and  M.  Gertler  (2000):  Monetary  Policy  Rules  and  Macroeconomic 
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (1), 147-180. 
Issing, O. (2005), “Why did the Great Inflation not happen in Germany?”, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis Review, March/April. 
Orphanides,  A.  (2003):  “The  Quest  for  Prosperity  without  Inflation”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 50 (3), 633-663.  
Orphanides,  A.  (2004):  “Monetary  Policy  Rules;  Macroeconomic  Stability  and  Inflation:  A 
View from the Trenches”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36 (2), 151-177. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 7
