Lucas Papademos: China and the European Union – global economic 
challenges and policy responses 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Hamburg Summit: “China meets Europe”, Hamburg, 11 September 2008. 
 Introduction  
I.  
Dear Lord Mayor Von Beust, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a privilege and pleasure for me to be in Hamburg today to address this distinguished 
audience  on  some  important  and  topical  policy  issues  concerning  the  rapidly  growing 
economic  relations  between  China  and  Europe.  The  Free  and  Hanseatic  City  of  Hamburg 
provides an ideal stage for addressing these issues. Hamburg’s history as a great port and 
trading metropolis bears testimony to how openness to commerce and exchange generates 
growth and prosperity. Still today, Hamburg is the second-largest port in Europe, and ranks 
ninth in the world. It is thus not surprising that China is Hamburg’s most important and fastest 
growing  trade  partner,  accounting  for  more  than  one  third  of  total  shipments.  Hamburg  is, 
therefore, one of the most vital points where Europe meets China. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  economic  relations  between  the  European  Union  and 
China in the context of the major policy challenges being faced by both our economies in an 
environment  of  increasing  global  interdependence.  I  will  examine,  in  particular,  the  role  of 
economic  reforms  and  monetary  policy  in  addressing  the  challenges  stemming  from  the 
marked  slowdown  in  global  economic  growth  and  the  persistently  high  inflation,  and  will 
assess their effects for the China-EU economic relationship. Let me start with a brief review 
of key features of the bilateral trade between the EU and China and related policy issues.  
The trade dimension of the China-EU economic relationship 
II.  
Trade  between  the  27  members  of  the  European  Union  and  China  has  expanded  at  an 
impressive pace, especially since China joined the World Trade Organisation (WTO) at the 
end of 2001. China has indeed become the second largest trading partner of the EU since 
2005, while it was ranking fourth in 1999. From China’s perspective, the relative importance 
of the EU in total trade has grown even more impressively: the EU is now the first trading 
partner of China, having overtaken both the United States and Japan since 2005. Increasing 
trade with China has clearly implied major benefits for Europe. Our economy has benefited, 
at least over a certain period of time, from the favourable impact on inflation resulting through 
various  channels  from  the  lower  cost  of  imported  manufactured  and  intermediate  goods. 
Moreover,  increased  competition  has  provided  a  further  stimulus  for  the  introduction  of 
structural reforms to enhance the efficiency and flexibility of the European economy. 
So,  why  do  we  Europeans  occasionally  express  concern  about  the  expanding  trade  and, 
more generally, the economic ties between the EU and China? I think that there are many 
bad and some good reasons. The main reason, in my view, is that Europe can not yet reap 
the full potential benefits of free trade owing to certain “asymmetries” characterising the EU-
China trade relationship. Let me first illustrate this with some figures. While China is the EU’s 
main  import  partner,  it  is  only  its  fourth  largest  export  partner.  In  2007,  the  value  of  EU 
imports  from  China  was  231  billion  euro,  almost  four  times  higher  than  the  imports  from 
Japan. The EU’s exports to China amounted to almost 72 billion euro, that is, less than one 
third of the imports from China. The EU currently exports more to Switzerland, a country with 
only  7.5  million  inhabitants,  than  to  China!  As  a  result  of  this  asymmetry,  the  EU’s  trade 
deficit  with  China  was  160  billion  euro  in  2007,  accounting  for  86%  of  the  EU  total  trade 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 1
deficit.  To  put  it  differently,  the  total  trade  deficit  of  the  EU  of  186  billion  euro  very  much 
reflects the sizeable imbalance in the European-Chinese trade. 
There are several explanations for the EU-China trade imbalance. A significant part of it is, of 
course,  the  natural  outcome  of  market  forces.  For  instance,  the  large  Chinese  trade 
surpluses in the textiles and IT sectors can be explained by China’s competitive advantage 
and specialisation in labour-intensive production. In addition, due to its increasing role as an 
“assembling hub”, China has become an export platform in Asia, meaning that several goods 
that  were  previously  exported  directly  from  other  Asian  countries  are  now  exported  from 
China.  At  the  same  time,  while  Europe  has  a  comparative  advantage  in  the  production  of 
high  value-added  goods,  such  as  pharmaceuticals  and  machinery,  we  do  not  observe 
significant surpluses in the trade of any of these products.  
Why does Europe not export more of the products where it has a comparative advantage to 
China? And, more generally, what other factors can explain the observed asymmetries in the 
EU-China  economic  relationship? One  possible  explanation  is  that  European  firms  are  not 
able  to  successfully  export  high-tech  goods  to  China  due  to  difficulties  in  accessing  its 
domestic  market.  According  to  the  European  Commission,  non-tariff  barriers  in  China  are 
indeed estimated to result in a loss of European exports estimated at 20 billion euro, or 30% 
of total trade.1 Another likely reason relates to the exchange rate between the euro and the 
Chinese renminbi. While the bilateral exchange rate is only one factor affecting the growing 
trade deficit, it is difficult to argue that it has had a negligible impact over the years 2002-07: 
in that period, the Chinese trade surplus with the euro area almost tripled while the Chinese 
renminbi depreciated vis-à-vis the euro by a cumulative 30%. In 2008, however, the renminbi 
has so far appreciated against the euro by 9.4%, a welcome development for the balancing 
of our trade relationship.  
III.  
Global economic challenges, structural reforms and monetary policy 
responses  
More  generally,  the  observed  “asymmetries”  characterising  the  EU-China  economic 
relationship reflect to a large extent differences in the structure and functioning of markets in 
the  two  areas  as  well  as  differences  in  the  economic  and  monetary  policies  pursued.  The 
latter are partly a consequence of differences  in domestic economic circumstances and of 
differences in the policy responses to the global economic challenges. 
At  the  present  juncture,  China  and  Europe  face  three  main  common  challenges,  albeit  to 
varying  degrees:  first,  a  marked  slowdown  of  the  global  economy  and  a  deteriorating 
economic outlook; second, persistently high inflation over a prolonged period of time, as a 
result  of  past  increases  in  oil  and  food  prices  as  well  as  of  rising  underlying  domestic 
inflationary  pressures;  and,  third,  continuing  tensions  in  global  financial  markets  that  have 
intensified in recent months. 
The  magnitude  and  nature  of  the  economic  challenges  being  faced  domestically  varies 
across countries and economic areas. In advanced industrial economies, including the euro 
area economy, the deceleration of economic growth has turned out to be more marked and 
abrupt than previously expected. At the same time, the pace of economic activity in many 
emerging market economies has so far remained relatively strong, although it is moderating. 
Nevertheless,  the  further  weakening  of  economic  activity  in  most  advanced  industrial 
economies is progressively having spill-over effects, through trade and financial markets, on 
emerging  market  economies.  The  hypothesis  of  decoupling  of  the  growth  performance  of 
advanced  and  emerging  economies  is  increasingly  being  tested  across  the  globe.  The 
                                                 
1   See European Commission (2007), “Future opportunities and challenges in EU-China trade and investment 
relations 2006-2010”. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2008
notable  exception  is  China  which  continues  to  experience  robust  growth,  only  moderately 
lower than the growth of 11.5% recorded in 2007. 
To address these multiple challenges, policy instruments must be used in an effective and 
consistent way. Effectiveness requires to choose the appropriate policy instrument that can 
materially contribute to the achievement of an objective in a sustained manner. Consistency 
requires using the available instruments in a way that is mutually reinforcing. The effective 
and  consistent  use  of  policy  instruments  should  produce  outcomes  that  have  a  durable 
overall positive impact on economic performance. Let me elaborate on these propositions by 
examining the appropriate policy responses to the global economic challenges we face in the 
euro  area  and  in  China,  and  by  assessing  their  effects  on  the  EU-China  economic 
relationship.  
Policy responses in the euro area 
In the euro area, although the slowdown of the economy is mainly the consequence of the 
impact of the significant past increases in oil and other commodity prices and of the direct 
and indirect effects of the ongoing financial turmoil, the growth performance of its economy 
over the medium and longer run will fundamentally depend on the implementation of further 
reforms that can raise trend productivity growth, by increasing investment in innovation and 
education, and raising the utilisation of labour, by enhancing the flexibility and adaptability of 
labour markets. Such reforms will simultaneously contribute to the moderation of unit labour 
cost  growth  and  to  the  more  efficient  response  of  both  product  and  labour  markets  to  the 
adverse  shocks  buffeting  the  European  economies.  As  a  result,  the  adjustment  of  the 
economy  will  be  facilitated  and  its  shock-absorption  capacity  strengthened.  Moreover,  the 
international competitiveness of the euro area will increase and this will help to reduce some 
of the asymmetries characterising the China-EU relationship. 
The  question  that  some  will  raise  is  whether  such  reforms  should  or  can  be  implemented 
during a period of heightened uncertainty and reduced consumer confidence. My answer is 
that  if  they  are  properly  designed,  adequately  explained  and  effectively  introduced,  such 
reforms can also help boost confidence in the performance and prospects of the euro area 
economy,  particularly  in  some  of  its  member  states  that  have  experienced  a  substantial 
cumulative erosion of competitiveness over the past years. 
Fiscal  policy  in  the  euro  area  can  play  a  stabilising  role  during  the  current  slowdown 
automatically, because our tax systems incorporate stronger income-stabilising mechanisms 
than  is  the  case  in  other  advanced  industrial  economies.  At  the  same  time,  budgetary 
policies  for  2009  and  beyond  should  reflect  and  fully  respect  existing  policy  commitments. 
The implementation of fiscal policies that aim at sound fiscal positions over the medium-term 
will  contribute  to  containing  inflationary  pressures  and  will  enhance  the  functioning  of  the 
automatic stabilisers that can mitigate the impact of shocks over the economic cycle. 
What is the role of the ECB in addressing the unfavourable combination of persistently high 
inflation, weakening economic growth and continuing tensions in the financial markets? The 
objective  of  the  single  European  monetary  policy  is  unambiguously  clear.  The  overriding 
goal, in accordance with our mandate, is to preserve price stability over the medium term. 
The stance of monetary policy must ensure that the high inflation we have been experiencing 
over  a  prolonged  period  of  time  does  not  get  embedded  into  medium  and  longer-term 
inflation expectations, which should be kept firmly anchored to price stability. Broad-based 
second-round  effects  from  higher  energy  and  other  commodity  prices  on  price  and  wage-
setting  should  be  avoided.  In  order  to  address  these  upside  risks  to  price  stability,  the 
Governing  Council  raised  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points  in  early  July.  We 
believe that the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving our objective. We 
will continue to monitor very closely all developments in the period ahead and will do what is 
necessary to preserve price stability in the euro area over the medium term. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 3
At the same time, the ECB will continue to manage liquidity in the interbank money market in 
order to ensure that the very short-term money market rate remains close to the ECB’s main 
policy rate, as required for the efficient implementation of monetary policy, and to alleviate 
the  persisting  pressures  in  the  term  money  markets,  so  as  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  the 
financial turmoil on the banking system and the broader economy. Over the past year, the 
ECB  money  market  operations  have  effectively  contributed  to  containing  risks  to  the  euro 
area’s financial stability without changing the stance of monetary policy – as defined by the 
key ECB interest rates – which remained firmly geared towards the price stability objective. 
Moreover,  although  the  ECB  supplied  large  amounts  of  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  to 
offset or contain the impact of disturbances to the money market, the injection of additional 
liquidity  was  temporary.  As  a  result,  the  overall  amount  of  bank  reserves  –  central  bank 
money– in the economy has not been augmented, but only the intertemporal allocation and 
the maturity structure of the central bank funds provided has been affected.  
Last  week,  we  announced  certain  changes  in  the  operational  risk  framework  (collateral 
framework) of the Eurosystem’s money market operations. These changes did not alter the 
key elements of this framework – as they did not affect the range of eligible counterparties or 
the range of eligible collateral – but they did refine some of the framework’s features so as to 
better contain certain potential risks in the light of changing financial market developments 
and practices. The changes introduced, which will be effective as of 1 February 2009, aim at 
striking a balance between preserving the stabilising features of the collateral framework and 
mitigating  risks  which  could  be  faced  by  the  Eurosystem  in  an  environment  of  protracted 
financial market tensions. 
Policy responses in China 
Let me now turn to China and focus on two policy issues that are particularly relevant to the 
global  economic  challenges  we  face  and  to  the  strengthening  of  the  EU-China  economic 
relationship.  A  bright  spot  in  the  clouded  global  economic  environment  is  the  continuing 
resilience of China’s growth. Indeed, the latest consensus forecasts project very strong GDP 
growth  of  9.9%  in  2008  and  9.2%  in  2009,  only  moderately  lower  than  the  economic 
expansion of 11.5% in 2007. The remarkably robust growth outlook of the Chinese economy 
is however surrounded by uncertainty in the light of the sharp slowdown in most advanced 
industrial economies and the declining pace of economic activity in a number of  emerging 
market economies. 
At  the  same  time,  inflation  pressures  in  China  intensified  in  late  2007  and  early  2008. 
Although  headline  inflation  declined  in  recent  months,  average  annual  CPI  inflation  is 
forecast2  to  be  6.9%  in  2008,  about  2  percentage  points  higher  than  the  average  annual 
inflation  rate  in  the  previous  year  and  the  inflation  target  set  at  the  beginning  of  2008. 
Moreover, the rise in underlying inflationary pressure is more visible in nominal wage growth, 
which according to some estimates was above 18% in the second quarter of this year, after 
having reached a peak of over 19% in the first quarter. If wage developments are indicative 
of  domestic  underlying  inflationary  pressures,  a  key  issue  is  how  China  will  contain 
potentially  significant  inflation  risks  which  could  undermine  the  sustainability  of  its 
extraordinary  growth  performance.  A  second  important  issue  is  the  implication  of  the 
combination of fast growth and rising inflation in China for the global inflation prospects, both 
because of potential effects on the prices of its exports and, especially, because of the large 
share  of  the  growth  in  the  demand  for  commodities  by  China  in  the  growth  of  total  global 
demand for commodities.3
                                                 
2   Consensus forecast for average annual CPI inflation in 2008. 
3  
In 2007, it was estimated that the growth in the demand for oil by China accounted for just over 47 % of the 
increase in total global demand in that year. 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2008
These  two  issues  are  intimately  linked  because  the  sustainability  of  growth  depends  on 
establishing  an  environment  of  low  inflation,  of  price  stability.  Moreover,  to  “maintain  the 
stability  of  the  value  of  the  currency  and  thereby  promote  economic  growth”  requires  the 
preservation of domestic price level stability. To secure these goals, monetary policy has to 
be fully geared towards achieving the internal price stability objective, as is the case in the 
euro area. But to successfully achieve price stability requires allowing for greater exchange 
rate  flexibility,  since  pegging  the  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  another  currency  or  a  basket  or 
currencies, or tightly managing the exchange rate, effectively limits the room of manoeuvre 
for  monetary  policy.  These  arguments  underscore  the  importance  of  the  steps  that  have 
been  taken  by  the  Chinese  authorities  since  the  exchange  rate  reform  in  July  2005:  they 
have formally delinked from the hard peg against the US dollar, allowed an appreciation of 
the  renminbi  in  effective  terms,  promoted  the  development  of  the  local  foreign  exchange 
market,  and  set  up  a  policy  framework  that  has  the  potential  to  deliver  even  greater 
exchange  rate  flexibility.  As  a  result  of  these  measures,  the  renminbi  has  appreciated  by 
almost  17%  in  real  and  around  15%  in  nominal  effective  terms.  These  developments  are 
welcome  and  should  be  praised  since  they  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  external  and 
internal  stability.  But  are  these  steps  sufficient  in  the  light  of  the  global  and  domestic 
challenges we all face? 
In July 2008, the Chinese authorities have emphasised at the highest political level that the 
central  policy  objective  is  “to  maintain  steady,  comparatively  fast  growth  while  fighting 
inflation”.4  The  continued  emphasis  on  fighting  inflation  is  especially  significant  during  this 
period of still strong underlying inflationary pressure. But as a central banker, I would like to 
add  that  to  win  the  battle  against  inflation  in  any  country  requires  enhancing  the  room  for 
manoeuvre  for  monetary  policy  and  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy  instruments. 
This would imply allowing for greater exchange rate flexibility, as the continuing substantial 
foreign  exchange  inflows  and  the  persistent  current  account  surpluses  of  China  keep 
augmenting  domestic  monetary  liquidity  and  increase  the  costs  of  sterilisation  operations. 
Moreover,  it  would  require  greater  reliance  on  indirect  means  of  monetary  control,  notably 
the use of the interest rates as an instrument to better manage liquidity in the money market 
and  influence  aggregate  demand  more  effectively.  To  this  end,  structural  changes  are 
necessary to enhance the functioning of the interbank money market and, more generally, to 
promote  the  development  of  the  financial  system.  Our  colleagues  at  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China  are  fully  aware  of  the  importance  of  such  reforms  and  have  been  taking  pertinent 
measures to strengthen the effectiveness of monetary policy instruments in fighting the battle 
against inflation. 
Two  questions  are  often  asked  concerning  two  perceived  trade-offs  that  may  be  faced  by 
central banks and economic authorities: First, the potential trade-off between fast, sustained 
growth and inflation, and, second, the potential trade-off between exchange rate stability and 
internal price stability. These issues have also been debated extensively and intensively in 
China  in  recent  years.  Let  me  say  that  the  European  experience,  as well  as  the evidence 
from other advanced as well as emerging market economies, clearly demonstrates that there 
is no stable trade-off between growth and inflation that can be effectively exploited by policy-
makers.  Containing  inflationary  pressures  and  preserving  price  stability  over  the  medium 
term is the best contribution that monetary authorities can make to achieving the objective of 
sustainable growth. The pace of durable growth can only be strengthened through structural 
reforms that can increase the economy’s efficiency and productive potential. On this front, we 
Europeans have made a lot of progress in recent years, but much more remains to be done. 
With regard to the concerns that have been expressed about the potentially adverse effects 
of currency appreciation on export performance and the pace of economic growth in China, 
let me point to the lessons of history. It provides rich evidence from many countries which 
                                                 
4   Excerpt from the statement of the Chinese Politburo issued at end-July 2008. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 5
adjusted their economy successfully to a stronger currency and became more prosperous as 
the  domestic  currency  appreciated  and  internal  price  stability  was  secured.  Germany’s 
economic  history  over  the  past  sixty  years  offers  the  best  example.  It  demonstrates  the 
benefits associated with the transition from a fixed exchange rate pegged to the US dollar, to 
a fixed but adjustable exchange rate, to the eventual adoption of a free float of the Deutsche 
Mark  that  allowed  for  greater  monetary  policy  autonomy.  This  autonomy  was  essential  for 
pursuing the primary objective of domestic price stability in Germany in the face of external 
price  shocks  without  hampering  –  and  indeed  even  helping  to  strengthen  –  its  overall 
competitiveness  performance  over  the  medium  and  longer  run.  But  there  are  also  other 
success  stories  of  achieving  price  stability  without  sacrificing  competitiveness  among 
emerging  market  economies,  which,  notwithstanding  significant  appreciation  of  their  real 
effective  exchange  rates,  have  experienced  stronger  non-inflationary  growth  that  was 
instrumental in securing those countries’ competitiveness and keeping up export growth. 
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
The  world  economy  is navigating  through  heavy  seas  at  the  moment.  Both  China  and  the 
European  Union  are  confronted  with  a  number  of  common  challenges  as  well  as  specific 
domestic  concerns.  In  order  to  address  these  in  an  effective  and  consistent  manner,  all 
available  policy  tools  need  to  be  used  in  an  appropriate  way.  This  requires  continued 
progress in implementing the necessary reforms. I think it is fair to say that we all have our 
homework  to  do  –  though  the  focus  of  these  efforts  naturally  differs.  In  Europe,  it  means, 
inter  alia,  focusing  on  labour  and  product  market  reforms,  in  order  to  enhance  the  growth 
potential of our economies; in China, it means, inter alia, reforms in financial markets and the 
banking  sector,  in  order  to  improve  financial  intermediation  and  monetary  control.  As  I 
highlighted  in  my  remarks,  one  of  the  common  challenges  that  we  all  face  is  the  high 
inflationary pressure affecting the global economy. To master this challenge, it is essential to 
use  monetary  policy  in  an  effective  and  determined  manner.  The  global  phenomenon  of 
inflation  is  perceived  in  many  countries  or  economic  areas  as  the  consequence  of  an 
“external” shock. This harbours the risk, if this shock is accommodated, that it will result in 
sustained  inflationary  pressure  with  adverse  effects  for  growth  in  these  countries  and 
beyond. Therefore, concerted efforts by monetary authorities worldwide are needed to fight 
global inflation. Finally, the combination of stability-oriented monetary policies and continued 
structural reforms would also help to address some of the asymmetries I referred to earlier 
and thus further strengthen the bilateral economic relations between Europe and China. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 110/2008
