Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building human capital for emerging challenges 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 9th Bank 
Human  Resources  Conference  2008  organised  by  the  Indian  Institute  of  Banking  and 
Finance  (IIBF):  "Building  Human  Capital  for  Emerging  Challenges",  Kuala  Lumpur, 
29 February 2008. 
 Let  me  first  of  all  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  the  participants  of  this  9th  Bank  Human 
Resource Conference organised by the Indian Institute of Banking and Finance (IIBF). It is 
our honour to host this conference that is being held outside India for the first time. This is 
one of the concrete outcomes of the alliance that has been entered into between the Indian 
Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  and  the  International  Centre  for  Leadership  in  Finance 
following the MOU that was signed about three months ago between the two organisations. 
The development of human capital has to be a constant undertaking in an environment of 
constant  change.  As  recent  as  ten  years  ago,  we  have  seen  the  economic  and  financial 
environment dramatically transformed. There has therefore required a corresponding change 
in the knowledge, skills, competencies and capabilities that are now required, in particular, by 
the banking industry, which is a highly knowledge-intensive and skills based industry.  
New challenges have also emerged in this environment arising from the rapid globalisation 
and  internationalisation  of  the  financial  system  and  the  significant  advancement  in 
technology.  These  developments  have  led  to  a  rapid  pace  of  innovation  and  enhanced 
international interdependence and inter-linkages. This has generated an environment that is 
increasingly more complex, competitive, uncertain and ambiguous. The recent episodes of 
financial  turmoil,  have  shown  that  even  financial  systems  in  developed  and  advanced 
economies continue to be vulnerable to financial stress.  
This more difficult operating environment demands new skills and the ability to manage these 
new challenges. Indeed, the role of leadership has changed. It is essential to have the talent 
that are not only able to see the new emerging opportunities, but also to be able to deal with 
the  high  level  of  unpredictability  and  navigate  through  turbulent  conditions.  The  industry 
leaders  need  to  be  visionary  and  comprehend  future  trends,  chart  strategic  directions  and 
adapt to changes to stay competitive and relevant. Effective leaders in this era, will be those 
who are continuous learners, who are on the cutting edge of excellence, who have strong 
convictions,  and  yet,  having  humility  to  recognise  the  need  to  reinvent  themselves  and 
inspire  their  organization  to  adapt  to  the  new  environment.  Such  attributes  are  vital  if  the 
financial services sector is to forge ahead and remain at the forefront of new innovations and 
thus  secure  long-term  competitiveness.  In  this  process,  there  needs  to  be  avenues  for 
continuous learning. The establishment of ICLIF is part of our commitment towards providing 
such  an  avenue  to  enhance  leadership  capability  and  develop  world-class  leaders  in  the 
financial services sector. 
The changing configuration of the global economy and financial markets, increasing regional 
economic  and  financial  integration,  increasing  internationalization  of  financial  services,  the 
continued enhancement to the regulatory structures and approaches will have a significant 
bearing on the future of the financial services industry. The road in front of us is therefore 
likely to be significantly different to the one from which we have traveled on. The investment 
in human capital development is thus important for the future development and growth in the 
financial services sector.  
Building human capital has become much emphasised in today's world. Successful banking 
institutions in the future will be increasingly dependent on intangible assets such as talent. As 
competition intensifies, the need for banking institutions to attract and retain the best skills 
and talents will become more urgent. Going forward, the availability of talents will become 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 1
the pivotal factor determining the capacity for the industry to reinvent and transform. Banking 
institutions  would  need  professionals  with  the  requisite  skills  and  expertise  not  only  at  the 
strategic and management level, but also at the technical and operational level. Successful 
institutions  will  be  the  ones  which  accord  high  priority  to  the  continuous  enhancement  of 
human capital.  
Human capital development has thus become of strategic importance and is integral to the 
success  of  an  organisation.  The  involvement  by  senior  executives  in  the  management  of 
human capital development has also become essential. Senior executives need to take the 
lead  and  devote  a  considerable  amount  of  their  time  to  this  initiative.  Human  resource 
development  functions  is  integral  to  the  talent  management  process  and  in  supporting  the 
human  capital  management  strategy.  Of  equal  importance  is  that  this  should  occur  at  all 
levels  in  the  organisation.  In  essence,  the  accountability  for  talent  development  requires 
concerted  efforts  throughout  the  organization  and  needs  to  be  embedded  as  part  of  the 
working culture that is communicated, shared and understood at all levels. 
While  the  need  for  human  capital  development  is  apparent,  what  is  less  apparent  are  the 
appropriate  methods  and  policies  that  should  be  adopted  to  advance  human  capital 
development.  The  financial  services  industry  needs  to  identify  the  appropriate  strategic 
direction for human capital development. Attention need to be given to the entry level, to the 
specialists and to the senior management levels. This would benefit from greater industry-
university linkages which is a major channel through which the talent requirement and talent 
gap  can  be  narrowed.  The  industry  involvement  in  the  curriculum  design  and  delivery  will 
ensure  graduates  are  equipped  with  the  relevant  knowledge  and  skills  that  meet  the 
requirements of the industry. Participation by the industry players may be in the reform of the 
academic curriculum and methodologies and in providing other forms of practical support to 
the  institutions  of  higher  learning.  This  will  contribute  directly  towards  meeting  the  human 
capital  needs  for  the  future.  The  quality  of  human  capital  is  the  cutting  edge  of 
competitiveness.  Having  competent  staff  to  deliver  high  quality  products  and  services  is 
critical  to  building  customer  confidence  and  goodwill,  driving  customer  satisfaction, 
enhancing  reputation  and  ultimately  realising  individual  institutions'  corporate  vision  and 
strategic goals. It is therefore, in the best interest of banking institutions to strengthen further 
the  competence  and  professionalism  of  staff  in  the  industry.  In  this  regard,  financial 
institutions  can  of  course  adopt  the  measure  of  “buying  talent”  from  the  market.  This  may 
however, risk in high compensations that are not commensurate with the value added. The 
more  desirable  option  is  the  building,  developing  and  maintaining  a  pipeline  of  talent  from 
within the company.  
Let me turn to Malaysia's experience in human capital development for the financial services 
industry. In Malaysia, structured and comprehensive approach to human capital development 
has been a key part of our efforts for the development and advancement of the industry. The 
programmes  by  ICLIF,  which  is  now  in  its  6th  year  of  operations,  provide  programmes  in 
leadership development for the senior management level in the financial services industry. 
The  programmes  carried  out  by  the  Institute  of  Bankers  Malaysia,  the  training  arm  of  the 
banking industry, have also been recently reviewed to meet the new demands of the financial 
sector.  In  addition,  dialogue  between  the  industry  and  other  education  providers  including 
institutions of higher learning have taken place to promote well equipped supply of talent. In 
September  2007,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  initiated  the  Financial  Sector  Talent  Enrichment 
Programme  (FSTEP)  to  train  and  prepare  1000  highly  qualified  graduates  for  immediate 
placements in banking and insurance institutions. This effort is undertaken in collaboration 
with the industry and training institutes and is aimed at boosting the supply of well-trained 
and competent personnel for the financial services industry. 
In  the  area  of  Islamic  finance  the  continued  international  expansion  has  increased  the 
demand for talent and expertise in the industry. The establishment of the International Centre 
for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF)  in  Malaysia  in  2006  represents  a  structured 
investment  in  the  development  of  human  capital  to  support  this  global  development  of  the 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2008
Islamic  financial  services  industry.  The  programmes  are  for  practitioners  and  graduate 
students. In addition, it is envisioned that INCEIF will act both as a professional certification 
body as well as an education centre for post-graduate programmes in Islamic finance.  
With  the  firm  commitment  to  build  human  capital,  the  challenge  is  to  formulate  the 
appropriate  strategies  and  mobilise  the  resources  necessary  to  produce  results  that  will 
enhance  the  intellectual  capital  of  the  industry.  This  will  require  the  combined  efforts  of 
internal  strategies  within  banking  institutions,  that  involves  a  holistic  approach  that 
coordinates the strategies for human resource management and development reinforced by 
strategies  for  organisational  development.  This  will  also  involve  putting  in  place  the 
appropriate processes and structures. A total solution will be required. These efforts will also 
need to be supported by education providers. Finally, this initiative of bilateral engagement 
on  the  issues  in  developing  talent  in  the  industry  will  also  gain  from  the  synergy  and  will 
contribute to strengthening the ability to further the agenda of building human capital in the 
financial services industry.  
On this note, I wish you a productive and successful conference. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 3
