Tarisa Watanagase: Thailand’s economy in 2008 and preparations for the 
future 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
luncheon  gathering  of  US  and  Thai  business  representatives  to  celebrate  the  175th 
anniversary of Thai-US relations, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Bangkok, 29 April 2008. 
 Excellencies, 
Distinguished US and Thai business representatives, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honour and pleasure to accept the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ invitation to speak at 
this gathering of distinguished members of the US and Thai business corporations and to join 
you in celebrating the 175th anniversary of Thai-US relations. My goal today is to contribute 
to your understanding of the prospects of the Thai economy and investment environment in 
2008 and beyond. 
My  talk  will  comprise  three  parts.  First,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  Thailand’s 
economic prospects and risks in the near term. Second, I will focus on some key challenges 
in  enhancing  the  economy’s  resiliency  and  competitiveness  while  managing  those  risks. 
Finally, I would like to highlight to you the roles of the Bank of Thailand in fostering economic 
and financial stability going forward. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since my last meeting with the American Chamber of Commerce in Bangkok last September, 
the  economic  tide  has  already  turned  in  Thailand’s  favour.  In  2007,  the  Thai  economy 
managed to grow by 4.8 percent for the whole year, given boost by GDP growth rate of 5.7 
percent in the fourth quarter of the year. While the government pump-priming helped achieve 
this  favorable  growth  outcome,  net  exports  contributed  to  almost  60  percent  of  the  overall 
GDP growth. 
Indeed, the robust growth of exports of 18 percent in US dollar terms in 2007 illustrated the 
ability of Thai exporters to adjust through quality improvement and search of new markets, as 
well  as  their  ability  to  preserve  overall  price  competitiveness  in  the  face  of  sharp  dollar 
decline.  Admittedly,  this  exceptional  export  performance  was  also  due  to  strong  trading 
partners’  demand  –  the  environment  which  is  unlikely  to  reoccur  in  2008.  I  will  return  to 
discuss this risk a bit later on. 
Monetary policy has been accommodative to growth since the beginning of 2007, with an aim 
to firm up domestic demand while safeguarding against undue inflationary expectations. The 
outcome on this front was quite favorable, as headline and core inflation were well contained 
at  2.3  and  1.1  percent,  respectively,  by  end-2007.  The  Thai  financial  markets  remained 
resilient through 2007 with only moderate fluctuations. Though credit and deposit grew slowly 
last year as domestic demand was weak, profitability of banks and financial institutions were 
satisfactory and the overall non-performing loans in the banking system remained moderate. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Against the background of sound monetary and financial stability, the growth momentum of 
the  Thai  economy  is  expected  to  gain  strength  through  the  year  2008.  This  trend  is 
envisaged, notwithstanding rising financial disruptions and ebbing confidence in the US and 
across the world as regards the global economic prospects, linked to the sub-prime woes in 
the US. 
Overall,  reflecting  the  solid  fundamentals  and  the  resiliency  of  the  Thai  economy,  the 
Monetary Policy Committee expects that the Thai economy will grow by 4.8-6 percent this 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 1
year.  However,  due  to  continued  high  prices  of  energy  and  food,  headline  inflation  is 
expected  to  be  in  a  range  of  4.0-5.0  percent  for  the  whole  of  2008.  Having  said  this,  the 
underlying inflationary pressure should be well contained as the core inflation forecast of 1.5-
2.5 percent still remains within the target. 
During the first two months of this year, private consumption and investment are firming up 
after recovering during the fourth quarter last year. Clearer political landscape post-election 
and  continued  spending  by  the  government  have  helped  revive  confidence  in  private 
investment  and  consumption,  which  constitute  almost  70  percent  of  total  demand  in 
Thailand. Indeed, confidence is one of the several factors underpinning private consumption 
expansion,  in  addition  to  fiscal  stimulus  measures,  and  agricultural  prices.  On  this  note,  I 
should  say  that  the  strong  growth  of  farm  income  has  helped  maintain  consumption 
momentum  especially  that  of  non-durables  during  periods  when  confidence  was  weak.  In 
2006  and  2007,  farm  income  grew  by  32.7  and  16.6  percent,  respectively.  Now,  we  are 
seeing a pick-up of consumption of durable goods as confidence increases, which is aided in 
part  by  the  continued  strong  growth  of  farm  income  by  25.8  percent  during  the  first  two 
months of 2008. 
Private investment, an important growth engine, had been held back over the past few years. 
However, private investment indicators have risen steady since the second half of last year, 
prior  to  the  pick-up  in  consumption,  reflecting  the  continued  high  capacity  utilization  well 
above  the  70  percent  mark.  Now  that  the  Government  has  announced  the  clear 
implementation  plan  for  public  investment  over  the  next  5  years,  the  public  sector’s 
commitment to invest heavily where it matters most should help boost business confidence 
for investment. 
Turning to the external sector, this year, the moderating net external demand would result 
from  the  anticipated  slowdown  of  the  global  economy,  linked  to  the  US  economic  and 
financial  downturns  through  the  international  trade  channel.  At  the  same  time,  agricultural 
exports are expected to increase in line with higher prices and global demands. During the 
first two months of 2008, while the value of exports grew strongly by 24.5 percent, the value 
of imports increased more rapidly by 36.2 percent, resulting in a small trade deficit. However, 
we  expect  the  overall  trade  balance  in  2008  to  remain  in  surplus  due  to  the  expansion  of 
exports to new markets. As for the current account, we expect the surplus to amount to about 
4-7 billion US dollar for the whole year, up from the surplus of 2.1 billion US dollar for the first 
two months of 2008. 
Distinguished Guests, 
I now move to the second part of my talk, on the issue of risks to the Thai economy in 2008. I 
believe that there are two important risks stemming from external sources, namely 1) the US 
recession and high oil and commodity prices, and 2) the potentially more volatile international 
financial markets. 
On the prospects of global growth and global inflation, there is no doubt that the risks for 
both have increased in the near term. Despite the US Fed’s sharp and substantial interest 
rate cuts and liquidity support measures to forestall the rise in mortgage interest rates and 
ease  the  liquidity  and  credit  crunch,  the  world  now  expects  the  US  economy  to  weaken 
substantially. 
In  the  meantime,  global  price  pressure  has  not  yet  peaked  as  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and 
commodities  continue  to  rise  as  world  demand  for  them  strengthens  in  the  face  of  tight 
demand-supply  situation.  Moreover,  price  pressure  could  come  from  potentially  adverse 
geopolitical events, unfavorable weather condition, and further dollar slide in the future. At 
this  point,  we  cannot  be  certain  that  when  the  oil  price  finally  adjusts  downward,  such  a 
correction will be substantial enough to bring the global inflation risk down. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2008
What do these risks mean for the macroeconomic management in Thailand? 
So  far,  we  have  observed  the  cost-push  pressure  in  the  recent  acceleration  of  domestic 
headline  inflation,  which  rose  from  2.3  percent  at  end-2007  to  5.3  percent  at  end-March, 
averaging  5.0  percent  during  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  During  this  same  period,  core 
inflation averaged 1.5 percent. 
The  central  bank  is  keeping  close  monitoring  of  the  inflation  trend.  The  aim  is  to  prevent 
higher  inflation  from  dampening  the  anticipated  recovery  of  consumption  as  purchasing 
power  declines.  And,  rising  costs  would  also  reduce  business  profit  margins  and  delay 
private investment. Nevertheless, though this downside risk is substantial, higher commodity 
prices will accelerate farm income, which tends to augment consumer purchasing power and 
income of agricultural exporters. 
As for the volatility emanating from international financial markets, my view is that the global 
financial environment may become more volatile for the rest of this year. However, now that 
the  US  dollar  has  lost  sufficient  ground,  no  one  knows  for  sure  which  way  a  currency  will 
move.  But,  with  increasing  likelihood,  we  should  expect  to  see  more  2-way  movements  in 
regional currencies. 
On the impact of the sub-prime woes on the Thai financial system stability, I can assure you 
that the direct impact of the sub-prime crisis on the Thai economy is minimal. As you may 
already know, only four Thai banks have CDO investment exposures, accounting for merely 
0.3 percent of the banking system’s total assets. Of the four banks, the one that was more 
affected than the rest has already recapitalized. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  these  two  external  risks,  Thailand,  benefiting  from  ongoing 
adherence  to  policy  discipline,  is  fortunate  to  have  ample  room  for  maneuvering  a  flexible 
policy mix going forward. Fiscal policy now aims at firming up growth and reviving confidence 
without  worry  on  public  debt  sustainability.  Concurrently,  the  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
policies have room to safeguard economic stability and smooth out short-term fluctuations. 
On monetary policy, the Monetary Policy Committee has been holding the policy rate, in light 
of  the  fact  that  growth  recovery  has  remained  on  track,  while  closely  following  inflation 
developments. As for the exchange rate management, the Bank of Thailand will maintain our 
principle under the managed float exchange rate system to let the exchange rate reflect the 
fundamentals of the economy. 
Indeed, to gain most from exchange rate flexibility, recognizing that US dollar is an invoice 
currency,  we  have  consistently  sought  to  limit  the  volatility  of  the  Thai  baht  vsUS  dollar 
exchange rate. In fact, the baht has been the least volatile currency in the region last year. 
Going forward, we will continue to take care of the short-term volatility when we deem it too 
disruptive to export or import price-quotation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  my  talk  with  AMCHAM  in  Bangkok  in  September  2007,  my  key  message  was  that 
Thailand’s future prosperity depends critically on capitalizing on and strengthening further the 
resiliency of our domestic economy. This is so that the economy can withstand volatility and 
safeguard against monetary and financial instability that may eventually disrupt real sector 
activities. Today, I wish to reiterate that same key message even more strongly in light of the 
risks I highlighted. 
Looking forward, income can be increased in the short term through higher wages and fiscal 
stimulus  to  augment  purchasing  powers,  especially  when  price  pressure  is  high.  But,  over 
the  medium  term,  the  mix  of  macroeconomic  policies  needs  to  maintain  focus  on  helping 
economic players to adopt better risk management, deal with market excesses, and reduce 
distortions in the economy. Over the longer term, increases in wages and employment can 
be  sustained  only  by  the  growth  of  productivity  that  in  turn  improves  the  economy’s 
competitiveness. 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 3
For the Thai economy to compete successfully and grow robustly over the medium term, I 
like to echo the Finance Minister’s key message in the recent New York Roadshow. That is 
policies  need  to  focus  on  the  investment  in  infrastructure  and  embark  on  further  structural 
reforms.  The  government  investment  plans  for  2008-2012,  as  they  are,  will  address  the 
entire spectrum of infrastructure deficiency our economy faces. Moreover, the modernization 
of  public  transportation,  housing  and  water  resource  management,  as  well  as  health  and 
education spending should translate into better private sector return from cost reduction and 
productivity increase. 
In  parallel with  building  modern  infrastructure has  to  be  the  development  of  skilled  human 
resources. Similar to elsewhere in the world, the labor quality shortage is also a key problem 
in  Thailand.  Here,  skills  produced  through  formal  schooling  are  found  to  be  different  from 
those which firms find useful. Therefore, while formal schooling is an important source of skill 
and  quality  development,  experience  in  the  workplace  is  equally  essential  for  human 
resource development. 
As  members  of  the  business  communities,  your  role  as  investors  and  employers  will  help 
make  Thailand’s  real  sector  more  competitive  by  investing  in  the  best  technology  and 
capacity  to  use  that  technology  efficiently.  This  will  in  turn  increase  the  attractiveness  of 
Thailand for international trade and investment, especially as Thai exporters have benefited 
from new market penetration and the growth of intra-regional trade. We recognize that the 
US  is  the  largest  single  trade  partner  for  Thai  exports,  though  its  market  share  has  been 
declining. As for US direct investment in Thailand, the US ranks fourth in terms of the size of 
FDI, accounting for about 12 percent of total FDI inflows annually since 2000. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I turn now to the last part of my talk which focuses on the roles and directions of the Bank of 
Thailand in fostering economic growth, investment, and financial stability. Let me touch on 
two  topics  here,  namely  1)  the  three  new  financial  legislations  that  will  enhance  the 
transparency  and  efficiency  of  central  bank  responsibilities  in  safeguarding  monetary  and 
financial system stability, and 2) the second-phased financial sector master plan. 
The  three  new  financial  legislations,  which  were  passed  at  the  end  of  2007,  are  the  new 
Bank  of  Thailand  Act,  the  Financial  Institution  Business  Act  (FIBA),  and  the  Deposit 
Protection  Agency  Act.  The  interconnectedness  between  these  three  laws  recognizes  the 
importance  for  central  bank  in  optimizing  the  synergy  in  responsibilities  for  safeguarding 
concurrently monetary and financial stability. The new BOT Act empowers the central bank 
to ensure monetary and financial system stability and enhances its operational efficiency and 
effectiveness  of  monetary  operations.  This  is  achieved  by  strengthening  the  transparency 
and accountability of the BOT’s monetary policy process. Under the new Act, the Monetary 
Policy  Committee  will  be  charged  with  legal  responsibility  in  the  realm  of  both  monetary 
policy target and exchange rate management policy. The Act will also increase the Bank’s 
operational  independence  by  making  it  more  difficult  to  dismiss  the  Bank’s  governor, 
requiring a cabinet decision with a clear underlying reason. 
Meanwhile,  the  Financial  Institutions  Business  Act  (FIBA)  governs  the  framework  and 
conduct  of  financial  institution  supervision,  designed  to  capture  the  international  best 
practices  of  financial  institution  supervision  according  to  Basel  Core  Principles  (BCP). 
Specifically,  this  law  allows  the  central  bank  to  implement  consolidated  supervision  of 
financial  conglomerates,  as  their  business  models  evolve,  together  with  prompt  corrective 
actions,  macro-prudential  measures,  and  measures  to  improve  consumer  protection  from 
unfair practices by some financial institutions and non-banks. 
Finally, the Deposit Protection Agency Act will replace the current blanket deposit guarantee 
in place since 1997. The new system of limited-coverage deposit insurance will be phased in 
over  four  years  to  allow  banks  and  depositors  to  adjust  to  the  new  framework.  The 
establishment  of  the  Deposit  Protection  Agency  should  reduce  banks’  moral  hazard  and 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2008
introduce  more  market  discipline  to  the  banking  sector  by  putting  pressure  on  banks  to 
improve financial strengths if they want to attract and retain depositors. 
I now turn to the Bank of Thailand’s financial sector master plan (FSMP). You may recall that 
the  implementation  of  the  first  master  plan  started  in  2004  and  was  completed  in  March 
2007,  when  the  last  commercial  bank  licensed  under  the  plan  started  its  operation.  Key 
initiatives under the first plan involved 1) improving financial access, 2) increasing efficiency 
of  the  banking  sector  through  removal  of  regulatory  obstacles  to  market  development  and 
through consolidation of smaller financial institutions, and 3) strengthening market discipline 
through  more  stringent 
information  disclosure  and  enhanced  consumer  protection 
mechanism. Through licensing reform and the so-called one-presence policy, there has been 
a  significant  consolidation  and  reduction  in  the  number  of  financial  institutions  under  the 
supervision  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  While  evaluation  of  FSMP  Phase  I  is  currently  being 
undertaken, there is evidence to suggest that the banking sector has shown improvement in 
both operating efficiency and resiliency. 
Turning  to  the  second-phased  financial  sector  master  plan,  the  overarching  objective  is  to 
improve  efficiency,  competitiveness,  and  resiliency  of  the  financial  sector.  The  goal  is  that 
financial institutions can more effectively perform their intermediary functions and meet the 
challenges  of  a  rapidly  changing  environment.  Moreover,  we  expect  the  financial  sector 
advancement  to  also  contribute  to  the  overall  economic  and  social  development  of  the 
country. Thus, the plan will also aim to promote a more complete financial access, ensuring 
that all needed financial services are available at appropriate prices to bankable users in all 
market segments. 
I  envisage  that  these  objectives  would  be  achieved  through  policy  measures  under  three 
main pillars. The first pillar will aim to improve financial institutions’ operational efficiency by 
reducing  unnecessary  costs  that  stem  from  outdated  or  overly  restrictive  regulations  and 
approval process. In this regard, private sector’s input will be a key ingredient in improving 
the  regulatory  environment  to  one  that  is  more  conducive  to  business  efficiency  and 
innovation,  while  ensuring  that  prudential  considerations  both  at  individual  and  systemic 
levels are not compromised. 
The second pillar will look at improving efficient intermediary functions of the financial sector 
by  increasing  the  level  of  competition  through  further  deregulation  and  liberalisation. 
Deregulation  would  involve  expanding  business  scope  and  enhancing  the  role  of  existing 
players, including banks, non-banks and other niche banks. One of the deciding factors for 
the  optimal  number  and  type  of  new  players  would  be  the  value  added  that  these  new 
institutions, be they universal banks or niche banks, could bring to the financial system, such 
as  technical  expertise  and  product  innovations.  Set  against  these  benefits,  however,  are 
potential risks to financial stability stemming from disorderly competition and exits. 
Thus, liberalisation considerations will be grounded on a robust supervisory framework and 
be appropriately sequenced and phased. This is so that risks from potential concentration of 
market power and financial instability are minimised. 
The  final  pillar  aims  to  fill  the  gaps  in  institutional,  including  legal  and  information, 
infrastructure  that  are  necessary  for  an  efficient  and  modern  financial  system.  We  will  be 
looking  at  the  legal  framework  and  other  measures  that  would  support  a  more  effective 
functioning and supervision of financial institutions. These include sound credit culture (e.g., 
bankruptcy and foreclosure laws) and implementation of international best practices, such as 
new  international  accounting  standards.  On  the  information  side,  efforts  will  focus  on  the 
information infrastructure that would assist financial institutions in pricing and managing risks 
better. Areas for improvements are, for example, the operation of the Credit Bureau, rating 
agency,  and  more  complete  data  on  key  economic  sectors  such  as  the  real  estate  and 
housing market, etc.  
BIS Review 54/2008 
 5
On the whole, while the policy recommendations will largely cover BOT-supervised financial 
institutions, those related to other types of financial institutions and broader financial markets 
can also be addressed if they are deemed to be systemically important. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In closing, allow me to emphasize once again that Thailand’s record of economic resiliency 
to adverse shocks and uncertainties in the past should clearly attest to the strength of our 
underlying  fundamentals.  The  US  and  Thailand  are  long-time  partners,  and  I  need  not 
mention how crucial it is to both our economies that we strengthen our trade and investment 
partnership in the years ahead. 
Going  forward,  the  policy  mix  will  centre  on  the  fiscal  prudence  and  public  investment  in 
basic  infrastructure  and  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  commitment  to  maintaining  economic  and 
financial stability. These together should translate into moderate long-term cost of investment 
financing and sustained economic expansion for Thailand. 
We  live  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  environment  that  is  highly  uncertain. 
Policymakers need always to be aware of what is in store for us so that we use the policy 
room available to craft the right and flexible macroeconomic policy mix that is best suited to 
changing circumstances. At the same time, with the collaboration of our trade and investment 
partners, we must remain firmly committed on the national goal of enhancing the economy’s 
productivity and competitiveness. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 54/2008
