Y V Reddy: Agriculture – emerging issues and possible approaches  
Text  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  of  the  40th  Convocation 
Address of the Acharya N G Ranga Agricultural University, Hyderabad, 5 June 2008. 
 His Excellency, the Governor of Andhra Pradesh and the Chancellor of Acharya N.G. Ranga 
Agricultural  University  (ANGRAU),  Shri  Narayan  Datt  Tiwari  garu;  Vice  Chancellor, 
ANGRAU, Dr. P. Raghava Reddy garu; Members of the Board of Management of ANGRAU; 
Registrar  of  ANGRAU;  Horticultural  University  Vice  Chancellor,  Dr.  S.D.  Sikhamani  garu; 
Members of the Academic Council of Agriculture and Home Science Faculties; dear students 
and staff of this university, respected parents, distinguished guests, media personnel, ladies 
and gentlemen.  
It is an honour and privilege for me to be with  you on this memorable  occasion. This is a 
convocation  address,  no  doubt,  but  it  is  also  an  occasion  to  dedicate  my  address  to  the 
memory of Acharya N.G. Ranga garu. His views on political economy and agriculture have 
acquired  great  relevance  and  special  significance  in  today’s  turbulent  world  of  high  food 
prices  and  focus  on  farmers’  well-being.  You,  my  young  friends,  will  have  a  critical  role  in 
resolving the emerging issues relating to agriculture, both in India and globally.  
Acharya  N.G.  Ranga,  who  was  educated  in  prestigious  institutions  in  the  United  Kingdom 
and was a Professor of Economics at Pachaiyappa’s College in Madras University, entered 
the  Guinness  Book  of  World  Records  as  a  Parliamentarian  with  fifty  years  of  service  in 
legislative  bodies.  He  was  a  leading  freedom  fighter  of  national  stature  and  a  great 
propounder, of international stature, of the importance of peasantry and agricultural labour. 
His beliefs led him to found the Bharat Krishikar Lok Party and the Swatantra Party along 
with Rajaji, which frowned upon the permit-licence Raj. The economic reforms in India since 
1991 have served us well and these have, in many ways, followed one of Professor Ranga’s 
suggestions  namely  “liberalisation”.  However,  only  recently  we  have  commenced  realising 
the significance of peasantry and rural labour that he had recognised decades ago. We now 
realise  how  critical  the  situation  in  regard  to  agriculture,  in  particular  food  prices,  is  to  all 
sections of the people, all over the world. In fact, it is uppermost in the current agenda of 
central banks around the world in the context of price stability and inflation expectations. I 
believe that the distinguished faculty and the knowledgeable students of this university would 
appreciate the contemporary relevance of Professor Ranga’s ideas and they will commit to 
play a historic role in resolving the issues that confront us today. 
At the outset, my hearty congratulations are due to the Graduating Class of 2008, who would 
be  receiving  their  hard  earned  degrees  and  awards.  I  also  compliment  the  staff  members 
who  have  received  awards  and  the  entire  faculty  for  their  efforts  in  imparting  high  quality 
education and inculcating good values to shape the personalities of our young generation. It 
is  the  endeavour  of  the  students  and  the  staff,  I  understand,  that  helped  this  agricultural 
university  in  winning  the  ICAR’s  Best  Agricultural  Institute  Award  two  times  in  quick 
succession and  also  the  ICAR  Best  Performance  Award  of  Students  in  the  ICAR  All  India 
Competitive Examinations twice in the last few years. 
Dear new graduates, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has an important stake in the subjects 
that you have been trained in. Our main objectives relate to maintaining price stability and aid 
the process of generating output and employment. Agricultural prices are really critical for the 
household budgets of about a billion people in our country. About sixty per cent of our work 
force in India is dependent upon agriculture and related activities. Though most policy issues 
in this regard fall within the domain of governments and universities like yours, the RBI has to 
monitor the developments and aid public policy through the financial system – especially in 
terms  of  price  stability,  financial  stability,  financial  inclusion  and  credit  delivery.  In  this 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 1
background, while there are many issues in agriculture, I will confine to a few. I will briefly 
explore the serious problem of food that is confronting the world today. This is followed by a 
narration of the Indian situation. In particular RBI’s approach to agriculture is described.  
Food prices as a global issue 
In  recent  months,  there  has  been  a  phenomenal  increase  in  food  prices  globally.  To 
illustrate, while the global food price index rose on average by 10.5 per cent in calendar year 
2006 and by 15.2 per cent in 2007, it has increased by a substantial 40.8 per cent in the first 
four months of 2008 compared to the corresponding period of the previous year. According 
to  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation  (FAO),  37  countries  in  the  world  are  presently 
facing food crisis, 31 of which are in Africa and Asia. Last week (end of May) the World Bank 
unveiled a US$ 1.2 billion fast track funding facility to help combat the impact of rising food 
prices on the poor. World leaders are currently (June 3-5 in Rome) meeting for a High-Level 
Conference on World Food Security hosted by FAO. The summit comes at a time when food 
prices have registered an increase of 55 per cent, in the last twelve months. The agenda for 
the summit includes measures relating to augmenting crop production, trade, aid, diversion 
to  bio  fuels  and  increasing  investment  in  agriculture  science  and  technology.  The  overall 
purpose  of  the  High-Level  Conference  is  to  address  food  security  issues  in  the  face  of 
soaring  food  prices  and  the  new  challenges  of  climate  change  and  energy  security.  The 
objective of the Conference is to assist countries and the internationalcommunity in devising 
sustainable solutions to the food crisis by identifying the policies, strategies and programmes 
required to safeguard world food security in the immediate, short and longer term. 
Undoubtedly,  the  current  global  food  situation  is  very  serious  and  hence,  we  need  to 
understand the reasons for such dramatic increase in food prices in a short period.  
First, it is said that rapid growth of China and India is lifting standards of living of millions of 
people every year thus putting enormous pressure on global demand. It is also argued that 
the  food  basket  has  changed  and  is  contributing  to  higher  demand.  However,  a  closer 
scrutiny would reveal that enhanced demand cannot explain a sudden spurt in prices in one 
year since these two economies have been growing at elevated and accelerating levels for 
over a decade, if not over two decades. Further, China has been a net wheat exporter and its 
per capita meat consumption had reached western standards by 2005. India is an exporter or 
an  importer  at  the  margin,  except  in  regard  to  vegetable  edible  oils  where  it  has  been  a 
consistent net importer in recent years, and also to a small extent in regard to pulses. 
Second, the drought conditions, possibly induced by climate change, in some countries like 
Australia and Ukraine, may provide some explanation for price increases. It is also likely that 
dwindling  stock  levels  observed  in  several  countries  could  have  exacerbated  the  scarcity 
conditions.  Further,  administrative  measures  in  some  countries  to  restrict  or  discourage 
exports  of  food  products  might  have  stabilised  prices  in  those  countries  but  could  have 
enhanced the prices in some other countries. However, these reasons do not fully explain 
the widespread global increases in prices of all the commodities at the same time. 
Third,  it  is  argued  that  increases  in  energy  costs  are  resulting  in  cost  push  inflation  but 
contribution of energy costs to overall costs in agriculture may not explain the huge increase 
in food-prices.  
Fourth, related to the current elevated energy prices, there has been diversion of corn and 
edible oils to bio-fuels, which are significantly influenced by policy mandates. Very clearly this 
diversion to bio-fuel is a policy induced new reality which coincided with price escalation in 
precisely those products and hence, is noteworthy. 
Fifth,  the  financialisation  of  commodity  trade  and  current  extraordinary  conditions  in  global 
financial markets could have influenced the spurt in prices. The recent reductions in interest 
rates in the U.S. and the injection of liquidity have resulted in investors seeking new avenues 
such  as  commodity  markets,  in  view  of  the  turbulence  in  financial  markets  and  the  low 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2008
returns in treasuries. The relatively easy liquidity and low interest rates, by themselves, make 
holding of inventories attractive and thus induce greater volatility to commodity markets. The 
weakening  of  the  U.S.  dollar  is  also  advanced  as  a  reason  for  the  recent  volatility  in 
commodity  markets,  including  food  items.  It  is  evident  that  this  phenomenon  is  also  now 
coinciding with the across-the-board rise in food prices. 
In  brief,  while  there  are  demand  and  supply  side  pressures  on  food  items,  there  is 
considerable  merit  in  the  arguments  that  recent  extraordinary  increases  in  food  prices  are 
closely linked to the public policy responses to high energy costs in advanced economies, 
and the turbulence in financial markets and financial institutions. It is said that the impact of 
such policy induced diversion of food to bio-fuels is significant at this juncture and reflects a 
preference to fill the fuel tanks of automobiles rather than fill the empty stomachs of people. 
Similarly, it is sometimes held that the weight accorded to financial stability in public policy 
may now be at the expense of stability in real sector – especially of sensitive commodities 
like food. At the same time, there is a general consensus that public policies in regard to food 
in many economies around the world have not provided adequate incentives to farmers to 
increase the supply of food and other agricultural products to comfortably match the growing 
demand over the medium term.  
As regards prospects for the near future, there are severe imponderables, especially relating 
to  the  path  of  future  prices  of  oil;  progress  in  restoration  of  normalcy  in  financial  markets, 
especially  currency  markets;  and  the  extent  of  slow  down  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  its 
consequential impact on the world economy as a whole. Further, public policies in regard to 
food, especially diversion to bio-fuel; cross border trading; subsidies; and replenishment or 
use of buffer stocks; would impact the evolution of prices globally. However, the redeeming 
feature is that supply response in regard to food grains is possible in a year or two. As per 
FAO  estimates,  wheat  output  is  set  to  achieve  a  new  record  in  2008,  though  against  the 
backdrop  of  deeply  depleted  stocks.  Global  production  of  rice  in  2008  is  expected  to  be 
marginally better than the previous year and hence, some depletion of stocks held may be 
expected.  Global  output  of  edible  oil  is  anticipated  to  fall  by  about  three  per  cent  in  the 
current year, and according to FAO, oil seeds and edible oil prices are expected to remain 
firm.  
What is the medium term to long term outlook for food prices at the global level? According 
to the Agricultural Outlook from OECD and FAO, while agricultural commodity prices should 
ease  from  their  recent  record  peaks,  they  are  expected  to  average  well  above  their  mean 
level of the past decade. Two days ago (June 3rd) U.N. Secretary-General said, in a speech 
at the High-Level Conference on World Food Security hosted by FAO that world food output 
needs to rise by 50 per cent by 2030 to meet rising demand. 
The implications of such a scenario in global farm outputs and prices for us should be very 
clear.  With  rapid  economic  growth  in  our  country,  the  food-consumption  will  rise  in  an 
unprecedented fashion since we are over a billion people. The food basket will also change. 
We have to augment food supplies within the country since marginal requirements or even a 
perception of shortfalls in domestic supply in our economy can have significant influence on 
world prices. As we have over half of the work force depending on agriculture, and as we 
have  scope  for  increasing  productivity  in  agriculture,  there  is  no  reason  why  we  cannot 
ensure  food  security  for  our  country,  at  a  minimum.  Indeed,  India  can  become  the 
“Annapoorna” for the world and I feel that Andhra Pradesh can become the “Annapoorna” for 
India.  
In this regard, I can do no better than quote Dr. M.S. Swaminathan, one of our esteemed 
agricultural scientists, “India has the technological and economic capability to demonstrate 
how  farming  system  can  be  adjusted  to  different  weather  patterns.  It  is  hoped  that  at  the 
Rome Conference, Indian representatives will serve as a bright affirming flame in the midst of 
the sea of despair we see around us”. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 3
Indian situation 
Let us now focus on the Indian situation. At the outset, it must be recognised that increase in 
food prices in India in recent months has been only a fraction of that observed in many other 
countries.  In  particular,  the  global  prices  of  wheat  and  rice  had  almost  doubled  between 
January and April 2008, while in India the increase has been far less than one tenth of that. 
In a sense, this vindicates the long-standing public policy of emphasis on a degree of food 
security in our country, especially due to the vulnerability of large segments of the population. 
Yet, the prices of food articles spurted in India also in 2006 and 2007. The average annual 
increase in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) of food articles was around 7.0 per cent during 
that period. While increase in the food prices was led by wheat (13.0 per cent) during 2006, 
rice  (6.0  per  cent)  and  edible  oil  (13.1  per  cent)  also  joined  in  the  price  rise  in  2007. 
However,  food  prices  have  exhibited  some  moderation  during  2008.  The  Wholesale  Price 
Index of food articles during 2008-09 (up to May 17, 2008) has increased by around 2.5 per 
cent as compared with the corresponding period (3.1 per cent) in the previous year.  
Of  greater  interest  may  be  the  current  outlook  for  individual  commodities,  which  appears 
positive for wheat, with significant improvement in procurement. In regard to rice production 
which stagnated since mid-90s, some turnaround is observed since 2005-06. The prices of 
edible  oil  increased  sharply  in  2006-07  and  spiked  during  2007-08.  However,  some 
moderation  has  been  observed  during  the  current  financial  year  so  far.  Due  to  stagnant 
levels of production in pulses the demand-supply gap is met through imports, but domestic 
prices saw a spurt before seeing a decline during the last one year. Prospects for sugar, of 
which  India  is  amongst  the  largest  producers,  appear  bright  for  the  current  year,  since 
production has risen substantially since 2005-06.  
Overall, some abatement of global prices, indication of better domestic supplies and addition 
to our buffer stocks, along with the series of measures already taken by the government, on 
the supply side, are expected to yield results in the months to come. Over the medium term, 
however,  the  National  Food  Security  Mission  launched  about  two  years  ago  should  yield 
positive results.  
RBI’s approach to agriculture 
RBI’s  major  objectives  are  to  maintain  price  stability  and  maintain  growth  momentum, 
especially  employment  generation.  In  this  endeavour,  agriculture  plays  a  critical  role  since 
agricultural  commodities  have  a  relatively  significant  weight  in  price  indices  in  our  country 
and  also  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations.  In  terms  of  employment  also  agriculture 
dominates, accounting for about sixty per cent of the total, while in terms of GDP its share is 
less than a third of that. However, the policy space available to RBI is basically confined to 
managing  aggregate  demand  through  appropriate  stance  in  regard  to  growth  in  money 
supply, interest and exchange rates and, to some extent, flow of credit through banks. Yet, in 
view of the criticality of agriculture, RBI articulates its approaches to agriculture through the 
Annual Reports. Let me summarise briefly, the analysis and the views as expressed by the 
Directors of the RBI in their Annual Reports during the recent past – say last five years. 
(a) 
Since the mid-1990s, the growth of the agricultural sector has not only been low, but 
also volatile. The crop yields have shown an unstable trend in recent years. An area 
of growing concern has been the continued incidence of localised droughts even in 
good  monsoon  years.  In  recent  years,  the  food  consumption  basket  is  getting 
diversified  towards  value  added  food  products  such  as  meat,  poultry,  fish, 
vegetables  and  fruits.  It  is  important  for  production  to  respond  to  these  shifts  in 
consumption. 
The share of agriculture in the total gross capital formation (GCF) in real terms has 
been declining in recent years mainly on account of steady erosion in the share of 
public  investment.  The  inadequacy  of  private  investment  in  fulfilling  the  capital 
(b) 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2008
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
requirements  of  agriculture  has  raised  concerns  about  the  state  of  the  rural 
infrastructure, which could turn into a binding constraint on growth.  
Several initiatives have been taken in recent years to improve the agricultural credit 
delivery mechanism. However, some bottlenecks continue to affect the flow of credit 
to  agriculture.  To  attain  a  higher  growth  in  agriculture,  the  major  areas  requiring 
attention  in  the  financial  sector  are,  inter  alia,  spread  of  insurance  against  crop 
losses  and  facilities  for  meeting  the  needs  of  the  rural  economy.  Newer  forms  of 
credit assessment and risk management systems may also have to be put in place, 
besides  upgrading  skills,  and  ushering  in  changes  in  attitudes  and  mind-sets. 
Information  technology  has  to  be  used  to  facilitate  transformation  in  various 
processes of rural credit. 
Efficient and well developed agricultural markets are necessary to enable farmers to 
deal  with  inherent  risks  associated  with  the  perishability  of  their  produce,  to  get 
remunerative prices, and to secure smooth access to input supplies. Towards these 
objectives, the agricultural marketing system in the country needs to be integrated 
and  strengthened.  Given  the  several  risks  that  farmers  face,  such  as  future  price 
and monsoon conditions, there is a need to put in place appropiate risk mitigation 
policies.  Accordingly,  a  comprehensive  public  policy  on  risk  management  in 
agriculture could promote a more efficient and commercialised agriculture that could 
also  provide  relief  to  the  distressed  farmers.  Rural  infrastructure,  which  includes 
agriculture research and extension, transport, electricity, and storage structures, not 
only enhances the productivity of physical resources, but also helps in supply chain 
management and value addition in agriculture. 
Greater focus needs to be placed on agricultural research in the coming years as 
the  success  so  far  has  been  restricted  to  select  crops.  Efforts  to  modernise  and 
strengthen  the  agricultural  research  system,  including  the  agricultural  universities, 
need  to  be intensified. The  Green  Revolution  has  been  the  cornerstone  of  India’s 
agricultural  development,  transforming  the  country  from  one  of  food  deficiency  to 
self-sufficiency. The time is now ripe for a second Green Revolution which will lay 
emphasis  on  diversifying  the  agricultural  sector  further  in  order  to  capture  new 
market opportunities. 
As  regards  flow  of  credit,  in  which  RBI  has  a  role  primarily  as  the  regulator  of  banking 
system, it has been the RBI’s endeavour to enhance credit flow to agriculture by removing 
the bottlenecks in credit delivery. The RBI, on its part, is intensifying efforts in revitalising the 
rural  cooperative  credit  system,  strengthening  regional  rural  banks,  providing  incentives  to 
commercial  banks  for  investments  in  rural  economy  and  ensuring  an  adequate  and  timely 
delivery of credit at a reasonable price. The programme for financial inclusion initiated by the 
RBI  in  collaboration  with  banks  and  several  State  Governments,  by  adopting  modern 
technology, is being intensified and expanded. 
Andhra Pradesh  
Before concluding this section on India and RBI, let me hasten to add that Andhra Pradesh 
has shown a visionary leadership by putting irrigation and agriculture at the top of agenda for 
public  policy.  Andhra  Pradesh  has  anticipated  the  emerging  criticality  of  agriculture  and 
designed a policy that is now being followed by many other states in India. RBI has been 
having  the  privilege  of  very  close  cooperation  and  coordination  with  the  Government  of 
Andhra Pradesh. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 5
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by reiterating that globally demand for agricultural products will be very high 
for the next two to three decades. India will play a dominant role in contributing to both global 
demand and global supply. Agriculture will be increasingly more diversified and not confined 
to food crops. Scientific agriculture is and will be the key for the future. The path ahead is far 
from  smooth,  and  traversing  this  path  requires  constant  efforts,  vigilance  and  dedication.  I 
am sure that the knowledge gained from your education will help you in moving forward in 
your endeavours in life, with determination and confidence. 
My dear young graduates in agriculture and horticulture, you have a bright – a very bright – 
future since India, indeed, the world beckons you. Make the best of it by working hard and 
purposefully  and  at  the  same  time  being  happy.  Remember,  the  ultimate  goal  is  your 
happiness and the final judge of how you achieve it is your own conscience.  
I pray that your continuing commitment to the cause of agriculture will be an inspiration and a 
matter of pride to the future generations. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2008
