Axel A Weber: Monetary policy in the Eurosystem 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, as part of the 
Ken Dixon public lecture series, University of York, York, UK, 10 June 2008. 
 Introduction 
1  
Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  being  invited  to  deliver  a  speech  as  part  of  the  Ken  Dixon  public 
lecture  series.  Some  of  you  probably  know  that  I  worked  as  a  professor  of  economics  at 
various German universities before I became President of the Bundesbank. As a professor, I 
used to dig rather deeply into economic issues related to both international economics and 
monetary policy and shared the insights I gained with my students in lectures and seminars. 
As a policymaker, however, my public speeches now often focus on the outlook for current 
monetary policy in the Eurosystem. 
Thus,  as  a  side  effect  of  my  change  of  direction  from  being  an  academic  to  becoming  a 
policymaker, the subject matter delivered in my public appearances has narrowed somewhat 
to  mid-term  inflation  and  economic  outlooks.  Given  that  I  still  like  to  talk  about  more 
fundamental  issues  in  my  speeches  from  time  to  time,  I  welcome  occasions  such  as  this 
lecture in which I can shed greater light on a more basic feature of monetary policy. 
Over  the  next  45  minutes  or  so,  I  shall  mainly  be  elaborating  on  the  nature  and  role  of 
macroeconomic  projections  in  monetary  policy.  In  this  context,  I  shall  draw  on  the 
experiences of the Bank of England and of the Eurosystem and will also provide you with 
some details of the projections which the Bundesbank now publishes semi-annually. 
Since the design of monetary policy, the underlying strategy and its various inputs, such as 
macroeconomic  projections,  usually  provide  a  good  deal  of  food  for  thought  leading  to  an 
exchange of views, I am looking forward to a discussion afterwards. 
Before  I  talk  about  macroeconomic  projections  in  greater  detail,  I  would  like  to  start  my 
remarks by bringing to mind the basic state of monetary policy in general and of Eurosystem 
monetary policy in particular. 
The current state of (European) monetary policy 
2  
Over  the  past  few  decades,  a  well-founded  consensus  has  emerged  about  the  nature  of 
sound monetary policy. It comprises two key elements.  
First, the agreement that inflation should be low and stable. The rationale behind this low-
inflation  paradigm  is  that  price  stability  reduces  the  degree  of  economic  uncertainty,  and, 
therefore, facilitates the efficient allocation of resources in an economy. In addition to this key 
benefit,  maintaining  price  stability  also  minimises  other  negative  effects  that  accompany 
inflation,  such  as  unintentional  effects  on  the  distribution  of  income  and  wealth.  Hence, 
maintaining price stability is, and should be, a central bank’s primary objective because it is 
the  best  way  in  which  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  economic  stability,  economic 
prosperity and job creation. 
Second, the clear assignment of responsibility for inflation to an independent central bank. 
Undisputedly, independence is an exceptional privilege granted to only a few institutions in 
democratic societies. However, the independence of modern central banks is not an end in 
itself. Rather, central bank independence helps to maintain a long-term stability orientation of 
monetary  policy  by  insulating  decision-making  bodies  from  short-termist  political  influence. 
Put briefly, an independent central bank is in the interests of the general public. Central bank 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 1
independence assists in enhancing monetary policy’s credibility and its effectiveness, which 
can be measured by inflation expectations, for instance. 
The role of inflation expectations, in particular, has attracted a lot of attention over the past 
decade and it has become a key element of modern monetary policy and the related field of 
research.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  inflation  expectations  are  now  considered  to  play  a 
central  role  in  the  transmission  process  of  monetary  policy,  as  it  has  become  evident  that 
expected future inflation is a crucial determinant of actual future inflation. 
Some  observers  see  this  as  absolutely  critical.  Michael  Woodford,  for  example,  a  highly 
renowned  US-based  researcher,  even  put  it  as  follows:  “Not  only  do  expectations  about 
policy matter, but, at least under current conditions, very little else matters.” In other words, 
steering inflation expectations has now become an important – or even the most important – 
lever for central banks in pursuing price stability. 
Not very long ago, many central banks were very opaque institutions from an outsider’s point 
of view. By contrast, transparency has now become a key element in the design of modern 
monetary  policy.  The  reason  for  this  is  twofold.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the  principle  of 
democratic accountability according to which an independent central bank – since it is not 
even indirectly subject to electoral accountability – must be transparent in order to give the 
public the opportunity to see whether monetary policymakers are fulfilling their mandate. 
On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  transparency  and  monetary  policy  effectiveness  are 
positively correlated. Basically, at least to a certain degree, the more transparent monetary 
policy is, the more effective it becomes in maintaining price stability. The reason for this is 
that  transparency  makes  it  possible  for  market  participants  to  better  understand  both  the 
central  bank’s  objective  and  its  strategy  and,  hence,  enables  them  to  better  anticipate  the 
future  monetary  policy  course.  In  turn,  this  reduces  uncertainty  among  market  participants 
and the public and helps to anchor inflation expectations at a level consistent with the central 
bank’s inflation target. 
There are four crucial elements that contribute to a transparent monetary policy. First, a clear 
definition  of  the  ultimate  goal,  that  is  a  quantitative  price  stability  target.  Second,  the 
announcement  of  a  coherent  and  robust  monetary  policy  strategy.  Third,  the  real-time 
publication  of  the  data  relevant  to  decision-making.  Finally,  the  immediate  and  consistent 
explanation, justification and publication of policy decisions. 
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy follows these guiding principles very closely. With respect 
to the first point – the definition of the ultimate goal – the Eurosystem’s primary objective is to 
maintain  price  stability,  as  stipulated  in  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community. 
Since the Treaty itself does not give a precise operational definition of what is actually meant 
by the term “price stability”, we on the ECB’s Governing Council define it as a year-on-year 
increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below, but 
close  to  2%.  Taking  into  account  the  existence  of  long  time-lags  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy, price stability is to be maintained in the medium term. 
While the definition of price stability is the first step in establishing a transparent monetary 
policy, the Governing Council’s policy decisions are based on an explicit, publicly announced 
monetary policy strategy. The Eurosystem’s approach to organising, evaluating and cross-
checking  the  information  relevant  to  assessing  the  risks  to  price  stability  is  based  on  two 
complementary perspectives, known as the “two pillar-strategy”. 
In this context, the first perspective aims to assess the short to medium-term determinants of 
price  developments,  with  a  focus  on  real  activity  and  financial  conditions  in  the  economy. 
This  takes account  of  the  fact  that  price  developments  over  those  horizons  are influenced 
largely by the interplay of supply and demand in the goods, services and factor markets. This 
perspective, the first pillar, is the “economic analysis”. 
The  second  perspective  or  pillar  –  the  “monetary  analysis”  –  focuses  on  a  longer-term 
horizon, exploiting the long-run link between money and changes in the general price level. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2008
The monetary analysis serves mainly as a means of cross-checking, from a medium to long-
term perspective, the short to medium-term implications for monetary policy stemming from 
the economic analysis. 
As regards the third and fourth point of a transparent monetary policy – the publication of the 
data  relevant  to  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the  substantiation  of these  decisions  –  the 
Eurosystem’s  communication  policy  is  very  advanced  as  well.  For  instance,  the  monthly 
decisions on key interest rates and their underlying reasoning are explained in detail to the 
public by the ECB President in a press conference that directly follows the meeting of the 
Governing  Council.  Furthermore,  media  representatives  have  the  opportunity  to  pose  their 
questions to the ECB President in the subsequent Q&A session. 
Taken together, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework is transparent, and monetary 
policy decisions are explained to the public both in great depth and in real time. 
Notwithstanding all these elements of a “state of the art” monetary policy, some observers, in 
particular  from  the  English-speaking  world,  have  repeatedly  called  into  question  the 
European monetary policy framework and have doubted its clarity. 
These  critics  claim  that  European  monetary  policy  is  not  sufficiently  transparent,  and 
therefore sends out misleading signals, especially regarding the future course of key interest 
rates. This assertion is particularly surprising given that many studies have shown time and 
again that the predictability of the single European monetary policy is, in fact, very high – not 
low,  as  some  critics  claim.  This  applies  to  both  the  short-term  horizon  –  decisions  on  key 
interest rates have been highly foreseeable over short time horizons, and to the long-term 
horizon – the monetary policy framework, comprising monetary policy’s ultimate goal and its 
strategy, is well understood by most market participants. 
This  is  also  reflected,  for  instance,  in  long-term  inflation  expectations,  which  have  been 
largely  contained  since  the  launch  of  European  monetary  union.  Therefore,  as  empirical 
evidence  clearly  shows,  the  European  monetary  policy  framework  is  definitely  not  as 
complicated as some observers always claim. On the contrary. 
But what precisely is it that some critics have in mind when they say that European monetary 
policy  lacks  transparency?  In  addition  to  the  usual  complaints  about  minutes  and  voting 
records, which I will not dwell upon here, one aspect is the role and use of macroeconomic 
projections  in  policymaking.  In  this  context,  some  commentators  contend  that  European 
monetary  policy  is  lagging  behind  the  “state  of  modern  monetary  policy”,  particularly  with 
respect to how its macroeconomic projections are conveyed to the public and how they are 
used for policymaking purposes. 
During the remaining part of my speech, I shall elaborate on this subject. In doing so, I would 
first  like  to  shed  some  light  on  the  rationale  behind  macroeconomic  projections  and  the 
method used before talking about the importance and use of projections in monetary policy. 
The rationale behind macroeconomic projections and the method used 
3  
Forecasting and utilising projections of the likely development of key economic variables is 
key to effective central banking. Why is this so? The main reason for this is that monetary 
policy  measures  affect  the  economy  only  after  a  long,  variable  und  uncertain  time  lag.  A 
stability-oriented  monetary  policy  should  therefore  not  merely  respond  to  actual  data  on 
inflation and the real economy. Rather, it should act in a pre-emptive manner and, in turn, 
should not wait for risks to price stability to materialise. 
Metaphorically speaking, obviously, a stability-oriented monetary policy cannot be conducted 
by looking through the rear-view mirror – in other words, by focusing on past inflation and 
real economic data. Moreover, looking through the side window – that is relying primarily on 
current  observations  of  growth  and  inflation  –  is  not  sufficient  either,  since  the  long  and 
variable lags of monetary policy transmission mean that today’s inflation can no longer be 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 3
influenced by current  monetary policy decisions. Thus, the  only viable  option for monetary 
policy is to act in a forward-looking manner in order to ensure price stability over the medium 
term.  
Therefore,  (at  least  implicit)  forecasts  for  inflation  and  real  GDP  growth  are  tools  used  by 
most  central  banks  nowadays  for  assessing  the  appropriateness  of  the  current  monetary 
policy  stance.  In  this  context,  three  particular  questions  arise:  “What  are  the  specific 
characteristics of economic forecasts?”, “How can these characteristics be conveyed to the 
general public?”, and “How can monetary policy make use of macroeconomic projections?” 
Central forecast and uncertainty 
3.1  
Especially  with  respect  to  the  first  two  questions,  I  do  not  want  to  go  into  too  many 
mathematical  details  regarding  forecasting  techniques,  as  this  would  make  my  remarks  a 
highly technical presentation. I would prefer to concentrate instead on the fundamental and 
most important elements of forecasting.  
So, where to start if one wants to generate a forecast? As we are living in an ever-changing 
economic  environment,  the  starting  point  of  every  forecast  is  a  set  of  forward-looking 
assumptions, at least with respect to main economic variables such as future market interest 
rates,  exchange  rates,  crude  oil  prices  and  both  world  trade  and  growth.  The  fact  that 
economic projections are built on assumptions highlights their typical conditional nature. 
Such  assumptions  are  then  used  as  input  factors  for  a  macroeconomic  model  of  the 
economy as a whole, which, as a result, provides a central forecast, reflecting the most likely 
outcome  over  the  projection  horizon,  also  called  the  “point  forecast”  or  the  “baseline 
scenario”. 
So far, so good. Up to now, this has been relatively easy to understand, but this is not the 
end of the forecasting process. A key consideration to bear in mind is that point forecasts do 
not  allow  the  proper  quantification  and  communication  of  two  very  important  aspects  of  a 
forecast, namely uncertainty and risk. 
Uncertainty and risk are two different things. I am therefore going to cover them separately. 
Let me first elaborate on the issue of uncertainty before looking more closely at the issue of 
risk. 
Kenneth Wallis, a researcher who has been working a lot on forecasting issues, rightly points 
out  that  “it  is  now  widely  recognised  that  a  point  forecast  [central  projection]  is  seldom 
sufficient  for  well-informed  decision-making  in  the  face  of  an  uncertain  future,  and  that  it 
needs to be supplemented with an indication of the degree of uncertainty.” 
In other words, even though the baseline scenario presented is to be regarded as the most 
likely  development  given  the  assumptions  made,  it  is  subject  to  uncertainties  since  actual 
future developments may deviate from the expected developments as reflected in the point 
forecast. 
The greater the difference between the point forecast and the subsequent actual realisation 
of the forecast variables is on average, the more uncertain is the forecast. Conversely, if the 
average deviation is low, this indicates that the forecasts are comparatively secure. 
What are the actual causes of the more or less high degree of uncertainty when generating 
macroeconomic  forecasts?  Five  sources  of  forecasting  uncertainty  and  possible  causes  of 
forecast errors can be distinguished.  
First,  the  model  used  for  forecasting  can  differ  from  the  actual  macroeconomic  process, a 
fact called “model uncertainty”. Models generally describe the macroeconomic process at a 
very high degree of abstraction and aggregation and thus necessarily conceal some of the 
complexities  of  economic  processes  or  confine  the  account  to  certain  elements  which  are 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2008
deemed characteristic. For the forecast, it is assumed that the relationships considered in the 
model are of sufficient relevance and will remain valid over the forecasting horizon.  
Second, the starting values on which a forecast is based can be tentative and thus subject to 
future statistical revisions. This is known as “data uncertainty”.  
Third, estimates are also necessary for the exogenous variables in the model, and these can 
be fraught with errors. This is termed “exogenous uncertainty”. The development in oil prices 
and capital market rates used for the forecasts are classic examples of this. 
Fourth, it can be expected that a number of non-systematic disruptions will occur during the 
forecast  period.  These  “stochastic  shocks”  cannot  be  foreseen  owing  to  their  incidental 
nature  but  are  temporarily  able  to  influence,  more  or  less  strongly,  the  underlying 
relationships between the economically relevant variables. This phenomenon is referred to 
as “residual uncertainty”. For instance, unusual weather conditions can temporarily have a 
stronger  impact  on  value  added  than  in  the  usual  seasonal  pattern,  particularly  in  the 
construction industry.  
Finally, estimation of the model parameters is also subject to uncertainty as samples of only 
a  limited  size  are  available  and  the  data  used  can  be  fraught  with  errors.  This  is  called 
“estimation uncertainty”.  
The  various  sources  of  forecasting  uncertainty  are  not  generally  independent  of  each 
another.  They  can  be  mutually  reinforcing  but  may  also  offset  each  other.  It  is  thus 
conceivable, for example, that an underestimation of the euro’s exchange rate against the 
US  dollar  will  go  some  way  towards  “correcting”  an  underestimation  of  the  dollar  price  of 
imported crude oil in terms of the effect on domestic prices. 
Being aware of the various sources of uncertainty associated with point forecasts is essential 
for a sensible use these projections, but this does not answer the question of how to actually 
put a figure on the degree of uncertainty. 
Not surprisingly, the precise extent of the forecasting uncertainty is unknown and has to be 
estimated. One procedure is to carry out stochastic simulations with a model. However, such 
simulations can hardly account for the effects of model uncertainty. Moreover, most forecasts 
are  not,  in  fact,  purely  model-based:  a  wealth  of  other  information  and  expert  opinions  is 
included.  
Therefore,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  ECB,  the  Bundesbank  and  most  other  institutions’ 
estimates for forecasting uncertainty are based on forecast errors discovered ex post, that is 
“with  the  benefit  of  hindsight”.  For  instance,  the  mean  absolute  error,  the  variance  or  the 
standard deviation of the errors can be used as a measure of forecasting uncertainty.  
Nowadays, the Bank of England, for example, employs a variance measure. In accordance 
with ECB practice for publishing Eurosystem projections, the measure of uncertainty used by 
the Bundesbank is the mean absolute forecast error above and below the point projection, 
which constitutes an uncertainty band. So, the width of the uncertainty band is double the 
mean absolute forecast error. If the errors occur randomly and are normally distributed, this 
area covers just under 60% of the distribution.  
However,  in  contrast  to  the  Bank  of  England,  the  ECB  and  the  Bundesbank  do  not  relate 
forecast  uncertainty  to  a  certain  distribution.  The  Bank  of  England,  relying  on  its  variance 
measure derived from past forecast errors, publishes a density forecast, thereby enabling the 
public to calculate any preferred measure of forecast uncertainty. The forecast density also 
allows  the  calculation  of  probabilities  associated  with  certain  inflation  ranges,  that  is,  for 
example, the probability that inflation will lie between 1% and 2% in a specific period. 
However, such a probability can, in principle, also be determined using the forecasts of the 
ECB and the Bundesbank. The main difference from the forecasts of the Bank of England is 
that the ECB and the Bundesbank leave the assumption about the distribution of the forecast 
errors to the public. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 5
Risks associated with macroeconomic forecasts 
3.2 
It  is  often  assumed  that  uncertainties  are  distributed  symmetrically  around  the  central 
forecast. However, depending on the specific data situation and conditions, there may well 
be signs when the projections are produced that this will not be the case. Indeed, unlike in 
the  historical  patterns,  there  is  not  a  symmetrical,  but  often  a  skewed  distribution,  which 
means that a deviation from the central forecast to one side is more likely than to the other 
side. 
Technically speaking, in such a case, the single most likely outcome – the point forecast or 
mode – deviates from the expected average outcome – the mean forecast. If this is the case, 
the terms “upside” or “downside” risks are used as part of a central bank’s risk analysis.  
In  this  context,  a  distinction  can  be  made  between  exogenous  risk  factors  –  especially 
developments  in  the  world  economy  and  interest  rates  –  and  endogenous  (domestic)  risk 
factors.  For  example,  unexpected  movements  in  oil  prices  or  exchange  rates  or  further 
implications of the financial market turbulence we have been observing during the past ten 
months are considered to be risk factors at present. 
While  the  Bank  of  England  quantifies  these  risks  and  calculates  its  density  forecasts 
accordingly, 
to  qualitative  risk 
assessments. Thus, they might, for example, simply speak of upside risks to inflation towards 
the  end  of  the  forecast  horizon,  whereas  the  Bank  of  England  might  publish  that  the 
skewness of its inflation density forecast equals 0.1 in the third quarter of 2010, implying that 
there is a slight upward risk in that quarter. 
the  Bundesbank  restrict 
the  ECB  and 
themselves 
How to convey uncertainty and risk? 
3.3 
Given  the  uncertainties  and  risk  associated  with  macroeconomic  forecasts,  the  question 
arises of how these facts should be conveyed to the public. One possible approach could be 
to  communicate  both  elements  in  a  purely  qualitative  (verbal)  way  without  any  specific 
quantitative  piece  of  information.  However,  many  forecasting  institutions  apply  a  method 
which  also includes some  additional  numerical  information  or  which,  in  addition,  translates 
this information into charts. 
The Bank of England, for instance, has been publishing its well-known fan charts for more 
than 12 years now. These skewed fan charts reflect both the degree of uncertainty and the 
perceived risk to the forecast and, being in the form of a graph, they are quite intuitive. 
The Eurosystem, by contrast, does not use fan charts as part of its quarterly macroeconomic 
staff projections, which include projections for inflation and the growth of real GDP. Rather, 
the Governing Council has decided to communicate the inherent uncertainty of forecasts by 
publishing the projections in the form of ranges, whose width is twice the average value of 
the absolute forecast error. 
With  respect  to  the  issue  of  risk,  some  observers  make  the  criticism  that  the  Eurosystem 
approach is not as advanced as that of the Bank of England, for example, because how the 
projections are conveyed to the public does not adequately communicate the balance of risk 
to  the  projected  outcome.  In  particular,  the  criticism  has  sometimes  been  made  that  the 
Eurosystem does not make use of skewed fan charts as the Bank of England does. 
In this connection, I would like to stress that, although the Eurosystem does not explicitly use 
fan charts, the way in which the Governing Council communicates the balance of risks with 
respect  to  the  staff  projection  has,  in  my  view,  the  same  information  content,  at  least 
qualitatively. 
At first sight, when looking at the ranges of the Eurosystem’s staff projections, there seems 
to  be  no  indication  whether  risks  to  the  outlook  are  symmetrically  or  asymmetrically 
distributed  –  in  other  words,  whether  risks  are  balanced  or  skewed  to  the  upside  or 
6 
 BIS Review 75/2008
downside. Therefore, many observers simply take the mid-point of the projection ranges and 
interpret this figure as the view of the Governing Council. 
But,  in  this  context,  there  are  two  important  elements  Eurosystem  observers  should  not 
overlook.  First,  the  projection  exercise  is  carried  out  by  staff  members  of  the  Eurosystem. 
Therefore,  the  projections  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  Governing  Council’s  view  or  its 
subjective  judgement.  Second,  and  more  importantly,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  does 
signal  its  subjective  assessment  regarding  the  balance  of  risk  to  the  staff  projections  by 
explicitly giving qualified indications in various ways. 
For instance, at the most recent press conference following the Governing Council meeting 
last  week,  the  ECB  President  stressed,  on  behalf  of  the  whole  Council,  that  risks  to  the 
outlook  for  inflation  remain  on  the  upside  in  both  the  short  and  medium  term.  He  also 
indicated  that  the  balance  of  risks  to  the  output  growth  projections  lie  on  the  downside. 
Finally, he added that the uncertainty surrounding the outlook remains high. Such messages 
are regularly conveyed not only in the press conference and the Monthly Bulletin, but also in 
many speeches by members of the Governing Council. 
In  my  view,  there  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  publishing  a  skewed  fan  chart  or 
indicating the asymmetry of risks in a qualitative, verbalised form like the Eurosystem does. 
In other words, “fans of the fan chart” might see the Governing Council’s statements on the 
Eurosystem  staff  projections  as  “verbalised  fan  charts”,  reflecting  the  Governing  Council’s 
subjective judgements with respect to the balance of risks. 
In  our  own  Bundesbank  approach,  we  have  chosen  to  communicate  uncertainty  in  the 
macroeconomic staff projection for Germany in a more formal way than the Eurosystem. This 
takes the form of an in-between view by adding a symmetric fan chart to the central forecast 
regarding the economic development in Germany. The main benefit of a fan chart is that it is 
pretty  illustrative  and,  because  of  this,  a  fan  chart  is  likely  to  convey  more  clearly  the 
message and degree of uncertainty related to the projections. 
We  arrived  at  a  more  sceptical  assessment  regarding  the  associated  question  of  whether 
such a fan chart should also reflect a risk assessment, that is whether – technically speaking 
– it should also be skewed. To do this, the impact of the various risk factors on the form and 
position of the density function of the forecast variable would have to be quantified.  
Although different approaches exist, such as the one taken by the Bank of England, there is 
not yet any generally accepted procedure for achieving this. Furthermore, while the Bank of 
England’s  risk  statements  are,  in  quantitative  terms,  clearly  more  precise  than  the  risk 
statements  of  Bundesbank  and  the  Eurosystem,  the  basic  question  arises  as  to  whether 
such  precision  is  warrantable.  My  answer  is  that  I  am  rather  sceptical  about  the  ability  to 
forecast  macroeconomic  risks  in  a  precise,  quantitative  manner.  Therefore,  it  seems 
preferable to me to assess risks in a qualitative, verbal manner only. 
Put  briefly,  I  think  that  our  approach  with  respect  to  the  Bundesbank’s  forecasts  – 
symmetrically  constructed  uncertainty  bands  supplemented  by  a  qualitative  (verbal)  risk 
assessment  –  strikes  a  good  balance  between  displaying  our  view  on  the  degree  of 
uncertainty  related  to  the  forecast  and,  at  the  same  time,  being  aware  of  the  limitations 
generally  faced  by  risk  assessments.  In  this  context,  putting,  for  example,  the  Bank  of 
England’s risk forecasts under scrutiny, our internal research has made the point that these 
forecasts contain little, if any, additional information. Finally, let me briefly cover the role of 
projections in monetary policy and then draw a conclusion. 
The role of projections in monetary policy 
4  
The  role  which  macroeconomic  projections  play  in  the  conduct  of  actual  monetary  policy 
differs among central banks according to the policy strategy they pursue.  
BIS Review 75/2008 
 7
Macroeconomic projections and, in particular, the inflation outlook, are the key element of the 
monetary  policy  strategy  referred  to  as  “inflation  targeting”  or,  more  precisely,  “inflation 
forecast  targeting”.  The  Bank  of  England  provides  a  classical  example  of  this  policy 
approach.  Pursuing  such  a  strategy  principally  provides  a  transparent  decision  rule  for 
monetary policy. 
In few words, the central bank sets its key interest rate in such a way as to ensure that its 
own  forecast  coincides  with  the  inflation  target  over  the  time  horizon  relevant  to  monetary 
policy. Hence, if the inflation projection forecasts the inflation rate to be above the target, the 
decision rule suggests that key interest rates should be increased and vice versa. Basically, 
owing  to  this  rather  simple,  but  transparent  and  comprehensible  rule,  monetary  policy 
becomes more predictable, as the likely policy course of the central bank can be anticipated 
relatively well by market participants. 
It  is  well  known  that,  in  principle,  a  rule-based  and,  thus,  relatively  predictable  monetary 
policy building on an explicit policy strategy helps to reduce uncertainty and, thus, renders 
central bank policy more effective. 
However, central banks that act as inflation forecast targeters are not necessarily dependent 
on  a  new  official  inflation  outlook  in  order  to  adjust  their  key  interest  rate.  The  Bank  of 
England, for instance, has shown twice during the past two years that it is free to change its 
monetary policy stance without referring to a new inflation report. 
For many market participants, these interest rate moves came as a surprise. This underlines 
the  point  that  forecast  targeting  should  not  be  misconstrued  as  an  attempt  at  absolute 
monetary policy predictability, either in the timing or the direction and size of policy moves. 
Hence,  in  almost  every  case,  central  banks  that  pursue  an  inflation  forecast  targeting 
strategy do so in a rather flexible way, thus leaving room for additional policy manoeuvre if 
warranted by the specific situation. Notwithstanding its basically simple and intuitive decision 
rule,  inflation  forecast  targeting  includes  a  substantial  degree  of  judgement  and  should 
therefore  not  be  confused  with  the  notion  of  a  mechanical  reaction  to  the  official  inflation 
outlook. 
In this context, one should also bear in mind that the Bank of England’s inflation outlook, for 
example, is not the outcome of a purely technical exercise. Rather, it represents the iterative 
conduct of the forecasting exercise between the Monetary Policy Committee and the bank’s 
staff, and, ultimately, the subjective assessment of the Monetary Policy Committee regarding 
medium-term  inflationary  pressures.  Evidently,  this  assessment  can  change  between  two 
publicly released inflation reports if significant new information becomes available. 
While  the  inflation  outlook  is  of  crucial  importance  for  inflation  forecast  targeting  central 
banks, the Eurosystem takes a different approach. As outlined above, we base our interest 
rate  decisions  on  two  pillars and  do  not  target  the  inflation  projection  in  a  way  a  forecast-
targeting central bank does. This is particularly the case as the inflation projection reflects the 
assessment of the staff, not necessarily that of the Governing Council. 
Our  two-pillar  approach  is  designed  to  ensure  that  no  relevant  information  is  lost  in  the 
assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  and  that  appropriate  attention  is  paid  to  different 
perspectives and the cross-checking of information in order to come to an overall judgement 
of the risks to price stability. 
Against the backdrop of an environment generally characterised by considerable uncertainty, 
the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy allows the adoption of a robust monetary policy 
which  reduces  the  risk  of  policy  errors  that  might  be  caused  by  over-reliance  on  a  single 
indicator, forecast or model. 
In this context, the regular broad macroeconomic projections are one important input factor 
for our policy decisions, but they are not the only relevant information we make use of. In 
particular, we also look at the development of monetary aggregates, as inflation is ultimately 
8 
 BIS Review 75/2008
always  and  everywhere  a  monetary  phenomenon  –  a  point  repeatedly  stressed  by  Milton 
Friedman and supported by a tremendous number of empirical studies. 
Conclusion 
After  this  overview  of  macroeconomic  projections,  their  characteristics  and  their  role  for 
monetary policy, let me conclude by saying that, nowadays, the basic principles of stability-
oriented central banks are largely the same everywhere. Inflation should be low and stable, 
and a central bank’s policy should focus primarily on achieving this goal. 
The actual monetary policy strategies, or, in other words, the way in which central banks try 
to live up to this goal, in fact differ to a certain extent, as I outlined earlier when referring to 
the Eurosystem’s and the Bank of England’s approach. 
However, irrespective of the differences between the respective strategies, these variations 
should not be overstated either. Ultimately, I think that the approaches adopted do not differ 
dramatically.  This  applies  to  the  method  and  the  outcome,  too.  Evidently,  either  stability-
oriented  approach  proves  to  be  largely  successful  in  containing  both  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations. 
Against this background, I do not see any signs that one approach might be clearly superior 
to the other, as some commentators suggest from time to time. More precisely, I do not see 
any  obvious  shortcomings  in  our  own  approach  either.  Nor  do  I  perceive  any  obvious 
advantages – or any which are, at the same time, free of obvious limitations – in the policy 
approaches taken by other central banks which would lead me to conclude that any change 
is needed in our own framework. 
In general, any monetary policy strategy has to take due account of the specific situation of 
the  currency  area  for  which  it  is  responsible.  As  this  is  so,  different  policy  frameworks  for 
achieving the same ultimate goal – price stability – are an absolutely natural outcome, not a 
surprising one. 
Furthermore,  I  think  that  another  aspect  is  well  worth  mentioning.  The  diversity  of  specific 
approaches  which  are,  nevertheless,  built  on  the  same  stability-oriented  fundamentals, 
enriches  the  wealth  of  experience  available  to  monetary  policymakers.  This  helps  to  draw 
further  conclusions  for a  robust  and  successful  monetary  policy  in  a  continuously  evolving 
economic landscape and, hence, helps to maintain price stability in the long run. 
Having said that, just one last point: speakers should exhaust their topic, not the audience. 
Therefore, I shall conclude with only two sentences. Thank you for your attention. I am now 
looking forward to our discussion. 
References 
Britton, Erik, et al., The Inflation Report Projections: Understanding the Fan Chart, Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin, February 1998. 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monetary Policy Transparency, Monthly Report, March 2000. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  The  Uncertainty  and  Risks  involved  in  Macroeconomic  Forecasts 
[Box], Monthly Report, December 2007. 
European Central Bank, A Guide to Eurosystem Staff Macroeconomic Projection Exercises, 
2001. 
Knueppel,  Malte  and  Schultefrankenfeld,  Guido,  How  informative  are  Risk  Forecasts?  An 
Examination  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Risk  Forecasts,  Bundesbank  Discussion  Paper 
(forthcoming). 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 9
Wallis,  Kenneth  F.,  Forecast  Uncertainty,  its  Representation  and  Evaluation,  Tutorial 
Lectures, IMS Singapore, 2007. 
Woodford, Michael, Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness, Presented at the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium,  “The  Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the 
Future", Jackson Hole, 2005. 
10 
 BIS Review 75/2008
