Axel A Weber: Globalisation, monetary policy and the euro  
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Norges 
Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway)  Conference  on  Monetary  Policy  “Jarle  Bergo  Colloquium: 
Globalisation and Monetary Policy”, Oslo, 7 March 2008.  
 Introduction  
1 
Speaking on globalisation and monetary policy at the current juncture I feel tempted to refer 
to  the  famous  song  by  Bob  Dylan  “The  times  they  are  a-changin”.  One  verse  has  several 
great lines of advice for economists:  
Come writers and critics  
Who prophesize with your pen 
………………… 
And don't speak too soon 
For the wheel's still in spin 
…………………….  
The loser now 
Will be later to win  
For the times they are a-changin'.  
It was only some months ago when a lot of “writers and critics have prophesized” that in an 
era  of  globalisation  inflation  is  and  should  be  no  reason  for  concern  for  monetary  policy 
makers.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  they  should  have  followed  Bob  Dylan’s  advice:  “But 
don’t speak too soon, for the wheel is still in spin”.  
Today  inflation  has  reappeared  on  a  global  scale  and  –  in  the  face  of  the  global  financial 
turbulences  of  the  past  months  –  the  debate  in  the  media  has  switched  from  being  in  a 
“goldilocks environment” to the inherent risks of entering a period of stagflation.  
Considering that, as Bob Dylan put it, “the times they are a-changin” a medium- to longer-
term  perspective  is  of  the  essence.  Taking  such  a  medium-term  view,  I  have  always 
belonged to the sceptics with regard to the “globalisation = low inflation”-paradigm.  
In my following remarks I want to concentrate on some of the implications globalisation has 
for monetary policy. There are at least two issues at play here: The influence of global factors 
on  domestic  price  developments  as  well  as  the  implications  of  globalisation  for  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  I  want  to  briefly  discuss  the  current  stance  of 
monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  in  the  face  of  global  inflationary  pressures  and  global 
financial tensions.  
I will argue that with regard to the first two more general aspects the globalisation process 
does  not  fundamentally  call  into  question  the  ability  of  an  independent  central  bank  to 
guarantee price stability over the medium-term. Thus, globalisation by no means reduces the 
need for a stability-oriented domestic monetary policy. This principle applies all the more to 
the current environment of elevated inflationary pressures and heightened financial market 
tensions. Of course, I do not intend to invoke the impression that the globalisation of goods 
and  financial  markets  has  not  altered  price  dynamics  and  transmission  forces.  To  the 
contrary!  
But  the  bottom  line  of  my  arguments  is,  that  globalisation  ultimately  raises  the  degree  of 
uncertainty with which monetary policy decisions are taken.  
Uncertainty,  however,  is  something  we  are  confronted  with  as  policy  makers  on  a  almost 
daily basis. It asks for a robust monetary policy strategy. Robustness in that context implies a 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 1
broad  analysis  of  monetary  and  economic  indicators.  But  it  also  means  a  clear  and  well-
known strategic framework that puts price stability to the forefront.  
To put it in Dylan’s words: globalisation certainly “holds the wheel in spin”. But it does not 
change the fundamental direction of a stability-oriented monetary policy, nor the need to take 
a medium-term view, because “the times, they are a-changin”.  
Globalisation: basic remarks and characteristics  
2  
Let me start with some basic observations regarding globalisation.  
Globalisation  is  a  term  referred  to  pretty  often  in  the  media,  and  by  politicians  and 
economists. However, there is no single definition of what globalisation actually means nor is 
there  a  single  key  figure  for  measuring  its  scale  and  evolution  over  time.  To  me,  a  useful 
starting-point  is,  quite  fundamentally,  the  notion  that  globalisation  describes  the  ongoing 
process  of  the  international  division  of  labour.  In  the  wake  of  this  process,  the  domestic 
markets for goods and services, as well as labour markets, are becoming more and more 
interlinked and interdependent internationally.  
In the absence of a single yardstick to gauge the extent to which globalisation is evolving, it 
is useful to look at various developments that, in combination, capture this process. Let me 
just pick out two distinctive developments.  
First: The steadily rising volume of global trade, whose growth rate has been exceeding that 
of  global  GDP  for  a  long  time  now.  On  average,  global  trade  has  grown  50%  faster  than 
world GDP over the past 35 years.  
During the 1990s, global trade even grew twice as fast as global GDP. Among the factors 
explaining this development are a number of developments which have particular relevance: 
more and more goods and services are becoming tradable. In addition, more companies and 
economies have become involved in foreign trade. Let us briefly look at some figures:  
a) 
as a result, the degree of real economic openness of many countries has increased 
significantly (as measured by total exports and imports of goods and services as a 
ratio  of  GDP).  For  example,  in  the  German  case,  the  relevant  figure  amounts  to 
roughly 75% at the current juncture, compared with just over 60% in 1990.  
global trade is also boosted by the ongoing internalisation of production structures. 
These are most visible by looking at the growing stock of FDI.  
b) 
increased 
form  8.9% 
According to UNCTAD figures, worldwide FDI stocks amounted to over 26% of world gdp in 
2006.  In  1990  the  corresponding  number  was  less  than  9%.  In  Germany  the  relevant 
numbers 
to  nearly  35%.  The  German  development  roughly 
corresponds to the Norwegian numbers (9.4 %/36 %).  
Second: The increasing openness of many economies in financial terms, measured by the 
ratio of the sum of external assets and liabilities to domestic GDP. For Germany, this figure 
currently  amounts  to  roughly  375%,  which  is  more  than  three  times  as  high  as  in  1990. 
Compared  with  other  developed  countries,  Germany  is  among  those  group  of  larger 
economies  that  have  the  highest  degree  of  financial  openness.  In  addition,  the  increasing 
financial  openness  of  many  economies  has  also  been  reflected  by  strongly  rising 
international capital flows, for example, in terms of cross-border securities transactions.  
The  process  of  globalisation  has  been  evolving  among  developed  countries  for  many 
decades now. Therefore, in contrast to what some observers might think, the current process 
of globalisation per se is neither new nor of special recent relevance. However, the pace of 
this process has been increasing rapidly for more than a decade now. In particular, declining 
costs  of  telecommunication  and  transportation  have  been  the  main  drivers  of  this 
development.  In  addition,  skill  levels  in  many  regions  of  the  world  have  improved 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2008
considerably  as  has  the  quality  of  goods  and  services  produced  in  formerly  rather 
underdeveloped countries.  
What has changed the face of globalisation is the fact that globalisation nowadays extends to 
a larger group of countries than in the past. More and more countries with formerly rather 
closed  economies  have  opened  themselves  to  the  world  market.  Thus,  new  players  have 
entered on to the global stage and are becoming increasingly relevant economic powers and, 
as a result, competitors to established developed countries.  
As  a  consequence,  the  process  of  globalisation  is  leading  to  a  shift  in  weights  within  the 
global  economy.  This  shift  is  nothing  exceptional.  It  is  quite  a  natural  development  which 
simply  reflects 
these 
developments have implications for many areas of economic policy, we should not forget that 
in the end globalisation is one of the most powerful forces to increase living standards. Thus, 
we  should  resist  protectionist  measures  wherever  they  arise  in  order  to  reap  the  mutual 
beneficial gains of a more global economy.  
the  continuously  evolving  global  economic 
landscape.  While 
2.1 Globalisation and the euro  
Another example for significant shifts in the international financial system in recent years are 
the developments after the introduction of the euro in 1999. Replacing the former currencies 
of  the  member  states  of  European  Monetary  Union  the  euro  has  gradually  grown  in 
importance  with  regard  to  its  international  role.  By  now,  it  is  the  second  most  important 
international currency next to the US-Dollar.  
The euro position clearly exceeds those of the former D-Mark before entering EMU, not least 
because of the deeper and more liquid financial market backing the euro.  
At  the  end  of  1998,  the  D-Mark  made  up  for  13%  of  forex  reserves,  10½  of  outstanding 
international  bonds  and  13  %  of  credit  institutions’  cross-border  forex  transactions.  In 
comparison, at the end of 2006 the euro share in international debt portfolios amounted to 
more than 30%. And the share of euro in international forex reserve holdings rose to over 
25 %.  Here,  however,  we  should  take  into  account  the  limited  data  coverage  with  an 
undisclosed  share  of  reserves  of  more  than  one  third  at  the  end  of  2006.  The  euro’s 
attractive role as a reserve currency clearly has to do with its role as an anchor currency for 
over 40 countries.  
Especially, many  countries  in  geographical  proximity  to  the  euro  area  use  the  euro  in  one 
way or the other as an anchor in their specific exchange rate regimes.  
I  could  give  you  additional  figures  on  the  use  and  the  relative  importance  of  the  euro  in 
various  segments  of  financial  markets  and  international  trade.  These  would  underline  the 
general impression that the euro has emerged as the second world currency. What seems 
more interesting in my view, is to reflect on some of the possible policy implications of the 
international role of the euro.  
It is true, that having an currency that is ranking high among international investors means 
that in principle external influences might gain in importance for monetary policy makers.  
But  there  should  be  no  principal  conflict  of  interests  between  external  and  domestic 
conditions when monetary policy is operating under a flexible exchange rate and a clear-cut 
price stability mandate. The growing international role of its own currency then will primarily 
reflect the stability-oriented domestic policy.  
This said, let me come back to my general topic and let me continue by looking more closely 
at the relationship between globalisation and monetary policy, which is certainly of special 
interest to a central banker.  
For  central  banks,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  forces  and  transmission  channels  of 
globalisation in order to calibrate the appropriate monetary policy stance.  
BIS Review 27/2008 
 3
Globalisation and inflation  
3  
The primary objective of many central banks throughout the world nowadays is price stability. 
This  also  holds  for  the  Eurosystem.  Only  when  this  goal  is  achieved  is  there  room  for 
monetary policy to support the general economic policies in the euro area. This hierarchical 
ordering reflects the sound economic principle that there is no principal conflict between price 
stability  and  economic  stabilisation.  Neither  in  the  long-run,  nor  –  for  most  cases  –  in  the 
short-run.  Rather:  Only  by  credibility  that  is  achieved  in  following  a  price  stability  course, 
monetary  policy  is  able  to  support  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation.  Price 
stability is thus both a means and an end for monetary policy.  
Given our focus on price stability, it is clear that a thorough understanding of the inflation-
generating  process  and  inflation  dynamics  is  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  Governing 
Council in deciding on short-term interest rates.  
The ongoing increase in real globalisation has been coinciding with a decline in inflation rates 
worldwide over the past decades. It is not surprising that these parallel developments have 
been given a causal interpretation along the lines that increased real globalisation has been 
driving  down  inflation  rates.  And,  indeed,  over  the  past  years,  the  price  of  manufacturing 
imports in the euro area has been rather stable, thus dampening, other things being equal, 
the increase in the overall consumer price index. The same developments could be observed 
in  other  mature  economies  as  well.  For  example,  in  the  euro  area  the  share  of  low-cost 
countries in euro area imports has increased from one third to over one half since 2000 (ECB 
(2008)). This is assumed to have dampened euro are import price inflation by 2.1 percentage 
points on average per annum.  
For  Germany  our  own  research  also  found  that  relative  producer  prices  in  manufacturing 
sectors are negatively correlated to the import share of these sectors (Bundesbank (2007)).  
This  prima  facie  evidence  seems  to  support  the  view  that  globalisation  has  been  a  main 
factor in lowering inflation rates. However, I have always been quite sceptical about whether 
the  story  of  globalisation  adequately  captures  the  aspects  that  are  most  important  for 
explaining the decline in inflation rates, at least for the euro area. It is monetary policy that, 
over  the  medium  to  long  term,  pins  down  trend  inflation.  Globalisation  through  increased 
trade with labour-abundant economies will affect only relative prices. It is a well-known fact 
that,  for  the  aggregate  price  level  and  its  rate  of  change,  relative  price  effects  have  no 
ultimate influence.  
Of  course,  globalisation  might  have  contributed  to  the  observable  decline  in  cross-country 
trend inflation as positive price shocks have created an environment in which some central 
banks  could  use  “the  opportunistic  approach  to  disinflation”.  But  this  does  not  seem  a 
convincing explanation for the bulk of industrial countries.  
Moreover, the increase in trade volumes relative to GDP is a process that was already under 
way  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  At  the  same  time  inflation  rates  during  this  period  were 
substantially higher than today.  
Finally, even the immediate relative price effects of trade with emerging economies are not 
as  benign  for  inflation  in  industrial  countries  as  is  commonly  assumed.  The  rapid 
industrialisation  of  economies  like  China  and  India  has  led  to  sharply  rising  commodity 
demand from these countries. This demand has contributed markedly to the increases in oil, 
food and raw material prices over the past couple of years.  
It is difficult to estimate the net effect of these different terms-of-trade shocks on the overall 
price level in industrial countries. But, in my view, there are no reasons to assume that the 
overall outcome has been one of a more benign inflation outlook.  
While  this  more  sceptical  view  was  often  disputed  still  some  months  ago,  the  current 
inflationary  pressures  in  industrial  countries  arising  from  energy  and  food  prices  have 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2008
certainly raised the awareness that the price effects of globalisation have been anything than 
a one-sided blessing.  
Taken  all  together,  there  are  growing  reasons  for  exercising  caution  with  regard  to  the 
popular  globalisation  story  of  inflation.  In  other  words,  in  my  view,  the  real  effects  of 
globalisation  on  the  inflation  process  are  an  issue  that  should  be  of  some  interest  for 
monetary  policymakers.  But,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the  importance  commonly  attached  to 
globalisation forces is less clear than popular views often assume.  
The  decline  in  trend  inflation  worldwide  is  better  explained  by  monetary  policy  in  many 
countries  being  geared  towards  price  stability,  which  is  enhanced  by  the  increasing 
independence of central banks in achieving their goals.  
This point – and the immediate implications for monetary policy – can also be illustrated with 
an  eye  on  macroeconomic  theory.  Here,  in  modern  macroeconomic  models  inflation 
dynamics are captured by (more or less forward-looking) Phillips curves.  
For  example,  by  now  in  academia  and  in  central  banks,  the  New  Keynesian  dynamic 
stochastic  general  equilibrium  framework,  which  includes  an  expectations-augmented 
Phillips curve, provides one of the workhorse models for monetary policy analysis. The policy 
advice  offered  by  this  framework  stresses  the  importance  of  the  management  of  private 
sector expectations even more than the traditional time inconsistency literature. According to 
Woodford  (2003),  “not  only  do  expectations  about  policy  matter,  but  ...  very  little  else 
matters.”  Even  if  one  does  not  completely  share  this  view,  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations  are  a  prerequisite  for  achieving  the  primary  objective  of  many  central  banks 
nowadays: price stability in the medium-term and also undoubtedly are a crucial measure of 
a central bank’s performance and credibility.  
Inflation expectations therefore closely link the success of monetary policy to its credibility; 
and the latter is supported if the central bank follows a systematic decision-making process, 
that is a rule-based policy strategy, and the general public has as clear an understanding of it 
as possible: in other words, monetary policy is transparent and communicated effectively.  
These advances in monetary policy, especially the anchoring of inflation expectations, in my 
view have been the main driving forces for globally declining inflation rates over the past few 
decades.  
But  what  is  important  to  understand  at  the  current  juncture:  The  successful  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations and the more effective monetary policy response to inflationary shocks 
will both show up in a flatter Phillips curve when it is estimated in reduced form. This is, in 
fact,  an  application  of  Goodhart’s  Law:  For  example:  Once  monetary  policy  is  responding 
more  effectively  to  inflationary  pressures  due  to  changes  in  capacity  utilisation,  the  output 
gap  will  empirically  lose  the  information  content  that  has  qualified  it  to  play  the  role  of  a 
leading  indicator.  The  empirical  evidence  of  a  flatter  Phillips  curve  is  an  empirical 
phenomenon that has been documented for several economies, including the United States 
and  the  euro  area  (see,  for  instance,  BIS  (2006)).  One  common  explanation  for  this 
phenomenon has been that globalisation of goods markets changed both trend inflation as 
well as the cyclical dynamics of the inflation process.  
But as also stated by Rick Mishkin (2007), the main reason for this is as I believe monetary 
policy having been more successful in stabilising both inflation and output.  
The  question  of  who  deserves  the  credit  is  by  no  means  a  theoretical  exercise.  It  has 
important  policy  implications.  To  be  more  specific:  estimated  Phillips  curves  may  give 
misguided policy advice when the monetary policy reaction and its effects are not properly 
taken  into  account.  First,  the  empirical  result  that  inflation  is  less  responsive  to  economic 
shocks  and  that  inflation  persistence  is  lowered  could  lead  monetary  policy  to  be  too 
complacent  when  it  comes  to  the  appropriate  response  to  economic  shocks.  Second,  the 
empirical  result  of  a  flatter  Phillips  curve  implies  a  seemingly  higher  sacrifice  ratio. 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 5
Accordingly,  the  impression  that  a  given  reduction  in  inflation  is  more  costly  in  terms  of 
output may lead policymakers to be more reluctant to respond to inflationary pressures.  
The important point to take into account is that if the dominant structural factors for a flatter 
Phillips  curve  has  been  a  more  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  in  the  past,  these  policy 
implications  may  mistakenly  induce  too  lax  a  monetary  policy  today.  This  opens  up  the 
possibility of inflation expectations becoming less well anchored and, if this scenario were to 
materialise the task of monetary policy would become even more difficult.  
Let  me  mention  one  other  more  general  aspect  of  the  linkages  between  globalisation  and 
monetary policy.  
Financial globalisation and monetary policy  
4  
Another  aspect  of  globalisation  with  potential  crucial  implications  has  to  do  with  the 
impressive growth in cross-border financial flows. As domestic asset prices are increasingly 
determined by global factors, the transmission channels of monetary policy measures might 
change as well. This is especially relevant for long-term interest rates as they constitute one 
of  the  main  variables  through  which  monetary  policy  influences  economic  outcomes  and 
inflation. For example, there is empirical evidence that the co-movement between German 
and US long-term nominal government bond yields have significantly increased since 1990, 
i.e.  during  the  period  of  dynamic  financial  market  globalisation  (Bundesbank  (2007)). 
Moreover, the behaviour of long-term rates in the US in the period between mid 2004 and 
mid  2005  –  famously  phrased  as  a  “conundrum”  by  the  then  chairman  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  –  has  raised  fears  that  monetary  policy  might  have  lost  influence  over  domestic 
long-term rates in the face of closely integrated financial markets.  
At first sight, this view appears to be supported by simple correlation analyses for the euro 
area  and  selected  OECD  countries.  But:  does  globalisation  mean  that  monetary  policy  is 
losing  its  leverage  over  domestic  long-term  interest  rates?  And  if  so,  does  this  mean 
monetary policy is becoming ineffective?  
I do not want to go too much into the details. Let me just make three points: First, simple 
eyeball-regressions indicating a weaker linkage between short-term and long-term rates are 
insufficient  to  establish  the  result  that  monetary  policy  has  become  less  effective  in 
influencing long-term rates. It could just reflect more stable inflation expectations against the 
background of increased monetary policy credibility. Thus, what would be more important is 
an analysis of the effects of unexpected moves in the short-term rate. Empirical studies that 
focus on these measures do not find evidence that either the monetary policy of the Federal 
Reserve  or  the  Eurosystem  suffers  from  a  diminished  leverage  over  long-term  rates 
(Ehrmann (2005), Brand (2006)).  
Second, even if it would be true that long-term interest rates are increasingly determined on 
the global capital market, this by no means renders monetary policy ineffective. One of the 
workhorses  of  international  macroeconomic  theory,  the  Mundell-Fleming  model,  dealt  with 
precisely this issue some 40 years ago. And you are familiar with the result that, as long as 
you operate a flexible exchange rate, monetary policy becomes the more effective the higher 
the degree of capital mobility is. The exchange rate channel then more than compensates for 
the decline in the ability to influence long-term rates.  
Finally, one might debate whether influence over long-term rates is the most important way in 
which central banks achieve their goals. Issues such as the transparency, independence and 
credibility  of  monetary  policy  are,  in  my  view,  far  more  important  in  stabilising  inflation 
expectations and thus safeguarding price stability.  
Apart from its likely influence on the transmission of monetary policy, financial globalisation is 
increasingly affecting financial stability aspects as well. The term “financial stability” broadly 
describes  the  financial  system’s  ability  to  perform  its  key  functions  efficiently,  including  in 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2008
stress  situations  and  periods  of  profound  structural  change.  This  embraces  the  efficient 
allocation of financial resources, the settlement of payments and securities transactions, and 
the  spreading  and  pricing  of  risk.  The  importance  which  many  central  banks  attach  to  the 
stability  of  the  financial  systems  has  increased  substantially  over  the  past  few  years. 
Regarding  financial  globalisation,  the  main  reason  for  this  development  is  that  the 
internationalisation of financial flows has increased the degree of integration of the national 
financial  systems  and  has  therefore  also  heightened  the  risks  of  contagion  in  the event  of 
turbulence.  
Thus, financial stability issues are, at least implicitly, also a task for central banks. What is 
the  basic  rationale  behind  this  conclusion?  The  central  banks’  primary  objective  of 
safeguarding  monetary  stability,  and  by  this  means  facilitating  sustainable  growth  and 
development,  requires  a  stable  financial  system.  In  fact,  monetary  and  financial  system 
stability are intertwined phenomena: Monetary stability can be maintained only if the financial 
system is sufficiently stable to transmit monetary policy signals, for example. In turn, a stable 
financial  system  is  unthinkable  without  monetary  stability,  which  is  a  necessary,  albeit  not 
sufficient prerequisite for financial stability.  
All these more general aspects of the relationship between globalisation and monetary policy 
I have mentioned are important factors for the appropriate calibration of the monetary policy 
stance at the current juncture. Therefore, I want to spend my final remarks on the current 
monetary policy challenges in the euro area.  
Some remarks on current monetary policy challenges in the euro area  
5  
In assessing the current economic environment and the appropriate monetary policy stance 
nearly all the above mentioned distinct features of globalisation come into play.  
Like  many  other  countries,  the  euro  area  is  confronted  with  global  price  pressures  from 
commodities  and  food.  In  addition,  the  transmission  of  the  financial  market  tensions 
originating in the US mortgage market to other countries has been fast. Moreover, spill-overs 
to other asset classes and intermediaries have played a prominent role. These developments 
have clearly been propagated by financial globalisation.  
Central banks are affected in many ways by the current financial turbulence. Being in charge 
of banking supervision in many countries, central banks are concerned with the liquidity and 
solvency  dimensions  of  individual  financial  institutions.  Being  a  “liquidity  provider  of  last 
resort”, central banks are concerned with tensions on the money markets. Being important 
macroeconomic actors in their capacity as setters of key interest rates, central banks have to 
weigh  the  potential  impact  of  financial  market  turbulence  on  the  real  economy,  on  growth 
figures and on inflation rates.  
As  you  will  probably  know  the  Governing  Council  in  its  meeting  yesterday  has  decided  to 
keep the policy rate unchanged at 4 %. But we have made clear that the current inflationary 
outlook and the medium-term upside risks are our major concern. Due to the steep increases 
in  the  prices  of  processed  and  unprocessed  food  since  mid  2007,  the  unbroken  trend 
increase in raw materials and another hike in energy price inflation in the second half of last 
year  the  HICP  headline  figures  in  the  euro  area  have  reached  levels  not  seen  since  the 
beginning of EMU.  
Annual HICP rates since November 2007 were above 3 % – well above the upper threshold 
of our definition of price stability. Moreover, core rates have crept up over the past months. 
Even  leaving  energy  prices  and/or  unprocessed  food  prices  out  of  the  picture  the 
corresponding inflation rate exceeds our medium-term comfort zone. Finally, even assuming 
a  marked  decline  in  food  price  inflation  over  the  course  of  2008,  as  embedded  in  the 
projections, does not result in annual HICP rates below 2 % in a single month in 2008. Due 
to increases in unit wage costs core inflation rates are projected to equally exceed the 2 % 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 7
margin  over  the  course  of  2008.  And  even  taking  into  account  a  forecast  horizon  beyond 
2008 gives no sign for relief.  
Medium-  to  long-term  inflation  risks are  also  signalled  by  the  unbroken dynamic  growth  of 
monetary aggregates.  
Long-term inflation expectations derived by break-even rates have also picked up over the 
past weeks resuming their upward trend observable since last summer. This is more visible 
for  long-term  inflation  expectations  derived  from  financial  market  prices  than  from  those 
derived from surveys.  
On the other hand we took into account that the prospects for global growth have become 
somewhat  clouded.  This  translates  into  a  less  optimistic  outlook  on  foreign  demand. 
Together  with  increased  risk  aversion  on  financial  markets  and  slightly  less  favourable 
financing  conditions  the  forecast  range  for  real  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  and 
Germany was shifted down. The weakening in gdp rates that has already been observed in 
the fourth quarter 2007 will carry over into the first half of 2008. But then a gradual recovery 
towards potential rates should set in. Overall, this outlook is consistent with growth just below 
potential  on  average  this  year.  Our  latest  projections  take  into  account  in  the  baseline 
scenario  that  some  of  the  previously  identified  upside  risks  to  inflation  and  some  of  the 
downside risks to growth have in part materialised over the past weeks.  
And  while  it  is  true  that  the  current  environment  for  projections  is  characterised  by  an 
unusual  amount  of  uncertainty,  I  would  emphasise  that  this  is  true  for  growth  as  well  as 
inflation.  
Taken all together, the current policy stance in the euro area has to be judged as contributing 
to  achieving  our  medium-term  objective  of  price  stability.  Weaker  growth  prospects  do  not 
pose  sufficient  reason  to  expect  a  dampening  of  inflationary  pressures  in  the  foreseeable 
future.  
Given our mandate of price stability and the identified upside risks especially in the medium-
term we have today re-iterated and emphasised our commitment to maintaining price stability 
as our primary objective in accordance with our mandate.  
References  
6 
Bank for International Settlements (2006), 76th Annual Report.  
Brand, C. et al (2006), The Impact of ECB Monetary Policy Decisions and Communication on 
the Yield Curve, ECB Working Paper No 657.  
Bundesbank (2007), Globalisation and Monetary Policy, Monthly Bulletin, October 2007.  
Ehrmann,  M.  et  al  (2005),  Stocks,  Bonds,  Money  Markets  and  Exchange  Rates,  ECB 
Working Paper No 452.  
European  Central  Bank,  Globalisation,  Trade,  and  the  Euro  Area  Macroeconomy,  Monthly 
Bulletin, January 2008.  
Mishkin, F. S. (2007), Inflation Dynamics, speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California, March 23.  
Woodford,  M.  (2003),  Interest  and  Prices,  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy, 
Princeton University Press.  
8 
 BIS Review 27/2008
