Axel A Weber: Financial markets, economic forecast and monetary 
policy  
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the British 
Chamber of Commerce in Germany, Frankfurt am Main, 17 April 2008.  
 1  
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen  
Last week, the Bank of England cut its official Bank Rate by 25 basis points to 5.0%. We at 
the ECB’s Governing Council decided to leave the key ECB interest rate of 4.0% unchanged, 
but to continue to monitor very closely all developments over the coming weeks. In the UK as 
well as in the euro area, monetary policy decisions were taken against a backdrop in which 
global headwinds play a crucial role. I would therefore like to use this opportunity to discuss 
the economic outlook for the euro area in general and Germany in particular as well as the 
Eurosystem’s monetary policy stance.  
Let me start, however, with the ongoing financial market turmoil, as it is arguably the global 
risk  factor  that  is  attracting  the  most  attention  at  the  moment.  As  for  the  other  global 
headwinds, in particular energy and food prices and a global rebalancing, I can assure you 
that they will get a mention later on.  
Recent financial market developments  
2  
Over  the  past  few  months,  practically  all  financial  markets  have  been  experiencing 
considerable  tensions.  Indeed,  what  began  as  a  fairly  contained  deterioration  in  the 
(relatively small) US subprime market has rapidly developed into a severe test of the stability 
of the global financial system.  
The unfolding of the global financial market turmoil is often broken down into various waves. 
In  August  2007,  the  first  wave  hit  the  markets  for  securitised  and  structured  financial 
products  as  well  as  the  interbank  money  markets.  The  predominant  feeling  was  one  of 
general  mistrust  among  market  participants  in  terms  of  the  extent  and  the  distribution  of 
subprime-related  losses.  The  second  wave  reached  global  financial  markets  in  November 
2007. Once the banks had published their quarterly reports, it became evident that losses 
incurred by globally active financial institutions were not confined to transactions related to 
residential mortgage markets and far exceeded expectations. Hence, the focus shifted from 
liquidity  issues  to  concerns  about  market  participants’  solvency.  The  third  wave,  which  we 
have  been  witnessing  since  February/March,  consists  of  a  massive  deleveraging  in  the 
global financial system.  
Incoming data support the view that adjustment processes in global financial markets are far 
from over and that they will continue to be painful. But some positive signs are also emerging 
now  indicating  that  the  worst  may  be  behind  us.  This  leads  us  to  the  question  about  the 
origins of the current financial market turmoil, which is at once the first turmoil in the market 
for securitised products. Contrary to what Ulrich Cartellieri, at the time a board member of 
Deutsche Bank, once conjectured, namely that “banks are the steel industry of the 1990s”, 
meaning that banking would lose much of its importance in a world moving towards capital-
based financial systems, the current turbulence clearly demonstrates that the securitisation 
of  credit  risk  has  by  no  means  reduced  the  leading  role  banks  play  within  the  financial 
industry. On the contrary, commercial and investment banks initially benefited from the rapid 
development  of  structured  financial  instruments  such  as  residential  mortgage-backed 
securities (RMBS), credit default swaps (CDSs) and collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 1
by actively managing their own credit portfolios, earning fees from originating, structuring and 
distributing these instruments and earning revenue from market-making and trading.  
Despite such profits, the originate-and-distribute model, that is the ability to distribute credit 
risk  away  from  one’s  own  balance  sheet  –  through  the  use  of  structured  products  –  to 
investors  with  an  appetite  for  it,  is  at  the  heart  of  today’s  financial  market  tensions.  The 
ongoing tensions have revealed serious vulnerabilities that had long been masked by the fast 
pace  of  growth  in  credit  risk  transfer  markets.  First,  the  originate-and-distribute  model 
induced investment banks as well as other, often unregulated financial institutions such as 
hedge funds and special purpose vehicles to take on large holdings of credit risk with a high 
degree of leverage. Second, securitisation exacerbated the information asymmetries that are 
inherent  in  credit  markets.  In  particular,  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  distribution  of  credit 
risk among global market participants and, consequently, transparency about exposures is 
limited. Third, some market participants’ risk management standards have not kept pace with 
developments.  This  cocktail  of  vulnerabilities  may  explain  the  surprising  speed  with  which 
mistrust  among  market  participants  spread  around  the  world,  causing  several  financial 
market segments to dry up temporarily. 
However,  there  is  more  to  the  present  financial  market  turmoil  than  meets  the  eye  of  the 
casual observer. When comparing the ongoing financial market turmoil with similar episodes 
in  the  past,  it  becomes  evident  that  a  process  is  at  work  in  which  macroeconomic  and 
financial factors reinforce each other. This is particularly true and visible in the USA. Let me 
exemplify this interplay using the present financial market developments. Against the benign 
and  prolonged  backdrop  of  robust  global  economic  growth,  low  inflation,  a  low  level  of 
interest rates, low default rates and rising asset prices in many countries, not just in the USA, 
lending experienced rapid growth. Credit transactions were also supported by the originate-
and-distribute  model  and  by  the  strong  demand  for  securitised  products  owing  to  a  global 
search  for  yield.  These  processes  were  mutually  reinforcing  until  the  credit  cycle  finally 
turned  and  set  in  motion  a  deleveraging  in  the  financial  system,  which  has  in  turn  put 
pressure  on 
institutions’  capital 
requirements.  
The  extent  to  which  a  global  downturn  in  the  credit  cycle  affects  the  real  economies  in 
different  parts  of  the  world  obviously  varies  according  to  a  country’s  direct  and  indirect 
exposure, the degree of overvaluation in housing and mortgage markets, the structure of its 
banking system, its macroeconomic imbalances and other factors. As for the euro area and 
Germany, the economic outlook is still favourable, a point I will elaborate on shortly.  
In  times  of  sizable  money  market  tensions,  restoring  confidence  among  financial  market 
participants  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  For  a  transitional  period,  central  banks  have 
therefore been acting as market makers of last resort on interbank markets. The Eurosystem 
in particular has used its standard refinancing operations in order to stabilise the euro area 
overnight rate around the minimum bid rate of currently 4%. We will continue this policy as 
long as tensions persist in order to ensure the orderly functioning of the euro area money 
market. However, it is important to bear in mind that we in the Eurosystem strictly separate 
our  management  of  aggregate  liquidity  conditions  from  the  determination  of  our  monetary 
policy stance. This implies that when deciding on key interest rates, the primary objective of 
the  Governing  Council  has  been  (and  will  continue  to  be)  price  stability,  which  is  in 
accordance with our mandate.  
But what about the fundamental problems facing the financial markets – how are they to be 
solved?  Various  groups  at  a  European  and  international  level,  especially  the  Financial 
Stability Forum (FSF), are busy finding ways to overcome the apparent vulnerabilities of the 
global financial system. Last weekend, the FSF presented its detailed recommendations for 
enhancing the resilience of the global financial system. The recommended actions are in five 
areas:  
• 
Strengthened prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management  
financial  market  prices, 
financial 
thereby 
raising 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Enhancing transparency and valuation  
Changes in the role and uses of credit ratings  
Strengthening the authorities’ responsiveness to risks  
Robust arrangements for dealing with stress in the financial system  
• 
• 
• 
• 
These  measures  are  a  first  step  to  a  regulatory  response  which  aims  at  tackling  those 
weaknesses  of  the  global  financial  system  that  caused  the  current  and  severe  financial 
stress. In our G-7 meeting last weekend in Washington, we endorsed the FSF’s report. It is 
now  essential 
implemented  effectively.  Rapid 
implementation  will  help  to  restore  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  markets  and  financial 
institutions.  
The  FSF  has  not  yet  made  recommendations  about  the  forces  that  contribute  to 
procyclicality,  as  this  is  an  issue  that  requires  further  study.  Procyclicality  is  inherent  in 
financial transactions and means that the monitoring, measuring and pricing of financial and 
credit  risks  typically  tend  to  be  too  optimistic  in  an  economic  upturn  and  are  often  too 
pessimistic in an economic downturn. It is well understood that the financial and regulatory 
infrastructure  should  not  add  to  or  exacerbate  the  procyclicality  of  credit  and  financial 
transactions. We therefore need to study carefully how the resilience of the global financial 
system with respect to procyclicality can be enhanced further.  
recommendations  are 
these 
that 
Economic outlook for the euro area and Germany  
3  
After four to five years of buoyant growth, the global economy now faces a new setting: On 
the one hand, the US subprime crisis and its repercussions in various financial markets have 
had a dampening effect not only on the US, but also on the global economy. On the other 
hand, inflationary pressures, which mainly stem from sharply rising energy and food prices, 
are increasing on a worldwide scale. They pose a particular challenge to some developing 
countries, but also give rise to concern in industrialised countries.  
Against this backdrop, the US housing market, and with it the US economy as a whole, has 
deteriorated  further  over  the  past  few  months.  Consequently,  economists  and  financial 
market  participants  alike  are  –  once  again  –  asking  themselves  if  Europe  will  be  able  to 
decouple now that the US outlook has substantially deteriorated.  
Arguably,  in  today’s  globalised  world  where  domestic  markets  for  goods  and  services,  as 
well as labour and capital markets, are becoming increasingly interlinked, Europe is unlikely 
to succeed in isolating itself from the development in one of the world’s major economies. 
And indeed, in the UK, after a decade or more of a non-inflationary consistently expansionary 
economy  (a  time  dubbed  “nice”  by  Mervyn  King,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England), 
output growth is expected to moderate and inflation to rise further this year. In the euro area, 
too,  the  weakening  global  expansion,  stronger  pressure  from  commodity  prices  and  the 
impact of financial market developments have set the stage for a more cautious, though still 
robust  economic  outlook.  As  a  consequence,  in  March,  the  ECB  staff  slightly  adjusted 
downwards  its  macroeconomic  projections  on  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Average 
annual real GDP growth is now projected to be between 1.3% and 2.1% (average: 1.7%) in 
2008  and  between  1.3%  and  2.3%  (average:  1.8%)  in  2009,  which  reflects  moderate  but 
ongoing economic activity.  
Hence, exaggerated growth pessimism is the wrong attitude at the current juncture. Instead, 
it is important to keep in mind that even if a full decoupling of the euro area economy from 
the  US  economy  does  not  seem  plausible  for  the  time  being,  structural  shifts  in  the  world 
economy have taken place that support the view that a US slowdown will have less of an 
impact  in  Europe  than  in  the  past.  This  hope  is  further  justified  by  the  euro  area’s  sound 
economic fundamentals and its likely good performance in the first quarter of 2008.  
BIS Review 49/2008 
 3
To elaborate further on the decoupling issue, let me turn my attention to Germany. German 
real GDP has grown strongly by 2.7% on average over the past two years in price-adjusted 
terms. Despite mounting global headwinds, the German economy has started into 2008 on a 
positive  note,  which  is  reflected  in  substantial  increases  in  both  industrial  activity  and 
construction output in the first quarter of this year. We expect German GDP growth in the first 
quarter to be around ¾ %. Moreover, business sentiment has not deteriorated so far. Labour 
market conditions remain favourable, with the number of unemployed at its lowest level in 15 
years,  down  almost  1.5  million  unemployed  within  the  last  two  years.  However,  consumer 
spending remains lacklustre. As for its future path, we expect private consumption to benefit 
from  the  sustained  improvement  on  the  domestic  labour market.  But  there  is  the  high  risk 
that consumer spending will prove sensitive to the elevated levels of consumer price inflation 
and thus display protracted weakness.  
All things considered, however, the German economy has weathered the global headwinds 
remarkably well. Indeed, the conditions required for a continuation of the economic upturn in 
Germany are still very much in place even though downside risks persist. We still expect the 
German  economy  to  grow  roughly  in  line  with  potential  in  2008  and  see  no  need  to 
substantially  change  our  December  2007  projection.  There  are  three  main  factors  that 
support this favourable outlook.  
1) 
the  past 
The  remarkable  efforts  made  by  German  companies,  wage  bargainers  and 
politicians  over 
few  years,  namely  restructuring  measures,  wage 
moderation and labour market reforms, have strengthened corporate balance sheets 
and  boosted  the  price  competitiveness  of  German  firms.  It  is  worth  recalling  that 
these efforts were the outcome of a painful learning process resulting from years of 
stubbornly  high  unemployment  and  competitiveness  problems  for  major  German 
industrial sectors. Now that these efforts are starting to bear fruit, it is essential that 
all  parties  concerned  do  not  abandon  them  for  short-time  vested  interests  and 
thereby jeopardise the sustainability of economic growth.  
The second reason for German firms’ relatively good position is external demand. In 
this context, fears are frequently voiced that the strong euro and the slowdown of 
the  global  economy  could  prove  a  drag  on  German  export  performance.  To  date, 
these fears have not been realised. First, the major share (that is more than 40%) of 
German exports goes to the euro  area and is therefore not affected by exchange 
rate movements – at least not directly. In addition, total German exports include an 
increasing  percentage  of  capital  goods  (such  as  machines  and 
technical 
less  price-responsive.  Second,  a 
equipment), 
considerable portion of Germany’s exports goes to new and faster-growing markets, 
such  as  Asia  and  the  new  EU  member  states,  which  have  so  far  proved  fairly 
resilient to the slowdown in the US economy. Third, the euro’s appreciation should 
not  only  be  viewed  from  the  perspective  of  external  demand.  A  strong  euro 
simultaneously  dampens  the  prices  of  import  goods.  This  helps  to  curb  the 
inflationary pressures resulting from strong rises in energy and food prices and thus 
has a stabilising effect.  
The third factor in favour of a fairly optimistic economic outlook for Germany is that 
the  ongoing  financial  market  turmoil  has  so  far  had  no  discernible  impact  on  the 
German  economy.  In  particular,  credit  growth  is  still  robust,  the  German  housing 
market is not overstretched, corporate balance sheets remain strong and consumers 
are  not  excessively  leveraged.  So  far,  the  German  banking  system  has  proven 
sound. Admittedly, the ongoing adjustments in the global financial markets will be 
associated  with  a  number  of  further  challenges  for  banks  both  nationally  and 
internationally. However, from the current perspective, the risk of a credit crunch in 
Germany is fairly remote.  
for  which  global  demand 
is 
2) 
3) 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
In summary, the driving forces behind the current upswing of the German economy remain 
fundamentally intact. As a consequence, I see no compelling reason to paint a bleak growth 
scenario for the German economy in the ongoing year.  
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy stance  
4  
Strong  upward  pressure  on  global  inflation  can,  to  a  large  extent,  be  explained  by  sharp 
hikes  in  energy  and  food  prices.  A  combination  of  protracted  and  robust  global  economic 
growth  and  increasing  capacity  constraints  drove  commodity  prices  to  new  record  highs. 
Consequently, inflation has increased markedly all over the world, a development which, in 
industrialised countries, has been particularly pronounced since the second half of 2007. 
This is also true of the euro area. The annual Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
rose to a worrying 3.6% in March. This is the highest rate since the euro’s launch in 1999 
and well above the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability – inflation rates of below 2% in 
the medium term. Looking ahead, energy and food prices are likely to keep the eurozone’s 
inflation  rate  at  elevated  levels  for  longer  than  initially  expected.  Hence,  we  will  witness 
temporarily  high  inflation  rates  for  a  more  protracted  period  than  previously  anticipated, 
though rates will eventually decline towards 2%.  
What does such an outlook mean for the Eurosystem’s monetary policy stance? To put the 
issue into a broader perspective, let me note that a central bank cannot adequately react to 
the  (temporary)  first-round  effects  stemming  from  increases  in  oil  and  food  prices,  indirect 
taxes and the like. Nor should it attempt to do so, since a change in monetary policy impacts 
on  the  price  level  only  with  a  considerable  time  lag  of  several  quarters.  Consequently,  a 
central bank reacting mechanically to first-round effects would be likely to do more harm than 
good.  
In the medium run, however, the persistence of high energy and food price inflation is cause 
for serious concern. Protracted relative price changes may translate into medium to longer-
term inflation expectations becoming less well anchored and drifting slowly over and above a 
central  bank’s  price  stability  threshold.  Elevated  inflation  expectations  could  give  rise  to  a 
damaging wage-price spiral, thereby generating the so-called “second-round effects”. Given 
the  costs  of  curbing  such  inflation  dynamics  once  they  have  started,  the  stability-oriented 
Eurosystem  has  to  fight  the  risk  of  broad-based  second-round  effects  decisively  and 
proactively. The recent rounds of wage settlement in the euro area have not contributed to 
curbing  inflation  pressures.  On  the  contrary,  recent  wage  dynamics  in  conjuncture  with 
elevated  and  persistent  energy  and  food  price  pressures  have  increased  the  risk  of  a 
prolonged period of intolerably high inflation.  
At  our  last  meeting  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  we  have  emphasised  that  given  the 
uncertainty about the economic outlook and the downside risks associated with the tensions 
in global financial markets, the continued vigorous expansion of money and credit and the 
strong  upside  risks  to  price  stability  the  current  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  stance  will 
contribute  to  the  anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  at  a  level 
consistent with price stability. At the same time, the ECB’s Governing Council has promised 
to  do  what  is  needed  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  will  continue  to  remain  firmly 
anchored at low levels.  
Against this background, we will have to continuously monitor closely all incoming data and 
evaluate whether the current level of interest rates in fact ensures to achieving our objective. 
After all, the best contribution the Eurosystem can make to sustainable growth in the euro 
area is to safeguard price stability in the medium to long term – and not to be forgotten: A 
reliable monetary policy in combination with a commitment to provide liquidity to ease market 
tensions also helps to reduce uncertainty in times of the ongoing financial market turmoil.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 5
