Christian Noyer: Conducting monetary policy in times of financial stress 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the European Banking 
and Financial Forum, Prague, 1 April 2008. 
 For  more  than  two  centuries,  preserving  the  value  of  money  and  fostering  the  stability  of 
payment systems and credit and financial markets have been the two main responsibilities of 
central banks around the world. Under normal circumstances, we tend to think of these tasks 
as  relatively  distinct.  Furthermore,  this  practical  dichotomy  broadly  reflects  the  academic 
state  of  the  art:  as  Professor  Goodhart  recently  stressed,  the  large  consensus  on  the 
macroeconomic policy side of central banking that has emerged over the last two decades 
contrasts  with  the  absence  of  consensus  on  the  appropriate  theoretical  framework  for 
analysing  financial  stability  and  the  best  ways  of  ensuring  it  or  restoring  it  when  it  breaks 
down.1
However, in times of stress, some interactions inevitably emerge. For instance, the financial 
turmoil  has  a  clear  impact  on  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  transmission  (see  for 
example the unusually large spreads on the money markets since August 2007). Conversely, 
adequate  monetary  policy  decisions  and  credible  communication  should  contribute  to  the 
orderly  unwinding  of  financial  crises.  Periods  of  turmoil,  like  the  one  we  are  now 
experiencing, are thus clearly challenging, since we have to rethink the way in which we can 
meet both of our responsibilities.  
I  will  first  address  the  issue  of  the  necessary  separation  of  liquidity  management  and 
monetary policy decisions. I will then briefly compare policy actions in the US and the euro 
area  and  I  will  conclude  with  some  lessons  we  can  draw  from  the  current  experience  of 
financial stress.  
Disentangling liquidity management and monetary policy action is key 
One  big  challenge  for  central  bank  policy-making  and  communication  in  these  times  of 
financial stress is to get the message across to the public that liquidity management, which 
has  a  short-term  perspective,  can  be  completely  separated  from  the  definition  of  the 
monetary  policy  stance,  which  has  a  medium-term  perspective.  Indeed,  in  a  period  of 
increasing  inflationary  risks  stemming  notably  from  excess  demand  for  commodities  and 
energy  worldwide,  it  is  crucial  that our  liquidity  management  should  not  be  misinterpreted, 
nor should it contribute to a deterioration of inflation expectations. 
To put it bluntly, monetary policy-making is about setting the policy rate at a level consistent 
with  the  macroeconomic  objectives  of  the  central  bank,  and  no  more,  while  liquidity 
management  is  about  getting  the  money  market  functioning  in  a  “normal”  way,  so  that 
monetary policy impulses can be transmitted effectively to the rest of the economy. I have in 
mind our efforts to bring one-month to three month interest rate spreads back to their usual 
low  and  stable  levels.  Note  that,  broadly  speaking,  what  I  here  call  liquidity  management 
could, to some extent, come under the Lender of Last Resort function (LLR) of central banks, 
although the range of possible actions by the LLR is obviously not limited to the market-wide 
                                                 
1  Cf. Goodhart and Tsomocos (2007). 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 1
open-market  operations  that  we  have  conducted  so  far  in  the  euro  area  (they  include  in 
particular targeted ELA to an illiquid credit institution).2  
To  make  my  point  more  explicit,  let  me  briefly  recall  a  standard  result  by  William  Poole 
(1970), which implies that, when demand for central bank money is uncertain, it is optimal to 
stabilise  the  short-term  interest  rate,  letting  money  supply  adjust  endogenously.  That  is 
precisely what has happened in the euro area over the last few quarters. Indeed, the bulk of 
liquidity  injections  since  last  August  has  merely  been  an  attempt  to  align  the  timing  and 
maturity of liquidity supply with changing demand within the reserve maintenance periods, in 
order to stabilize the very short-term interest rate on the interbank market. Of course, this is 
always a difficult task, since the increase in the precautionary demand for liquidity altered the 
behaviour of banks and rendered the forecasting models we use to calculate the benchmark 
need for liquidity less effective, at least temporarily. However, since the Eurosystem acted as 
a  price-taker  during  these  liquidity  injections,  it  is  obvious  that  the  interest  rates  at  which 
these fine-tuning and longer-term operations were settled had no information content for the 
monetary policy stance.  
Comparing policy actions across the Atlantic 
The best way to convey the message that monetary policy actions and liquidity management 
are by and large two separate things is probably to draw some lessons from a comparison of 
what  has  been  happening  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  While  liquidity  management 
strategies appear to have been roughly identical over the last few months in the US and the 
euro area, monetary policies seem to have diverged quite a bit, with the Fed cutting the fed 
funds  target  by  3%  over  three  quarters  down  to  2.25%,  while  the  ECB  has  maintained  its 
repo rate unchanged at its pre-crisis level of 4%.  
Let us first take a look at liquidity management issues. Interestingly enough, in an attempt to 
rein  in  the  soaring  short  term  spreads  on  its  money  market  (e.g.  the  3-month  OIS-BOR 
spread  nosed  above  100bp  in  December)  the  Fed  adjusted  its  operational  framework  in  a 
way that roughly closed the gap with its euro area counterpart. In particular, the new Term 
Auction  Facility  that  the  Fed  implemented  in  mid-December  enlarges  both  the  range  of 
eligible  borrowers,  from  about  20  primary  dealers  to  all  banks  that  are  judged  to  be  in 
generally sound financial condition, and the range of eligible assets that can be brought as 
collateral to the auction, from T-bonds to corporate bonds and MBS. Consequently, longer 
term liquidity injections by the Fed now run along similar lines as the ECB’s ones. 
Regarding monetary policy issues, the sharp rate cuts carried out by the Fed, including two 
75bp cuts, contrast at first sight with the policy stance of the ECB. Why such a difference? 
Does this point to a lack of reactivity on the part of the ECB during downturns? This claim, 
though  often  heard,  is  not  supported  by  scientific  analyses  of  past  actions.  For  instance, 
recent  simulations  conducted  by  Prof.  Larry  Christiano  and  co-authors  suggest  that  the 
ECB’s actions were indeed more effective in stabilizing output in the aftermath of the 2001 
crash (Christiano, Rostagno and Motto, 2007), while different shocks and different degrees of 
nominal rigidities in both economies accounted for apparent different reaction functions. 
Looking at the present situation, I think that it is possible to reconcile both views if one takes 
account of the nature and extent of macroeconomic uncertainty that currently affects the US 
economy as compared with the euro area. 
Economic  uncertainty  facing  policymakers  has  always  been  a  first-order  problem,  but  it  is 
obviously  particularly  acute  in  periods  of  stress.  Taking  into  account  some  non-benign 
                                                 
2   Recent research at the Banque de France highlights moral hazard issues associated with the choice of any of 
these instruments by the LLR, cf. Ewerhart and Valla (2007), when the strategic behaviour of money market 
participants is explicitly modelled. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2008
dimensions of this uncertainty may be an incentive for central bankers to implement a “risk-
management” approach to monetary policy. This is at least the view that Fed Gov. F. Mishkin 
has  expounded  in  a  recent  speech  on  “Monetary  policy,  risk  management  and  financial 
disruptions” (Mishkin, 2008).  
Over the last few decades, research in macroeconomics has focused on two main types of 
uncertainty:  
- 
uncertainty  about  the  current  state  of  the  economy,  commonly  called  data 
uncertainty,  
uncertainty about the structure of the economy, which includes: 1/ uncertainty about 
some key parameters of the economy (e.g., the slope of the Phillips curve) which 
may be seen as a benign form of model uncertainty, with some parameters varying 
in the neighbourhood of an unknown true value; and 2/ a more radical uncertainty 
about  the  true  model  in  a  given  model  space  (e.g.  what  is  the  true  probability 
distribution  of  shocks,  is  it  Gaussian  or  not,  what  is  the  magnitude  of  the  “tail 
risks”?). Issues like: “What are the non-linear dynamics that financial disruption may 
trigger?” are here of the essence. 
 Regarding data uncertainty, a general principle of conduct is certainty equivalence: a policy 
rule that is optimized under the assumption of an absence of data uncertainty is still optimal 
in  the  presence  of  such  uncertainty.  Regarding  the  consequences  of  “simple”  parameter 
uncertainty, a key reference is the Brainard (1967) principle of caution, which suggests that 
the  monetary  policymaker  should  react  more  cautiously  to  shocks  to  variables  associated 
with  uncertain  parameters  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  process.  However,  what 
central  banks,  and  in  particular  the  US  Fed,  face  today  may  be  seen  as  a  radical  kind  of 
model uncertainty. Not only are they uncertain about the value of specific parameters, but the 
probability  distributions  of  target  variables  and  shocks  may  have  changed  and  standard 
linear approximations may not be valid anymore.  Concretely, this means that they have to 
make up their mind and set the most appropriate policy considering competing models of the 
economy  (and  possibly  misspecified  models,  because  of  the  unprecedented  nature  of 
ongoing events). Risk management considerations are then of the essence. 
Risk management considerations are probably best understood as an application of the so-
called robust control approach that notably L. Hansen and T. Sargent have adapted from the 
engineering literature.3 Interestingly enough, lessons from this recent literature tend to violate 
the  Brainard  principle:  under  robust  control,  a  stronger  reaction  to  economic  data  may  be 
warranted in order to prevent relatively unlikely but potentially disastrous outcomes (e.g. the 
Great Depression again). Mishkin’s case for a risk-management approach to US monetary 
policy in the present juncture obviously provides a sound rationale for the last three rate cuts 
by the FOMC (-75bp and -50bp in January and -75bp in March). President Bernanke’s in-
depth knowledge of the credit crunch of the 1930s in the US (cf. Bernanke, 1983) probably 
also helped shape this view that there is a non-zero probability in the current juncture of an 
“ugly equilibrium” of the debt-deflation type that must be discarded by prompt and vigorous 
policy action.  
An  immediate  question,  then,  is  to  determine  whether  these  analyses  are  relevant  for  the 
conduct of monetary policy in the euro area. For the time being, they are not. My reasons for 
being relatively more optimist that our American colleagues are threefold:  
                                                 
3   The key idea of robust control is that policy-making should aim at minimizing the consequences of worst-case 
scenarios. Even if the required policy eventually appears sub-optimal considering ex post that the large-scale 
shocks have not materialized, a risk-management approach assesses that the associated cost of buying an 
insurance is small compared to the alternative. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 3
   First, a major financial disruption (involving the banking system) is less likely in the 
euro area than in the US. European banks are of course not immune from losses 
due to their exposure to the US subprime market or other markets that have frozen 
since  the  crisis  burst  out,  but  this  exposure  is  on  average  significantly  lower  than 
that  of  their  US  counterparts  and  their  model  of  universal  banking  allows  them  to 
mitigate the consequences of a crisis in one segment of their activity. 
Second,  empirical  evidence  supports  the  view  that  the  real  macroeconomic 
consequences of protracted financial distress should be relatively less disruptive in 
the euro area. First of all, household indebtedness has remained relatively low by 
international  standards  in  the  euro  area  in  general  (and  notably  in  France). 
Furthermore, available evidence points to a weak transmission of financial shocks to 
household consumption via the wealth channel. 
Finally, the short-term economic outlook is much more encouraging in the euro area 
than in the US. Even if our economies are slowing down, no recession lies on the 
horizon.  
Some lessons so far for the euro area 
The crisis is clearly not over and all the consequences of accumulated financial imbalances 
have not unravelled yet. However, after more than seven months, I think it is already possible 
to  take  stock  of  what  we  have  learnt  so  far.  My  concluding  remarks  will  draw  tentative 
lessons along three main lines. 
1. 
As  regards  liquidity  management  first,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  close 
cooperation between central banks, and notably between the ECB and the Fed has 
been crucial for dampening the effects of the protracted confidence crisis that has 
frozen  up  international money  markets.  Our  coordinated  actions  with  the  Fed  and 
other  major  central  banks,  notably  to  provide  euro  area  resident  banks  with  US 
dollars  under  swap  agreements  with  the  Fed,  have  clearly  demonstrated  our 
determination to act collectively to restore normal liquidity conditions in the interbank 
markets.  Enhancing  swift  and  complete  information  exchanges  between  central 
banks,  and  also  between  central  banks  and  supervisors  is  certainly  a  continuing 
priority.  I  have  to  say  that  the  French  model  of  bank  supervision,  where  the 
supervisors are inside the central bank, has shown once more its advantages in the 
current context. 
As regards monetary policy, I want to stress that even a flexible policy – as inspired 
by risk management considerations à la Miskin – can only be implemented if needed 
when  inflation  expectations  remain  appropriately  anchored  to  the  central  bank’s 
objective.  In  other  words,  a  solid  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  remains  a 
prerequisite for rate cuts in times of heightened financial uncertainty and downside 
risks  to  growth.  I  am  convinced  that  in  times  of  financial  trouble  it  is  all  the  more 
necessary to insure price stability. In that respect, the diagnosis regarding the state 
of inflation expectations is thus decisive in the current juncture. Usual market-based 
indicators such as Break Even Inflation Rates (BEIRs) are reliable indicators of long 
term  inflation  expectations4;  however,  such  market-based  indicators  may  be 
plagued  by  unusually  large  risk  or  liquidity  premia  during  a  period  of  financial 
turmoil,  which  means  that  we  have  to  be  very  cautious  in  our  assessment.  More 
concretely, this implies that the plummeting real rates and tighter BEIRs on some 
market  (see  for  example  the  market  for  French  indexed  debt  over  the  last  few 
2. 
                                                 
4   Cf.  for  instance  Coffinet  and  Frappa  (2008)  at  the  Banque  de  France,  and  Beechey,  Johannen  and  Levin 
(2008) at the Board of the US Federal Reserve. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2008
3. 
weeks) may well be partly explained by such technical factors and not reflect any 
marked  deterioration  in  the  outlook  for  inflation.  But  we  should  obviously  remain 
especially cautious in order to keep expectations firmly anchored. 
Last but not least, we should keep in mind that central banks, either viewed as the 
monetary policy-makers or as the Lenders of Last Resort, cannot and should not be 
held  responsible  for  everything.  In  my  view,  regulatory  issues  relating  to  the 
profusion of financial innovations that emerged during the last boom episode should 
now  rank  high  on  the  agenda.  Indeed,  regulatory  lapses seem  to  me  to  lie  at  the 
heart of the subprime crisis, which appears to many as a “credit boom gone bad”5.  
                                                 
5   Recent  research  by  Dell’Aricia,  Igan  and  Laeven  (2008)  shows  for  instance  that  delinquencies  in  the  US 
subprime  mortgage  market  are  statistically  larger  in  areas  that  experienced  larger  increases  in  the  number 
and  volume  of  loans,  because  the  latter  was  linked  to  a  decrease  in  lending  standards.  In  turn  this 
deterioration in lending standards by banks can be explained by changes in market structure (with the entry of 
new aggressive competitors) and the increasing recourse by banks to asset securitization and loan sales. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 5
