Timothy F Geithner: Reducing systemic risk in a dynamic financial 
system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at The Economic Club of New York, New York, 9 June 2008. 
 Since the summer of 2007, the major financial centers have experienced a very severe and 
complex financial crisis. The fabric of confidence that is essential to the viability of individual 
institutions and to market functioning in the United States and in Europe proved exceptionally 
fragile.  Money  and  funding  markets  became  severely  impaired,  impeding  the  effective 
transmission of U.S. monetary policy to the economy. Central banks and governments, here 
and  in  other  countries,  have  taken  dramatic  action  to  contain  the  risks  to  the  broader 
economy.  
Why was the system so fragile?  
Part of the explanation was the size of the global financial boom that preceded the crisis. The 
larger the boom, the greater the potential risk of damage when it deflates.  
The underpinnings of this particular boom include a large increase in savings relative to real 
investment opportunities, a long period of low real interest rates around the world, the greater 
ease with which capital was able to flow across countries, and the perception of lower real 
and inflation risk produced by the greater apparent moderation in output growth and inflation 
over the preceding two decades.  
This  combination  of  factors  put  upward  pressure  on  asset  prices  and  narrowed  credit 
spreads  and  risk  premia,  and  this  in  turn  encouraged  an  increase  in  leverage  across  the 
financial system.  
This dynamic both fed and was fed by a wave of financial innovation. As the magnitude of 
financial  resources  seeking  higher  returns  increased  around  the  world,  products  were 
created  to  meet  this  demand.  Financial  innovation  made  it  easier  for  this  money  to  flow 
around  the  constraints  of  regulation  and  to  take  advantage  of  more  favorable  tax  and 
accounting treatment.  
The U.S. financial system created a lot of lower quality mortgage securities, many of which 
were packaged together with other securities into complex structured products and sold to 
institutions around the world. Many of these securities and products were held in leveraged 
money  or  capital  market  vehicles,  and  financed  with  substantial  liquidity  risk.  And  yet,  by 
historical  standards,  the  overall  level  of  risk  premia  in  financial  markets  remained 
extraordinarily low over this period.  
The structure of the financial system changed fundamentally during the boom, with dramatic 
growth in the share of assets outside the traditional banking system. This non-bank financial 
system  grew  to  be  very  large,  particularly  in  money  and  funding  markets.  In  early  2007, 
asset-backed commercial paper conduits, in structured investment vehicles, in auction-rate 
preferred securities, tender option bonds and variable rate demand notes, had a combined 
asset  size  of  roughly  $2.2  trillion.  Assets  financed  overnight  in  triparty  repo  grew  to  $2.5 
trillion.  Assets  held  in  hedge  funds  grew  to  roughly  $1.8  trillion.  The  combined  balance 
sheets of the then five major investment banks totaled $4 trillion.  
In comparison, the total assets of the top five bank holding companies in the United States at 
that point were just over $6 trillion, and total assets of the entire banking system were about 
$10 trillion.  
This parallel system financed some of these very assets on a very short-term basis in the 
bilateral or triparty repo markets. As the volume of activity in repo markets grew, the variety 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 1
of  assets  financed  in  this  manner  expanded  beyond  the  most  highly  liquid  securities  to 
include less liquid securities, as well. Nonetheless, these assets were assumed to be readily 
sellable at fair values, in part because assets with similar credit ratings had generally been 
tradable  during  past  periods  of  financial  stress.  And  the  liquidity  supporting  them  was 
assumed  to  be  continuous  and  essentially  frictionless,  because  it  had  been  so  for  a  long 
time.  
The scale of long-term risky and relatively illiquid assets financed by very short-term liabilities 
made many of the vehicles and institutions in this parallel financial system vulnerable to a 
classic type of run, but without the protections such as deposit insurance that the banking 
system  has  in  place  to  reduce  such  risks.  Once  the  investors  in  these  financing 
arrangements  –  many  conservatively  managed  money  funds  –  withdrew  or  threatened  to 
withdraw their funds from these markets, the system became vulnerable to a self-reinforcing 
cycle  of  forced  liquidation  of  assets,  which  further  increased  volatility  and  lowered  prices 
across  a  variety  of  asset  classes.  In  response,  margin  requirements  were  increased,  or 
financing  was  withdrawn  altogether  from  some  customers,  forcing  more  de-leveraging. 
Capital  cushions  eroded  as  assets  were  sold  into  distressed  markets.  The  force  of  this 
dynamic  was  exacerbated  by  the  poor  quality  of  assets  –  particularly  mortgage-related 
assets – that had been spread across the system. This helps explain how a relatively small 
quantity of risky assets was able to undermine the confidence of investors and other market 
participants across a much broader range of assets and markets.  
Banks could not fully absorb and offset the effects of the pullback in investor participation – 
or  the  "run"  –  on  this  non-bank  system,  in  part  because  they  themselves  had  sponsored 
many  of 
large  contingent 
commitments  to  provide  liquidity  support  to  many  of  the  funding  vehicles  that  were  under 
pressure. They had retained substantial economic exposure to the risk of a deterioration in 
house prices and to a broader economic downturn, and as a result, many suffered a sharp 
increase in their cost of borrowing.  
The funding and balance sheet pressures on banks were intensified by the rapid breakdown 
of  securitization  and  structured  finance  markets.  Banks  lost  the  capacity  to  move  riskier 
assets off their balance sheets, at the same time they had to fund, or to prepare to fund, a 
range of contingent commitments over an uncertain time horizon.  
The  combined  effect  of  these  factors  was  a  financial  system  vulnerable  to  self-reinforcing 
asset  price  and  credit  cycles.  The  system  appeared  to  be  more  stable  across  a  broader 
range of circumstances and better able to withstand the effects of moderate stress, but it had 
become  more  vulnerable  to  more  extreme  events.  And  the  change  in  the  structure  of  the 
system  made  the  crisis  more  difficult  to  manage  with  the  traditional  mix  of  instruments 
available to central banks and governments.  
these  off-balance-sheet  vehicles.  They  had  written  very 
First repair, then reform 
What should be done to reduce these vulnerabilities?  
Our first and most immediate priority remains to help the economy and the financial system 
get through this crisis.  
A  range  of  different  measures  of  liquidity  premia  and  credit  risk  premia  have  eased 
somewhat relative to the adverse peaks of mid-March.  
Part of this improvement – this modest and tentative improvement – is the result of the range 
of policy actions by the Federal Reserve System, the U.S. Treasury and other central banks. 
Part  is  the  consequence  of  the  substantial  adjustments  already  undertaken  by  financial 
institutions to reduce risk, raise capital and build liquidity.  
These actions by institutions and by the official sector have helped to reduce the risk of a 
deeper downturn in economic activity and of a systemic financial crisis.  
2 
 BIS Review 74/2008
But the U.S. economy and economies worldwide are still in the process of adjusting to the 
aftermath of rapid asset price growth and unsustainably low risk premiums. This process will 
take time.  
As we continue to work with other central banks to ease the adjustment now under way in 
the U.S. economy and globally, we are working to make the financial system more resilient 
and to improve its capacity to deal with future crises.  
We are working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), with banking 
supervisors in the United States and the other major economies, and with the U.S. Treasury 
to  strengthen  the  financial  foundation  of  the  major  investment  and  commercial  banks.  We 
have  encouraged  a  significant  increase  in  the  quality  of  public  disclosure.  We  have 
supported efforts that have brought a very substantial amount of new equity capital into many 
financial institutions. These efforts will help mitigate the risk of a deeper credit crunch. And 
even  as  the  Federal  Reserve  has  worked  to  mitigate  the  liquidity  pressures  in markets  by 
implementing  a  new  set  of  lending  facilities,  we  have  worked  with  the  SEC  and  others  to 
ensure  that  the  major  institutions  are  strengthening  their  liquidity  positions  and  funding 
strategies.  
We are also initiating important steps to strengthen the financial infrastructure. We are in the 
process  of  encouraging  a  substantial  increase  in  the  resources  held  against  the  risk  of 
default  by  a  major  market  participant  across  the  set  of  private  sector  and  cooperative 
arrangements for funding, trading, clearing and settlement of financial transactions that form 
the  "centralized  infrastructure"  of  the  financial  system.  We  have  begun  to  review  how  to 
reduce  the  vulnerability  of  secured  lending  markets,  including  triparty  repo  by  reducing,  in 
part, the scale of potentially illiquid assets financed at very short maturities.  
This  afternoon,  17  firms  that  represent  more  than  90  percent  of  credit  derivatives  trading, 
meet  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  with  their  primary  U.S.  and  international 
supervisors to outline a comprehensive set of changes to the derivatives infrastructure. This 
agenda includes:  
• 
• 
the establishment of a central clearing house for credit default swaps,  
a  program  to  reduce  the  level  of  outstanding  contracts  through  bilateral  and 
multilateral netting,  
the incorporation of a protocol for managing defaults into existing and future credit 
derivatives contracts, and  
concrete  targets  for  achieving  substantially  greater  automation  of  trading  and 
settlement.  
  These  changes  to  the  infrastructure  will  help  improve  the  system's  ability  to  manage  the 
consequences of failure by a major institution. Making these changes will take time, but we 
expect to make meaningful progress over the next six months.  
The set of ongoing and near-term initiatives I just outlined are only the beginning and should 
be considered a bridge to a broader set of necessary changes to the regulatory framework in 
the United States and globally.  
I  believe  the  severity  and  complexity  of  this  crisis  makes  a  compelling  case  for  a 
comprehensive  reassessment  of  how  to  use  regulation  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance 
between efficiency and stability. This is exceptionally complicated, both in terms of the trade-
offs involved and in building the necessary consensus in the United States and the world. It 
is  going  to  require  significant  changes  to  the  way  we  regulate  and  supervise  financial 
institutions, changes that go well beyond adjustments to some of the specific capital charges 
in the existing capital requirement regime for banks.  
We have to recognize, however, that poorly designed regulation has the potential to make 
things worse. We have to distinguish carefully between problems the markets will solve on 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 3
their own and those markets cannot solve. We have to acknowledge not just that regulation 
comes with costs, but that if not carefully crafted it can distort incentives in ways that may 
make the system less safe. And we have to focus on ways regulation can mitigate the moral 
hazard risk created by the actions central banks and governments have taken and may take 
in the future to avert systemic financial crises.  
I am going outline some broad proposals for reform, focusing on the aspects of our system 
that are most important to reducing systemic risk. These proposals do not address a myriad 
of other important aspects of regulatory policy, including consumer protection issues in the 
mortgage  origination  business,  the  future  role  of  government  and  government-sponsored 
enterprises in our housing markets, and many others.  
Any agenda for reform has to deal with three important dimensions of the regulatory system.  
• 
Regulatory policy. These are the incentives and constraints designed to affect the 
level and concentration of risk-taking across the financial system. You can think of 
these  as  a  financial  analog  to  imposing  speed  limits  and  requiring  air  bags  and 
antilock brakes in cars, or establishing building codes in earthquake zones.  
Regulatory  structure.  This  is  about  who  is  responsible  for  setting  and  enforcing 
those rules.  
Crisis  management.  This  is  about  when  and  how  we  intervene  and  about  the 
expectations we create for official intervention in crises. 
  Here are a few broad points on each of these.  
Regulatory policy 
The objectives of regulatory policy should be to improve the capacity of the financial system 
to withstand the effects of failure and to reduce the overall vulnerability of the system to the 
type of funding runs and margin spirals we have seen in this crisis.  
First, this means looking beyond prudential supervision of the critical institutions to broader 
oversight  of  market  practices  and  the  market  infrastructure  that  are  important  to  market 
functioning. Two obvious examples: we need to make it much more difficult for institutions 
with little capital and little supervision to underwrite mortgages, and we need to look more 
comprehensively how to improve the incentives for institutions that structure and sell asset-
backed securities and CDOs of ABS. And supervision will have to focus more attention on 
the extent of maturity transformation taking place outside the banking system.  
Second,  risk-management  practices  and  supervisory  oversight  has  to  focus  much  more 
attention on strengthening shock absorbers within institutions and across the infrastructure 
against  very  bad  macroeconomic  and  financial  outcomes,  however  implausible  they  may 
seem  in  good  times.  After  we  get  through  this  crisis  and  the  process  of  stabilization  and 
financial  repair  is  complete,  we  will  put  in  place  more  exacting  expectations  on  capital, 
liquidity  and  risk  management  for  the  largest  institutions  that  play  a  central  role  in 
intermediation and market functioning.  
This is important for reasons that go beyond the implications of excess leverage for the fate 
of any particular financial institution. As we have seen, the process of de-leveraging by large 
but  relatively  strong  institutions  can  cause  significant  collateral  damage  for  market 
functioning and for other financial institutions.  
Inducing institutions to hold stronger cushions of capital and liquidity in periods of calm may 
be the best way to reduce the amplitude of financial shocks on the way up, and to contain the 
damage on the way down. Stronger initial cushions against stress reduces the need to hedge 
risk dynamically in a crisis, reducing the broader risk of a self-reinforcing, pro-cyclical margin 
spiral, such as we have seen in this crisis.  
4 
 BIS Review 74/2008
How should we decide where to set these constraints on risk-taking? This is hard, but the 
objective should be to offset the benefits and the moral hazard risk that come from access to 
central bank liquidity in crises, without setting the constraint at a level that will only result in 
pushing more capital to the unregulated part of the financial system.  
Risk management and oversight now focuses too much on the idiosyncratic risk that affects 
an individual firm and too little on the systematic issues that could affect market liquidity as a 
whole.  To  put  it  somewhat  differently,  the  conventional  risk-management  framework  today 
focuses too much on the threat to a firm from its own mistakes and too little on the potential 
for mistakes to be correlated across firms. It is too confident that a firm can adjust to protect 
itself from its own mistakes without adding to downward pressure on markets and takes too 
little account of the risk of a flight to safety – a broad-based, marketwide rush for the exits as 
the financial system as a whole de-leverages and tries collectively to move into more liquid 
and lower risk assets of government obligations.  
Third,  although  supervision  has  to  focus  first  on  the  stability  of  the  core  of  financial 
institutions,  it  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  scale  of  leverage  and  risk  outside  the  regulated 
institutions.  
I do not believe it would be desirable or feasible to extend capital requirements to institutions 
such as hedge funds or private equity firms. But supervision has to ensure that counterparty-
credit risk management in the regulated institutions contains the level of overall exposure of 
the regulated to the unregulated. Prudent counterparty risk management, in turn, will work to 
limit the risk of a rise in overall leverage outside the regulated institutions that could threaten 
the stability of the financial system.  
Supervision  has  to  explicitly  focus  on  inducing  higher  levels  of  margin  and  collateral  in 
normal  times  against  derivatives  and  secured  borrowing  to  better  cover  the  risk  of  market 
illiquidity.  Greater  product  standardization  and  improved  disclosure  can  also  help,  as  will 
changes to the accounting rules that govern what risks reside on and off balance sheets.  
Finally, central banks, governments and supervisors have to look much more carefully at the 
interaction between accounting, tax, disclosure and capital requirements, and their effects on 
overall leverage and risk across the financial system. Capital requirements alone are rarely 
the most important constraint.  
The President's Working Group on Financial Markets and the Financial Stability Forum has 
laid out a very detailed list of reforms to begin this process. And we are fortunate to have 
Jerry  Corrigan  engaged  in  working  to  shape  a  set  of  recommendations  to  help  us  get  the 
balance right.  
Regulatory structure 
Apart from the mix of incentives and constraints set by regulatory policy, the structure of the 
regulatory  system  in  the  United  States  needs  substantial  reform.  Our  current  system  has 
evolved  into  a  confusing  mix  of  diffused  accountability,  regulatory  competition,  an 
enormously  complex  web  of  rules  that  create  perverse  incentives  and  leave  huge 
opportunities for arbitrage and evasion, and creates the risk of large gaps in our knowledge 
and authority.  
This crisis gives us the opportunity to bring about fundamental change in the direction of a 
more  streamlined  and  consolidated  system  with  more  clarity  around  responsibility  for  the 
prudential safeguards in the system. In this regard, Secretary Paulson's blueprint outlines a 
sweeping consolidation and realignment of responsibilities, with a clear set of objectives for 
achieving  a  better  balance  between  efficiency  and  stability,  between  market  discipline  and 
regulation. This proposal has stimulated a very constructive set of discussions, and will help 
lay the foundation for action when the dust settles.  
BIS Review 74/2008 
 5
The most fundamental reform that is necessary is for all institutions that play a central role in 
money  and  funding  markets  –  including  the  major  globally  active  banks  and  investment 
banks – to operate under a unified framework that provides a stronger form of consolidated 
supervision, with appropriate requirements for capital and liquidity.  
To complement this, we need to put in place a stronger framework of oversight authority over 
the  critical  parts  of  the  payments  system,  not  just  the  centralized  payments,  clearing  and 
settlements systems but the infrastructure that underpins the decentralized over-the-counter 
markets.  
The  Federal  Reserve  should  play  a  central  role  in  this  framework,  working  closely  with 
supervisors  here  and  in  other  countries.  At  present  the  Federal  Reserve  has  broad 
responsibility for financial stability not matched by direct authority, and the consequences of 
the actions we have taken in this crisis make it more important that we close that gap.  
Crisis management 
No financial system will be free from crises, whatever the design of the regulatory framework 
or the rules of the game. The framework of lender-of-last-resort policies and the regime for 
facilitating  an  orderly  resolution  of  a  major  non-bank  financial  institution  are  critical  to  our 
ability to contain financial crises.  
In response to this crisis, the Federal Reserve has designed and implemented a number of 
innovative new facilities for injecting liquidity into the markets. These facilities have played a 
significant role in easing liquidity strains in markets and we plan to leave them in place until 
conditions in money and credit markets have improved substantially.  
We are also examining what suite of liquidity facilities will be appropriate in the future, with 
what conditions for access and what oversight requirements to mitigate moral hazard risk. 
Some of the mechanisms we have employed during this crisis may become permanent parts 
of  our  toolkit.  Some  might  be  best  reserved  for  the  type  of  acute  market  illiquidity 
experienced in this crisis.  
It would be helpful for the Federal Reserve System to have greater flexibility to respond to 
acute  liquidity  pressure  in  markets  without  undermining  its  capacity  to  manage  the  federal 
funds rates at the FOMC's (Federal Open Market Committee) target. The authority Congress 
has granted the Fed to pay interest on reserves beginning in 2011 will be very helpful in this 
regard. We welcome the fact that Congress is now considering accelerating that authority.  
The major central banks should put in place a standing network of currency swaps, collateral 
policies  and  account  arrangements  that  would  make  it  easier  to  mobilize  liquidity  across 
borders quickly in crisis. We have some of the  elements of this framework in place today, 
and these arrangements have worked relatively well in the present crises. We should leave 
them in place, refine them further and test them frequently.  
The  Federal  Reserve  Act  gives  us  very  broad  authority  to  lend  in  crises.  We  used  that 
authority  in  new  and  consequential  ways,  but  in  the  classic  tradition  of  central  banks  and 
lenders  of  last  resort. As  we  broadened  the  range  of  collateral  we  were  willing  to  finance, 
extended  the  terms  of  our  lending and  provided  liquidity  insurance  to primary  dealers,  our 
actions  were  carefully  calibrated  to  improve  overall  market  functioning  by  providing  an 
effective  liquidity  backstop  and  to  avoid  supplanting  either  the  interbank  market  or  the 
secured funding market.  
In  addition  to  these  new  facilities,  the  Fed  made  the  judgment,  after  very  careful 
consideration,  that  it  was  necessary  to  use  its  emergency  powers  to  protect  the  financial 
system  and  the  economy  from  a  systemic  crisis  by  committing  to  facilitate  the  merger 
between  JPMorgan  Chase  and  Bear  Stearns.  We  did  this  with  great  reluctance,  and  only 
because it was the only feasible option available to avert default, and because we did not 
believe we had the ability to contain the damage that would have been caused by default.  
6 
 BIS Review 74/2008
Our actions were guided by the same general principles that have governed Fed action in 
crises over the years. There was an acute risk to the stability of the system;  we  were not 
confident that the damage could be contained through other means; we acted only to help 
facilitate an orderly resolution, not to preserve the institution itself; and the management of 
the  firm  and  the  equity  holders  of  the  institution  involved  suffered  very  substantial 
consequences.  
Although we assumed some risk in this transaction, that risk is modest in comparison to the 
risk  of  very  substantial  damage  to  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  as  a  whole  that 
would have accompanied default.  
Conclusion 
One of the central objectives in reforming our regulatory framework should be to mitigate the 
fragility of the system and to reduce the need for official intervention in the future. I know that 
many hope and believe that we could design our system so that supervisors would have the 
ability to act preemptively to diffuse pockets of risk and leverage. I do not believe that is a 
desirable or realistic ambition for policy. It would fail, and the attempt would entail a level of 
regulation and uncertainty about the rules of the game that would offset any possible benefit. 
I do believe, however, that we can make the system better able to handle failure by making 
the shock absorbers stronger.  
This  crisis  exposed  very  significant problems  in  the  financial  systems  of  the  United  States 
and some other major economies. Innovation got too far out in front of the knowledge of risk.  
It  is  very  important  that  we  move  quickly  to  adapt  the  regulatory  system  to  address  the 
vulnerabilities  exposed  by  this  financial  crisis.  With  the  leadership  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury, Hank Paulson, we are beginning the process of building the necessary consensus 
here and with the other major financial centers.  
Let  me  just  finish  by  saying  that  confidence  in  any  financial  system  depends  in  part  on 
confidence  in  the  individuals  running  the  largest  private  institutions.  Regulation  cannot 
produce integrity, foresight or judgment in those responsible for managing these institutions. 
That's up to the boards and shareholders of those institutions.  
One of the great strengths of our system is the speed with which we adapt to challenge. We 
can do better, and I am reasonably confident we will.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 7
