Liu Shiyu: Earnestly strengthening commercial real estate management 
to adjust real estate credit structure and prevent credit risks 
Speech by Mr Liu Shiyu, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Conference 
on Strengthening Commercial Real Estate Credit Management, Beijing, 11 December 2007. 
 Housing is a basic need for people’s livelihood. The CPC Central Committee, State Council 
and  Party  Committees  and  local  governments  at  various  levels  attach  great  importance  to 
housing, and the healthy development of the real estate industry and real estate finance. On 
August 23, 2007 the State Council convened the National Urban Housing Work Conference, 
in  which  new  requirements  about  how  to  strengthen  macro-adjustment  of  the  real  estate 
market and to provide affordable housing to low-income households in a faster manner were 
put forward. The People’s Bank of China (PBC) and China Banking Regulatory Commission 
(CBRC),  in  order  to  implement  the  spirit  of  the  Urban  Housing  Work  Conference,  issued 
Notice  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  the  China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission  on 
Strengthening Management of Commercial Real Estate Credit (hereafter referred to as the 
“Notice”) on September 27, which immediately came to the attention of commercial banks. 
Requirements outlined in the Notice are followed in an earnest manner to improve credit risk 
management  in  the  real  estate  sector.  The  public  is  generally  positive  toward  the  Notice, 
whose  effect  is  gradually  unfolding.  Pursuant  to  the  spirit  of  the  Central  Economic  Work 
Conference and the requirements to develop the housing sector and housing consumption, 
with a view to keep the seriousness, efficacy and development trend of the credit policies, to 
speed up credit restructuring and to forestall credit risks, the PBC and CBRC, after extensive 
study and soliciting opinions from commercial banks and relevant authorities, jointly issued 
the Supplementary Notice of the People’s Bank of China and the China Banking Regulatory 
Commission  on  Strengthening  Management  of  Commercial  Real  Estate  Credit  (hereafter 
referred to as the “Supplementary Notice”), which clarifies some regulations on strengthening 
the management of housing consumption credit. 
Good results achieved in developing the real estate market and real estate finance  
With the rapid development of the national economy and the deepening reform of the urban 
housing  system,  more  houses  are  being  constructed.  Real  estate  sector  has  become  an 
important driving force for economic growth, and real estate finance dominated by housing 
development  and  consumption  credit  has  become  an  important  business  of  commercial 
banks. The real estate market and the real estate financial market develop rapidly and have 
achieved good results. 
First,  the  housing  quality  in  urban  areas  continues  to  improve.  From  2003  to  2006,  the 
average  annual  acreage  of  completed  new  homes  exceeded  600  million  square  meters, 
while the per capita acreage grew from 23.5 square meters to 27 square meters. As of end 
2006, 80% of urban residents live in independent homes. 
Second, housing security system makes continuous headways. As of end 2006, completed 
acreage  of  affordable  housing  (including  housing  built  for  employees  with  collected  funds) 
across China surpassed 1.3 billion square meters, enough to accommodate 1.65 million low-
income  households.  As  of  October  2007,  644  out  of  656  cities  established  the  low-rent 
housing  system,  accounting  for  98.2%  of  the  total,  and  improving  the  living  conditions  of 
681,000  low-income  families.  As  of  September  2007,  over  100  million  employees  were 
covered by the Housing Provident Fund scheme. Housing provident fund contribution totaled 
1.5  trillion  yuan,  with  a  balance  of  900  billion  yuan.  About  42  million  employees  enjoyed 
better  housing  conditions  by  utilizing  the  housing  provident  fund  and  applying  for  housing 
provident fund loans.  
BIS Review 3/2008 
 1
Third,  real  estate  financial  businesses  develop  rapidly.  As  of  October  2007,  outstanding 
commercial  real  estate  loans  of  major  financial  institutions  stood  at  4.69  trillion  yuan, 
accounting for 18.02% of the total RMB outstanding loans. Outstanding loans for real estate 
development amounted to 1.76 trillion yuan, while outstanding individual housing loans 2.6 
trillion yuan, accounting for 6.76% and 9.99% of the total outstanding RMB loans in financial 
institutions. Outstanding loans guaranteed by housing provident fund reached 450.22 billion 
yuan,  nearly  18%  of  the  individual  housing  loans  issued  by  commercial  banks.  A  housing 
financial  system  combining  commercial  loans  and  policy  loans  take  form.  Fast-developing 
real estate consumption loans not only help tens of thousands of households to realize their 
dreams of having their own houses, but also expand domestic demand, support economic 
growth and promote social harmony. 
Fourth, progress has been made in real estate financial products innovation. In recent years, 
commercial  banks  have  developed  and  launched  fixed  interest  payment,  grace  period 
payment,  housing  relay  loans  and  other  products  that  improve  efficiency  and  create  more 
alternatives  to  borrowers.  Some  commercial  banks  tapped  the  possibility  of  reverse 
mortgage  loans  that  link  self-occupied  housing  with  pensions.  Housing  mortgage-backed 
securities were issued. Pilot programs of commercial housing loans securitization are under 
way. 
China is a developing country with a population of 1.3 billion, out of which over 500 million 
live in urban areas. It is already an achievement that we have improved the living conditions 
of  urban  residents  within  such  a  short  period  of  time.  Commercial  banks  have  played  an 
important role in this process, which deserves full recognition. Such achievements would be 
impossible without the leadership of the Communist Party of China, market-oriented reform, 
opening-up, and priority given to housing, employment, agriculture and other key issues.  
Major problems and challenges at the current stage 
I.   Major problems in the real estate market 
Though the real estate market and the real estate financial businesses develop rapidly, we 
have also noticed that recently such acute problems as excessively rapid growth of housing 
prices in certain cities, irrational supply and demand structure, inability of low-income people 
to afford housing, etc. 
1. 
Commercial  housing  price  has  been  on  the  rise.  From  2003  to  2005,  the  y-o-y 
growth of urban housing price registered 5.1%, 10.8%, 6.5% and 5.3% respectively. 
As of October 2007, the y-o-y growth of sales prices in 70 large-and-medium-sized 
cities averaged at 9.5%. Sales prices of newly constructed commercial housing rose 
by 10.6%, representing an overall upward trend. 
The  mix  of  housing  available  in  the  market  is  irrational.  Aggregate  supply  is 
insufficient, especially the supply of medium-and-small-sized apartments. Statistics 
from the Ministry of Construction show that at the beginning of 2006, only 19.18% of 
the residential area of commercial housing on sale in 40 big cities was less than 90 
square  meters.  The  proportion  rose  slightly  to  25.77%  by  October  2007,  still  far 
behind the regulatory objective stipulated in prevailing rules and regulations.  
Macro-regulation policies are not completely in force. In recent years, with regard to 
the  rapid  price  hike  and  irrational  housing  mix  available,  the  State  Council  has 
adopted  a  series  of  policies  to  strengthen  macro-regulation  over  the  real  estate 
market, which have yielded some results, but there are still some policies that are 
not put in place in a few localities. There is an apparent shortage of medium-and-
low-priced  and  medium-and-small-sized  housing.  From  January  to  October  2007, 
investment in housing less than 90 square meters only accounted for 21.46% of the 
total  housing  investment.  Some  developers  hoarded  land  and  curtailed  supply  to 
2. 
3. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2008
4. 
push up prices. From January to October 2007, housing investment grew by 31.4% 
nationwide, with floor space newly constructed up by 22.6%, but completed acreage 
by merely 9.1%.  
Low-income households have difficulties in affordability. At present, nearly 10 million 
urban households whose per capita floor space of residential housing is below 10 
square meters. Among them, 4 million households receive subsistence allowances, 
accounting  for  5.5%  of  the  total  number  of  urban  households.  At  the  same  time, 
persistent price hike and slow development in small-and-medium-sized house lease 
market make it difficult for low-income households to purchase or rent houses in the 
market. 
The above problems, though limited to certain localities and created by structural imbalance, 
have huge impact on society due to the following reasons. First, mismatch between supply 
and demand is acute. From the demand side, there is a continuously strong demand as a 
result  of  higher  income  and  faster  urbanization.  From  the  supply  side,  the  insufficient 
aggregate  demand  is  coupled  with  imbalanced  mix  of  housing  available  and  shortage  of 
supply of small-and-medium-sized apartments. From January to October 2007, floor space 
completed stood at 232 million square meters, up 8.8% y-o-y. Sold space grew by 33.1% y-
o-y to 489 million square meters, 2.11 times of space completed, resulting in a slower growth 
of supply than that of demand. Second, shortage of residential construction land and price 
hike  of  land,  raw  materials  and  wages  push  up  sales  prices.  Third,  psychological 
expectations and housing price hike interact. Urban residents prefer purchase to lease, early 
purchase to late purchase and big apartments to small apartments. After having purchased 
their own apartments, some people make speculative investment, which further pushes up 
housing prices. Fourth, housing price hike in the international market is contagious. In recent 
years, the global housing market has witnessed faster price hike during a longer period time 
with far more wide-ranging impact than any other period of time before, not only in developed 
countries  such  as  the  US,  UK,  France,  Spain,  Italy,  Belgium,  Denmark,  Sweden  and 
Australia,  but  also  in  Brazil,  India,  Thailand  and  other  developing  countries.  From  2001  to 
2006,  housing  price  in  the  US,  France  and  the  UK  rose  by  54.9%,  50%  and  85.4% 
respectively, while the single-year price hike in the three countries was 11.32% in 2005 for 
the  US,  16.25%  in  2005  for  France  and  24.86%  in  2002  for  the  UK.  Driven  by  economic 
globalization, worldwide liquidity surplus and international flow of capital, housing price hike 
spreads globally. 
II.  
1. 
2. 
Problems in real estate finance 
The  real  estate  credit  is  growing  excessively  fast.  As  of  end  of  October  2007, 
outstanding commercial housing loans reached 4.69 trillion yuan, a y-o-y growth of 
30.75%, up 1.01 trillion yuan from the beginning of the year, accounting for 28.9% of 
the  total  new  RMB  loans  of  commercial  banks  during  the  same  period  of  time. 
Outstanding  individual  housing  loan  reached  2.6  trillion  yuan,  619.2  billion  yuan 
more than the beginning of the year, up 35.57% y-o-y. Entrusted loans with housing 
provident fund reached 450.22 billion yuan at the end of October, up 96 billion yuan 
than the year beginning, up 34.87% over the same period of last year. 
Competition  is  extremely  fierce,  creating  huge  underlying  risks.  At  present,  real 
estate loans, especially individual housing loans, are classified as prime assets. To 
take  more  market  share,  local  offices  of  some  commercial  banks  lower  lending 
criteria, reduce examination steps and relax investigation through distorted practice. 
As a result, banks assets become less secure. In 2006, competent authorities find 
out after sampling and surveying housing loans in 16 cities that on average 22.31% 
of borrowers didn’t meet loan officers directly when getting loans. In cities including 
Zhengzhou, Beijing, Hangzhou and Guangzhou, this proportion is 46.31%, 35.4%, 
32.83% and 32.2% respectively. 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 3
3. 
4. 
Mortgage refinance loans and additional mortgage loans are granted without proper 
approval. The multipliers of mortgage refinance loans and additional mortgage loans 
generally  fluctuate  with  the  value  of  real  estate,  likely  to  magnify  housing  credit 
when the economy grows and housing price soars. In addition, most credit is used 
to purchase more houses or to invest in the stock market, creating more potential 
risks to the banking system and accumulating more bubbles in the real estate and 
stock markets. As of end-August 2007, outstanding mortgage refinance loans and 
additional loans in 16 major cities reached 41 billion yuan, 3.5 times of that in the 
same period of last year. 
Weak  loan  management  unveils  risks  associated  with  “fake  mortgage”.  A  few 
branches  and  sub-branches  of  commercial  banks  defy  the  requirements  of  “three 
examinations”. Some of them even collaborate with real estate developers and real 
estate agents to make up housing mortgage loan contracts in order to grant loans 
for real estate developments under the name of housing consumption loans, or to 
help developers to speculate on difficult-to-sell buildings through “fake mortgage”. 
Attach great importance to lessons drawn from real estate markets in other countries 
Real estate markets in many countries and regions have experienced cyclical fluctuations or 
even bubble bursts. This is particularly true in recent years when some developed countries 
and developing countries are on the downside of the curve after continuous price hike. A few 
of them are exploring measures to achieve “soft landing”, which deserves our close attention. 
The  real  estate  bubble  in  Japan  in  the  1990s,  real  estate  bubble  in  Hong  Kong  after  the 
Asian  financial  crisis  and  the  sub-prime  crisis  this  year  in  the  US  are  well  known.  Some 
valuable points can be summarized after in-depth and comprehensive analysis of the above 
crises and other problems in the international real estate market. 
First,  real  estate  industry  is  an  important  driving  force  or  a  pillar  industry  for  a  country  or 
region.  Real  estate  industry  concerns  over  50  other  industries,  so  the  development  of  the 
real estate industry closely relates to the overall economic growth. When economy is in the 
upside curve of the cycle, the real estate industry grows continuously. But when  economy 
goes downward, real estate industry experiences shrinking investment and consumption. If 
real  estate  bubbles  burst  due  to  economic  or  political  factors,  housing  prices  will  plummet 
before economic slowdown at a faster rate than overall economic growth, inflicting greater 
impacts on consumer confidence and economic growth than any other industry.  
Second,  real  estate  industry  is  a  typical  capital-intensive  industry,  and  its  development 
provides  space  for  financial  development  and  innovation.  However,  real  estate  industry 
influences the financial sector. If banks fail to prevent risks associated with real estate loans, 
relax lending criteria, and grant more individual mortgage loans and development loans, then 
bubbles are likely to appear or accumulate, whose burst will threaten the banking system or 
even financial security, and further influence economic, social and political stability. 
Third, housing is a basic need for people’s livelihood as well as a public good. It is necessary 
for  the  government  to  adopt  guarantee  measures,  and  for  financial  institutions  to  perform 
social  responsibilities.  However,  new  risks  will  be  triggered  if  banks  are  allowed  or 
encouraged  to  provide  excessive  loans  to  low-income  households.  Before  the  sub-prime 
crisis  in  the  US,  most  low-income  borrowers  were  too  optimistic  about  their  income  and 
applied for loans that they couldn’t afford to repay. But the market is volatile; the running of 
the economic cycle is not at the control of borrowers. When income shrinks or interest rate 
resets, borrowers will have to pay more, and potential risks translate into actual crisis. 
Fourth,  securitization  and  credit  derivatives  have  played  a  positive  role  in  terms  of 
diversifying home loan risks, expanding real estate finance to more financial institutions and 
other  institutional  investors,  and  diversifying  risks  in  the  banking  system.  However,  if 
commercial banks, investment banks, institutional investors, auditors and rating agencies are 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2008
myopic and weak in information disclosure, risks connected with real estate finance are likely 
to  be  covered  or  underestimated.  In  the  US  sub-prime  crisis,  underestimation  of  the  risks 
associated with sub-prime loans-backed securitization products or credit derivatives makes 
the sub-prime crisis unnoticeable, abrupt and highly contagious. 
Fifth,  it  is  necessary  to  improve  or  relax  financial  control  in  order  to  fully  display  the 
fundamental role of the financial market in resources allocation and to provide a favorable 
environment for financial innovation. However, governments shall master the laws governing 
the  functioning  of  market.  If  governments  don’t  perform  market  supervision,  early  warning 
and forward-looking risk guidance, they will fail to prevent risks from happening.  
Sixth, in the process of economic integration, it is a logical choice for developing countries to 
open  up  to  the  outside  world  and  utilize  foreign  capital  in  order  to  achieve  fast  economic 
development. However, due to surplus liquidity and cross-border capital flow, foreign capital 
will have a greater impact on domestic capital markets, especially the markets in countries 
and  regions  that  experience  persistent  economic  growth  and  local  currency  appreciation, 
which are more likely to fall prey to hot money.  
Earnestly strengthen real estate credit management 
In  recent  years,  the  PBC  and  CBRC  have  issued  a  series  of  policy  guidelines  and 
supervisory  regulations  in  accordance  with  state  policies  on  housing  development  and 
consumption,  with  the  purpose  to  promote  the  healthy  development  of  the  real  estate 
financial businesses and to prevent financial risks. Not long ago, in order to accomplish the 
tasks  put  forward  in  the  urban  residential  housing  work  conference,  the  PBC  and  CBRC 
jointly issued the Notice, which specifies the requirements on how to strengthen commercial 
housing  credit  management.  Regulation  of  real  estate  credit  is  emphasized  from  different 
perspectives:  1)  stricter  management  of  real  estate  development  loans;  2)  strengthened 
management  of  housing  consumption  loans,  especially  prohibition  of  mortgage  refinance 
loans  and  additional  mortgage  loans  for  unspecified  purposes  and  fluctuating  with  the 
valuation of real estate; 3) guidance of individuals’ consumption and investment and higher 
minimum  down  payment  ratio  and  lending  interest  rate  for  second  home  mortgages;  4) 
inclusion of solely foreign-invested commercial banks and joint-stock commercial banks into 
the  regulatory  policy  system;  5)  strengthened  credit  information  management  in  the  real 
estate  sector  to  fully  leverage  the  credit  information  system  that  includes  both  enterprises 
and individuals. 
Recently  the  PBC  and  the  CBRC  issued  the  Supplementary  Notice  in  accordance  with 
housing consumption policies and other policies at the state level. First, the number of home 
loans is calculated by households (including loan applicants, their spouses and children). In 
China, housing is a necessity for family life, so it is more reasonable to calculate the number 
of home loans by households, both in line with our national situation, and conducive to the 
enforcement of the Notice, guidance and promotion the reasonable allocation of real estate 
resources and strengthening the macro-regulation of the real estate industry. Second, given 
the  reasonable  demand  of  residents  to  improve  their  living  conditions,  households  having 
purchased  the  first  home  with  loans  whose  per  capita  residential  space  is  lower  than  the 
local  average  level,  first  home  loan  rate  applies  if  such  households  apply  for  a  second 
mortgage,  so  as  to  curtail  irrational  demand  (including  speculation)  and  improve  people’s 
living conditions. This policy is consistent with the Notice. After borrowers present information 
of  total  living  space  certified  by  real  estate  administrative  authority  according  to  their 
registration  information,  commercial  banks  decide  whether  first  home  loan  rate  shall  apply 
against living space information, residential permit and other documents, while the average 
per capita residential space comes from last year’s figure released by statistics department. 
Second  home  interest  rate  applies  to  re-borrowers  who  don’t  conform  to  the  above 
conditions. Third, the Supplementary Notice prescribes that housing provident fund loans are 
also subject to the Notice. Either housing provident fund loans or commercial loans are the 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 5
liabilities of households. Housing provident fund loans will not exempt from market volatility. 
Therefore, second home loan rate applies to households who are in housing provident fund 
loan scheme and who are applying for commercial loans.  
There  are  some  requirements  concerning  how  to  further  implement  the  Notice  and  the 
Supplementary Notice. 
First,  reach  a  common  understanding.  Regional  offices  of  PBC,  CBRC  and  commercial 
banks shall carefully study the spirits of the 17th CPC Congress and Central Economic Work 
Conference,  implement  the  scientific  approach  to  development,  exercise  tight  monetary 
policies,  strengthen  regulation  over  real  estate  credit,  improve  management  of  real  estate 
credit  risks,  speed  up  real  estate  credit  restructuring,  drive  forward  real  estate  financial 
innovation so as to promote the healthy development of the real estate market. 
Second, streamline risk management stipulations. Headquarters of commercial banks shall 
improve  and  unify  bank-wide  real  estate  credit  management  stipulations,  and  all  their 
branches  and  sub-branches  shall  grant  real  estate  loans  in  strict  conformity  with  such 
stipulations.  Units  and  staff  responsible  for  real  estate  financial  businesses  shall  explain 
lending policies to their customers in order to safeguard the seriousness of credit policies. 
Third,  make  sure  that  all  relevant  policies  are  put  in  place.  Principles  and  polices  on  real 
estate credit regulation are specified in the Notice and Supplementary Notice. They key is 
implementation. Mortgage refinance loans and additional mortgage loans shall be eradicated 
steadfastly  to  achieve  zero  mortgage  refinance  without  specific  information  or  real 
transactions and zero additional mortgages. Commercial banks shall refrain from accepting 
applications with false information or certificates, and notify local banking associations.  
Fourth, improve financial services for protective housing development. Commercial banks, in 
addition to improving commercial credit risk management, shall restructure the credit mix to 
give priority to ordinary commercial housing and affordable housing and households capable 
of making repayment and applying for loans to buy self-occupied houses. At the same time, 
commercial banks shall improve their services for affordable housing and low-rent housing in 
the preconditions of risk control and in accordance with the state housing guarantee system. 
Improve the low-rent housing system, regulate the construction and distribution of affordable 
housing and earnestly do a good job in housing guarantee for low-income households. 
Fifth, go on with real estate financial innovation. Real estate finance is an important part of 
financial innovation. If we attributed sub-prime crisis to financial innovation, we will run the 
risk  of  mistaking  the  phenomenon  as  the  root  cause.  In  recent  years,  real  estate  financial 
innovation has made initial achievements through concerted efforts. We should summarize 
experiences,  continue  to  push  ahead  with  financial  innovation,  improve  the  efficiency  of 
resources  allocation,  identify  and  diversify  financial  risks  in  the  real  estate  sector  so  as  to 
promote the healthy development of the real estate financial market.  
6 
 BIS Review 3/2008
