Jürgen Stark: Structural reforms in Europe 
Bullet points by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, for a speech delivered at the OECD-IMF Conference on Structural Reforms in Europe, 
Paris, 17 March 2008. 
  It  is  well  established  that  the  lack  of  structural  reforms  is  the  main  factor  behind  the 
relatively disappointing economic performance of some euro area countries over the last 
few decades. Despite the acceleration in economic growth of the last three years, the gap 
in  GDP  per  capita  between  the  euro  area  and  the  United  States  remains  substantial, 
reflecting  lower  levels  of  both  productivity  and  labour  utilisation.  Overcoming  these 
constraints  to  growth  is  essential  in  the  current  environment,  where  the  European 
economy  is  facing  a  number  of  important  challenges,  including  rapid  technological 
change, accelerating globalisation and ageing populations.  
•  The  EMU  is  a  catalyst  for  structural  reforms  in  Europe.  Within  the  monetary  union, 
regional monetary and exchange rate policies are no longer viable options. Flexible and 
integrated  labour  and  product  markets  are  therefore  a  prerequisite  for  the  smooth 
functioning of the euro area, including countries’ ability to absorb shocks and fully benefit 
from  EMU.  This  is  why  a  price-stability  orientated  monetary  environment  in  principle 
provides  more,  not  fewer,  incentives  for  national  governments  to  implement  structural 
reforms.  
•  The performance of the euro area policy framework, however, has been mixed. On the 
one hand, the first nine years of EMU have been characterised by low and stable inflation 
and firmly anchored inflation expectations, vindicating the monetary policy framework laid 
down in the Maastricht Treaty. On the other hand, the overall achievements of economic 
policies over the last nine years have been rather disappointing. Progress with structural 
reforms still falls short of expectations, fiscal policies in some countries conflicted with the 
rules of the fiscal framework, eventually leading to an adjustment of the rules rather than 
of  policies,  and  also  wage  policies  have  often  not  taken  sufficient  account  of  the 
requirements of the new situation of a single currency. 
•  The institutional framework of the EMU provides European policy-makers with the tools to 
successfully  address  the  challenges  ahead.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  established  a  clear 
allocation  of  responsibilities  to  different  policy  areas,  reflecting  the  fact  that  assigning 
policy instruments primarily to one  single  policy objective and making individual policy-
makers responsible for one single policy instrument ensures a high level of effectiveness 
and accountability.  
•  The single monetary policy was given the task of maintaining price stability in the euro 
area  and  was  assigned  to  the  ECB  as  an  independent,  supranational  institution. 
Economic policy deals with the other economic objectives. Responsibility for the various 
areas  of  economic  policy  has  largely  remained  with  the  Member  States,  since  these 
policies  are  best  carried  out  at  the  national  level  in  order  to  ensure  that  they  are 
appropriately tailored to the specific characteristics and needs of the individual countries. 
•  More specifically: 
o  structural policies in the Member States are supposed to seek to create flexible and 
efficient structures in product and labour markets with a view to fostering the growth 
potential of euro area economies and improving the adjustment mechanisms in EMU;  
fiscal policies are supposed to ensure the sustainability of public finances, effectively 
limiting government deficit and debt ratios, thereby also ensuring that automatic fiscal 
stabilisers work effectively as an adjustment mechanism in the currency union; and 
o 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 1
o  wage policies should be compatible with trend developments in productivity in order 
to foster full employment and should take into account the overriding importance of 
wage flexibility as an equilibrating adjustment mechanism in the EMU. 
•  Within the Lisbon strategy, as refocused and reaffirmed by the European Council in 2005, 
Member  States  aim  to  gear  national  policies  towards  micro-economic  flexibility  and 
macro-economic stability. This would strengthen the capability of the euro area economy 
to  swiftly  re-allocate  economic  resources  in  view  of  exogenous  economic  shocks  and 
improve its long-term growth prospects. The Lisbon Strategy and the peer surveillance of 
its implementation at the national level have raised the awareness among governments 
in European countries that structural reforms are decisive for remaining competitive in an 
increasingly global economic environment and to fully realising the economic potential of 
the EMU.  
•  Significant  progress  in  reforming  labour  market  policies  –  especially  in  the  areas  of 
pension schemes, early retirement and part-time work – has been achieved over the last 
ten years in some European countries, contributing to the significant rise in the euro area 
employment rate, accompanied by a decline in the aggregate unemployment rate from 
10.6% in 1996 to 7.2% most recently. The latest number is the lowest on record since the 
early 1980s, but should not give rise to complacency.  
features  appear 
•  These encouraging developments show that past labour market reforms, immigration and 
wage moderation have helped to overcome some of the constraints on growth stemming 
from rigid and over-regulated labour markets. Despite this progress, we are still a long 
way from having exhausted the potential for further increases in participation rates and 
employment.  The  unemployment  rate  is  still  unacceptably  high  and  the  employment 
rates,  especially  among  young,  female  and  older  workers,  remain  low  by  international 
standards.  These 
“insider-outsider” 
characterisation of the European labour market, where structural impediments, triggered 
by the legal and regulatory environment, high taxes on labour and rigidities associated 
with  wage  regulations  may  prevent  those  groups  “at  the  margins”  from  actively 
participating in the labour market. 
In  addition,  in  those  European  countries  and  regions  where  competitiveness  has  been 
lost  in  the  past  or  the  unemployment  rate  remains  too  high,  it  is  essential  that  wage 
increases do not fully exhaust productivity gains in order to provide incentives for firms to 
create  additional  jobs.  In  this  respect,  flexible  wage  setting,  resulting  in  particular  in 
sufficient  wage  differentiation,  is  crucial  in  order  to  strengthen  or  at  least  maintain 
competitiveness  and  improve  employment  opportunities,  in  particular  for  less-skilled 
workers.  
to  be  consistent  with  an 
 •  Furthermore,  many  studies  point  to  the  potential  that  competition  has  to  increase 
employment and to boost productivity trends by improving production efficiency and by 
enhancing  the  incentive  to  invest  and  innovate1.  In  the  European  Union,  significant 
progress  has  been  made  in  strengthening  competition  and  increasing  economic 
integration  over  the  last  two  decades.  The  single  market  has  already  brought  sizable 
benefits for the European economy.2 However, much remains to be done, in particular in 
some  market  services  sectors.  The  extension  and  deepening  of  the  internal  market 
remains a priority as regards further financial market integration, the pursuit of effective 
                                                 
1   See the ECB Occasional Paper Series No 44 “Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services 
sector”, by the Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB, April 2006. 
2   The European Commission recently estimated that the single market has brought about an increase of 2.75 
million  extra  jobs  and  an  extra  increase  in  welfare  of  €518  per  head  in  2006,  corresponding  to  a  2.15% 
increase of the EU’s GDP over the period 1992-2006 (See European Commission, “The single market: review 
of achievements”, November 2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2008
competition in the energy market, and the implementation of the Services Directive. The 
growing role of services3 in modern economies suggests that improvements in European 
living standards are likely to depend on a high degree of competition and on productivity 
improvements in the services sector.  
•  Let me now focus more specifically on financial integration, which is of key importance for 
the  ECB.  The  process  of  European  financial  integration  is  gradually  taking  place  and 
considerable  progress  has  already  been  made.  The  degree  of  integration,  however, 
varies  across  market  segments,  and  integration  is  generally  more  advanced  in  those 
market  segments  which  are  closer  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  While  the  euro  area 
banking markets for wholesale and capital market-related activities show clear signs of 
increasing integration since the introduction of the euro, the retail banking segment has 
remained more fragmented, leaving European consumers unable to take full advantage 
of the benefits of the EMU and the Single Market.4 
 in 
institutional 
the  current 
framework,  but  rather 
•  While there has been progress in the implementation of structural reforms in Europe, the 
catalyst  role  of  EMU  in  improving  Europe’s  growth  potential  has  not  yet  been  fully 
exhausted.  The  lacklustre  performance  in  many  euro  area  countries  is  rooted  not  in 
deficiencies 
in  some  national 
governments’  lack  of  willingness  to  implement  structural  reforms.  The  reasons  why 
politically motivated governments tend not to implement sufficient structural reforms are 
by  now  well  known.  Structural  reforms  typically  have  positive,  long-term  effects,  which 
can  be  difficult  to  ascertain  in  advance,  but  often  negative  short-term  effects  that  are 
relatively more visible to voters.  
It  has  sometimes  been  argued  that  some  macroeconomic  stimulus  from  aggregate 
demand policies might help foster the implementation of structural reform packages by 
offsetting potential short-term costs of reforms. This idea that there could be a trade-off 
between structural reforms and macroeconomic accommodation is disputable, notably in 
the  EMU.  Such  accommodation  could  be  provided  either  by  monetary  policy  or  fiscal 
policy, which I will now discuss in turn. 
In the EMU monetary policy is not the appropriate tool for mitigating the potential short-
term  costs  of  structural  reforms  or  for  providing  incentives  for  reforms  at  the  national 
levels.  First,  reform  needs  differ  across  euro  area  countries  and  the  single  monetary 
policy is by its very nature unable to mitigate the potentially different short-term country-
specific  costs  of 
there  are  well-known  and  overwhelming 
implementation  problems  of  ex  ante  coordination  between  policy  makers  with  different 
objectives. This typically gives rise to incentive distortions for the policy actors involved. 
An  immediate  consequence  of  any  attempt  to  seek  closer  coordination  with  the  ECB 
would be a blurring of responsibilities, which would lead to every institution being made 
responsible  for  everything,  which  in  the  end  would  mean  that,  amid  confusion,  no 
institution was responsible for anything, and no successful reform implemented. 
reforms.  Second, 
 •  Price stability is the best contribution monetary policy can make to structural reforms in 
Europe.  By  improving  the  quality  of  relative  price  signals,  our  price  stability-orientated 
monetary policy makes it easier for policy makers and European citizens to identify the 
areas in which structural reforms are most needed. Beyond safeguarding price stability, 
                                                 
3   Today, the services sector accounts for 70% of GDP, 68% of employment and 96% of the new jobs created, 
but  only  20%  of  intra-EU  trade.  This  discrepancy  reflects  not  only  the  fact  that  services  often  have  an 
intrinsically  local  character,  but  also  the  many  barriers  and  obstacles  still  hindering  the  free  movement  of 
services within the European Union. 
4   See  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Heider,  E.  Papaioannou  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial  markets  and 
innovation in productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, September, as well as ECB 
(2007) “Financial integration in Europe”, Frankfurt a.M: ECB. 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 3
there is nothing monetary policy can do to foster the growth and employment potential of 
our  economies.  The  only  modest  contribution  a  central  bank  can  make  to  structural 
reforms is to assess their impact, and communicate in a balanced manner and through 
different  channels  and  fora  its  views  on  the  expected  effects  of  reforms  to  the  public, 
thereby helping to build a constituency supporting reform packages. 
•  As to fiscal policy, let me first stress that I have doubts on the possibility to make a deficit 
limit contingent on the implementation of structural reforms by national governments. The 
inherent  difficulty  of  assessing  the  short-term  costs  of  structural  reforms  in  real  time 
creates  significant  moral  hazard  problems,  with  governments  having  an  incentive  to 
overestimate the costs of reforms they are implementing to mask additional spending or 
shortfalls in consolidation efforts unrelated to reforms. Having said that, it is clear that the 
recent reform of the Stability and Growth Pact allows fiscal policy to mitigate the possible 
short-term cost of structural reforms, if these are clearly specified and can be quantified. 
It  is,  however,  crucial  that  fiscal  authorities  create  the  necessary  room  for  manoeuvre 
regarding 
implementation  of  reforms  beforehand. 
Otherwise, there is a risk of significant policy mistakes, with reforms eventually leading to 
persistent increases in deficit and debt ratios. 
their  possible  support 
the 
for 
 
Employment rates in the euro area and the US 
  Source: Eurostat. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2008
