Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Corporates in the Single Euro Payments Area 
– business as usual? 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European  
Central  Bank,  at  the  “Panel  discussion:  Cash  Management  in  20  years”,  at  the  20th 
Finanzsymposium, Mannheim, 17 April 2008. 
 Introduction  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  today  to  take  part  in  the  20th  Finanzsymposium,  which  has 
brought  together  some  of  the  main  corporates  active  in  Europe.  The  main  topic  of  this 
session is the major changes that have been observed in the financial industry over the past 
few years, and the changes that may occur over the next two decades.  
 After many years of economic and financial integration, I would like to address an issue that 
has so far received little attention from the corporate side: integration in the retail payments 
market.  In  this  panel  session,  let  us  discuss  the  extent  to  which  the  most  recent  payment 
developments are having a positive impact on your businesses. 
Since  the  launch  of  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA)  in  January  this  year,  it  is  no 
longer simply “business as usual”. Through SEPA, a single European market place has been 
created, which will be of great benefit to corporates.  
The  SEPA  project  will  bring  about  a  comprehensive,  pan-European  harmonisation  of 
payment instruments for euro payments. 
In January 2008, the banking community successfully launched the SEPA credit transfer, as 
well as a common framework for card payments. These will be followed by the SEPA direct 
debit before the end of next year. The new Single Euro Payments Area enables customers to 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 1
make payments anywhere in the euro area as quickly, safely and easily as they can in their 
own  country.  Within  SEPA,  all  euro  payments  are  treated  as  domestic  payments  and  are 
carried out using a single set of payment instruments. 
The  Single  Market  also  stands  to  benefit  considerably  from  the  wide  range  of  new 
opportunities  that  have  been  opened  up  through  the  launch  of  SEPA,  as  it  will  promote 
competition  and  innovation,  as  well  as  improve  conditions  for  customers.  In  this  context,  I 
would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  a  recently  published study  on  the  economic  impact  of 
SEPA, which was carried out by the ECB in close cooperation with a number of European 
banks. 
The  study  clearly  shows  that  it  depends  on  the  interplay  between  two  forces.  On  the  one 
hand, greater competition resulting from the abolition of cross-border barriers will determine 
banks’ earnings. On the other hand, an electronic, fully automated SEPA environment means 
that banks will benefit from efficiency gains and potential economies of scale. 
The ECB’s study also reflects banks’ expectations that, in the future, more use will be made 
of more alternative, innovative payment methods than cash.1  
The  ECB,  as  well  as  the  national  central  banks,  are  striving  for  more  integration  in  the 
financial  markets.  Public  authorities  are  responsible  for  providing  an  adequate  framework 
that  is  conducive  to  such  financial  integration,  i.e.  legislation  and  rules  for  cross-border 
transactions that guarantee a level playing-field for all market participants. The adoption of 
the Payment Services Directive in 2007 was a major step in this regard. Now it just needs to 
be transposed into national law.  
The impact of SEPA 
                                                 
1   Schmiedel (2007), “The economic impact of the Single Euro Payments Area”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, 
August. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2008
 The impact of SEPA is expected to be substantial. A recent study conducted on behalf of the 
European  Commission2  mentions  that  banks  and  their  customers  are  expected  to  benefit 
from SEPA. It is calculated that these benefits could reach €123 billion (cumulative over six 
years).  However,  the  study  also  clearly  points  out  that,  if  stakeholders  are  reluctant  to 
embrace  SEPA  and  if  the  migration  towards  SEPA  does  not  take  place  in  a  timely  and 
comprehensive manner, there are likely to be fewer benefits for customers and banks and 
corporates  could  even  record  losses  –  for  example  if  participants  have  to  run  systems  in 
parallel due to a slow migration process.  
For corporates, SEPA will have an impact in three areas in particular: 
• 
First, SEPA will simplify payments. For their incoming and outgoing euro payments, 
corporates  will  be  able  to  use  a  pan-European,  single  set  of  instruments  and 
arrangements based on the latest international standards. Pricing is expected to be 
competitive and services will improve due to the competition at the pan-European 
level. 
Second,  SEPA  provides  greater  clarity  and  will  enable  corporates  to  manage  and 
transfer their liquidity in a cheaper and faster manner. SEPA provides clarity on the 
timing of payment processing cycles and possible revocations. For example, thanks 
to SEPA, corporates are aware of the maximum processing time for payments, as 
well  as  the  maximum  amount  of  time  customers  have  to  revoke  a  direct  debit  in 
Europe. 
Third, additional standards are being created to optimise processes, as well as to 
facilitate better interfaces between the financial management systems of corporates 
(i.e.  enterprise  resource  planning  systems)  and  the  systems  operated  by  banks. 
New standards will allow account-related information to be handled more efficiently. 
Corporates will also receive additional information on their bank statements thanks 
to SEPA.  
                                                   
2   “SEPA:  potential  benefits  at  stake  –  Researching  the  impact  of  SEPA  on  the  payments  market  and  its 
stakeholders”, Capgemini Consulting. 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 3
 Let me now turn to those issues that need to be addressed by corporates in order to ensure 
that SEPA is implemented successfully.  
• 
First,  corporates  will  have  to  migrate  their  databases,  which  still  contain  national 
account numbers, in order to incorporate the international bank account numbers. 
Most euro area countries have agreed on a migration procedure aimed at assisting 
the corporates to do this.3  
Second,  corporates  will  have  to  contact  the  banks  in  order  to  be  able  to  better 
evaluate the benefits that SEPA will bring to their organisation. Banks will provide 
information as to how products and payment cycles may be improved, but you could 
also contact your provider directly with regard to better products. 
Third,  corporates  could  plan  ahead.  Several  initiatives  are  under  way,  which  are 
focusing on corporate-to-bank connectivity and a standardised way of transmitting 
remittance information with the payment.  
  So  far,  not  many  corporates  have  actively  started  preparing  themselves  for  SEPA,  as  for 
them, the precise impact of SEPA is not entirely clear. This is probably related to the initial 
reluctance  of  banks  and  software  providers  to  communicate  on  SEPA,  as  some  of  their 
products  are  still  in  the  pilot  phase.  By  the  end  of  2010,  we  expect  the  vast  majority  of 
payments to be executed as SEPA payments. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that 
there  is  a  need  to  specify  an  end  date  on  which  the  current  payment  instruments  will  be 
phased out.4  
                                                 
3   So  far,  a  conversion  procedure  for  migrating  from  the  traditional  national  account  number  (BBAN)  to  the 
international account number (IBAN) has been agreed in 13 euro area countries (BE, DE, ES, FR, GR, IT, CY, 
LU, MT, NL, AT, SI, FI). The decision process has not yet been finalised in two euro area countries (IE, PT). 
4   So  far,  a  schedule  for  the  phasing-out  of  national  payment  instruments  has  been  agreed  in  six  euro  area 
countries (BE, FR, CY, NL, SI and FI). 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2008
Discussions have already begun and I hope that progress will soon be made in this regard.  
 Of  course,  the  SEPA  project  is  by  no  means  complete.  Other  topics,  which  are  currently 
being  worked  on  in  the  banking  industry,  include  future  payment  instruments,  such  as  the 
SEPA  direct  debit5  and  an  additional  European  card  scheme.  The  European  Payments 
Council (EPC), in collaboration with the Eurosystem and European Commission, is currently 
looking into different ways of ensuring that the new services are ultimately at least as good 
as  the  current  ones  and  that  they  meet  customers’  requirements.  For  example,  all  direct 
debits will have to be changed so that they comply with the new Payment Services Directive, 
which  will  have  been  transposed  by  the  end  of  November  2009.6  In  terms  of  cards,  the 
Eurosystem is contributing to the clarification of the economic and political rationale for an 
additional European card scheme, and is identifying practical steps that could be taken in this 
direction.  
I  expect  that  the  details  on  the  SEPA  products  and  the  migration  times  will  soon  become 
clearer,  and  that  stakeholders  will  become  more  actively  involved  in  the  SEPA  debate. 
Indeed, I have been informed that some forward-looking corporates have already started to 
prepare themselves for SEPA credit transfers. 
They have started to introduce the new SEPA standards, have improved their connectivity 
with  banks  –  and  all  this  in  the  light  of  a  more  competitive  service  (and  more  competitive 
pricing behaviour).  
                                                 
5   With regard to direct debits, the Eurosystem is encouraging the migration of existing mandates towards the 
new  SEPA  direct  debit  scheme,  and  we  are  facilitating  discussion  between  competition  authorities  and  the 
banking industry in order to clarify the features of this scheme. 
6   Directive  2007/64/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  13  November  2007  on  payment 
services in the internal market amending Directives 97/7/EC, 2002/65/EC, 2005/60/EC and 2006/48/EC and 
repealing Directive 97/5/EC (Text with EEA relevance). 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 5
The role of corporates over the next few years 
 Finally,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  innovation  and  the  role  of  the  corporates  over  the  next  few 
years. In general, innovation occurs on different levels. It could lead to 
• 
• 
• 
improved goods and services (such as SEPA instruments); 
improved organisational processes (such as supply chain innovation);  
improved  production  processes  (such  as  specialised  payment 
outsourcing). 
factories  or 
Regarding the first level of innovation, i.e. product and services innovation, I assume that, 
with SEPA, the new payment instruments for Europe will be at least as efficient, easy and 
secure as they are today in your own countries. 
Furthermore,  the  banking  industry  is  already  thinking  about  expanding  its  range  of  SEPA 
instruments to include pan-European online and mobile payments, which will lead to a further 
broadening and deepening of SEPA. 
The second level is process innovation. The assumption is that SEPA will lead to a better 
organisation of processes and constitute a first step towards the end-to-end straight-through 
processing (STP) of payments and collections. 
Corporates  will  then  be  able  to  interact  better  with  their  counterparts  and  conduct  their 
financial  transactions  more  easily,  irrespective  of  where  they  are  located.  The  banking 
industry  (e.g.  via  the  Euro  Banking  Association)  has  also  started  to  look  into  electronic 
invoicing (e-invoicing), and the European Commission is currently analysing the legal issues 
with regard to e-invoicing (such as electronic signature). In addition, the ISO (International 
Organization for Standardization) has started work on harmonising procedures for reporting 
and bank statements. Ultimately, the entire supply chain will be improved. 
Third, the production process will be improved. For payments, this could mean that more use 
is made of outsourcing and payment factories, which, thanks to economies of scale, can also 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2008
be offered by non-banks. Banks could even set up their own “non-banks” to whom they could 
outsource some of their payment functions. It remains to be seen to what extent outsourcing 
could be expanded.  
Corporates have  two  important  roles  to  play  in  these  different  levels  of  innovation.  On  the 
one  hand,  they  are  playing  an  important  role,  together  with  the  banking  industry,  in  the 
creation of these new payment solutions and the related processes. On the other hand, they 
are also key players in the implementation of the European solutions. 
Let me now conclude. 
Conclusion 
 Since January 2008, payment services have been offered at a pan-European level. Within 
SEPA, there is no longer any difference between domestic and cross-border euro payments 
within SEPA when using the SEPA credit transfer.  
SEPA has triggered an entire process of reforms which will further improve the functioning of 
the  financial  system.  I  am  confident  that  corporates  will  play  a  role  in  creating  a  more 
innovative and integrated market. 
My  “fellow  countryman”  Joseph  Schumpeter  coined  the  phrase  “innovative  entrepreneur” 
(schöpferischer Unternehmer). There is now demand for future-oriented corporates who will 
use  SEPA  as  to  drive  the  optimisation  of  processes  and  thereby  provide  the  necessary 
requirements for innovation, which will encourage economic growth and social change.  
It is encouraging to see that some entrepreneurs are already very active in the debate on the 
future  SEPA  instruments.  A  forum  has  been  created  at  the  European  level  to  enable 
stakeholders to be more closely involved in the SEPA project. This is called the Customer 
Stakeholder  Forum.  There  are  also  forums  at  the  national  level  that  are  working  on 
improvements and innovation for the next 20 years. I hope that many corporates will join the 
discussions  in  the  forums  and  thus  improve  the  European  launch  pad  known  as  SEPA. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 7
