Jean-Claude Trichet: Presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report 2007 to 
the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
to the European Parliament, Strasbourg, 9 July 2008. 
 Monsieur le Président, mesdames et messieurs les membres du Parlement Européen, c’est 
pour  moi  un  grand  honneur  de  vous  présenter  –  comme  le  prévoit  le  Traité  –  le  Rapport 
annuel 2007 de la BCE. Mais comme vous le savez, les relations entre le Parlement et la 
BCE vont bien au-delà des obligations imposées par le Traité. De fait, nous avons établi, au 
fil  des  années,  un  dialogue  très  étroit.  C’est  la  quatrième  fois  cette  année  que  j’interviens 
devant vous. De même, mes collègues au sein du Directoire de la BCE ont été en contact 
étroit avec le Parlement Européen concernant diverses questions, telles que l’élargissement 
de la zone euro, les systèmes de paiement et le dixième anniversaire de l’Union monétaire et 
économique.  Je  constate  avec  plaisir  que,  selon  la  proposition  de  résolution,  le  dialogue 
entre le Parlement et la BCE a porté ses fruits.  
Ich werde Ihnen zunächst einen kurzen Überblick über die wirtschaftlichen Entwicklungen in 
den  Jahren  2007/2008  geben  und  die  geldpolitischen  Maßnahmen  der  EZB  erläutern. 
Danach  möchte  ich  einige  Anmerkungen  zu  Punkten  und  Vorschlägen  machen,  die  Sie  in 
Ihrem Entwurf einer Entschließung zum Jahresbericht 2007 der EZB vorgebracht haben.  
Economic and monetary developments 
In 2007, the ECB operated in a challenging environment, with rising and volatile commodity 
prices  and,  since  the  second  half  of  2007,  heightened  uncertainty  stemming  from  the 
ongoing  correction  in  financial  markets  across  the  world. Despite  these  developments,  the 
euro area economy continued to expand at solid rates in 2007, with annual real GDP growing 
by 2.7%. 
In the first half of 2008, moderate ongoing growth in real GDP has continued, although the 
quarter-on-quarter  profile  is  likely  to  show  significant  volatility,  owing  to  temporary,  in  part 
weather-related,  factors.  It  is  thus  important  to  focus  on  the  medium-term  trend  when 
assessing growth developments.  
Looking  ahead,  on  the  external  side,  growth  in  emerging  countries  should  remain  robust, 
supporting euro area foreign demand. On the domestic side, the economic fundamentals of 
the  euro  area  remain  sound  and  the  euro  area  does  not  suffer  from  major  imbalances. 
Moreover,  employment  rates  and  labour  force  participation  have  increased  significantly  in 
recent years, and unemployment rates have fallen to levels not seen for 25 years.  
That  being  said,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  this  outlook  for  growth  remains  high,  with 
downside  risks  mainly  relating  to  further  unanticipated  increases  in  commodity  prices, 
possible further spillovers from continuing tensions in financial market to the real economy 
and increasing protectionist tendencies.  
Turning to price developments, in 2007 average annual HICP inflation in the euro area was 
2.1%, slightly above the ECB’s definition of price stability. However, towards the end of the 
year, substantial increases in international oil and food prices brought inflation to levels well 
above 2%. Since then inflation in the euro area has risen further and, in the wake of renewed 
sharp commodity price increases, arrived at the worrying levels of around 4% in mid 2008. 
Looking  ahead,  the  annual  HICP  inflation  rate  is  likely  to  remain  well  above  the  level 
consistent with price stability for some time, moderating only gradually in 2009.  
BIS Review 88/2008 
 1
Risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  remained  clearly  on  the  upside  in  2007  and 
have intensified over recent months. These risks include possible further rises in commodity 
prices and unanticipated increases in indirect taxes and administered prices. In addition, the 
Governing Council is strongly concerned that price and wage-setting behaviour could add to 
inflationary  pressures  through  broadly-based  second-round  effects.  First  signs  are  already 
emerging in some regions of the euro area. In this context, indexation schemes for nominal 
wages are of particular concern and should be avoided.  
As  in  2007,  the  monetary  analysis  in  the  first  half  of  2008  has  continued  to  confirm  the 
prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer  horizons.  In  line  with  our 
monetary  policy  strategy,  we  take  the  view  that  the  sustained  underlying  strength  of 
monetary and credit expansion in the euro area over the past few years has created upside 
risks to price stability. Over recent quarters, these risks appear to have become manifest as 
inflation has trended upwards. Against this background, the continued strength of monetary 
dynamics represents an important signal of the risks to price stability over the medium term 
that  we  have  been  addressing  through  our  actions  since  end-2005.  Moreover,  a  thorough 
assessment of available data suggests that the ongoing financial market correction has, as 
yet, not significantly affected the availability of bank credit.  
To  contain  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  the  Governing 
Council further adjusted the monetary policy stance in March and June 2007. After a period 
of unusually high uncertainty in the context of the financial market correction, in July 2008 the 
Governing Council has brought the minimum bid rate in the Eurosystem’s main refinancing 
operations to 4.25%. This action underlines the Governing Council’s strong determination to 
prevent second-round effects and maintain longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored 
in line with price stability. This is the contribution of the ECB’s monetary policy to preserving 
purchasing power over the medium term and supporting sustainable growth and employment 
in the euro area. 
Following last week’s decision to raise rates, in the Governing Council’s current assessment 
the monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving price stability over the medium term. 
We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
Other issues raised in the European Parliament’s draft resolution on the ECB’s Annual 
Report 2007 
Mister President, honourable members of the European Parliament, in your draft resolution 
you raise a large number of issues of relevance to the ECB. I would like to assure you that 
we  will  consider  your  remarks  and  requests  with  great  care  and  report  back  to  you 
accordingly. I will now briefly elaborate on some of these points. 
Monetary policy strategy  
I  would  like  to  start  by  welcoming  the  positive  assessment  made  by  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Affairs Committee of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Our two-pillar framework 
ensures that all information relevant for the assessment of risks to price stability is taken into 
account  in  a  consistent  and  systematic  manner  when  taking  monetary  policy  decisions.  In 
particular, the monetary analysis guarantees that the ECB’s monetary policy is oriented to 
the  medium  to  longer  term.  Given  the  close  link  between  monetary  developments  and 
evolving  imbalances  in  credit  and  asset  markets,  the  monetary  analysis  has  proven  a 
particularly valuable asset in times of financial distress. In 2007 the Governing Council has 
launched within the Eurosystem a research agenda to enhance further its monetary analysis, 
as  is  also  proposed  in  the  draft  resolution  to  continue  to  improve  the  ECB’s  analytical 
infrastructure. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2008
Transparency 
I would also like to welcome the Committee’s recognition that making the minutes of the ECB 
Governing  Council’s  meetings  available  to  the  public  would  not  be  advisable.  Such  a 
measure would draw attention to individual positions when in a euro area of 15 – and very 
soon  16  –  countries,  what  counts  is  the  position  of  the  collegial  decision  maker,  the 
Governing  Council.  It  could  also  lead  to  pressures  on  Governing  Council  members  to 
abandon their necessarily euro area perspective when taking monetary policy decisions. As 
already  emphasised  on  previous  occasions,  I  see  the  Introductory  Statement  I  present  on 
behalf of the Governing Council at the monthly press conference as an equivalent to what 
other  central  banks  call  “summary  minutes”.  Together  with  the  ensuing  Q&A  session,  the 
Introductory Statement provides in real time a comprehensive overview, on the part of the 
Governing  Council,  of  the  current  monetary  policy  stance.  This  communication  instrument 
has served us very well in guiding financial market expectations. 
Fiscal policies 
As regards fiscal policies, the ECB shares the view expressed in the draft resolution that all 
Member States must fully respect the Stability and Growth Pact. However, after the decline 
of the past four years, a renewed increase in the euro area aggregate fiscal deficit ratio is 
projected  for  2008.  There  is  a  clear  risk  that  some  countries  will  not  comply  with  the 
provisions  of  the  preventive  arm  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Achieving  sound  and 
sustainable  budgetary  positions  and  on  this  basis  allowing  the  free  operation  of  automatic 
stabilisers is the best contribution fiscal policy can make to macroeconomic stability. 
Economic differentials in the euro area and structural policies 
The draft resolution also refers to the risks posed by economic differentials across euro area 
countries,  which  to  some  extent  reflect  structural  rigidities  and/or  inappropriate  national 
policies. It goes without saying that economic divergences across euro area countries cannot 
be addressed by monetary policy.  
In  order  to  avoid  a  protracted  period  of  either  low  growth  and  high  unemployment  or 
overheating, as a country responds to asymmetric shocks, reforms to enhance the resilience 
to  such  shocks  should  be  undertaken  at  the  national  level.  These  include  well  designed 
structural  reforms  to  enhance  competition,  increase  productivity  and  foster  labour  market 
flexibility. Greater flexibility in euro area labour markets and wages would reduce adjustment 
costs and inflation pressures in the event of adverse supply shocks and would augment the 
economy’s  resilience,  thus  limiting  employment  losses  and  facilitating  the  conduct  of  the 
stability-oriented monetary policy of the ECB.  
Let  me  emphasise  again  that  there  is  a  need  for  a  lucid  monitoring  of  national 
competitiveness  developments,  including  unit  labour  costs,  as  recouping  ex  post  a  loss  of 
competitiveness  is  a  difficult  exercise.  In  this  regard,  we  support  the  Parliament’s  call  for 
responsible wage policies. 
Financial stability and supervision 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  issues  highlighted  by  the  financial  market  correction  for  crisis 
prevention and crisis management, which also figure prominently in your draft resolution.  
As  regards  crisis  prevention,  the  market  correction  highlighted  issues  for  both  supervisors 
and  central  banks.  Supervisors  should  make  further  efforts  to  reinforce  cooperation  and 
exchange of information on a cross-border basis. To that end, it is of crucial importance to 
further exploit the potential of the Lamfalussy framework. The Ecofin Council has agreed on 
certain measures to that end, and attention should now shift towards implementing them. Let 
me  mention  in  this  context  that  the  market  correction  has  not  provided  any  convincing 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 3
evidence  for  an  overhaul  of  the  current  supervisory  framework,  for  instance  through  the 
setting up of a new authority for EU supervision.  
Central  banks,  including  the  ECB,  have  to  a  great  extent  been  effective  in  identifying  the 
weaknesses and risks to the financial system that materialised as the turmoil unfolded. Such 
warnings  may  be  found,  for  instance,  in  many  past  issues  of  the  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review. In this context, the ECB also recognises the need to further enhance cooperation 
between central banks and supervisors which could entail the use of supervisory information 
to  enrich  financial  stability  assessments,  and  the  translation  of  such  assessments  into 
tangible supervisory action. 
Looking  to  lessons  for  crisis  management,  a  main  issue  that  emerged  during  the  turmoil 
concerns the need for a smooth flow of information between central banks and supervisors 
during  the  unfolding  of  a  crisis.  Central  banks  may  need  supervisory  information  for  the 
effective performance of their functions in the management of a crisis, such as money market 
interventions, provision of Emergency Liquidity Assistance, and financial stability monitoring. 
This applies to the Eurosystem as well. Supervisors from their side may benefit from central 
bank information, for instance as regards banks’ liquidity positions. Therefore, the envisaged 
reinforcement  of  the  EU  legal  basis  for  information  exchange  between  central  banks  and 
supervisors is strongly supported by the ECB.  
Payment systems 
My final remarks concern the integration of Europe’s payment systems. The ECB noted with 
satisfaction  the  positive  assessments  in  the  draft  resolution  about  SEPA  and  TARGET2. 
Concerning  the  Eurosystem’s  TARGET2-Securities  initiative,  the  Governing  Council  will  in 
the coming weeks decide on the continuation of the T2S project. It is important to note that 
all major CSDs have responded positively to our initiative. 
I thank you very much for your attention. I am now available to answer your questions.  
4 
 BIS Review 88/2008
