Timothy F Geithner: Actions by the New York Fed in response to liquidity 
pressures in financial markets  
Testimony of Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  US  Senate  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing  and 
Urban Affairs, Washington DC, 3 April 2008. 
The original speech, which contains three Annexes, can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s 
website.  
 Good  morning,  Chairman  Dodd,  Ranking  Member  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the 
Committee. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to appear before you today. I am here to 
outline  the  actions  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  in  response  to  present 
challenges in financial markets, including those in relation to the proposed merger of Bear 
Stearns and JPMorgan Chase. 
On  the  evening  of  Thursday,  March  13,  2008,  I  took  part  in  a  conference  call  with 
representatives from the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department. On that call, the SEC staff informed us 
that  Bear  Stearns’  funding  resources  were  inadequate  to  meet  its  obligations  and  that  the 
firm had concluded that it would have to file for bankruptcy protection the next morning. The 
SEC said it concurred in that judgment, and it would spend the evening discussing with Bear 
what kind of bankruptcy filing was appropriate.  
The  conference  call  that  evening  took  place  against  the  backdrop  of  an  extraordinarily 
challenging period in the U.S. financial system. This context was critical to the decisions we 
made over the next several days. And I think it’s important to start with an explanation of the 
broad risks to the economy posed by the crisis now working through the financial system. 
The intensity of the crisis we now face in U.S. and global financial markets is a function of the 
size and character of the financial boom that preceded it. This was a period of rapid financial 
innovation  –  particularly  in  credit  risk  transfer  instruments  such  as  credit  derivatives  and 
securitized  and  structured  products.  There  was  considerable  growth  in  leverage,  greater 
reliance on ratings on structured credit products and a marked deterioration in underwriting 
standards. 
The innovation in financial products was accompanied by a dramatic increase in the amount 
of  financial  intermediation  occurring  outside  the  core  banking  system.  The  importance  of 
securities  broker-dealers,  hedge  funds,  and  mutual  funds  in  the  financial  system  rose 
steadily.  Off-balance-sheet  vehicles  of  various 
increased 
concentrations of longer-dated assets were held in funding vehicles with substantial liquidity 
risk. 
The deterioration in the U.S. housing market late in the summer of 2007 precipitated a sharp 
rise  in  uncertainty  about  the  value  of  securitized  or  structured  assets.  Demand  for  these 
assets contracted dramatically and the securitization market for mortgages and other credit 
assets  stopped  working.  This,  in  turn,  increased  funding  pressures  for  a  diverse  mix  of 
financial  institutions.  Uncertainty  about  the  magnitude  and  the  level  of  losses  for  financial 
institutions fueled concern about credit risk in exposure to those institutions. 
Part of the dynamic at work was that banks were forced to provide financing for – or take 
over  –  the  assets  in  a  range  of  structured  investment  vehicles  and  conduits  financed  by 
asset-backed commercial paper. As some investors attempted to liquidate their holdings of 
these  assets,  many  of  the  traditional  providers  of  unsecured  funding  to  banks  pulled  back 
from  their  counterparties  in  anticipation  of  the  potential  withdrawals  of  funds  by  their  own 
investors.  
forms  proliferated,  and 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 1
Market participants’ willingness to provide term  funding even against high-quality collateral 
declined  dramatically.  As  a  consequence,  the  cost  of  unsecured  term  funding  rose 
precipitously and the volume shrunk. Banks were funding themselves at shorter and shorter 
maturities.  As  unsecured  term  funding  markets  deteriorated,  the  premium  on  liquid, 
marketable collateral – such as Treasury securities – rose considerably. 
Even with the dramatic actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks to address 
these  liquidity  pressures,  the  strains  in  financial  markets  persisted.  In  many  respects, 
conditions  worsened  materially  in  February  and  March.  Credit  spreads  on  financial 
institutions widened, equity prices declined and market functioning deteriorated sharply. By 
the early part of March, the threat of a disorderly adjustment was growing. 
What  we  were  observing  in  U.S.  and  global  financial  markets  was  similar  to  the  classic 
pattern in financial crises. Asset price declines – triggered by concern about the outlook for 
economic performance – led to a reduction in the willingness to bear risk and to margin calls. 
Borrowers needed to sell assets to meet the calls; some highly leveraged firms were unable 
to meet their obligations and their counterparties responded by liquidating the collateral they 
held.  This  put  downward  pressure  on  asset  prices  and  increased  price  volatility.  Dealers 
raised margins further to compensate for heightened volatility and reduced liquidity. This, in 
turn, put more pressure on other leveraged investors. A self-reinforcing downward spiral of 
higher haircuts forced sales, lower prices, higher volatility and still lower prices. 
This dynamic poses a number of risks to the functioning of the financial system. It reduces 
the effectiveness of monetary policy, as the widening in spreads and risk premia worked to 
offset part of the reduction in the fed funds rate. Contagion spreads, transmitting waves of 
distress to other markets, from subprime to prime mortgages and even to agency mortgage-
backed  securities,  to  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  and  to  corporate  bonds  and 
loans. In the current situation, effects were felt in the municipal and student loan markets. 
The most important risk is systemic: if this dynamic continues unabated, the result would be 
a  greater  probability  of  widespread  insolvencies,  severe  and  protracted  damage  to  the 
financial system and, ultimately, to the economy as a whole. This is not theoretical risk, and it 
is not something that the market can solve on its own. It carries the risk of significant damage 
to economic activity. Absent a forceful policy response, the consequences would be lower 
incomes  for  working  families,  higher  borrowing  costs  for  housing,  education,  and  the 
expenses of everyday life, lower value of retirement savings and rising unemployment. 
Federal Reserve response 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  a  series  of  policy  actions  to  help  contain  the  risks  to  the 
economy  posed  by  this financial  crisis.  The  Federal  Open Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has 
reduced  the  nominal  federal  funds  rate  target  by  300  basis  points  since  August  of  2007. 
Alongside these appropriately aggressive monetary actions, the Federal Reserve has taken 
a series of initiatives aimed at improving market liquidity and overall market functioning. A 
more detailed description of these liquidity initiatives is included as Annex I. 
These actions are designed to allow financial intermediaries to finance with the central bank 
assets  they  can  no  longer  finance  as  easily  in  the  market.  And  in  this  way  these  liquidity 
facilities reduce the need for those institutions to take the types of actions, such as selling 
other assets into distressed markets or withdrawing credit lines extended to other financial 
institutions, that would serve to amplify the pressures in markets. 
In  addition  to  these  monetary  policy  and  liquidity  actions,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been 
working  with  community  groups  and  housing  advocates  across  the  country  to  help 
homeowners navigate the complex challenges of higher resets and falling home prices. The 
Federal Reserve is actively working with homeowners and communities to identify solutions 
to avoid foreclosures and their negative effects, support appropriate consumer protection and 
responsible lending practices, and apply our expertise in research and evaluation to provide 
2 
 BIS Review 39/20086
community  groups,  counseling  agencies,  regulators,  and  others  with  detailed  analysis  to 
support efforts to help troubled borrowers and communities. 
I believe that the Federal Reserve System’s response has helped reduce the risk of systemic 
damage to the financial system, and thereby helped mitigate a potential source of downside 
risk  to  growth.  This  in  turn  has  helped  mitigate  the  risks  to  the  broader  economy.  It  is 
important to recognize that a substantial adjustment, recognition of losses, and reduction in 
risk has already taken place. And a range of different prices of financial assets now reflect a 
very cautious view of the future. The severity of the pressures in markets evident over the 
last  few  months  are  in  part  a  reflection  of  the  speed  and  force  with  which  markets  and 
institutions  in  our  financial  system  adapt  to  fundamental  changes  in  the  outlook.  This 
capacity to adjust and adapt is one of the great strengths of our system. Nevertheless, we 
still face a number of challenges ahead. The seeds of this crisis took a long time to build up, 
and they will take some time to work through. 
The role of banks and investment banks in our financial system 
A  driving  force  behind  Congress'  creation  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  in  1914  was  its 
recognition of the need for a public institution to perform the role of lender of last resort. The 
financial landscape in 1914 (and continuing until relatively recent times) was one dominated 
by  traditional  banks.  When  the  Federal  Reserve  was  founded,  there  was  no  deposit 
insurance, so the willingness of individuals and businesses to hold deposits at a particular 
bank  depended  wholly  on  their  degree  of  trust  that  the  bank  would  be  able  to  promptly 
furnish them with the money they had deposited – whenever they might request it. But – as 
Congress  understood  –  the  business  of  banking  involves  making  loans  as  well  as  taking 
deposits.  Because  banks,  in  order  to  make  money,  needed  to  extend  long-term  credit  to 
customers for things like the purchases of homes or investments in business equipment, not 
all of the money taken in by banks could be readily available to be paid out if depositors were 
to request it. In fact, only a small fraction of a typical bank’s assets were kept in liquid enough 
form  to  be  immediately  paid  to  depositors  upon  demand.  This  fundamental  fact  of  bank 
operation  left  banks  –  and  the  banking  system  –  open  to  liquidity  shocks  that,  nearly  a 
century later, have their echoes in recent market developments. 
The financial crises around the turn of the century were the historic catalyst for the Federal 
Reserve’s creation by Congress. It is panic or fear that drives depositors en masse to the 
door of the banking house to demand their money back. In such a case, even an institution 
that is fundamentally solvent – i.e., whose assets (mostly longer-term loans) are worth more 
than its liabilities – may find that it does not have enough cash on hand – that is, enough 
liquidity – to satisfy its customers. 
The function of a lender of last resort in such a case is to lend to the institution that is facing 
heightened  customer  demand  for  repayment  in  an  amount  sufficient  to  satisfy  customer 
demands, while taking assets of the institution as security for the lending. If the lender of last 
resort does not act to fulfill this role, the institution facing heightened customer demands for 
repayment  may  be  forced  to  begin  a  “fire  sale”  of  its  assets,  the  distressed  and  hurried 
nature of which will cause them to be sold at less than their true long-run value, which may 
quickly  lead  to  the  insolvency  of  the  institution.  The  insolvency  may  precipitate  further 
downward pressure on the market value of such assets magnifying the risk to other financial 
institutions. 
Over the past 30 years, we have moved from a bank-dominated financial system to a system 
in which credit is increasingly extended, securitized and actively traded in a combination of 
centralized  and  decentralized  markets.  In  many  ways,  the  business  models  of  banks  and 
non-bank  financial  institutions  –  especially  large  securities  firms  –  have  converged,  with 
banks playing a greater agency role in the credit process, and securities firms doing more of 
the financing. 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 3
It  is  important  to  understand  that  investment  banks  now  perform  many  of  the  economic 
functions traditionally associated with commercial banks, and they are also vulnerable to a 
sudden  loss  of  liquidity.  Unlike  commercial  banks,  which  rely  significantly  on  deposits  for 
funding, investment banks operate according to a business model in which they fund large 
portions of their balance sheets on a secured, short-term basis in what is known as the repo 
market. Because the assurance of access to short-term secured funding on a daily basis is 
such a critical component of business functioning for these entities, they are vulnerable to the 
possibility  of  a  sudden  pullback  in  short-term  lending,  or  a  reduction  in  the  willingness  of 
investors to lend against certain classes of securities.  
As  we  have  seen  throughout  the  past  nine  months,  these  changes  in  the  relative  roles  of 
traditional  commercial  banks  and  investment  banks  have  changed  the  nature  of  financial 
stability.  In  the  United  States,  the  regulatory  framework  and  most  of  the  tools  that  were 
created  to  prevent  and  manage  financial  crises  were  developed  in  a  bank-dominated  era, 
and we have had to adapt those tools to deal with current market realities. 
Bear Stearns 
With  this  important  context,  let  me  return  to  the  actions  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in 
response to the situation that arose at Bear Stearns. That response was shaped in roughly 
four  stages:  (1)  the  decision  on  the  morning  of  March  14  to  extend  a  non-recourse  loan 
through the discount window to JPMorgan Chase so that JPMorgan Chase could in turn lend 
that  money  to  Bear  Stearns;  (2)  the  decision  on  March  16  by  JPMorgan  Chase  and  Bear 
Stearns  for  JPMorgan  Chase  to  acquire  Bear  and  guarantee  certain  of  its  liabilities,  along 
with  an  agreement  in  principle  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  would  provide 
certain  financing  in  the  context  of  that  acquisition;  (3)  the  launching  of  the  Primary  Dealer 
Credit  Facility;  and  (4)  the  events  of  the  following  week,  culminating  in  the  March  24 
announcement of revised merger agreement and guaranty terms between JPMorgan Chase 
and  Bear,  and  the  finalizing  of  the  terms  and  structure  of  the  associated  loan  from  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Let me begin with the market situation in which Bear was operating in the days leading up to 
March  13.  Fixed-income  traders  had  begun  hearing  rumors  that  European  financial 
institutions had stopped doing fixed income trades with Bear. Fearing that their funds might 
be frozen if Bear wound up in bankruptcy, a number of U.S.-based fixed-income and stock 
traders  that  had  been  actively  involved  with  Bear  had  reportedly  decided  to  halt  such 
involvement.  Many  firms  started  pulling  back  from  doing  business  with  Bear.  Some  hedge 
funds  that  had  used  Bear  to  borrow  money  and  clear  trades  were  withdrawing  cash  from 
their  accounts.  Some  large  investment  banks  stopped  accepting  trades  that  would  expose 
them  to  Bear,  and  some  money  market  funds  reduced  their  holdings  of  short-term  Bear-
issued  debt.  The  rumors  of  Bear’s 
its  balance  of 
unencumbered liquidity on March 13 to decline sharply to levels that were not adequate to 
cover  maturing  obligations  and  funds  that  could  be  withdrawn  freely.  This  precipitated  the 
phone call that I described in the beginning of my testimony. 
The  news  that  Bear’s  liquidity  position  was  so  dire  that  a  bankruptcy  filing  was  imminent 
presented us with a very difficult set of policy judgments. In our financial system, the market 
sorts  out  which  companies  survive  and  which  fail.  However,  under  the  circumstances 
prevailing in the markets the issues raised in this specific instance extended well beyond the 
fate of one company. It became clear that Bear’s involvement in the complex and intricate 
web of relationships that characterize our financial system, at a point in time when markets 
were  especially  vulnerable,  was  such  that  a  sudden  failure  would  likely  lead  to  a  chaotic 
unwinding of positions in already damaged markets. Moreover, a failure by Bear to meet its 
obligations  would  have  cast  a  cloud  of  doubt  on  the  financial  position  of  other  institutions 
whose business models bore some superficial similarity to Bear’s, without due regard for the 
fundamental soundness of those firms.  
financial  health  caused 
failing 
4 
 BIS Review 39/20086
The sudden discovery by Bear’s derivatives counterparties that important financial positions 
they  had  put  in  place  to  protect  themselves  from  financial  risk  were  no  longer  operative 
would have triggered substantial further dislocation in markets. This would have precipitated 
a rush by Bear’s counterparties to liquidate the collateral they held against those positions 
and to attempt to replicate those positions in already very fragile markets. 
In  short,  we  judged  that  a  sudden,  disorderly  failure  of  Bear  would  have  brought  with  it 
unpredictable but severe consequences for the functioning of the broader financial system 
and  the  broader  economy,  with  lower  equity  prices,  further  downward  pressure  on  home 
values, and less access to credit for companies and households. 
Following  that  initial  call  with  the  SEC  on  March  13,  my  colleagues  in  New  York  and  in 
Washington spent the night focusing on the implications of a large-scale default by Bear and 
how we might contain the consequential damage. Bear renewed conversations that began 
earlier  that  day  with  JPMorgan  Chase,  which  is  Bear’s  clearing  bank  for  its  repo 
arrangements,  to  explore  a  range  of  possible  financing  options.  The  New  York  Fed 
dispatched a team of examiners to Bear Stearns to look at its books so that we could get a 
better handle on what could be done. We gathered the best information we could, evaluated 
the risks involved, and explored a range of possible actions. 
At  5:00  a.m.,  we  participated  in  a  conference  call  with  our  colleagues  at  the  Board  of 
Governors  and  the  Treasury  to  review  the  options  and  decide  on  the  way  forward.  After 
careful deliberation, together we decided on a course of action that would at least buy some 
time to explore options to mitigate the foreseeable damage to the financial system. With the 
support of the Secretary of the Treasury, Chairman Bernanke and the Board of Governors 
agreed  that  the  New  York  Fed  would  extend  an  overnight  non-recourse  loan  through  the 
discount  window  to  JPMorgan  Chase,  so  that  JPMorgan  Chase  could  then  “on-lend”  that 
money to Bear Stearns. 
This action was designed to allow us to get to the weekend, and to enable us to pursue work 
along two tracks: first, for Bear to continue to explore options with other financial institutions 
that might enable it to avoid bankruptcy; and second, for policymakers to continue the work 
begun on Thursday night to try to contain the risk to financial markets in the event no private-
sector solution proved possible. 
Over the course of that day, March 14, Bear was downgraded by the credit rating agencies, 
and  the  flight  of  customer  business  from  Bear  accelerated.  This  set  in  motion  a  chain  of 
decisions across the financial system as market participants prepared for the possibility that 
Bear  would  not  be  open  for  business  once  Asian  markets  opened  on  Sunday  night.  This 
highlighted the urgency of working toward a solution over the weekend, ideally a solution that 
would definitively address the prospect of default by Bear. 
Bear  approached  several  major  financial  institutions,  beginning  on  March  13.  Those 
discussions  intensified  on  Friday  and  Saturday.  Bear’s  management  provided  us  with 
periodic  progress  reports  about  a  possible  merger.  Although  several  different  institutions 
expressed  interest  in  acquiring  all  or  part  of  Bear,  it  was  clear  that  the  size  of  Bear,  the 
apparent  risk  in  its  balance  sheet,  and  the  limited  amount  of  time  available  for  a  possible 
acquirer  to  conduct  due  diligence  compounded  the  difficulty.  Ultimately,  only  JPMorgan 
Chase was willing to consider an offer of a binding commitment to acquire the firm and to 
stand behind Bear’s substantial short-term obligations. 
As JPMorgan Chase and other institutions conducted due diligence, my colleagues in New 
York and Washington continued to examine ways to contain the effects of a default by Bear. 
As  part  of  these  discussions,  we  began  to  design  a  new  facility  that  would  build  on  other 
liquidity initiatives taken by the Federal Reserve System, and provide a more powerful form 
of liquidity to major financial institutions. 
Following  the  announcement  on  March  11  of  the  Term  Securities  Lending  Facility,  which 
allowed  primary  dealers  to  pledge  a  wider  range  of  collateral  in  order  to  borrow  Treasury 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 5
securities,  we  had  consulted  with  market  participants  on  how  to  structure  the  auctions  to 
maximize their potential benefits to market functioning. Those discussions yielded a number 
of helpful suggestions. In view of those suggestions, and after considering the greater risks 
to  the  financial  system  posed  by  the  Bear  situation,  we  were  able  to  work  quickly  on  a 
companion facility that would transmit liquidity to parts of the market where it could be most 
powerful. 
This  is  what  led  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  to  approve  the 
establishment of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility on March 16. Under Section 13(3) of the 
Federal Reserve Act, the Board of Governors is empowered to authorize a Federal Reserve 
Bank  like  the  New  York  Fed  to  lend  to  a  corporation,  such  as  an  investment  bank,  in 
extraordinary  circumstances  under  which  there  is  evidence  that  the  corporation  cannot 
“secure  adequate  credit  accommodations  from  other  banking  institutions.”  The  Board  of 
Governors  needed  to  make  the  statutory  finding  that  the  circumstances  were  exigent  and 
extraordinary, and it did so, based on the situation prevailing in the financial markets and the 
distinct  possibility  that  absent  an  assurance  of  liquidity  to  major  investment  banks  the 
deterioration in financial conditions likely would have continued with substantial effects on the 
economy. 
We recognized, of course, that the use of this legal authority was, in itself, an extraordinary 
step. At the same time, we were mindful that Congress included this lending power in the 
Federal Reserve Act for a reason, and it seemed irresponsible for us not to use that authority 
in this unique situation. Even with an agreement in place that might reduce the probability of 
a  default  by  Bear,  we  decided  that  independent  of  that  outcome,  it  was  important  to  get 
assured liquidity to primary dealers by Monday morning, to address the accelerating process 
of deleveraging and tightening liquidity seen in the financial system. 
On  Sunday  morning,  executives  at  JPMorgan  Chase  informed  us  that  they  had  become 
significantly more concerned about the scale of the risk that Bear and its many affiliates had 
assumed. They were also concerned about the ability of JPMorgan Chase to absorb some of 
Bear’s trading portfolio, particularly given the uncertainty ahead about the ultimate scale of 
losses  facing  the  financial  system.  In  this  context,  we  began  to  explore  ways  in  which  we 
could  help  facilitate  a  more  orderly  solution  to  the  Bear  situation.  We  did  not  have  the 
authority  to  acquire  an  equity  interest  in  either  Bear  or  JPMorgan  Chase,  nor  were  we 
prepared  to  guarantee  Bear’s  very  substantial  obligations.  And  the  only  feasible  option  for 
buying  time  would  have  required  open  ended  financing  by  the  Fed  to  Bear  into  an 
accelerating withdrawal by Bear’s customers and counterparties. 
We  did,  however,  have  the  ability  to  lend  against  collateral,  as  in  the  back-to-back  non-
recourse arrangement that carried Bear into the weekend. After extensive discussion with my 
colleagues at the New York Fed, Chairman Bernanke, and Secretary Paulson, and with their 
full support, the New York Fed and JPMorgan Chase reached an agreement in principle that 
the  New  York  Fed  would  assist  with  non-recourse  financing.  Using  Section  13(3)  of  the 
Federal Reserve Act, the New York Fed agreed in principle to lend $30 billion to JPMorgan 
Chase and to secure the lending with a pledge of Bear Stearns assets valued by Bear on 
March 14 at approximately $30 billion. This step made it possible for JPMorgan to agree to 
acquire  Bear  and  to  step  in  immediately  to  guarantee  all  of  Bear’s  short-term  obligations. 
This guarantee was especially important to stave off the feared systemic effects that would 
be triggered by the panic of a Bear bankruptcy filing and of the failure to honor its obligations. 
And  by  agreeing  to  lend  against  a  portfolio  of  securities,  we  reduced  the  risk  that  those 
assets would be liquidated quickly, exacerbating already fragile conditions in markets. The 
portfolio of securities is described in Annex II to this testimony. 
On the evening of Sunday the 16th, I sent a letter to James Dimon, the CEO of JPMorgan 
Chase, to memorialize the fact that we had reached a preliminary agreement that the New 
York Fed would assist the acquisition with $30 billion in financing, with the understanding that 
the  parties  would  continue  working  during  the  week  towards  a  formal  contract.  We  also 
6 
 BIS Review 39/20086
provided regulatory approvals, including under Section 23A, to assist with the merger and a 
transitional period for phasing in the assets under our capital rules. 
The announcement of the agreement between Bear Stearns and JPMorgan Chase and the 
announcement of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility were finalized just before Asian markets 
opened on Sunday night, and the announcement of these actions helped avert the damage 
that would have accompanied default. 
On  Monday  morning,  March  17,  the  $13  billion  back-to-back  non-recourse  loan  through 
JPMorgan Chase to Bear was repaid to the Fed, with weekend interest of nearly $4 million. 
The Primary Dealer Credit Facility was made available to the market. And at the request of 
and with the full cooperation of the SEC, examiners from the New York Fed were sent into 
the  major  investment  banks  to  give  the  Federal  Reserve  the  direct  capacity  to  assess  the 
financial condition of these institutions. 
Discussions  were  also  continuing  regarding  the  details  of  the  Fed’s  financial  arrangement 
with JPMorgan Chase. Our legal teams engaged in the meticulous work of finalizing the legal 
structure of the lending arrangement that had been agreed to in principle, including defining 
the precise pool of collateral and related hedges that would secure the $30 billion loan. 
At the same time, several infirmities became evident in the agreement between JPMorgan 
and Bear during the week of March 17th that needed to be cured.  
Negotiations between the two sets of counterparties proceeded almost immediately between 
the New York Fed and JPMorgan Chase on the one hand, and between JPMorgan Chase 
and Bear Stearns on the other. The New York Fed and JPMorgan discussed the details for 
the secured financing. Bear Stearns and JPMorgan continued to negotiate changes to the 
merger agreement that would tighten the guarantee and provide the necessary certainty that 
the merger would be consummated. All the parties shared an overriding common interest: to 
move toward a successful merger and avoid the situation in which they found themselves on 
March 14. 
The  extended  Easter  weekend  saw  intense  sets  of  bilateral  negotiations  among  the  three 
parties. The deal, finally struck in the early morning hours on March 24, held benefits for all 
parties.  That  deal  included  a  new,  more  precise  guaranty  from  JPMorgan,  which  lifted  the 
cloud of default risk that had been hanging over the transaction. Bear stockholders were to 
receive a higher share price. In addition to fixing the guaranty, JPMorgan gained assurance 
that  its  merger  with  Bear  would  take  place.  And  the  New  York  Fed  obtained  significant 
downside  protection  on  the  loan  and  a  tighter  guaranty  on  its  exposure.  The  new  Fed 
financing facility will be in place for a maximum of ten years, though it could be repaid earlier, 
at the discretion of the Fed. This is an important feature: the assets that are being pledged as 
collateral can be managed on a long-term basis so as to minimize the risks to the market and 
the  risk  of  loss.  They  can  be  held  or  disposed  of  at  any  time  over  the  next  decade.  A 
summary of Terms and Conditions is attached as Annex III. 
In keeping with the traditional role of a lender of last resort, the extensions of credit to Bear 
Stearns that the Fed made to facilitate the merger were secured by collateral. The $29 billion 
loan  will  be  extended  only  when  and  if  JPMorgan  Chase  and  Bear  merge.  We  will  be 
protected from loss by three different risk mitigants: first, a substantial pool of professionally-
managed collateral that, as of March 14, was valued at $30 billion; second, the agreement on 
the part of JPMorgan Chase to absorb the first $1 billion of any loss that ultimately occurs in 
connection with this arrangement; and third – and perhaps most importantly – a long-term 
horizon  during  which  our  collateral  will  be  safe-kept  and,  if  sold,  will  be  sold  in  an  orderly 
fashion that is not affected by the unnaturally strong downward market pressures that have 
been associated with the recent liquidity crisis. 
Are there risks here? Yes, but the risks are modest in comparison to the substantial damage 
to  the  economy  and  economic  well-being  that  potentially  would  have  accompanied  Bear’s 
insolvency.  Congress  created  the  Federal  Reserve  after  the  Panic  of  1907  with  broad 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 7
authority  and  a  range  of  instruments  to  assume  precisely  this  type  of  risk,  in  support  of 
overall financial stability and economic growth. Assisting the JPMorgan Chase merger with 
Bear was the best option available in the unique circumstances that prevailed at the time. 
There are those who have suggested that by intervening to forestall, and ultimately prevent, 
a  bankruptcy  filing  by  Bear  Stearns,  the  Federal  Reserve  risks  magnifying  the  chance  of 
future financial crises, by insulating market participants from the consequences of excessive 
risk  taking.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  had  we  not  acted  we  would  in  effect  have 
penalized  those  individuals,  companies  and  financial  institutions  that  had  behaved  more 
prudently, but would have suffered significant damage from the effects of default by a major 
institution. 
The negative consequences to Bear’s owners and employees from recent events have been 
very real – so real that no owner or executive or director of a financial firm would want to be 
in Bear Stearns’ position. While we clearly knew that our actions, both in the context of the 
JPMorgan Chase transaction and in the establishment of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
would affect incentives for financial market participants, adding to the risk of “moral hazard,” 
we believe that the lesson of the actual outcome for equity holders will serve to check and 
even diminish incentives for undue risk-taking. 
I  believe  that  the  actions  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  on  a  number  of  fronts  in  recent 
months have reduced some of the risk to the economy that is inherent in this adjustment in 
financial markets. By reducing the probability of a systemic financial crisis, the actions taken 
by the Fed on and after March 14 have helped avert substantial damage to the economy, 
and they have brought a measure of tentative calm to global financial markets. Relative to 
the  conditions  that  existed  on  March  14,  risk  premia  have  narrowed,  foreign  exchange 
markets are somewhat more stable, energy and commodity prices are lower, perceptions of 
risk in the financial system have diminished, and the flight to quality is less pronounced. 
Nevertheless, liquidity conditions in markets are still substantially impaired and the process 
of de-leveraging remains underway. And this will amplify the headwinds facing the U.S. and 
global  economy.  In  this  context,  policymakers  and  financial  market  participants  need  to 
continue to act forcefully. And their actions need to be proportionate to the challenges. 
Financial  institutions  need  to  continue  to  improve  the  quality  of  disclosure,  and  even  the 
strongest institutions face compelling incentives to raise new equity capital so that they can 
take advantage of the opportunities ahead. 
Actions  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  major  government  sponsored  enterprises,  the 
Federal Housing Finance Board and the Federal Housing Administration to provide finance 
to  the  mortgage  market  and  help  reduce  the  risk  of  avoidable  foreclosures  are  a  very 
important complement to the broader policy actions already in place to contain the downside 
risks to the economy. 
The Federal Reserve, working closely with other major central banks, will continue to provide 
liquidity to markets to help facilitate the process of financial repair. 
Looking  forward,  we  face  as  a  nation  a  number  of  very  important  policy  questions.  This 
financial  crisis,  as  all  past  crises,  has  highlighted  vulnerabilities  that  require  action.  No 
economy is stronger than its financial system, and as we continue to focus on the immediate 
challenges of financial repair and supporting economic growth, we need to begin the process 
of building consensus on a comprehensive set of change to our regulatory framework. 
In  addition  to  a  stronger  set  of  protections  for  consumers,  the  overwhelming  imperative  of 
reform  must  be  to  put  in  place  a  stronger  framework  for  financial  stability.  Our  objective 
should be a system that preserves the unique strengths of our financial markets in providing 
individuals  and  entrepreneurs  access  to  capital  and  credit,  but  with  a  greater  capacity  to 
withstand stress. 
8 
 BIS Review 39/20086
 This will require significant changes to regulatory policy and the supervisory framework. And 
the focus has to be on changing the incentives that all financial market participants face in 
managing the risk in exposure to adverse outcomes. 
In my view, there are a set of important objectives and principles that should guide this effort.  
We need to ensure there is a stronger set of shock absorbers, in terms of capital 
• 
and  liquidity,  in  those  institutions,  banks  and  a  limited  number  of  the  largest 
investment banks, that are critical to market functioning and economic health, with a 
stronger form of consolidated supervision over those institutions.  
We  need  to  substantially  simplify  and  consolidate  the  regulatory  framework,  to 
reduce the opportunity for regulatory arbitrage, not just in the mortgage market, but 
more broadly.  
We  need  to  make  the  financial  infrastructure  more  robust,  particularly  in  the 
derivatives and repo markets, so that the system can better withstand the effects of 
default by a major participant.  
We need to redesign the set of liquidity facilities that we maintain in normal times, 
and  in  extremis,  in  the  United  States  and  across  other  major  central  banks.  And 
these changes will have to come with a stronger set of incentives and requirements 
for  the  management  of  liquidity  risk  by  financial  institutions  with  access  to  central 
bank liquidity.  
And we need to make sure that the Federal Reserve has the mix of authority and 
responsibility  to  respond  with  adequate  speed  and  force  to  the  prospects  of 
systemic threats to financial stability.  
   Conclusion 
We look forward to working with the Congress and the Executive Branch to put in place a 
system of financial sector oversight and crisis management that works well in the context of a 
21st-century financial system. 
The actions that we took were intended to protect the economy from the consequences of 
risks to the financial system that could have decreased the availability of home mortgage and 
other credit, put further downward pressure on home values, eroded retirement savings and 
ultimately  led  to  a  loss  of  jobs  and  incomes  as  businesses  faced  added  difficulties  in 
financing expanded operations and job creation. 
Policymakers – both in the Federal Reserve and in the federal government – must continue 
to be proactive in their response to rapidly changing circumstances. 
Finally, I want to express my admiration and appreciation to members of my staff who have 
performed with great skill and care under extreme pressure. And I would like to also thank 
Chairman Bernanke, Secretary Paulson, Chairman Cox and my many other colleagues in the 
Fed and the supervisory community. 
Thank you again for giving me the opportunity to appear before you today. 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 9
