Jean-Claude Trichet: The creation of economic and corporate wealth in a 
dynamic economy  
Contribution to the panel discussion by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  conference  organised  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  Bank  of 
France and The Conference Board, Frankfurt am Main, 17 January 2008. 
 Dear guests, dear colleagues, 
I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  today  on  the  role  of  macroeconomic  policy  for long-term 
economic growth. 
Before  talking  about  the  role  of  policy,  I  will  briefly  look  back  at  the  economic  growth 
performance of the euro area in the past decade and focus on some of the factors underlying 
the rate of growth of potential output. I will then look in more detail at how macroeconomic 
policies can help to increase Europe’s trend growth rate. 
the degree of labour utilisation;  
demographic trends; and  
productivity growth. 
The economic performance of the euro area since the mid-1990s 
Between 1996 and 2006 the annual growth rate in the euro area averaged 2.1% per year,1 
which was below the growth rates observed in a number of other industrialised economies, 
including the United States, where the average growth rate of real GDP was 3.1%. What are 
the fundamental causes of this unsatisfactory trend growth in the euro area, especially this 1 
percentage  point  difference  with  the  US  ?  The  answers  can  be  found  by  looking  at  the 
factors that determine long-term economic growth, namely:  
• 
• 
• 
Over  the  period  1996-2006  the  euro  area  witnessed  an  improvement  in  labour  utilisation, 
which increased by an  average of  0.4% per year2 compared with almost no growth in the 
United  States  when  defined  as  total  annual  hours  worked  divided  by  the  working  age 
population. Labour utilisation therefore accounts for 0.4 percentage point of the euro area-US 
growth differential, “in favour” of the euro area. This improvement in labour utilisation in the 
euro  area  mainly  reflects  the  significant  increase  observed  in  the  euro  area’s  overall 
employment  rate,  from  58%  in  1996  to  64.4%  in  2006,  accompanied  by  a  decline  in  the 
aggregate unemployment rate from 10.7% to 7.9%.3 This is a very encouraging fact, which 
shows that labour market reforms and immigration may have helped to overcome some of 
the constraints on growth on the supply side of the euro area economy. However, it should 
be  noted  that,  despite  this  progress,  we  are  still  a  long  way  from  having  exhausted  the 
potential for further increases in participation rates and employment. And this appears even 
more  urgent  if  we  consider  that,  over  the  same  period,  Europe’s  growth  performance  has 
been constrained by its low rate of population growth and the ageing of its society. 
As  regards  demographic  trends,  the  working  age  population  of  the  euro  area  grew  by  an 
average  of  0.4%  per  year  over  the  period  1996-2006,  compared  with  1.3%  in  the  United 
                                                 
1   European Commission – AMECO database. 
2   European Commission – AMECO database. 
3   Eurostat. 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 1
States.4 These demographic trends therefore account for 0.9 percentage point of the euro 
area-US  growth  differential,  “in  favour”  of  the  US.  Taken  together,  labour  utilisation  and 
demographic trends can explain 0.5 percentage point of the difference between the growth 
rates of the United States and the euro area, “in favour” of the US.  
On the basis of a 1.1 percentage point difference in annual average growth between the US 
and the euro area over the period 1996-2006, the remaining differential of 0.6% for real GDP 
growth  indeed  stems  from  annual  average  labour  productivity  growth  of  1.3%  in  the  euro 
area and 1.9% in the United States.  
It is true that the positive labour supply shock over the past decade might have contributed to 
the  disappointing  productivity  growth  seen  in  the  euro  area.  However,  standard  growth 
accounting analyses show that developments in labour supply are only part of the story. The 
slowdown  in  labour  productivity  growth  can  be  attributed  to  a  large  extent  to  a  marked 
deceleration in total factor productivity. Those countries that have tended to compensate for 
the  positive  labour  supply  shock  by  increasing  investment  growth  and/or  exploiting  the 
potential  efficiency  gains  offered  by  new  technology  in  particular  have  enjoyed  stronger 
labour productivity growth. For instance, over the period 1996-2005 the direct contribution of 
ICT to labour productivity growth, as measured by the contribution of ICT capital services, 
has  in  the  United  States  been  roughly  double  that  observed  in  the  euro  area  (0.63 
percentage  point  in  the  United  States,  compared  with  0.37  percentage  point  in  the  euro 
area). Similarly, hourly labour productivity growth in ICT manufacturing and service sectors5 
grew by an average of 12.6% and 6.5% in the United States and the euro area respectively 
over that period.6  
There could, of course, be many reasons for this decline in total factor productivity growth 
rates,  and  this  conference  has  been  useful  in  shedding  light  on  some  explanatory  factors. 
Among the most prominent causes are those structural features of the European economies 
that  are  undermining  investment  incentives  and  impeding  the  efficient  allocation  of 
resources. There is, for example, some empirical evidence of a negative correlation between 
anti-competitive regulation and the contribution made to productivity growth by services using 
ICT.7  The  impact  of  structural  features  determining  the  “viscosity”  of  economies  may  of 
course change over time. In my view, rapid technological changes and the globalisation of 
economies, both of which require the restructuring of economies, have made the remaining 
rigidities and the “viscosity” of European economies more costly in terms of productivity and 
growth performance over the past decade. In this respect, I would agree with the findings of 
the paper on market structures and productivity presented at this conference by Mr Scarpetta 
and Mr Nicoletti.  
                                                 
4   The demographic trend combines population growth, which was 0.4% on average for the euro area and 1.0% 
for the United States, as well as changes in the age structure, defined  as the working age population as a 
share of the total population, which remained constant in the euro area while increasing by 0.2% on average 
in the United States. 
5   Electrical machinery, post and communication services. 
6   Source: EU KLEMS. Note that these figures are calculated as averages of the growth rates observed over the 
period in question. 
7   See,  for  example,  A.  Alesina,  S.  Ardagna,  G.  Nicoletti  and  F.  Schiantarelli  (2005),  “Regulation  and 
investment”,  Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association  3,  pp.  791-825,  in  which  the  authors  find  that 
regulatory  reforms  have  had  a  significant  positive  impact  on  capital  accumulation  in  the  transport, 
communication  and  utilities  sectors,  especially  in  the  long  run.  In  G.  Nicoletti  and  S.  Scarpetta  (2003), 
“Regulation,  productivity  and  growth”,  Economic  Policy,  April,  the  authors  find  that  various  anti-competitive 
product  market  regulations  significantly  reduce  total  factor  productivity  growth  at  the  industry  level.  In  their 
contribution to this conference, J. Albert, G. Nicoletti and S. Scarpetta provide a broad survey of the relevant 
literature and some additional evidence. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2008
On the basis of this diagnosis, the best contribution that macroeconomic policy can make to 
long-term  growth  is  to  provide  an  environment  conducive  to  employment,  investment  and 
increases  in  our  economies’  capacity  to  adjust  in  response  to  technological  and economic 
change. I should like to highlight two key priorities, namely: 
• 
increasing  the  flexibility  of  labour  and  product  markets  and  furthering  economic 
integration; and 
implementing a stable macroeconomic framework.  
• 
This  is,  of  course,  not  an  exhaustive  list.  But  I  think  that  these  are  the  key  elements  for 
macroeconomic policy, and I will focus on these here today. 
Increasing the flexibility of labour and product markets and furthering economic 
integration 
Well-functioning, integrated markets are required in order to meet the challenges posed by 
greater innovation and increase the adjustment capacity of an economy. For this to happen, 
labour markets need to be flexible. In the context of rapid technological change, it is essential 
to  ensure  that  the  labour  force  is  employable  and  flexible  by  facilitating  the  adjustment  of 
human  capital  in  line  with  labour  market  needs.  A  high  level  of  employment  protection 
legislation may  have  a  particularly  strong  negative  impact  on  industries  experiencing  rapid 
technological change, since it may prevent the efficient matching of workers to jobs in view of 
new job requirements. Unfortunately, progress in increasing contractual flexibility, particularly 
for permanent contracts, has been disappointingly slow in several euro area countries. Wage 
flexibility also has an important role to play in the smooth functioning of markets. Structural 
rigidities  in  wage  setting,  by  not  allowing  firms  and  sectors  to  remain  competitive  and  not 
sufficiently reflecting existing levels of unemployment, reduce market opportunities for firms 
and thereby limit labour demand, investment and long-term growth.  
In  addition,  an  economic  environment  comprising  well-integrated  goods  markets  and 
financial  systems  provides  a  level  playing  field  allowing  productive  forces  to  thrive.  Some 
progress  has  been  made  in  the  EU  in  strengthening  competition  and  increasing  economic 
integration over the last two decades. The single market initiative has already brought about 
considerable  benefits  for  the  EU  economy.  The  European  Commission  recently  estimated 
that  the  single  market  had  resulted  in  2.75  million  extra  jobs  over  the  period  1992-2006, 
corresponding to an increase in welfare of €518 per head by 2006.8 However, much remains 
to be done, particularly in some service sectors. The extension and deepening of the EU’s 
internal market clearly remains a priority as regards further financial market integration and 
the implementation of the Services Directive. The economic importance of services suggests 
that  improvements  in  European  living  standards  will  crucially  depend  on  productivity 
improvements in this area. 
ECB studies, including work presented at this conference, have shown the key importance of 
financial  integration  and  modernisation  for  the  efficient  operation  of  the  economy.9  The 
process  of  European  financial  integration  is  gradually  taking  place,  with  considerable 
progress  being  made,  for  instance,  in  capital  markets  and  wholesale  banking.  However,  it 
appears that the retail banking sector has not yet fulfilled its potential, and competition and 
integration in this market segment still appear insufficient. 
                                                 
8   European Commission, “The single market: review of achievements”, November 2007. 
9   See  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Heider,  E.  Papaioannou  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial  markets  and 
innovation in productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, September, as well as ECB 
(2007) “Financial integration in Europe”, Frankfurt am Main. 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 3
Finally, allow me also to briefly mention labour migration. In my view, labour migration is an 
important  adjustment  mechanism  in  the  context  of  monetary  union.  However,  evidence 
suggests that cross-border labour mobility is limited within the euro area. Although this can 
be attributed in part to differences in culture and language, efforts should at least be made to 
remove the remaining formal institutional barriers to labour mobility across the euro area. At 
the  same  time,  well-designed  immigration  policies  should  benefit  the  European  Union  by 
supporting the allocative efficiency of markets. 
Let  me  also  stress  the  fact  that  flexible  and  integrated  labour  and  product  markets  are 
prerequisites for the smooth functioning of a monetary union such as the euro area. Regional 
monetary and exchange rate policies are no longer possible, and so well-designed structural 
policies that enhance flexibility in product and labour markets are crucial in order to ensure 
the continued competitiveness of European companies. 
Macroeconomic stability with a view to supporting stronger, sustainable growth 
This brings me to my second point, namely the contribution that fiscal and monetary policy 
can make to long-term sustainable economic growth. 
First of all, sound national fiscal policies are of the essence in Europe because they support 
growth and stability. Prudent fiscal policies help, for instance, to avoid unnecessarily abrupt 
adjustments,  as  well  as  contributing  to  lower  risk  premia  on  long-term  interest  rates  and 
thereby  giving  rise  to  more  favourable  financing  conditions,  which  in  turn  promotes 
investment  and  long-term  growth.  It  is  important  that  all  governments  comply  with  the 
provisions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  as  regards  fiscal  consolidation.  In  particular, 
countries  need  to  make  use  of  economic  “good  times”  in  order  to  accelerate  fiscal 
consolidation. All of the countries concerned need to honour the commitments they made at 
the Eurogroup meeting in Berlin on 20 April 2007, namely to achieve their medium-term fiscal 
objectives by 2008 or 2009 – or 2010 at the latest.  
Beyond  that,  the  “quality”  of  public  finances  is  very  important  for  growth.  It  is  essential  to 
increase  the  efficiency  of  public  spending  in  order  to  facilitate  the  redirection  of  public 
expenditure  towards  physical  and  human  capital  accumulation  with  a  view  to  enhancing 
productivity. Indeed, evidence for the EU shows that there is room for improvement in public 
sector performance and efficiency, with gains possible with a public sector of the same size 
or even smaller.10 Moreover, inefficiently high levels of public spending imply high taxes and 
are likely to inhibit potential growth. The ECB therefore welcomes the emphasis placed by 
the  ECOFIN  Council  on  measures  to  improve  the  quality  and  efficiency  of  public  finances 
and on the importance of modernising public administrations in order to achieve better “value 
for  money”,  provide  the  public  with  better  services,  increase  control  over  government 
expenditure and enhance competitiveness.  
Let me now turn to the contribution made by monetary policy. Can monetary policy help to 
create conditions conducive to strong, sustainable growth? Before attempting to answer this 
question, one should always remind oneself of what monetary policy can – and cannot – do. 
In  practice,  monetary  policy  amounts  to  temporary  purchases  of  marketable  assets  from 
commercial banks in exchange for monetary base. No sophisticated economic theories are 
necessary  to  understand  that  our  monetary  policy  instrument  is  unable  to  directly  prop  up 
innovation and the underlying rate of productivity growth in the economy.  
This is not to say, however, that productivity growth is unrelated to monetary policy. In fact, 
theory  suggests  that,  ceteris  paribus,  a  permanent  productivity  slowdown  will  tend  to 
                                                 
10   See A. Afonso, L. Schuknecht and V. Tanzi (2005), “Public Sector Efficiency: An International Comparison”, 
Public  Choice,  123  (3-4),  pp.  321-347,  and  A.  Afonso,  L.  Schuknecht  and  V.  Tanzi  (2006),  “Public  Sector 
Efficiency: Evidence for New EU Member States and Emerging Markets”, ECB Working Paper No 581. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2008
increase  inflation  once  the  economy  reaches  its  new,  long-term  equilibrium.  In  order  to 
prevent  this  outcome  and  ensure  that  price  stability  is  maintained,  the  long-term  rate  of 
growth of money will have to be reduced.  
The  negative  effects  of  a  productivity  slowdown  can  be  greatly  exacerbated  if  an 
environment of stable prices is not maintained. Some scholars have, for example, linked the 
“Great  Inflation”  seen  in  the  1970s  to  policy-makers’  misinterpretation  of  changes  in  the 
economy’s rate of productivity growth. In their view, after years of strong growth in the 1960s, 
policy-makers  considered  the  slowdown  to  be  a  temporary  phenomenon,  while  it  later 
became evident that the deceleration in productivity was more persistent. According to this 
analysis,  given  the  difficulties  in  recognising  the  nature  of  the  slowdown  in  real  time, 
monetary  policy  did  not  prevent  a  build  up  of  inflation,  which  became  entrenched  in 
expectations  and  eventually  led  to  stagflation,  with  relatively  low  growth  and  double-digit 
inflation. A painful disinflationary process was necessary in order to restore macroeconomic 
stability. 
This  confirms  that  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  in  order  to  foster 
sustainable economic growth and job creation is to maintain price stability. This is generally 
true, not just in response to productivity developments. A monetary policy that is credible in 
pursuing price stability and ensuring that inflation expectations remain well anchored will help 
to  create  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  This,  in  turn,  will  ensure  the  economy 
functions  smoothly,  facilitate  firms’ long-term  planning  and  stimulate  investment.  For  these 
reasons, maintaining price stability is an explicit and overriding monetary policy objective in 
the euro area, as enshrined in the Treaty establishing the European Community. At the same 
time,  price  stability  and  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  ensure  that,  if  and  when 
inflationary shocks do materialise, they are less costly to correct in terms of macroeconomic 
disruption and do not, therefore, undermine sustainable long-term growth and job creation.  
So far, I have emphasised the importance of maintaining price stability and referred to the 
inflationary  experience  of  the  1970s,  but  I  would  not  wish  to  suggest  that  the  appropriate 
response to negative productivity developments is always the tightening of monetary policy, 
or that, conversely, the response to increases in productivity should always be the loosening 
of  monetary  policy.  On  the  contrary,  in  fact,  the  real  rate  should  move  in  the  opposite 
direction in the long run. Even in the short run, part of the difficulty in gauging the correct 
monetary  policy  response  lies  in  determining  whether  a  demand  or  supply  effect  is 
dominant.11  
In  addition,  it  is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  changes  in  the  rate  of  growth  of 
productivity do not occur in a vacuum, but instead typically take place at the same time as 
other unforeseeable events. In the euro area, the first few years of the new millennium have 
not been notable only for a slowdown in productivity growth and, potentially, its more recent 
stabilisation. We have also witnessed very significant volatility in exchange rates, successive 
dramatic  upswings  in  oil  prices  and,  last  but  not  least,  turmoil  in  financial  and  money 
markets.  These  other  shocks  may  obviously  counteract  the  impact  that  productivity 
developments have on inflation. 
I  believe  that  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  well  equipped  to  cope  with  the 
uncertainty related to possible changes in productivity growth because it does not commit the 
ECB to react mechanically to specific indicators or forecasts. Thus far the ECB has always 
remained prudent. It has not interpreted the temporary increases seen in productivity since 
the  start  of  EMU  –  namely  in  2000  and  2006  –  as  more  permanent  changes  to  trend 
                                                 
11   On the one hand, the fall in productivity will tend to limit potential output growth, thereby generating, ceteris 
paribus, excess aggregate demand and inflationary pressure. On the other hand, aggregate demand will be 
curbed  by  the  reduction  in  profitable  investment  opportunities  and  individuals’  permanent  income.  All  other 
things being equal, a fall in aggregate demand will tend to exert downward pressure on prices. 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 5
developments. By allowing us to make use of information from various types of analysis and 
by focusing in detail on the nature of shocks affecting the economy, the ECB’s strategy is 
likely to continue to serve it well in an environment of pervasive uncertainty regarding future 
productivity developments. 
Conclusion 
On this note, let me conclude by saying that macroeconomic policies contribute to long-term 
growth essentially by establishing the right framework conditions for the flexible and efficient 
functioning of the economy and by contributing to macroeconomic stability. In this respect, 
the ECB has contributed to Europe’s growth prospects and job creation and will continue to 
do so. The Lisbon strategy and the Stability and Growth Pact are valuable elements of the 
European governance structure which support such advances also in the area of fiscal policy 
and policies for product and labour markets. 
6 
 BIS Review 7/2008
