José Manuel González-Páramo: Central banks and the financial turmoil 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Eleventh  Annual  International  Banking  Conference  “Credit 
Market Turmoil in 2007-08: Implications for Public Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 
Chicago, 25 September 2008. 
 1.  
Introduction1  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here in Chicago on the occasion of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago’s  Eleventh  Annual  International  Banking  Conference.  Since  its  inception,  this 
conference  series  has  aimed  to  gather  prominent  academics,  policy-makers  and  market 
participants  to  discuss  issues  of  major  importance  for  our  banking  industries,  financial 
systems and economies at large, such as asset price bubbles, systemic financial instability, 
cross-border banking, or financial globalisation.  
Over time, a permanent concern of the organisers has been to focus on the implications for 
monetary and regulatory policies and, more generally, for public policies of such phenomena. 
It is fair to say that a great deal of knowledge has accumulated over time thanks to this series 
of conferences. It is also reasonable to reckon that the foundations of this body of knowledge 
have been put to the test by the financial market turmoil over the past year. 
When the Tenth Annual International Banking Conference took place in September of last 
year, the market turmoil had already broken out and central banks were already engaged in 
interventions  aiming  to  minimise  the  disruptions  to  money  markets  and  to  preserve  the 
implementation of their desired monetary policy stance. While market data on future interest 
rates  suggested  that  we  were  in  for  a  rather  protracted  period  of  tensions  in  money  and 
credit markets, it was not obvious at the time that the financial turmoil would turn out to be 
one of the most challenging events of the last century for our financial systems.  
Indeed, the international financial landscape looks today very different compared to one year 
ago and almost every day new events contribute to re-shape it further. In particular, over the 
past  two  weeks  adverse  events  occurred  almost  on  a  daily  basis  and  led  to  increased 
uncertainty  and  significant  financial  market  volatility.  A  large  bank  failed,  while  several 
financial  institutions  had  to  be  partly  or  entirely  taken  over  by  others.  In  response  to  the 
renewed  tensions,  public  authorities  announced  a  number  of  measures  and  initiatives  to 
address problems at both stressed markets and troubled individual institutions. In particular, 
central banks stepped up their efforts to inject liquidity in global money markets in order to 
guarantee their smooth functioning. 
As I mentioned earlier, one of the main objectives of this series of conferences is to discuss 
the main lessons for public policies arising from developments in the international banking 
and financial sector. The continuation of the market turmoil does not allow me to talk to you 
with the benefit of detachment and the comfort of an ex-post assessment. However, I should 
like to take advantage of the occasion to share with you some considerations on the ECB’s 
response to the market turmoil drawing on the experience of the past year. 
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Cornelia Holthausen for her valuable contributions. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 1
The separation between monetary policy formulation and its implementation 
2.  
Central bankers have, naturally, eyed the developments of the past year of financial turmoil –
and, particularly, their recent intensification – with great concern, as they have the potential 
to influence adversely the ability of central banks to steer monetary policy rates, affect the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  and,  more  generally,  may  pose  a  threat  to 
financial stability. 
Once  the  credit  concerns  that  had  built  up  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage  market  segment 
started to affect interest rates and traded volumes in the euro area money market, the ECB 
responded  to  these  highly  unusual  market  events  by  timely  and  forcefully  adjusting  its 
liquidity policy. I will not deal with the specificities of the ECB’s liquidity management over the 
past  year  –  this  will  be  carried  out  by  the  ECB  staff  in  tomorrow’s  session  on  “The 
Experience with Crisis Management” – but I would like to stress one fundamental principle 
underlying our response to the turmoil: “the separation principle”. This principle relates to the 
dichotomy  between  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  its  liquidity  policy  or,  in  other  words, 
between the formulation and implementation of monetary policy.  
During  the  turmoil,  the  separation  principle  proved  to  be  very  effective.  Supported  by  the 
flexibility  of  its  operational  framework,  the  ECB  was  able  to  react  in  a  flexible  and  quick 
manner to a changing market environment, and it allowed the steering of interest rates close 
to the policy rate by means of temporary quantity adjustments, albeit without increasing the 
aggregate supply of euro liquidity to the banking sector. 
The main objective of the ECB’s immediate and lasting responses to tensions in the money 
market was to keep under to control the very short-term interest rates as the first step in the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Broadly  speaking,  the  ECB’s  liquidity  policy  response 
consisted of three elements: First, it changed the timing of the liquidity provision within the 
maintenance period (the so-called “front-loading policy”), and thereby allowed banks to build 
up  temporary  liquidity  buffers.  Second,  it  lengthened  the  average  maturity  of  its  tender 
operations:  before  the  turmoil,  the  bulk  of  liquidity  was  supplied  through  one-week 
operations, and only about 30% was auctioned for three months. As the turmoil unfolded, the 
ECB gradually increased the share of the three-month operations and moreover introduced a 
six-month  maturity  operation.  Finally,  it  participated  in  the  joint  coordination  effort  of  an 
increasing number of central banks around the world within the context of the Term Auction 
Facility.  
More  specifically,  in  collaboration  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  ECB  offered  US  dollar 
liquidity to European banks at various maturities in order to satisfy the exceptional demand 
for those funds. I believe that all of these actions proved to be effective in easing the tensions 
at the short-term end of the global money markets and in maintaining control of short-term 
interest rates in the euro area. I am sure that global money and funding markets will continue 
to benefit from our very close cooperation in the times to come. Still, term interest rates in the 
money  market  continue  to  be  strongly  influenced  by  credit  concerns  and,  not  surprisingly, 
have proved to be only marginally sensitive to changes in liquidity policy.  
As a result, the transmission of monetary policy for the economy at large is affected by the 
ongoing turmoil. I will now turn to this very question. 
The impact of the turmoil on the monetary transmission mechanism 
3.  
During  the  current  turmoil,  the  role  of  banks  in  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary 
policy has been brought to the forefront. In Europe, as you know, universal banks continue to 
be important players in the financial landscape. This is why they also play a crucial role for 
the transmission of monetary policy, as upheld by several theories, notably the bank lending 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2008
channel,  and  supportive  empirical  findings.2  According  to  this  theory,  the  pass-through  of 
changes in monetary policy interest rates to the real sector of the economy is influenced by 
banks’ ability to provide credit to firms. This applies, in particular, to banks with less liquid 
balance  sheets,  often  the  smaller  banks.3  With  a  bank  lending  channel,  the  effects  of 
monetary tightening on the supply of credit becomes more pronounced.  
The European banking sector has undergone a phase of some structural changes over the 
past years. In particular, as in other parts of the world, the European market for structured 
financial  products,  such  as  asset-backed  securities  or  Collateralized  Debt  Obligations,  has 
grown rapidly over the last decade. For instance, the quarterly issuance of euro-denominated 
asset-backed securities increased from just under €20 billion at the beginning of the present 
decade  to  above  €150  billion  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year.4  These  developments 
potentially influence banks’ ability to grant credit.5  
Such  changes  are  important  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  because,  first,  they  affect 
monetary  analysis  (one  of  the  pillars  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy),  and  second, 
because they are likely to affect the monetary transmission mechanism. On the one hand, 
increased  securitisation  is  expected  to  weaken  the  effects  of  the  bank  lending  channel  by 
dampening the effect of monetary tightening on the supply of credit. Indeed, some evidence 
points to the fact that the supply of loans is positively affected by securitisation.6 On the other 
hand, a more developed and efficient financial system can contribute to a more effective and 
smooth transmission of monetary policy.7  
At the root of the problems that led to the current financial turmoil is precisely this growing 
segment of the financial industry. As valuations of asset-backed securities and other assets 
declined  rapidly,  and,  in  fact,  the  whole  securitisation  model  was  shaken,  the  outstanding 
amount  of  structured  products  decreased  significantly.  Obviously,  this  affects  bank  credit: 
according to the latest bank lending survey conducted in the euro area, more than 80% of 
banks judged that difficulties in raising funds via securitisation have had a negative impact on 
bank lending.8  
Overall,  the  financial  turmoil  may  have  affected  the  efficient  working of  the  banking  sector 
and might have an impact on the supply of credit to the non-financial sector. In light of the 
fact  that  bank  lending  remains  strong  (the  annual  rate  of  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations in August 2008 was a still robust 12.6 per cent), it is too early to quantify the 
extent  to  which  the  turmoil  may  influence  the  provision  of  loans.  Needless  to  say,  the 
Eurosystem,  and  undoubtedly  other  central  banks,  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the 
situation. 
                                                 
2   See  Bernanke,  B.  and  M.  Gertler  (1995):  “Inside  the  black  box:  the  credit  channel  of  monetary  policy 
transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, pp. 27-48. For the euro area, see contributions collected 
in  Angeloni,  I.,  A.  Kashyap  and  B.  Mojon  (eds.),  2003:  “Monetary  policy  transmission  in  the  euro  area”, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3   Kashyap,  A.  and  J.  Stein  (2000):  “What  do  a  million  observations  on  banks  say  about  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy?”, American Economic Review 90(3) , pp. 407-28. 
4   European Securitisation Forum (2008): “ESF securitisation data report – Q2:2008”. 
5   European Central Bank (2008b): “The role of banks in the monetary transmission mechanism”, ECB Monthly 
Bulletin, August 2008, pp. 85-98. 
6   See, for instance, Altunbas, Y., L. Gambacorta and D. Marquéz (2007): “Securitisation and the bank lending 
channel”, ECB Working Paper No. 838, and ECB (2008a). 
7   See, for instance, Gropp, R., C. Kok Sørensen and J. Lichtenberger (2007): “The dynamics of bank spreads 
and financial structure”, ECB Working Paper No. 714. 
8   European Central Bank (2008c): “The euro area bank lending survey”, January 2008. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 3
The role of uncertainty 
4.  
One  of  the  most  relevant  features  of  the  current  turmoil  has  been  the  high  degree  of 
asymmetric  information  and  the  enormous  increase  in  general  uncertainty  in  the  financial 
sector. I would like to distinguish between the two in the following way:9  
Uncertainty owes mainly to imperfect information in relation to credit valuations. Uncertainty 
generally  increased  during  the  summer  of  2007,  because  market  participants  realised  that 
the current practices used for valuations – often based almost solely on ratings – were no 
longer valid. With this type of uncertainty, market participants have difficulty in modelling the 
expected occurrence of defaults. Credit spreads can widen, also at the short end.10 Another 
typical effect is the flight-to-quality phenomenon: as in previous episodes of high uncertainty, 
during  the  turmoil  savers  have  shunned  equity  and  credit  risk  products  in  favour  of 
government bonds and commodities as well as cash and bank deposits. As a result, bank 
deposits increased significantly. 
The  term  asymmetric  information,  on  the  other  hand,  applies  to  an  adverse  selection 
problem,  notably  in  the  interbank  market,  where  market  players  can  no  longer  distinguish 
solvent from insolvent borrowers. Such a “lemon’s problem” induces banks to demand high 
risk  premia  of  their  creditors  and  lead  to  a  general  increase  in  interbank  market  rates. 
Moreover, it can lead to the rationing of credit provision. Indeed, during the turmoil, a general 
tightening  of  credit  standards  has  occurred  and  has  been  intense  and  wide-spread. 
Counterparty  credit  risk  and  uncertainty  about  the  development  of  entire  segments  of  the 
financial  market  –  notably  of  more  complex  instruments  such  as  collateralised  debt 
obligations and other related products – were important elements in the development of the 
turmoil. 
Central  banks  have  to  deal  with  this  increase  in  uncertainty  on  several  accounts.  First, 
monetary policy needs to take into account the heightened uncertainty: central banks need to 
refine their monetary and financial analysis, and monitor extremely closely the developments 
in the financial system and their impact on the pass-through of policy rates to the economy. 
Second, and to turn to the beginning of my remarks, liquidity management has become more 
active. Counterparty credit risk as well as uncertainty about the development of own liquidity 
needs  have  led  banks  to  hoard  liquidity  and  impaired  the  normal  functioning  of  money 
markets.  As  a  consequence,  the  liquidity  provided  to  the  market  does  not  circulate  as 
smoothly  as  it  does  in  normal  times.  Moreover,  the  nervousness  of  market  players 
sometimes implies stronger than anticipated interest rate reactions.  
Conclusion 
5.  
I would like to conclude by saying that monetary policy implementation has certainly become 
a  more  challenging  task  as  a  result  of  the  current  financial  turmoil.  At  the  same  time,  the 
flexibility  of  the  ECB’s  operational  framework  has  very  much  helped  us  in  coping  with  the 
turmoil. The ECB has been able to maintain control over the short end of the money market, 
though – not surprisingly – our influence on longer maturities, where prices are driven mainly 
by credit concerns, remained limited.  
At  the  ECB  we  believe  that  the  separation  principle,  i.e.  the  separation  of  liquidity  policy 
measures  from  any  considerations  about  the  monetary  policy  stance,  has  served  us  well. 
                                                 
9   On  this  subject,  see  Cassola,  N.,  M.  Drehmann,  P.  Hartmann,  M.  lo  Duca,  and  M.  Scheicher  (2008):  “A 
Research  perspective on the propagation of the credit market turmoil”, ECB Research  Bulletin  No. 7, June 
2008. 
10   This  has  been  modelled  formally  by  Duffie  and  Lando  (2001):  “Term  structure  of  credit  spreads  with 
incomplete accounting information”, Econometrica 69, pp. 633-664. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2008
Indeed,  the liquidity  policy  aided  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  even  in  the  turbulent 
times  experienced  over  the  past  year,  while  monetary  policy  was  left  free  to  focus  on  its 
overriding  objective  of ensuring  price  stability.  I  strongly  believe  that  especially  at  times  of 
high uncertainty and rising inflationary pressures like the present, a stable and predictable 
central  bank  policy  and  the  firm  anchoring  of  inflationary  expectations  are  of  particular 
importance. 
There is no doubt that these are very challenging times for our economies. Some scientists 
argue that wildfires can be in the long run beneficial to wildlife as over time barren burned 
areas are covered by healthier new growth. Without pushing too far the analogy, let’s hope 
that the equivalent applies to the weakest segments of our financial systems. This will very 
much depend on the ability of all concerned parties – both public and private – to draw the 
right lessons and thoroughly implement them.  
Bearing this in mind, I look forward to the second day of this conference, during which the 
regulatory implications of the ongoing events shall be discussed. I wish you all a pleasant 
evening. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 5
