Stanley Fischer: Challenges for Israel’s banking system 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Knesset 
Economic Affairs Committee, Jerusalem, 15 July 2008.  
 Today  I  would  like  to  talk  about  four  issues:  competition  in  Israel’s  banking  system;  the 
importance  to  banks’  customers  and  the  whole  economy  of  a  robust  banking  system;  the 
danger to banks’ customers in the proposal to separate credit cards from the banks; and the 
importance of the reform in bank fees. 
Competition in the banking industry 
1.  
This is a subject that has occupied the Bank of Israel for a long time. It is important for the 
banks’ customers, as it lowers the cost of the services they receive from the banks, improves 
their quality, and broadens their range; and it is important for the banking system, as it is the 
most effective way of making it more efficient. 
2.  
The importance of a robust banking system for its customers and for the 
whole economy 
It is of the utmost importance that customers depositing their money and savings in banks 
feel  confident  that  their  funds  are  being  well  managed  by  the  bank,  and  that  they  can 
withdraw them whenever they wish.  
Especially now, when banking systems around the world are confronting a serious financial 
crisis – which apparently is entering another very serious stage – it would be very dangerous 
to weaken Israel’s banking system, which as a result of prudent management has not run 
into serious problems, despite the crisis. If we weaken Israel’s banking system, its customers 
will be the first to pay the price. We must bear in mind, when dealing with the banks, that a 
robust banking system is essential for customers, normal economic activity, and growth. 
3.  
The danger to customers in the suggestion to separate the credit cards from 
the banks 
This is an example of a proposal currently being formulated that at the end of the day would 
harm the banks’ customers. It is a dangerous proposal.  
Separating the credit cards from the banks would not necessarily increase competition in the 
credit card markets, retail credit or retail banking, and in fact would probably have an adverse 
impact on consumers. Based on research we have carried out and experience abroad, it is 
clear that separating credit cards from the banks entails a high risk that it would increase the 
price of credit given via credit cards. Today the interest on credit via credit cards in Israel is 
significantly lower than on such credit abroad.  
In addition to which, as I mentioned, there is the risk that a further weakening of the banks 
would  have  both  a  direct  adverse  impact  on  customers  and  an  indirect  effect  that  would 
result from its negative impact on economic growth. 
The importance of the reform in bank fees 
4.  
I  am  in  favor  of  this  important  reform,  because  it  is  likely  to  increase  competition  in  the 
banking industry, to the benefit of its customers.  
BIS Review 93/2008 
 1
The  reform  was  the  outcome  of  the  intense  efforts  by  the  Knesset,  mainly  by  Member  of 
Knesset (MK) Moshe Kahlon, MK Gilad Ardan, the entire Economic Affairs Committee, and 
the Supervisor of Banks. Here I would like to compliment the staff of the Banking Supervision 
Department on the efforts they invested in this area, which resulted in a necessary and well-
planned reform. I would also like to mention the Ministry of Finance, the Director-General of 
the  Anti-Trust  Authority,  expert  advisers  and  consumer  organizations,  all  of  whom 
cooperated on this issue and supported the reform. 
The aim of this reform, which will affect us all, is to lower the costs paid by banks’ customers. 
There are two ways of achieving this: one is by imposing wide-ranging supervision on bank 
fees, and the other is by increasing competition in the banking system, and lowering prices 
via  market  forces.  The  first  method  gives  immediate  results,  but  brings  in  its  wake  much 
damage, which I will describe later. The second approach is the right one, which will yield 
long-term gains to consumers and to the economy as a whole. 
The reform has increased the level of transparency with regard to fees, and transparency is 
essential to the development of competition. Thus, the reform reduced the oversized list of 
bank fees, gave them uniform names, and created the current situation in which, for the first 
time, customers know the prices they are asked to pay for banking services. As a result of 
these changes, consumers can compare prices and make informed decisions – just as we all 
do when we go shopping.  
This  has  revolutionized  the  pricing  of  banking  services,  and  customers  can  see  what  they 
would be charged for various services in each of the banks, and they can then make rational 
decisions.  To  help  customers,  the  Bank  shows  on  its  website  the  fee  tariffs  of  the  banks, 
tables  and  calculators  enabling  customers  to  compare  the  costs  of  managing  their  current 
accounts, and other detailed relevant information. All these have created a new situation in 
Israel: for the first time customers are well aware of the full implications of the bank fees and 
have become more actively involved in this issue. 
The  reform  also  abolished  fees  in  the  retail  segment  wherever  there  is  interest:  credit 
arrangements, retail loans and deposits. This change results in significant savings in costs 
for a large proportion of banks’ customers, an important point that should be brought to the 
attention  of  the  public,  most  of  whom  were  previously  unaware  that  these  charges  were 
being made. 
The reform has already proved itself, and has started a positive trend in fees. Even before 
the reform went into effect, there was a saving of about 80 percent in the cost to customers 
of  handling  their  current  accounts,  which  is  likely  to  amount  to  half  a  billion  shekel.  And 
already now, just two weeks after the reform started, we can see cuts in fee tariffs on various 
bank services, and reductions offered to certain groups in the population. 
Thus, with the publication of their new tariffs in the middle of June, even before the reform 
had gone into effect, banks announced more than twenty reductions in the cost of various 
current account transactions, reductions for pensioners and other groups, plus another forty 
reductions  following  measures  taken  by  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  –  a  total  of 
more than sixty reductions in fees. In addition, there is at last evidence of variation in prices, 
in contrast to the uniformity that prevailed in the past, and it is the large banks, which in the 
past generally led the field in raising their fees, that are offering lower prices. This last point is 
particularly important not only because it is an indication of competition, but also because of 
the large banks’ wider spread network of branches that also covers outlying areas. 
The Bank of Israel is well aware of the special needs of the elderly and the weaker sections 
of 
involves  many  over-the-counter 
transactions  in  branches.  The  reform  has  already  made  banking  services  via  tellers  more 
accessible to them at the lower price charged for online services 
As mentioned, the Bank of Israel publishes a list comparing banks’ fees, both on its website 
and  via  press  releases,  and  provides  other  means  which  enable  customers  to  compare 
the  population,  whose  banking  activity 
typically 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2008
costs. The Banking Supervision Department is closely monitoring the implementation of the 
reform,  and  will  not  hesitate  to  take  any  steps  needed,  within  its  mandate,  to  protect 
customers in general or certain sections of the population if it sees their interests are being 
harmed. 
In  the  next  few  days  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  is  launching  a  large  publicity 
campaign to increase the public’s awareness of the new situation resulting from the reform, 
and to provide the means and information necessary to make the best decisions regarding 
the management of current accounts. 
It would be inadvisable to opt at this stage for simpler, “instant” solutions, such as imposing 
wide-ranging supervision over bank fees, or forbidding banks to charge fees at all. We must 
give  the  new  system  time  to  operate  properly,  and  to  allow  the  Banking  Supervision 
Department to deal with flaws that may come to light. Supervision must be the last step, not 
the first, and even then only if there is absolutely no alternative. Sweeping supervision is not 
advisable, is unacceptable around the world, will take us back to somewhere we do not want 
to be, and is likely to have an adverse effect on competition which we all favor so highly, and 
thus, in the final analysis, on consumers. This would probably occur because supervision is 
likely to result in the banks setting uniform fees, at the exact level determined, and the quality 
of  service  to  customers  would  be  impaired.  Moreover,  and  certainly  no  less  important,  it 
would probably deter potential competitors, particularly foreign banks, from entering the field 
of banking in Israel, meaning that competition would remain at its low level. 
Clearly  we  must  give  the  reform  a  chance;  it  has  been  in  effect  just  two  weeks.  It  is  also 
important that we all support the Supervisor of Banks in advancing the reform, and he, on his 
part, will do what is necessary to correct any flaws and to speed up the whole process. 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 3
